SEVEN TREATISES, Very necessary to be observed in these very bad Days To
prevent the Seven last Vials of God's Wrath, that the Seven Angels are to pour
down upon the Earth; Revel. xvi.

I. The Monstrous Murder of the most righteous King; Paralel'd to the Murder of
King CHARLES the First. Act. vii. 52. II. The Tragedy of Zimri, that slew his
King, that was his Master. 2. Reg. ix. 31. III. God's War with the wicked,
Rebels, Murderers, etc. Esaias. lvii. 21. IV. The lively Picture of these lewd
times. Jeremy. xiv. 10. V. The four Chiefest Duties of every Christian Man. 1.
Peter. ii. 17. VI. The true Properties, and Prerogatives of the true Saints.
John. x. 27. VII. The Chiefest Cause why we should love God. 1. John. iv. 19.


Whereunto is annexed The DECLARATION of the just Judgment of GOD

1. Upon our late King's Friends, that neglected him. 2. Upon the King's
Enemies, that rebelled, and warred against him. I. The perfideous Scots. II.
The bloody Irish. III. The Antichristian Presbyterians, and Parliament, that
killed the two Witnesses of Jesus Christ; Moses and Aaron, Magistrates and
Ministers. 1. In general upon all the Long Parliament, and especially upon the
Rump-Parliament, so termed. 2. In particular, upon many of the most wicked
Limbs of the great Antichrist, and the Members of that Parliament.


AND The superabundant Grace, and great Mercy of God showed toward this good
King, CHARLES the First. I. In his Life. II. In his Death. III. After his
Death. 1. In his Honor. 2. In his Children, and Posterity. 3. In all his
Friends and loyal Subjects.



By Gr. Williams, Ld. Bishop of Ossory.

LONDON. Printed for the Author. 1661.

The Resolution of the Author.
By the Grace of God, and the assistance of his blessed Spirit,
I will flatter no man.
I do fear none, nor any danger, but God.
I desire nothing of any man, but Love.
I covet no Preferment, but to keep what the blessed King, and my most gracious
Master (at the Motion of my ever Honored Lord, the Earl of Pembroke) has
given me. And,
He gave me all that I have, and to lose all for his sake, that gave me all, I
never cared.
I can have no long time to live, being now full Seventy and four years old.
I will speak nothing, to my knowledge, but truth: and, if I perish, I perish;
as Qu. Hester said.
Let God's will be done.
Jehovae Liberatori. GR. OSSORY.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY, And to the now-Convened PARLIAMENT, and
all Posterity, The Humble Remonstrance of Gruffith Williams, Lord Bishop of
Ossorie.
Shows,
THAT he is most strictly obliged, and indispensably bound as he is sent a
messenger from God to instruct his people, and called by His late Majesty, his
most gracious Master, and now most Glorious Martyr, Charles the first, of ever
blessed memory, to be the Bishop of Ossorie, to declare, and make Remonstrance
unto Your Majesty, to the now-Convened Parliament, and to all Posterity, these
few Subsequent things. As,

First, that ever since 1625. I lived with my ever-honoured Lord, and Master,
the Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery, for the most part, in His Majesty's
house at the Cockpit, about the space of eighteen years together, and about
seven years of that time, in His Majesty's service; and in that respect I had
fitter opportunity to observe His Majesty, and to understand the affairs, and
Trans-actions of the Court better then most others of His Majesty's Chaplains,
that waited only their accustomed Month, and then returned to their residence.
And mine Obligations to His late Majesty are so many, and so great, that I
cannot with the best of mine endeavors discharge the Dimidium of those duties,
that low to the blessed memory of that King; for he gave me all that I had, and
all that I have, and had not the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury provided, and
commended to His Majesty a far better, and abler man every way then my self,
His Majesty intended to make me the Teacher, and Tutour to Your Majesty, as I
heard it from His own mouth when my ever Honored Lord, and Master, the Earl of
Pembroke, and Mountgomery, brought me to examine His Son, and my Scholar, the
Lord Charles Herbert before His Majesty. And therefore I conceive, that I am
more obliged, and bound in Conscience, to declare what I do infallibly know to
be truth, to perpetuate the understanding thereof, unto Posterities, and to
undeceive the Ignorant, and Simplest sort of people, that know not things
aright, but, in hearing the lying reports of most Malicious men, do swallow
down the same for truths; then many others of His late Majesty's Chaplains.

And I call the great God of Heaven, and the Searcher of all hearts to be my
witness, that what I do, is neither out of Envy, Hatred, or Malice to any
particular man; or to Flatter, and to Insinuate my self into the favor of any
one the greatest man living; or for the hope, and expectation, of any benefit,
or Preferment in the World; whereas I never did, nor ever intended, to desire
any thing of Your Majesty, or of any other, but only to retain, and to enjoy
what our late Pious King, and my most gracious Master, has given me; because
that, although I was Plundered in England, and Plundered in Wales, and
Sequestered of all my Means both in England, and Wales, and had not left me one
penny of any Ecclesiastical Means, nor twenty Pound per annum, in all the World,
to maintain my self, and my Servants, of any Temporal Estate; so that I was
forced for these twelve last years, and more, to live upon a little Tenement,
for which I paid fifty shillings rent to Sir Gr. Williams, and four Pound land
by the year of mine own, poorer then poor Curates, with Oaten-Bread, and
Barly-Bread, and a little Butter-Milk, or Glas-Door, and sometimes Water, being
not able to keep any drop of Ale, or Beer in my house for these two lustra's of
years, and more, as all my Neighbors know; and to go attired in very mean
Country Clothes, and to do many servile works my self, about my House, Garden,
and Cattle, for want of means to hire laborers; yet for all this my sad
condition, lest I should be ensnared, and hindered to discharge my duty, and my
tongue entangled with such Bird-lime, I resolved to accept of no means,
benevolence, or maintenance from the Usurpers, Rebels, and the Robbers of the
Church of Christ, and of their brethren, whatsoever they should offer unto me,
and how great soever my wants should be; as, being contented, with the Apostle,
with any state, or condition, whatsoever, and hoping, that, as the Poet said of
Pompey, Non me videre superbum
Prospera fatorum;
so -- Nec fractum adversa videbunt.

But what I say herein, I do it only to demonstrate the truth of things, not
to those, that knew His Majesty, which were needless, but to those, that knew
Him not, and upon mis-apprehension of His Majesty's action's, related by
Malicious Adversaries misunderstood the same, and made a simple conversion of
White to Black, and of Good to Evil. For,

As I shall answer for what I say, at the Dreadful day of Judgment, I do here
profess, that in all mine Observation of what I saw, and what I heard, of the
Lords, and Gentlemen of His Court, in so many years, as they know I lived
therein, which was, ever since King James died, till the Wars began, I knew
neither Lord, nor Knight, nor Gentleman, nor any other man whatsoever, neither
have I read in any History, Greek, or Latin, of any Emperor, or King, I will
not except Constantine, nor Theodosius, nor St. Edward of Ingland, that was a
juster King, a wiser Governor, and a better man, then King Charles, that was
so Pious in his Devotions, so just and upright in all His Actions, so sweet in
His Disposition, so loving to His Friends, so mild to His Servants, so ready to
forgive His Enemies, and so free from all revenge for His greatest wrongs, that
when His own Subjects, and Servants, so Undutifully, and Maliciously, Rebelled,
and Warred against Him, and bespotted His Innocent Conversation, and pure Life,
with most false, and venomous Aspersions, I heard him say, I thank God, I can
freely forgive all my Enemies, and I pray God, that God would forgive them: and
I dare boldly affirm it, and can justify it, that He was as good a Protestant,
if not the best Protestant in all the Christian World, and, I am sure, the best
Protestant King, or Prince, that ever England saw; who, when I came unto Him,
immediately after Edg-Hill-fight, and said, that whatsoever otherwise, we
wanted in our Abilities, yet our Prayers should never be wanting, to beseech
the Almighty God, night and day, to bless Him, and to protect Him from all His
Adversaries, He answered, that He thanked us for our Prayers, and desired us to
continue our Prayers still, as He hoped we would do, for Him; because He
suffered all this War, and whatsoever else should betide Him, for our sake, and
for the defense of the true Protestant Religion, as it was Established in the
Church of England, and for the preservation of the known Laws of these
Kingdoms: and all the while I lived in His Court, I never saw the man, Clergy,
or Laity, that showed himself so punctually professing the Protestant Religion,
and so zealously, and regularly, observing the true service of God, as His
gracious Majesty.

What other Character I should give to this most excellent Prince, for a loving
faithful Husband to His Queen, and for a dear indulgent Father to all His
Children, His goodness therein is very very far beyond my ability of
Expression; as it is indeed in all the other particulars: so that the praise,
and Eulogie, which Homer gave to Achilles, and Ulysses, Virgil to Aenaeas,
Xenophon to his Cyrus, Eusebius to Constantine, and Osorius to Emmanuel King of
Portugal, I may truly ascribe to Him, or rather what the Prophet Jeremy, and
the Son of Sirach says of the good King Josias, or the Scripture of King
David, that he was a man according to God's own heart, so I hope, and believe,
that I may say with out mistake, without offense, that King Charles the First
was a man according to God's own heart, and though, as Christ non dimidiavit
dies suos, so God did soon bring this good King to His death, that He might be
soon delivered from the contradictions of Sinners, and soon brought to enjoy
the glorious Crown of Eternal life, yet was He most blessed, both in His life,
and death, as hereafter I shall more fully show unto you. And therefore I had
rather say no more, then to say too too little, as I shall, when I say my best
of this most gracious, and now most glorious King, Charles the First.

And though he was so good, so gracious, and so pious a King; yet this good,
gracious, and incomparably pious Protestant King, the gentlest, meekest, and of
the sweetest disposition of all the men I ever saw, was, as you well know, most
rebelliously Warred against, most Judas-like sold, most treacherously betrayed,
and most maliciously, Barbarously, and, for the spiteful mischeivous manner
thereof, most Jewishly, and unexpressably Murdered; and many more Noblemen,
and Gentlemen, Clergy, and Laity, Murdered in like manner, only for His
sake, and for the truth of their Loyalty unto Him, and their Fidelity unto God,
as I have Mystically, and yet fully showed in my Book of The great Antichrist
revealed, and in these Treatises following.

And can any thing so fowly defile the Land, and so highly provoke the Wrath,
and Indignation of God against his people, as the shedding of so much Innocent
Blood? or shall we think, that the just God will rest satisfied, and contented,
to have his Wrath appeased (especially, if we consider what he says to the
three sons of Noah, Genesis ix. 5, 6. and of the Bloody sins of Manasses, 2 King.
xxiv. 4. and to Ahab for letting Benhadad to escape, 1 King. xx. 42.) when he
sees the precious Blood of so Good, so Gracious, and so Pious a King, His own
Vicegerent, and the Blood of so many faithful Christians, Noblemen,
Gentlemen, and other loyal Subjects, that have lost their lives, for their
constancy in professing the true service of God, the right Faith of Christ,
and their duty, and loyalty to their true, and lawful King, left unexpiated,
and according to the Law of justice, unrevenged, and unpunished?

The truth of God says, Not so: therefore His now gracious Majesty, lest His
filial affection of so good, and so loving a Father, and His anger, and
indignation against such monstrous Murderers might seem to transport Him with
Passion to be overpartial, too rigid, and too severe, in His censure, against
these Murderers, did, most wisely, religiously, and Christian-like transmit the
Judgment, and Punishment of these transcendent Malefactors to his Parliament,
who, as he knew, had infinitely suffered most unspeakable Detriment, and
Damage, as well, though not near the like, nor so much as himself, in the loss
of their so good a King.

And the late Parliament, that was, The Keepers of the Liberties of Ingland by
the Authority of our Parliament (and you may compute, what Number of
Arithmetical Letters this name contained) and had very many of the King's
Enemies in it (and therefore likely not to do all things so well, as they
should do) yet has it most gallantly, religiously, and justly sentenced many
of them to death, and the just God, without Question, does most propitiously
accept, and approve of all those their doings, which are just according to his
own Precepts.

But though herein, they have done very well; yet do you think, that they have
done sufficiently well? I will not presume to teach them, that, in State
Affairs, are better able to be my Teachers, then I to advise their Wisdoms,
what they ought to have done; yet, as I am (...), I must humbly crave leave to
set down, what I conceive to be the just Will of God herein; and that is, that
all, and every one, that had any hand, or finger in that good King's Death, or
in the death of any of those His good Subjects, that were unjustly, and
illegally sentenced to death, (I do not speak of them, that were killed in the
War; because, as the Poet Lucan says, Pharsal. lib. 1. Victrix causa Diis
placuit, sed victa Catoni. And as the Prophet David says, The Sword devoureth
the one, as well as the other: but of those, that in cold blood, by usu ping
Judges, under the Color of Law, were contrary to the Laws, both of God, and of
the Land, most unjustly condemned unto death) should, for that their unjust
Proceedings, be justly questioned, and legally tried for their former Offense;
the same being of so high a Nature, as I showed to you before.

But you will say, many of them, as blind Bartimaeus might easily see, that
acted very highly against the last King, and, as it is conceived, had their
hands deep in his death, were as active, as any others, and most special
Instruments, to bring His now Sacred Majesty unto His Right, whereby, they have
fully expiated their foul offense, and deserve rather to be well rewarded and
honored, as some say they are, then any ways questioned, as their Adversaries
would have them to be.

I answer, that His Majesty is wise, as the Angel of God, and knows best,
what he should best do; and the Policy of State, is far beyond the Sphere of
mine Intelligence, and their doings therein ought highly to be commended, and
deserve not meanly to be rewarded; though, as Will. Summers told King Henry the
Eight, that such a Gentleman threatened to kill him, and the King answered,
that, if he killed him, he would have him hanged for it; Will. Summers replied,
Nay good King, let him be hanged before he kills me, or else, his death will
not preserve my life, and his hanging will do me no good: so I heard some say,
that they would have had the Enemies of the last King first punished for their
Rebellion, and the Murder of Him; and then rewarded for their good Service to
His now gracious Majesty, or else, reward them well for their good Service done
to our now gracious King, and then question them, and punish them answerable to
their Deserts, for their Disloyalty, and Treachery to our late King; as I read
it in the Turkish History, and in some other Historians, of some very wise
Kings, that did so to the like Offenders; because, we may believe it for a
truth, that they, which have proved false, to their own true, just, and lawful
Prince, will scarce ever prove faithful to any Prince, nor seem to be, but
either for hope, still to reap the fruit of their Subtlety, to turn, when the
Wind turns, or for fear to be dashed in Pieces, if they turn not their Sayls
to escape those Rocks; which they cannot otherwise avoid; and no thanks to such
men for any good they do, when they do it perforce, and therefore should be
trusted perchance.

And it may be, many of the very Murderers, both of the good King, and of his
loyal Subjects, have robbed, and spoiled, not the Egyptians of their Jewels,
but the Israelites, their Brethren, of their Goods, Lands, and Possessions,
which they have gotten into their own hands, and thereby became exceeding rich,
and enabled themselves to match their Sons, and their Daughters to great
Families, and to bestow large Gifts, that do blind the eyes of the wise, on
others, to make to themselves Friends of their unrig hteous Mammon, to preserve
them from there just deserts, and to pull down the Wrath, and Vengeance of God
on others, for this their obstructing of the straight rule of Justice, that
teaches us to do otherwise.

Or, if it were not so, many men do wonder, how so many men, as were conceived
to have been active, and most of them to have their hands embrued in the good
King's Blood, and were likewise guilty of the death of His innocent Subjects,
should escape uncensured, and so few of them sentenced, to expiate, and appease
the Wrath of God for such horrible, unparallebd, and transcendent Murders: for
I knew eight persons executed at Dublin for the Murder of one ordinary
Traveller, and is it not strange, that we see no more brought to their Trial
for such a S^aughter, as was done upon our good King, and His innocent
Subjects, so judicially, and yet so illegally, and altogether unjustly
sentenced to death? or shall we think, that no more were guilty, then were
condemned? or not rather, that the guilty Murderers, by their Wealth,
Subtlety, and Friends, made many others guilty of God's anger, and the pulling
down of God's vengeance upon many more, for their excusing, covering, and
clearing such abominable Transgressors: for I would have all men to consider
duly, how destructive Murder is to mankind, and how odious, and hateful it
is to God, above all other sins whatsoever, especially, when an innocent man is
judicially, and illegally Murdered, as you may rightly find the truth hereof
fully proved in the fifth Chapter of the first Book of The Great Antichrist
revealed, and in these Sermons following.

And I would the Protectours of the King's Murderers would rightly weigh what
the people said to King David, that His life was worth ten thousand of the
lives of the common people; and how the Lord punished the whole house, and
posterity of Saul, and all the Kingdom of Israel until his wrath was satisfied,
for the innocent death of the Gibeonites, that were but a poor contemptible
people, but killed without cause; 2. Sam. xxi. and especially, that there be
not any more, but two sins, that I can find, in the whole Book of God, that
the Lord says, cannot be pardoned, and obliterated, without their due
punishment, and they are, 1. The high Abuse of God's Messengers, and Publishers
of his Will. 2. The unjust shedding of innocent Blood. For


Of the First the Spirit of God says, that when the Lord God sent his
Messengers unto the Children of Israel, and they mocked the Messengers of God,
and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, the wrath of the Lord arose
against his People, until there was no Remedy; as if he had said, For other
sins of these Israelites, some ways, and remedies might have been found out, as
Moses, and Aaron, by their prayers, and censers appeased the wrath of God, to
turn away the Punishment of them; and David, and Ezra did the like from the
Jews: but when they mocked his Messengers, despised his Word, and misused his
Prophets, which were the only S^^ve, or Medicine, that could heal their
sickned Souls, when they refused, and cast away these Remedies from them, then
there was no Remedy in the World for them, to preserve them from their just
deserved Punishment; and therefore says the Text, The Lord brought upon them
the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the Sword, in the House
of their Sanctuary, and had no Compassion upon young Man, or Maiden, old Man,
or him, that stooped for Age; he gave them all into his Hand; for that there
was no Remedy. 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 15, 16, 17.

And of the Second the Spirit of God says, that the Lord sent against
Jehoiakim bands of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the
Moabites, and bands of the Children of Ammon, and he sent them against Juda to
destroy it, and to remove them out of his sight for the sins of Manasses, and
for the innocent blood that he shed, (for he filled Jerusalem with innocent
blood, as the Judges of the Rump-Parliament did fill Ingland) which the Lord
would not pardon, 2 Reg. xxiv. 4. as if he had said, though the Lord God might
have been persuaded by Prayers, and Tears, and Sacrifices to pardon all other
Sins; yet this sin of shedding innocent Blood, especially, when it is
judicially shed, the Lord will no ways, nor by any means pardon it, and, though
men would fain pardon it, yet God will not pardon it; because God, which is the
God of truth, and Truth it self, has said it: and, that we should not doubt of
it, he has said, Surely, your blood of your Lives will I require; at the hand
of every Beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, at the hand of every
man's Brother will I require the life of man. And, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed: for in the Image of God made he man, Genesis ix.
5, 6. and see how fully, and how energetically the Lord has said, and the
Scripture has set down, all these things, against the pardoning of them, that
shed innocent blood.

And then, these things being duly weighed, as Saint Ambrose said to
Theodosius, Quod inconsulto fecisti, consultius revocetur, so I believe, that,
if any man has inconsideratly, either through ignorance, corruption, or
partiality caused, or consented to let any Agag to escape, whom the Justice of
God has designed to death, he would assuredly, consultius errorem corrigere,
amend His former error, and not let the death of such a King, as was worth ten
thousand of us, and the Blood of so many of His loyal Subjects, as were
judicially, and unjustly condemned to death, pass away unpunished, and
unquestioned, whenever any of the Authors, or Contrivers of their death
should be found out; or at least wise, he would be satisfied, and not blame
others, for doing, if they do, what he should have done: It is no matter when;
(better late then never) for Nunquam sera est ad Justitiam via, The way to do
Justice is never too far, nor the time too late; and God deserreth his
Judgments for many years together, when we find Murderers flourishing in all
Pomp, and Power a long time, as I have showed it at large in the Tragedy of
Zimri; and yet at last, to come to taste of their just deserved Punishment; as
Pilate, and Herod, and the rest of the Murderers of Jesus Christ, were not
apprehended by God's Justice, some of them in forty years after they had
condemned their just, and lawful King; and many more such Murderers you may
find in Dr. Beard's Theater of God's Judgments, and in other Authors to have
lain secure, and to have slept in their sins for a long Season, before the hand
of Vengeance has rouzed them up: and yet after many Ages to pay Death for
Death.

And therefore, though the Parliament, and Parliaments have passed over, and
perhaps pardoned those, whom God says, he will not pardon; yet I conceive,
that whenever any of them, that had their hands imbrued, or the least finger
stained, in our King's Blood, or in the Blood those, His loyal Subjects, that
were judicially, unjustly condemned, shall be found out, and made known to be
such, they should be brought unto their Trial; especially when we consider,
that Justice done upon such transcendent Malefactors, that do now, as yet (as
it is conceived) wallow in those innocent Bloods, that they have spilt, and do
jet up and down, most proudly, in the spoils of their Slaughtered, and Beggered
Brethren, would, as the Scripture testifies, purge the Land from the stain of
that innocent Blood, which they have so plentifully lost and does still cry,
like Abel's Blood, for Vengeance against them, appease the Wrath of God for our
former neglect of doing Justice; increase the King's Revenues, by the Forfeited
estates of these Transgressors; satisfy the Friends of those Murdered
innocents; terrify all other Rebellious hearts from such horrible attempts,
and all other Judges, from abusing the Laws, and perverting Justice; and be an
excellent Example of a just, and unpartial proceeding against Traitors, for
the Foreign Kings to applaud it, and for their Subjects to fear it, if ever the
like thoughts should enter into their hearts of doing such things, as were done
by these Murderers.

And truly it has often grieved me, to hear the vulgar people so generally
complaining, that they see diverse of the late King's Enemies, and Rebels, that
they suspect guilty, some way, of the Kings death, so much favored in the
World, and so domineering over others, jetting up and down in Pride, so
gloriously trimmed with the spoils of the loyal Subjects, and some of the
King's Friends, and faithful Servants, sneaking up and down, wholly dejected,
so as if there were an Act of Oblivion past of the King's Friends, and an Act
of Indemnity for His Adversaries.

To whom I have often answered that our King is wise, as the Angel of God, and
He knows best what He has to do, far better then the best of us all, and
they should rather remember what the Psalmist says; Fret not thy self because
of the ungodly, neither be thou Envious because of the wicked doers: for they
shall soon be cut down like the Grass, and be withered like unto the green
Herb; especially when their Iniquity, their Treasons, and Treacheries, that as
yet are hidden from the Eyes of men, shall be found out, and be made apparent
unto the World.

And therefore, though I say all this, that I said before, as from the
straight, unpartial rule of severe Justice; yet, as I am a Bishop of Jesus
Christ, and a Messenger of the God of mercy, that takes no delight in the blood
of his Brethren, nor desires the death of any one; I am obliged most humbly,
and earnestly to pray, and beseech Your gracious Majesty, to be still gracious,
as You have demonstratively showed Your Self to be hitherto, unto these
ungracious Offenders; and when the Law of Justice has decreed their Desert, to
stretch forth unto them the right Hand of Mercy, and to do with them, as the
Wisdom of the most merciful God shall direct Your Majesty.

Secondly, The next thing, that I am bound to declare, and to remonstrate unto
Your Majesty, and to all others, is, (lest Your Majesty should be misinformed
concerning me, as I understood by Mr. Secretary Nicholas, I have been
misrepresented in Your Majesty's Court,) most humbly to beseech Your Majesty,
to give me leave, to make that Remonstrance to the World, which I hope no man
can contradict: as,

That I was Your Father's Chaplain, and waited on His Majesty six, or seven
years at least, in the Month of December, and when the Wars began, though my
ever honored Lord, and Master, the Earl of Pembroke, and Montgomery was
misled, contrary to his Childrens desire, to adhere unto the Parliament, which
fault can no ways be excused, though I could say very much to lessen it;
because I knew the Uprightness of that Noble Person, that was hoodwinked by the
Subtlety of his Adherents: yet, my self, according to my duty, stuck to his
Majesty, and persuaded some of his Children, that were my Scholars, to do the
like; and I wrote my first Book against the Parliament, which is entitled, The
Grand Rebellion, and, being fetched by a Troop of Soldiers, was carried
Prisoner to North-hampton, where the Committee had The Grand Rebellion in their
Hands, and had not God most mercifully, and very strangely turned away their
eyes, from looking on it, to preserve me, I looked for no other end, then to be
utterly ruined; but the Lord preserved me, and delivered me out of their hands:
and the next Winter, being in Oxford, I printed my Discovery of Mysteries, or,
The Plots of the pretended Parliament, to overthrow both Church, and State; and
on that very day, that I was preaching in Saint Marie's before the Parliament,
then sitting in Oxford, the Soldiers from Northhampton came, and plundered my
house, and all my Household Stuff, and about eight milch Kine, and all that I
had in Abthorp, where my Wife, and Children resided, and sequestered my Lands to
the use of the Parliament: yet this Breach could not break my Loyalty to my
King, or my Heart in my Body; but by the next Winter after, I had written my
third Book, entitled The Rights of Kings, and the Wickednesses of the
pretended Parliament, etc. And according to my poor Ability, out of the Means I
had from Wales, I gave unto His Majesty's own Hand every Winter, for three
years together, the Testimony of my Loyalty, and Affection, to the uttermost of
my Power; and His gracious Majesty did, like a most gracious King, most
favorably accept of that Mite, which I offered Him, as Sir Bryan O-Neal, and
others do very well know.

And when Major General Mytton came, and subdued our Country of Wales, though
the Archbishop of York was my singular good Friend, and very earnestly
persuaded me to submit unto the Parliament, and, to use his own words, said,
that I should fare no worse then he did, but should sail in the same Boat, and
so sink, or swim, and so be saved, or destroyed together; yet I answered, that
I would never trust them, that they would be true to me, that wrote so many
Books against them, when they were so false unto their King, that had been so
gracious unto them: and therefore I went, and gave ten pound to a Parliament
Captain to let me pass into Ireland, by a most desperate Attempt; under the
hands, and through the Pikes of mine Enemies, that would have destroyed me, had
they but known me: and there how faithfully, and freely I have often preached
for Obedience to his Majesty, and against both the Inglish, Scottish, and the
Irish Rebels, the most Honorable Duke of Ormond his Grace, and all the rest of
the Council at Dublin, can sufficiently testify.

And when the most noble Marquess could not possibly preserve Ireland any
longer, but was fain to yield it up unto the Parliament, and I had the Benefit
of the Articles of Ireland confirmed, and allowed unto me, under the Hands of
all the Commissioners, that signed them, I was taken at Sea in my Passage into
Wales, and pillaged of all that I had, my Books, Goods, Money, and Clothes, to
the full value of an Hundred Pounds, and then, coming to the Parliament for to
have the performance of the said Articles, one Scot, since executed for a
Traitor, demanded, if I wrote not The Grand Rebellion, and the other Books,
that I had written against the Parliament, and, I confessing the truth, he
asked, if I deserved not rather to have my head cut off, then to have the
benefit of any Articles; so I was feign to make mine Address to Sir Thomas
Fairfax, who very honorably wrote two Letters (which after I showed them, I
got again, and do still keep them, as a memorial of his just, and great favor
unto me) one to the Committee of North-hampton, who presently restored me to
all the Lands I had in that County; the other to the Committee of Anglesey,
who, though they were my near Kinsmen, and some of them descended from the
House of Owen Tydder, the Grandfather of Henry the Seventh, as well as my
self; yet very unjustly, and unfriendly, they denied to restore me to my Means
in that County: so that I was feign to make my second Address to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, who again, as honorably as formerly, wrote to
Major General Mytton, to put me into all my Possessions; but, before I could
come to General Mytton, Anglesey was revolted from the Parliament, and besieged
by Mytton, and the Means of the Deanerie, that belonged unto me, was Alienated
from the Church, and taken quite away, and so ever since I was forced to live
upon less means, then twenty pounds per annum, though my ever honored Lord the
Earl of Pembrook, and Mountgomery, offered, to procure me a Living, in
Lancashire, worth 400. l. per annum, so I would submit my self to the
Parliament, which, with many thanks unto his Lordship for his favor, I utterly
refused; and, though other Bishops accepted, and received, each one, 100.
pounds a year from Mr. Henry Cromwell, that offered the same very courteously
unto me, yet, knowing how unjustly he had power to bestow it, and how I should
be fettered if I accepted it, I refused to take it, and resolved to accept of
no Salarie, Gratuity, gift, or Benevolence from any man to this very day, but
to be very well contented with the poor estate, that God had left me; and when
as diverse Royalists, and other good Christians; seeing my mean estate, and
considering my much Sufferings, did offer me, and sent unto me diverse sums of
Moneys, I refused them all, and was feign, before they left sending to me, to
desire them publicly in the Pulpit at Dublin, to offer no more of their gifts,
and benevolence unto me (for whose love and good will I did most heartily thank
them) because I Preached not in expectation of any reward, but resolved to
refuse the same, in hope that they would the rather believe the truth of my
Doctrine, as I thank God, I saw many of them did, though many others were much
offended with me, so that I was forced to leave Dublin, and so fell to my
Prayeres and Studies more, and more, to discover The Great Antichrist,
comforting my self herein, that, if I was not mightily mistaken, in all my
readings, of the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost touching the coming of
that Antichrist within three years and an half after both the witnesses were
slain, that is, the King killed, and all the Bishop's silenced, and suppressed
from the execution of their Episcopal Function, which is their Spiritual
killing, I should, if I should live so long, see, both Your Majesty Restored,
to Your Kingdom, and the Bishop's Elevated, to their former Dignity, as,
blessed be God, now both are fully come to pass, according to mine exposition
of that Prophecy.

And this Prophetical expectation, of the Resurrection, and Restoration of
these two witnesses, the King, and the Bishops, according to the true sense and
meaning of the Holy Ghost I made known, and showed it to very many, both in
Dublin, in Wales, and in London; and though some of them, that saw mine
exposition of those Prophesies, that I thus explained, did but laugh at them,
and others thought it but a Fancy; yet, blessed be the God of Heaven, that
Reveals secrets unto his Servants, as Daniel says, we see the truth of mine
Explication, in all things accordingly fulfilled, and the confidence, that I
had in the assurance of their fulfilling, strengthened me, to be so bold in my
Sermon before the Judges of the general Assizes at Conwey, to speak for Your
Majesty's Restoration when You were coming toward Worcester, that, Colonel
Carter, now Sir John Carter (a man then vehement against Your Majesty, and now
loyal to Your Majesty as many others are, that cannot otherwise choose) told
me, as soon as ever I had done it, but that he would not seem to be uncivil: he
would have pulled me down by the Ears, out of the Pulpit, and the Governor of
Beumaresh, Colonel Courtney, was resolved to have clapped me up in Prison; so
that I was faign presently to fly away to save my self; and the like boldness,
I always used, in all the many Sermons, that I preached at Dublin, as most of
that loyal City can bear me witness; so that, sometimes I was forced, to take
Sea, and to fly, as I did at Conwey, to escape, as soon as ever I had finished
my Sermon. Sic multum terris jactatus and alto.

And now being restored to my Bishopric by the great goodness of God, and the
happy Restoration of Your Sacred Majesty, I do most humbly crave leave to
remonstrate, that as soon as I arrived in Ireland, I went about my Diocese, in
my Visitation, from one end to the other, that I might understand the State of
the Church, and the Condition of the Country, where I was exceedingly welcomed
by all the old Protestants, as they are termed, in every place; and when I had
sworn Churchwardens, and Sides-men, or Assistants in every Parish, I gave them
some Articles to be inquired after, and a convenient time, to return their
Answer into the Court.

And when they had answered to those Articles, I found thereby (and by what I
saw with mine own eyes in the Country) that the Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Quakers, and the other fanatic Limbs of the Beast, the Members of the Great
Antichrist, and the false Prophet that I have so amply deciphered, in my last
printed Book of the Antichrist, had suffocated, and suppressed the whole usual,
and accustomed Service of God; and as they had done in Ingland, to his dearest
Servants, so in Ireland, they had beheaded most of the Churches of Christ
within my Diocese, the Roofes of them, both Slates, and Timber, being quite
taken off, and converted to their own use, and the Walls of very many of them,
thrown down, even to the Ground; and of above an hundred Parishes, I saw not
ten Churches standing, nor half so many well repaired; they had as the Prophet
says, so destroyed, all the Houses of God in the Land, as being loath that
God, which gave them all they had, should have a House for his Servants, to
meet together, to praise his Name. And the great, and famous, most beautiful
Cathedral Church of Saint Keney, they have utterly defaced, and ruined, thrown
down all the Roof of it, taken away five great, and goodly Bells, broken down
all the Windows, and carried away every bit of the Glass, that, they say, was
worth, a very great deal; and all the doors of it, that the Hogs might come,
and root, and the Dogs gnaw the Bones of the dead; and they brake down a most
exquisite Marble Font, (wherein the Christians Children were regenerated) all
to pieces, and threw down the many many goodly Marble Monuments, that were
therein, and especially, that stately, and costly Monument of the most
honorable, and noble Family of the House of Ormond, and diverse others, of most
rare, and excellent Work, not much inferior (if I be not much mistaken) to
most of the best (excepting the King's) that are in Saint Paul's Church, or the
Abbey of Westminster: and, when I desired Mr. Connel my Register, to begin to
repair some places of that Church, and to set up some Benches, and Forms, to
let the people to understand, that we intended, and hoped (though it should
cost two thousand pounds) to have all the Church repaired; some of the
Anabaptists (as we have good reason to think so) came in the night time, (the
Church having no doors) and with Axes, and Hammers, or Hatchets, brake them
down, and carried them quite away, and did other unseemly Abuses besides.

And for the Preachers, and Ministers of God's word. The Great Antichrist had
so filled the Country with his false Prophets, Weavers, and Tailors, and the
like Preachers, that there were when I came thither, but three lawfully
ordained Ministers, in all the Diocese of Ossory. Mr. Baskervil, Mr. Kearney,
and Mr. Deane. The Laborers were so few, though the Harvest was very great,
especially, if we hoped to root up those very many stinking Weeds, that the
false Prophet has sowed amongst us; and for the Bishop's House, the Slates,
Roof, Timber, Windows, and Doors, all carried quite away, and very much of the
very Walls, thrown down, and ruined: Et sic periere ruinae: so that it cost me
above thirty pounds already, to fit a Room, or two, for me to lay in.

And for the Lands of the Bishop, the best of them are pretended to be
Fee-Farmes, and a Trifle reserved to be the Bishop's Rent, scarce worth the
looking after; and those pretended Fee-Farms, with most other of the best
Lands, contrary to all the directions of Cromwell, that, in all his Commissions,
excepted all the Church Lands, from the Soldiers Lots, were by the
Anabaptist's Commissioners, notwithstanding their grand Masters Prohibition,
given to the Colonels and Captains for their Arrears, and they do absolutely
deny to restore them unto the Church, until they besatisfied with Reprisals,
and so the Bishop has not any thing from them.

But if the Bishops be so still kept from their Means, how shall we be able to
do our Duties, and to discharge the Service, that we owe both to God, to our
King, and to the Church of God, when the Soldiers divide our Lands, as formerly
they did the Coat of Christ among themselves; and yet Pharaoh-like require of
us the full Tale of Bricks, though they take away the Straw wherewith we make
them.

But the mountainous Lands were only set annually to Tenants, and others, who
by reason of their high Rents, and greatness of their Taxes, were feign to
leave the same, and the Rents of some, a year, and of others, two years unpaid;
and so the Lands in many places, became waste, when no other Tenant durst enter
upon them, for fear of the Exchequer Writs, to distrain their Cattle, for the
Arrearages of Rents, as they had distrained, upon diverse of the under-Tenants
of them, that had run away; And for the Lands, and Houses of the Bishop, in,
and about Kilkenny, that are a special part of the Bishops Revenue, the
Soldiers took them all, either for their Arrears, or of the State for Rent,
into their hands; and the Recusants, being all driven out of the City, the
poorer sort of them remained in the Irish Town, and built Cabbins, and Cottages
upon the Bishop's Lands, and Gardens, and were forced, to pay their Rent unto
the Soldiers, that had the said Lands, and Gardens from the State; and when I
sent to demand my Rent from those Tenants, the Soldiers presently distrained
their Goods; and the poor men running unto me, to complain, and to know what
they should do, I willed them to pay their Rents unto the Soldiers, though they
were due to me; because, that rather then I would have the faces of these poor
men grinded betwixt the Millstones of two pretending LandLords, or that should
undertake so many Suits in Law, with so many Swordmen, as do now hold the poor
Bishop's Lands, I thought it better to be without my Bishopric, if no other
redress could be afforded me.

And whereas the Irish Town, that was without Walls, and altogether without the
Walls of the City of Kilkenney, did belong to the Bishop of Ossory, as being
his Manor of New-Court, and paid a very considerable Rent unto the Bishop,
which was a special part of his Revenue, Cromwell finding them Roman
Catholics, and involved in that unnatural Rebellion, and Un-Christian
Plundering of the Protestants, burnt most of their houses, and demolished them
to the ground; so that where formerly there were whole streets of goodly
houses, and rich Tradesmen inhabiting, and paying, some of them, great Rents,
and all of them, some chief Rent, unto the Bishop, the Bishop now has never a
penny, but only some plats, and patches of waste ground, to tread upon; when
as the Poet says, -- Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit:

And these few houses, that escaped the Tyrants, and fire, the men, of the 49.
years to whom Your Majesty bestowed the City of Kilkenney, with other places,
for their Arrears, have seized upon them, and so left nothing, but the name,
unto the poor Bishop of Ossory: for under that pretense of having the City of
Kilkenny, they do let, and set all the houses that did belong to the Bishops
Manor; and, as it is most true, that ne Hercules contra duos, so, how I
should contest with so many men I cannot tell; only this I can tell, that if
they do thus take away the Lands of the Churches, and detain them from the
right owners, I know not, which is more Sacrilegious, either these fair-spoken
Royalists, or the foul-mouthed Cromwellists, or the Rebellious Papists: because
each of them do take them away from the Church, and involve the Churchmen in
more troubles, to recover them, then they are like to get by them while they
live; such is our miserable condition to deal with these many men; I dare not
say, that they are the Limbs of the Beast, but they do the same things, that
the Beast did, and if they will take them, and detain them still from the
Church, I being full seventy four years old, am not able to contest with so
many men of arms, but I do hereby cite them, to appear to answer such things,
as I shall allege against them, before Jesus Christ.

And whereas Your Majesty's gracious pleasure was, most graciously to grant
unto every respective Bishop the Fee-Farms, and Leases of the Lands, that are
now vested in the Crown by the forfeiture of the Rebels in forty one; save
those, that should be restored to their former Possessours, upon the
information of his innocence Your Majesty, (being misinformed, as I
conceive, as the best, wisest, and justest King may be misinformed, as King
David was, in the case of Mepbosheth) has restored the most rigid, and stiff
Roman Catholic, that was always with, if not of, the Supreme Council, and the
Pope's Nuncio, at Kilkenny; and, as I am informed, a violent Plunderer of the
poor Protestants, and a Captain of Horse among the Rebels, and had taken Lands
in Connagh for his Estate in Lemster, unto all the Lands, that he held in the
County of Kilkenny, and to the best Lord-ship, that belonged unto the Bishop of
Ossory, and the only Lands, and Lordship of any note, that was held by any of
the Roman Catholics, and now vested in the Crown by that Rebellion, in all the
Diocese of Ossory; so that this Lord-ship, called the Upper-Court, and
Freshford, being restored unto the former Possessour, the Church of Ossory
receives not any great benefit by that Your Gracious favor unto the Church;
but her Lands, and Revenues herein stand like the Body of the Nightingale, that
is vox praetereaque nihil, and that has much feathers, and little flesh, or,
as the Poet says, Magni nominis umbra; ten pound yearly for that, which is
worth near two hundred pound.

And therefore Your Petitioner humbly prays, that Your Majesty would be
graciously pleased to cause, upon this informamation, that those Lands, and
Lordship of Upper-Court, shall be restored, according to Your most gracious
Grant, unto the Church. And, as Your Petitioner has already bestowed the whole
last years Rent, all that was due to the Bishop, (and more then he received as
yet) from the Tenants, for the repairing of the Chancel, and Quire of Saint
Keney, and the Bishop's house. (As the Rent of, Captain Joiner 8 l. Captain
Mainzor 24 l. Captain Eliot 25 l. Colonel Redman 33 l. Mr. John Grase 29 l.
Colonel Dillan 24 l. Mr. Feak 20 l. Lieutenant Col. Wheeler 7 l. Mrs. Bolger 20
l. The Miller 5 l.


Which is all the Rent, and Revenue of my Bishopric for the last year, because
the Parliament having got our Lands at an easy rate, only for taking it, did
in like manner let it as easily, for less then half the worth of it, which made
in all an hundred seventy three pounds, whereof your Petitioner laid out for
the repairing of the Chancel, and Quire of Saint Keney Church, one hundred, and
fifty pounds, and for repairing the Bishop's house, that was all so extreme
ruinous, above thirty pounds) So he does hereby promise, and oblige himself, to
God, and to Your Majesty, most faithfully, and freely to dispose of it all,
for the reparation of the body of the Cathedral Church of Saint Keney, that
Your Majesty may see, Your Petitioner does not so earnestly prosecute the
recovery, and restoring of those Lands, and Lordship of Upper-Court unto the Sea of Ossorie, for the enriching of himself, that, blessed be God for it, has
enough both for himself, and his, but for the benefit of the House, and Church
of God.

Or if Your Majesty think not well to continue Your former gracious Grant
thereof unto the Church, Your Petitioner humbly prays, You would be pleased
to further Your Petitioner to recover from Robert She, the former Possessor,
to whom it is now restored, the twenty years Rent, that is unpaid, and is due
to your Petitioner, ever since the Rebellion began, and before; and which
amounts to two hundred Pound, beside the forbearance of them: the which, Your
Petitioner conceives to be most just, and agreeable to all Law, Equity, and
Conscience.

And for the rest of the Minister's Livings, through what fate, or by what
means I know not, but through the just Judgment of God, that disposes all
things wisely, so it is, that very many of the poor Protestants, which were
robbed, and plundered by the Irish Rebels, are not one jot the better, by the
subduing of the Rebels, and Displantation of the Roman Catholics; but with
the Irish, and like the Irish, do live most poorly, and have as hard a Task to
get their own former Estates out of the Soldier's hands, as to pull the Club
out of Hercules his hands, as it appears by their dealing with my self; when,
upon my Petition unto the House of Peers, to be restored unto the Bishop's
Lands, that my Predecessor dyed seized of, I had an order of the Lords unto the
Sheriffs, to put me into the Possession of it, which was so totally detained
from me, that I had not so much Lands left me about Kilkenny, as would feed a
Goose; and when the Sheriffs, according to mine Order, came, to deliver me
Possession of it, a Captain of the Long Parliament, that had it given him, as
he said, for his Arrears, stood before the Sheriffs, and told them, they should
not tread upon his Lands, until he had his Reprisal for it, and because I knew
him to be a Member of the House of Commons, I advised the Sheriff; to let him
alone, and by no means to entrench upon their Privilege, conceiving, that
hereby he has more affronted the whole House of Lords, in withstanding their
Order, then he has done me, and if they pass by such an Affront, I may far
better do it; and if the Soldiers deal thus with me, that am their Bishop, and
a Member of the Higher House of Parliament, how hardly, think you, shall the
other poor Protestants, and the rest of the Country Gentlemen, that have been
these many years kept out of their Estates, get their Lands, and Possessions
out of their hands? let Blackwel's Case be for instance.

Yet truly I must needs confess, that the Temporal Lords, both of the Roman
Religion, and the Protestants, at all times have, and do show themselves most
faithful, and loyal to Your Majesty, and both favorable unto our Church, and,
without any superciliousness, very friendly with us, that are their Bishops,
and most willing to further us to all our Rights, and to grant us any lawful
favor, and especially to assist us, to root out those weeds, that disturb us
in the Government of God's Church, and the restoring, and setting forward the
true Service of God amongst our People.

But the Colonels, and Captains, and the rest of the Soldiery, that subdued the
Rebels, have the most part of the Kingdom in their Possession, and are very
tenacious of what is in their Hands, and do live gallantly, and very fairly;
and yet, in many places, the Country is left un-inhabited, and the best parts
but thinly peopled, and the ground lying well nigh waste, for the most part,
untilled, and ill-stocked, so that the Livings, which formerly were worth an
hundred pound a piece per annum, are now set for little more then twenty pounds
a piece; as mine own Rectory of Rath-Saran, and Rath-downy, that, before the
Rebellion, were reputed to be worth above an hundred pounds per an. were set
the last year for twenty six pounds, and the Lands of Bishop's-Logh, that my
Predecessor did set to his own Son for eighty pounds per annum, was this last
year, and before, set to Mr. Feak for twenty pound, and the like; by reason of
which slender means, and tenuity of the Livings, I found, that the
Commissioners for setting the Tithes, and settling Ministers to preach unto the
people granted to one Mr. Kearny, that had three Parishes before, 7, or 8.
Parishes more, and yet all those scarce able to make him a reasonable
Maintenance of an hundred pound per annum; so they granted six to one Mr.
Brooks, though he was no lawful ordained Minister; and Mr. Blake had six
Parishes given unto him by the Mayor, and Burgesses of Waterford, and all not
worth above twenty pounds per annum, as appears by his Presentation, and this
subsequent Letter unto my self.

HONORED SIR,
WE the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Citizens, of the City of WATERFORD, having in our
Power, by Charter from King CHARLES the First of ever blessed Memory, and
before by his Ancestors, the Presentation of a Minister to the Vicarages of
KILL CULLEHENE, RATH-PATRICK, BALLY GOREN, KILL MAKEVOY, MACKOLLY, and
WHITCHURCH, with the Donation thereof, all which amounts to twenty, and one
Pounds, or thereabouts, per annum, and having by consent in Council presented
RICHARD BLAKE, Clerk, to the same; WE earnestly pray, that if your Lordship
have any in your Dispose, that lies contiguous thereto; that your Lordship
would please to favor him therein, and it will thankfully be acknowledged by
us, and what you please to command, that is in our Powers, you may freely
command,

Waterford the 20.th. November. 1660. Your LORDSHIPS affectionate Friends, and
Servants. DAVIES Mayor. Sam. Brinsmead. Sheriffs. Sam. Brown. Sheriffs.



The Cause of which Sterility of Fruit, and Scarcity of Means, and the
thinness, or fewness both of Houses, and Inhabitants, I conceive to be, that
the Adventurers, and Soldiers have got the most part of the Lands, of the
Bishops, and Protestants, that the Irish drove away, and all the Lands of the
Rebels, and Roman Catholics, into their own Hands, and are neither willing to
part with it, nor able to till it, manure it, and replenish it with Tenants,
and Husbandry, as it ought to be.

Indeed I do confess, and it is most true, that, if the Irish Rebels, Popish
Priests, and Roman Catholics had had their Wids neither Protestant Bishop,
nor any other Protestant should ever have had any foot of Land in all the
Kingdom of Ireland.

And you know what Lex talionis says to them, but that we ought to be more
merciful, and to write our wrongs in the Dust, and not in Marble.

And therefore, we are all obliged, as specially to Your Sacred Majesty, that
brought our Peace, and Restoration to all, that we have; so Secondly to the
Adventurers, that laid out their Moneys, and to the Soldiers, that ventured
their Lives, and endured hardship, to restore us unto our Rights.

But if they adventured, either life, or money, to drive out the Rebels, and to
get both their Lands, and ours, that never offended, unto themselves, as many
of the Soldiers do about Kilkenny, then we owe them no thanks; and they do no
better, then as the Thieves robbed us, so they rob the Thieves, not for the
love of Justice, to make Restitution to the Owners, but to enrich themselves,
and how God likes of this keeping the right Owners from their Lands, and
Houses, let the Adventurers, Soldiers, and Buyers of them, judge themselves,
the Lord will judge it at another Day.

All which, and many more Distempers, that might be seen in that unsettled
Kingdom, and the Distresses of many unrelieved pillaged Protestants, that are
continued, through the unbridled Fury of the Presbyterians, and the blind
illimited Zeal of the Anabaptists, Quakers, and other Sectaries, that have
swarmed in this place, as appears by this Catalogue of them, that were
presented by the Churchwardens of one Parish, for their unlawful Conventicles.

That is to say, William Burgess of Kilkenny Esquire. Thomas Wilson, Esquire Thomas
Fox, Gent. Thomas Fonyver, Merchant. John Ball, Merchant. Francis Mitchel,
Merchant. Thomas Newman Esquire Richard Inwood, Innkeeper. William Hays, Gent. John
Beaver, Merchant. Edward Evans, Tanner. William Waters, Tailor. Francis
Hamblyn. George Dawson. William Mitchel, Gardener. Charles Duke, Gent. Thomas
Collins, Gent.


I thought it my Duty in all Humbleness, and Fidelity, to declare, and
remonstrate unto Your Majesty, and to Your most Honorable Parliament, and all
others, that desire to be informed herein: leaving it to Your Majesty's most
wise, and pious Consideration, and their religious Care of God's Service, and
Servants, to do, what to Your Majesty seems best herein; and most humbly
craving Pardon, if, in these things, I have done any thing, that in the least
way might offend Your Majesty, whom I so truly honor, and will ever as
faithfully serve, as any Subject within Your Kingdoms, not only, as You are my
King, but especially as You are the gracious Son of so glorious a Father, as is
that blessed King, CHARLES the First, whose Name, and Memory shall ever be like
the Composition of the most precious Ointment, that is made by the Art of the
Apothecary. So I rest.

Your MAJESTY'S most loyal, faithful, and obedient Subject, and Orator, GR.
OSSORY.

THE FIRST TREATISE.
Acts 7.52. Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And they
have slain them which showed before of the coming of the Just One, of whom ye
have been now the betrayers and murderers.


THE occasion of this our meeting and congregating our selves together at this
time in Gods House, is to confess our Great sins, to declare our Sorrows, and
to testify our Humiliation; as for all Other our transgressions, so Especially
for the high Rebellion, and malicious Deliberate murder, which our Fathers, our
Brethren, and the Rest of the people of these Dominions, have committed,
against their Own most Pious, Just, and Lawful King, CHARLES the First. And I
know not any ways, how to do the same better, then by parelleling the
Transcendent murder of our King, with that Inexpressible murder of the King of
the Jews, and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

For the performance of which Duty, I shall desire you to give Attendauce to
the Word of God, which you may find written in Acts 7.52.

These Words that I have read unto you, are the Words of the protoMartyr, Saint
Stephen; the first Witness, that lost his Life for Preaching the Truth, and
testifying the Faith and death of Jesus Christ: And they do contain a three
fold Act, or three special steps, descending down-wards toward hell, which,
with the assistance of God, I intend to handle, not to direct you the way
thither, but to divert all men from those dangerous paths, whose ends must be
so doleful unto them, without end: And they are,

1. Persecutio Prophetarum; the persecution of the Prophets. Three parts.


2. Occisio Praedicatorum; the killing of the Preachers.

3. Perditio and interfectio justi Regis; the betraying and murdering of a most
just, and the most righteous King, the King of the Jews. The three fowlest
facts that could be acted by any men, and would never have been done by any,
but by Jews, or worse than Jews.

1. The wisest amongst the sons of men says, Surely, that you need not doubt
it, Eccles. 7.7.
oppression makes a wise man mad, and therefore likely it makes simple men
and fools more mad; and oppression, which the Grecians call, (...), is nothing
else but violenta pressura, a violent pressure, and a pinching of their bodies,
or a sore pressing upon their estates, and impoverishing them, by Taxes,
impositions, and services, more than by the Laws ought to be imposed, or that
they be well able to bear.

And yet, as the Poet says, Clamitat ad Coelum --
Vox oppressorum, mercesque retenta laborum.
This oppression of the poor cries loud in the ears of God, for vengeance
against the oppressors; Psalm. 9.9. Prove. 22.23. Amos 5.21.
and God promises to be a refuge for the oppressed, and He threatens to
punish all the oppressors of the poor; yea, and to spoil the soul of those
that spoil them: and therefore, the great men of this world should take heed,
that they oppress not the poor, the fatherless, and the widow, that have least
shelter to preserve them from oppression.

But if Oppression be so heinous a vice, and so loud a crying sin, what shall
we think of Persecution? for persecution, that is derived of persequor: (...),
which signifies, ad extremum usque sequi, to follow and pursue his desire to
the uttermost execution, is of a far higher strain, and a close following after
the person of any one, to do him some great and apparent mischief, either to
take away his Liberty, or to bereave him of his Life, as Cain did to Abel, Gent
4.8. 1 Samuel 13.14.
and as Saul persecuted David, and hunted after him, even as a Patridge is
hunted upon the mountain from place to place. And thus did the Fathers of these
Jews persecute the Prophets: For the better understanding of which point, Three
things observable in the 1. part. i.e. The persecution of the Prophets.
I humbly beseech you to observe these three things.

1. The persecutors, their Fathers.

2. The persecuted, the Prophets.

3. The extent and generality of their persecution, Quem Prophetarum?

1. The persecutors.
The persecutors are said to be (...) their fathers; and (...) dicitur quasi
(...), ex se genitos servans, the keeper and preserver of those that are
begotten of him; And therefore it is the duty of all Fathers, Filios colere,
quasiproprie vitae propaginem, and proprio exemplo optime regere, tanquam
membra, says Marcilius Ficinus; To love and to delight in his Children, as in
the issue and the offspring of his own flesh, and the Continuance of his life;
and to guide them and instruct them by his own proper example, as he does guide
the members of his own body. And the Poet very divinely says, Nil dictu faedum
visuque haec limina tangat, Marcil. Fic. l. 3. Ep^st.

Intra quae puer est; procul hinc, prooul ite puellae,
Lenonum, and cantus pernoctantis parasiti;
Maxima debetur puero reverentia: si quid
Turpe paras, nec tu pueri contempseris annos,
Sed peccature obsistat tibi filius infans.
Let no unseemly act or unsavory speech be seen or heard, where thy Children
are, and if thou intendest to do any lewd prank, or to speak any immodest
thing; forget not the years of the young Youths, but when thou art about to do
it, let the consideration of thy Children refrain thee, that thou may not
teach them to be evil and wicked by thine example.

And it is the duty of Children to love and honor their Fathers, as those that
gave them their very being, and all the things wherein they delight; that is,
themselves; as Diogenes said to one that he saw despising his Father: And they
ought to imitate and to follow their Fathers, in all the good things that they
see they do.

But who were those Fathers of those Jews, that persecuted the Prophets, that
we may understand whom this Martyr means? For they boasted very much, that
they were the Children of Abraham, and very proud they were, that they had
Abraham to be their Father; because, as the Poet says, Vera quidem res est,
patrem sequitur sua proles,
Et leviter sequitur filia matris iter.
The Children are, like Apes, apt to imitate, and to follow their Fathers
ways, whether they be good or bad, and to become like their Fathers both in
respect of body and mind; because, as another says, Scilicet est olion vis
rerum in semine certa, Martil. Poet.

Et referunt animos singula quaeque patrum;
Nec leporem canis Aemathius, timidamve columbam Children commonly like their
Parents.

Notus hyperboreo falco sub axe creat.
There is a certain power and strength left by God in the seed of things, and
each several thing does show the nature of his begetter, as the Aemathian Dog
begets not a Hare, nor the Northen Hawk a fearful Dove, but, as Horatius
says, Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis
Est in juvencis, est in equis, patrum Horat. 4. Carm. 4.

Virtus; nec imbecillem feroces
Progenerant aequilae columbam.
The strong creatures beget strong breed, as we see in Beasts, in Bullocks, and
in Horses the strength and stature of their Sires; and the fierce Eagle
begeteth not a silly Pigeon.

So commonly, good and godly Fathers, have good and gracious Children; and for
the most part valiant and heroical men, beget valiant sons; as Jupiter begat
Hercules, Aeacus Achilles, and Anchises Aeneas. Romans 11.2^.
And the Apostle says that Children are beloved of God, for their Fathers
sake; and therefore questioniesse, a Principibus nasci praeclarum est, It is a
most excellent grace and honor, to be born of honorable parents.

And S. James says, that Abraham was called the friend of God: James 2.23.
and God himself gives this testimony of Abraham, that he knows Abraham
would command his Children, and his Household after him, Genes. 17.4.
that they should keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment.

And therefore it cannot be otherwise, but that this should be a great deal of
Honor, and Glory unto the Jews, that they were of the seed of Abraham, and the
sons of Israel, who wrastled with God, and would not let him go, until he
blessed him. But, though all good Fathers do take special care to make their
Children good, and say with the Poet, Hen, hen^ ut illud dictitant recte,
probum Patrem ab improbo, non posse nasci filium. Euripides.
Disce puer virtutem exme, verumque laborem, Learn to be good, and to serve God
by mine example; yet experience shows, that the best Fathers have not always
the best Children; for, as what Euripides says, is seen commonly true, (...)!
(...).
That a towardly son does seldom spring from an untoward father; because, as
the Proverb is, (...), An evil Crow brings forth an evil Egg: and, as Theognis
says, (...); The rose rises not from shrimps, nor * Mat. 7.16.
thorns of thistles. So it is often seen, that a good and a godly father, has
a very lewd and an ungodly son; as, faithful Abraham had a persecuting Ismael;
religious Isaac, had a profane Esau; dutiful David, had an undutiful Absalom;
zealous Ezechias, had an Idolatrous Manasses; Children not always like their
Parents.
and the good Prophet Samuel, had very bad sons; as were the sons of Eli. And
the profane Stories do record the like Progenies: For Caius Caligula, the
worst of that time, was the son of Germanicus, the best of that Age; and
Commodus, that became a lascivious swordplayer, was the son of Mar. Antonius,
that was a Sage Philosopher: So Chrysippus was the son of Gabrias the Athenian;
Carinus was the son of the Emperor Carus; and Licinius Galienus, was the son
of Cornelius Licinius Valerianus, very bad sons of very good fathers. And I
believe you may remember some fathers in your own time, that were good men, and
very loyal subjects, and their sons proved to be arrant rebels; and some godly
Bishops that had sons little better than the Rebels.

And therefore it is most true, which Ovid says, -- Non census nec clarum
nomen avorum, Ovid. de ponto l. 1.

Sed probitas magnos ingeniumque facit.
It is not our Progenitors, To be virtuous is more noble, than to be born of
Noble Parents.
nor the having of Abraham to be our father, that adds any thing to our
felicity, or increases our glory, unless we approve our selves faithful in our
calling, and dutiful to our God, as Abraham was, and our good fathers were: Nam
genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco --
The famous deeds, and the worthy exploits of our Ancestors, are none of ours:
and, as the Poet says, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus,
-- Hae nobilis Hector,
Alcidesque fuit --
It is our own virtues and goodness, and not the virtues of our Fathers that
makes us glorious and acceptable, both with God and Men.

And therefore, seeing it is the imitation of their fathers virtues, and
religious carriage, and not their procreation from their fathers seed, that
makes the children to be both loved and honored; and that so, their own proper
virtues only, and not their Ancestors, makes them glorious: I had rather be, as
Juvenal says, the son of Thyrsites, a base coward, and to imitate the exploits
of Achilles, the most valiant Heroic; than to be the son of Achilles, and to
behave my self like Thyrsites. And I would choose sooner to be a faithful
Jonathan, the son of persecuting Saul, than a rebellious Absalom, the son of
godly David.

But, as Horace says, and we have seen it true, that Aetas parentum, pejor
avis, Horat. 3. Carm. 6.
tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
The Progeny is worse than the Progenitors; our Fathers worse than our
Grandfathers; and we far worse than our Fathers; and our children like to be
worse than we are, a Progeny most vicious, Earipides in Heraclid, generatim
bane sententiam ad omnes mortales retulit.
when as the offspring still proves worse and worse: and, as Euripides says,
Thou shall scarce find one son amongst many, (...), which is not worse than his
father: which made a certain poor Widow most earnestly to pray for the long
life of her oppressing Landlord that was a most wicked Tyrant, and her grievous
persecutor: and being demanded the reason, why she did so zealously pray for
him, that never did her any good, The poor woman's prayer for her cruel Landlord.
but had heaped upon her very many intolerable wrongs: she answered, It was
because she knew his Grandfather; and he was a very bad man, and an unjust
Oppressor of his poor Neighbors; and his Son, this man's father, proved worse
than he; and This man is far worse than them both; and, if he were dead, I fear
his son will be the Devil himself.

So these Jews, though they were originally descended from Abraham, the friend
of God; yet the posterity of Abraham degenerating, How children degenerate from
their Parents.
and the Progeny still growing worse than the Progenitors, angring God in the
Wilderness forty years together, and killing his Prophets, when they enjoyed
the promised Land, S. Stephen tells them they were now the children of
Persecutors, and of murderers; and our Savior says, John 8.43.
They were the children of their father the Devil; because he was a murderer
from the beginning.

And, as then it happened with the posterity of Abraham, the Jews, to grow
worse and worse, from Gods friends, to be the Devils children: So I fear it is
now with the whole World, and with all the posterity of the first good
Christians, to grow worse and worse, and instead of being a faithful people, to
become a faithless and a stubborn generation, a generation that sets not
their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaves not steadfastly unto God: For in
the Primitive times, the Christians continued with one accord in the Temple
praying and praising God, and had Cor unum and animam unam; Acts 4.32.
but in the suceeding times they degenerated, and the love of many did wax
cold: and iniquity so far, and so fast incrased, that Linacrus reading the 6.
What Linacrus did.
and 7. chapters of S. Mat. threw away his Testament, and said, Certe, aut hoc
non est Evangelium Christi, aut nos non sumus Christiani; Certainly, either
this is not the Gospel of Christ, or we are not Christians, that are so far
from doing what he teaches, and commands us to do.

But when we find our Fathers to have degenerated from their good Fathers, and,
instead of being faithful Christians and good Subjects, to become Rebels and
Murderers or Idolaters, and the like; to rob their neighbors, and to resist
their King, to renounce their Baptism, and to profane the Chuches, to
countenance the wicked here on earth, and to despise the Saints that are in
Heaven, as some of our Fathers lately did all these things, and did much more
horrid acts than any of these: then ought we not to imitate them, and to walk
in the ways of our Fathers, as these Jews did, and, as the Prophet Jeremy
says, have done worse than their Fathers: Jerem. 16.12.
for we ought not to observe the Statutes of Omri, nor walk in the ways of
Jeroboam, nor do the wickedness that our Fathers did: but we ought to do as the
Lord advises us by his Prophet Ezechiel, saying unto us as he said unto the
Jews; Walk ye not in the Statutes of your Fathers, neither observe their
judgments, Ezech. 20.18.
nor their ordinances, nor defile your selves, by walking in their ways, and
doing the like wrongs as they have done, or confirming and continuing those
injuries, which they acted against their neighbors.

But, What, good children ought to do.
if they have made any Laws, and given any Judgments, to take away the goods,
or the lands and possessions of any man unjustly, be he of what Nation, or of
what Religion soever, when he has done nothing worthy of censure, and much
less of disinheriting; as I am sure, and you may be sure of it, they have done
to very many in these Dominions, and especially in this Kingdom: Then do not ye
justify those doings, and make good their judgments, and continue the wrongs
and oppressions that they have done, and so sin with your Fathers, and worse
than your Fathers, by making your selves, not only the partakers of their sins,
but also the Patrons and Protectors of all their unjust proceedings: But do ye
confess the iniquities of your Fathers, and say with the Prophet, That they
have done amiss, and dealt wickedly; and so do ye show your selves sorry for
their sins, and recede from their unjust doings, and rectify what they have
done amiss: And if we thus return unto God, Zach. 1 2. Malac. 3.7.
then God promises that He will return unto us, and he will bless us.

But when we have Abraham to our father, and are the sons of Jacob, the
children of such fathers, as feared God, and walked in his ways, relieved the
poor, and built and beautified Churches, and spent their days in praying, and
doing all other pious deeds, and wronging no man, either in word or deed; then
ought we not to say, with our new Saints, They were superstitious and ignorant,
and walked in darkness, by thinking to merit heaven by their works, What good
children ought not to do.
and have therefore merited to be sent to hell; which is a most ungodly, and
uncharitable censure, of most ungracious children, that delight rather to spit
in their fathers faces, than to commend and to imitate their Virtues. But we
ought to honor the memories of our forefathers, that have most faithfully
served God, and procured the blessings of God to those children that will serve
God, That God blesses the good children for their godly fathers sake. Genesis
26.24.
as they have done; because God loves, and has promised to bless the good
children that will walk in the ways of their godly fathers, for their fathers
sake, that had formerly served him, and taught their children to do the like:
even as you may see, how the Lord says unto Isaac; I am the God of Abraham thy
father, and I will bless thee, and multiply thy seed, for my servant Abraham's
sake.

And you may be sure, they are more to be commended, and more accepted of God,
that, in the night of ignorance, of blindness, and superstition, have done the
good works of the day; as the pious works of building and beautifying Gods
House, and the charitable works of relieving the poor, and erecting
almshouses, than those men, that, in the daylight of knowledge, and such clear
preaching of the Gospel as we have had, do the works of darkness, and the very
deeds of the Devil: as are, the persecuting of the Prophets. Quia melior est
fidelis ignorantia, August.
quam temeraria scientia.

2. Who were persecuted.
Having heard of the persecutors, their Fathers; we are now to speak of the
persecuted and they were the Prophets: for, (...)? Which of the Prophets have
not your fathers persecuted? says this holy Martyr. The Prophets were men sent
from God, to declare his will, to teach his people, to bring them unto God; and
it was their own defire, that God would reveal his will unto them by men, that
were like themselves, and not by Himself, whose Majesty was so glorious and so
terrible, that their weakness was not able to endure it: for when God descended
upon Mount Sinai, to talk unto his people, and to deliver his Statutes and
Ordinances unto them, and all the people saw the thunders and the lightnings,
and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking, they all removed and
stood afar off; Exodus 20.19.
and they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not
God speak with us, lest we die: for this great fire will consume us, and if we
hear the voice of the Lord our God, we shall die: Deuteronomy. 5.25, 26, 27.
and therefore go thou near unto God, and hear all that the Lord our God shall
say, and speak thou unto us, all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee,
and we will hear it and do it; and the Lord heard the voice of their Words,
and yielded to their desire; and, as the Prophet Amos says, Amos 3.7.
he reveals his will and his secrets unto his servants the Prophets, and he
sent them early and late, to reveal the same unto his people; And, as
Jehosaphat said unto Juda, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem; 2 Chro. 20.20.
Esaias 7.9.
If they believe in the Lord their God, they shall be established; and if they
believe his Prophets, they shall prosper; and if they will not believe them,
then surely, says the Prophet Esaias, they shall not be established, they cannot
be blessed.

And therefore, not only, not to believe these men, that are thus, and to this
end, sent from God, but also to persecute them, is an offense beyond mine
ability of expression: for to render good for evil, and to do good to them
that hate us, is charity; and to do as Christ advises us; and to render evil
for evil, is iniquity: and to do what God forbids us, who says, Vengeance
is mine, and I will repay for the evil that is done; Deuteronomy. 32.35.
But to render evil for good, and to persecute and destroy them that would
preserve us, is a devilish sin, and a degree beyond all ingratitude; which is
but the retention and denial of the thanks that we owe, and not the reddition
and offering the evil that we owe not; and should no ways be rendered to any
one. And, besides this unkind requital of the great good, that the Prophets
and publishers of Gods will do unto the people, with such great evil, as is,
the persecuting of them; to persecute the Prophets, and Messengers of God, is a
breach and a transgression of a special precept of God; who does peremptorily
say to every one, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; 1 Chro.
16.22.
And how then dares any man to persecute them, which is so high a degree and so
large a measure of harm?

But here you must observe with some diligence; What Prophets, What Persecution
is.
and whose Prophets, we must not harm; for the Lord says not this in general
of all Prophets, but do My Prophets no harm; and therefore we must examine what
and whose Prophets they were, whom their Fathers persecuted; For the Scripture
makes mention of two sorts of Prophets.

1. The one sort is of false Prophets, That there are two sorts of Prophets.
such as were the Prophets of the Groves, and the Prophets of Baal; and of the
Beast, that you may read of in the Revelation.

2. The other sort is of the true Prophets, such as were the Prophets of the
Lord, and these God owneth, and calls them, my Prophets; and bids every one
to take heed, that they do them no harm; and says further, that Whosoever
touches them, touches the apple of his eye. Zechary 2.8.


And for the first sort, that is, the false Prophets, as the Poet says, that
Saepe sub agnina latet hirtus pelle Lycaon;
Subque Catone pio, perfidus ille Nero.
The Wolf does often lurk under the Lamb-skin: So our Savior tells us, that
these false Prophets will come to us in sheeps clothing, Apoc. 13.11.
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves: and the Holy Ghost says, that the
false Prophet, signified by the Beast, that arose out of the Earth, had two
horns like a Lamb: that is, although every truth is from God, which is the God
of all truth: and truth is truth, as well from Simon Magus, as from Simon
Peter; from Plato the Philosopher, as from Paul the Apostle; yet because the
Heathens truths are mingled with some errors; and those false Prophets, The
very practice of the false Prophets.
either have not the Wit, or will not take the Pains, to sift the wheat from
the chaff, and the truth from their errors, therefore they will have nothing
but the two horns of the Lamb, the Two Testaments, which are the strength, to
uphold the Christian Religion, as Cornelius a Lapide, rightly expounds them,
Corn. a Lapid. in Apoc. c. 13.
and yet he spoke like the Dragon; to show unto us the true properties, and
practice of your false teachers, to allege nothing but the pure Scripture:
the very words of the Old and New Testament; and yet in their Expositions and
Apptications of them, to speak the words of the Dragon, that is, falsehoods and
lies: As the Dragon did unto Eve, when he told them they should be like gods,
Luke 12:49.
and he made them like Devils; and so the false Prophets, though they pretend
to bring down fire from heaven, that is the same fire, which our Savior says,
he came to bring upon the earth, which is the fiery zeal of Gods glory, and
fervent charity among neighbors; yet, in very truth, as the Poet says of
Ibis, Tincta Lycambaeo sanguine tela dabunt. Ovid. in Ibin.
Their sword is dipped in blood and ^ats the flesh of Innocents, and they will
give you poison in a golden cup, and deceive you even with Scripture Phrases;
when, as Claudian says de voluptate Stiliconis. Blanda quidem v^ltu, Claudian.
de volupt. l. 2. Stilic.
sed qua non tetrior ulla,
Interius fucata genas, and amicia dolosis
Illecebris --
So their Doctrine has the Countenance of truth, and the shows of a great
deal of piety and charity, but you can not see so far, as the further end of
their intention, or at least of his intention that sets them on this course;
which is, to divide the seamless coat of Christ, to bring sects and divisions
into the Church, and to break the two staffes, wherewith the Church of Christ
is guided and subsisteth, Beauty and Bands (i.e.) the pure Doctrine: and the
discreet Discipline of the Governors of the Church; that these Governors being
suppressed, and their discipline destroyed; and the bands, which are the Fences
of Gods Vineyard, being broken all to pieces; the wild Bore out of the
Forest, and all the Beasts out of the Field, may destroy the Vineyard at
their pleasure, and make the Church of Christ to become the Synagogue of Satan,
and the House of God a Den of thieves.

And therefore, when any of these false Prophets should arise, and seek to
withdraw Gods servants from the Truth and true God, Deuteronomy 13.5. 1 Reg. 18.40.
the Lord commands his people to put that Prophet to death: and so Elias caused
all the Prophets of Baal to be slain, and Jehu did the like; and though our
Savior Christ be not so severe in the New Testament, as God was in the Old
Testament, to command us to put the false Prophets to death; yet he does most
seriously advise us to beware of them; Apoc. 22.15.
and the Holy Ghost calls them Dogs, barking dogs, of whom the Apostle
bids us to beware, lest they bite us: And truly we have the greatest reason
in the world, to beware of them; because these false Prophets, that seduce the
people, with their smooth Preaching, and with the Words of God, are worse then
any other wicked men, that destroy none but themselves, and they bring
thousands after them out of the right way, and from the right service of God.

And yet, these false Prophets were the only Prophets, whom the Jews magnified;
and the true Prophets of God, they persecuted; for Jezabel fed 400. of these
false Prophets, at her own Table, which was a pretty company for one woman to
maintain; and for Elias which was the true Prophet of the Lord, she swore, that
she would be the death of him, as you may see in 1 Reg. 19.2. 1 Reg. 19.2.
And the rest of the People of the Jews walked in the same ways.

And therefore the Lord says, Micah 2.11.
If a man, walking in the spirit and falsehood, do lie, or walk with the wind,
and lie falfly, he shall even be the Prophet of this people.

And this has been the Common course of the world in all ages; For all wicked
men, and all worldlings, that would notwithstanding seem to be Religious, and
pretend to serve God as well as the best, and rather then the best, will
therefore have Preachers and Prophets to instruct them in the way of God as
they pretend, but it is indeed to cover and to cloak their Hypocrisy; and
therefore their Preachers must be like Jezabels Prophets; Prophets like
themselves, that will Prophecy what they please, and serve what god they
please, and with what service they like best. And such Prophets and Preachers,
as will do so, to follow their directory, they shall want no preferment, they
shall have annuities and pensions, and augmentations, and eat at Jezabels
Table. Thus did the Jews lay down a pattern to magnify the false Prophets; and
now the Christians follow them.

But how did they deal with the other sort of Prophets, that were the Prophets
of the Lord? the Prophet Esaias tells you, To the Seers, they said, see not, Esaias
30.10.
and to the true Prophets they said, Prophesy not to us right things: and
because the true Prophets, that the Lord owned to be His Prophets, would not
dissemble, and smooth them up, by sowing pillows under their elbows, and
prophesying placentia, deceits and pleasing things unto them; therefore, the
Holy Ghost tells us, they mocked these Messengers of God, 2 Chr. 36.16.
and despised his words, that is, the Words of God, that were spoken to them by
his Messengers, and they misused his Prophets, as you may see in 2 Chronicles.
36.16. And, as S. Stephen says, they persecuted them from time to time, and
from place to place. And thus did the Jews use, or rather abuse, the true
Prophets.

And have we not seen the like dealings in our own time, and the people
imitating these Jews to a hair? Persecuting all the Reverend Bishops, and all
the grave Preachers, and spoiling them of all their Livelihoods, to make them
the very scorn of the World, as we have been above these two Lustra's of years;
and yet, in a deep Hypocrisy, to magnify and to advance the false Prophets, and
those young novices and Preachers, that commended their ways, and walked after
their steps; though now, the tide being turned, the most of them cry Peccavi,
and say with the Jews, We have sinned with our Fathers, we have done amiss and
dealt wickedly; to let you see, what kind of Prophets they were, and what you
should conceive of their extorted confession: but enough of this, that shows
you, what Prophets, and whose Prophets their Fathers persecuted, the true
Prophets of the Lord. Yet here is one point more, and that is

3. The Generality of their persecution; for Quem Prophetarum, The Generality
of the Persecution.
says the Martyr, Which of the Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? Can
you name any one of Gods Prophets, that has escaped their persecuting hands?
And is it not strange, that there is no Bound nor Measure of their malice,
(...); The Devil is Gods ape.
but it must extend and reach to all Gods Prophets? Surely no: For the Devil is
Gods ap^^^nd as in many things else, so he would fain imitate God herein. As
God would have all the Prophets of Baal destroyed, that there might not be a
false Prophet left to seduce his people; so the Devil would have all the
Prophets of the Lord destroyed, that there might not be one true Prophet left,
to instruct Gods people: and therefore he cries out unto his instruments; Down
with them, down with them even to the ground, and let the foundations be cast
down, that their building may be quite demolished, like the re-edifying of
Jericho, whose builder should be accursed, and should lay the foundation
thereof in his First born, Josh. 6.26.
and set up the gates thereof in his youngest son, as it happened afterward unto
Hiel, the Bethelite. So would the instruments of Satan, deal with all Gods
Prophets, 1 Reg. 16.24.
as Jehu did with the Prophets of Baal, and as it happened to Segub and Abiram,
the sons of Hiel after the re-edifying of Jericho.

And did not the Long-Parliament take the same course, to root out all the
Bishops, all the Hierarchy, and all Episcopal men? all must down, root and
branch, and not one of them must be left.

Alas, alas, were they all wicked? or did some offend, and must all be
condemned for the offense of few? or will they show themselves like the
implacable goddess, which, as the Poet says, -- Exurere classem
Argivum, atque ipsos voluit submergere ponto,
Unius ob noxam, and furias Ajacis Oilei.
destroyed all the Navy, and drowned all the Argives for one man's fault. This
is to condemn the righteous with the wicked; and the Lord says, the Judges
should justify the righteous, Deuteronomy. 25.1.
and condemn the wicked, and not to condemn the righteous for the wicked, nor
with the wicked; for the Poet speaking of some lewd women says, Parcite
paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes,
Spectetur meritis quaeque puella suis.
Though some be loose and wanton, yet must you not for this, blame those that
are honest; so, though some of the Bishops might perhaps be found unworthy of
so high a calling, Is that a sufficient argument to destroy them all? Yet such
has been the Devils Logic to persuade his late Scholars, to make their
destruction as universal as Noah's deluge, to take them all away.

And so much shall serve for the first point, The killing of the Preachers.
i.e. The progression of these persecutors in their wickedness.
which is, the persecution of the Prophets: The next point is, 2. Occidio
praedicatorum. And that is their progression, and their going forward in their
wickedness more and more. As the Sun goes higher and higher unto the perfect
day; so do they go from one sin unto another, and still from the lesser unto
the greater: for they have not only persecuted the Prophets, says this holy
Martyr, but they have also slain them which showed before of the coming of the
just one, that is, the Preachers of Jesus Christ; wherein you may behold as in
a glass, the lively perfect picture of all wicked men, and the innate
inseparable condition of all malicious persecutors; that is, to proceed from
bad to worse, from one step to another, from one degree of evil to a viler,
until at last they fall into the bottomless gulf of all the most horrid
wickedness; and, as the Poet says, Flumina magna vides, parvis de fontibus
ort^:
Plurima collectis multiplicantur aquis.
From a small fountain thou may see great floods to arise, and many waters to
make great Seas; so from the small seeds of these m^ns ^^^ice, their sins
ascend to the top of intolerable mischief, or rather descend to the bottomiesse
gulf of their own unavoidable destruction: for so Cain at first was but angry
with his brother because the Lord accepted him, and liked better of his
sincerity, than of the others hypocrisy; then Acrior ad pugnam redit, and vim
suscitat ira, he began to hate and to malign him; after that, malitia
excoecavit eum, his malice moved him to persecute him; and last of all, most
inhumanely to kill him. So Pharaoh first envied the prosperity of the children
of Israel, because he thought, that Fertilior seges est alienis semper in
agris, God blessed them, and all that they had, better then he blessed him;
then, vim and injuriam intulit, he began to oppress them, by laying hard
taxes, and most cruel labors upon them; and then he killed their children, and
in all likelihood, would have killed them, if God had not delivered them out of
his hands.

And the reason of this their progression in wickedness, The reason why the
wicked grow from bad to worse.
is truly rendered by Seneca, Quia omne scelus majori scelere tuetur, every
heinous and most wicked deed, can never subsist and be upheld, but by a more
wicked deed: and therefore the Liar will swear and forswear himself to justify
his lie, the robber will kill the honest traveller for fear he should accuse
him; and the Rebel that rises to resist, and to war against his King, and
the Traitor that betrayeth his King, never thinks himself safe, until he can
be the death of his King; so the Heretics maintain their heresies and errors
with far greater heresies, and the Presbyterians that oppose and refuse to be
directed by their Diocesans, think themselves never satisfied, until they see
the Bishops wholly suppressed and destroyed.

And so the Jews walked in the same steps, and dealt after the same manner
with Gods Prophets.

And so likewise, ever since, the wicked worldlings deal with the true
Preachers of Jesus Christ; for the whole company of Gods children knows what
(...), great gulf, and a huge distance and difference, (not in nature
originally, figmentum unum, when as all men are made from the same lump, but in
generality and condition) there is, and has been ever seen, betwixt the Lay
Commonalty, and the learned Clergy of any Land, and how, as Ismael that was
born after the flesh, persecuted his own brother Isaac, that was born after the
Spirit; so the Lay-worldlings do ever malign and persecute unto death, all the
right spiritual Clergymen. And this persecution we of the Clergy have felt now
of late, to the very height, when very very many of the very best of them, that
did feed daintily, even with the Kings dishes, were, as the Prophet says, left
desolate in the street, and glad to sustain their lives with a little Barley
bread, and Glass-door, and they that were clad in Scarlet, were driven to
embrace the dung-hills, Jerem. 4.5.
and be clad in rags, and with Joshua, the high Priest, to be clothed with
filthy garments, Zechary 3, 3.
and so were made the scorn and Table-talk of their neighbors, and blamed that
they did not live, and go, according to their degrees and calling; when, as the
Proverb is, ultra posse non est esse, none is able to do beyond his ability;
and he only that wears the shoe, knows where it pincheth him.

And as the Jews not only persecuted the Prophets, but also slew the Preachers;
so, many of us were slain, some with the sword of these merciless men, and
many more with hunger and want, Zechar. 3, 3.1.
when their hearts were broken with the extremity of grief; and the weight of
those miseries that were laid upon these good men, were far heavier then the
pillars could support.

And so this persecution thus proceeding, did far exceed all former
persecutions beyond Nero's tyranny, and Dioclesians cruelty: and was of the
same kind, but of a higher strain than Julians stratagems, which was not only
to suppress Presbyteros, the Priests, but also to root out Presbyterium, Our
late persecution worse then Julians persecution.
the very Priesthood of Jesus Christ, and so to extinguish the Christian
religion out of the world; for these men imitating him, sought to supress not
the then Bishops that perhaps might be found to have offended, though that was
never proved; but Episcopacie it self, and the discentive succession thereof,
which we received by prayers, and the imposition of hands even from the
Apostles time; from those that are yet unborn, and have, I am sure, done
neither good nor evil, and yet have received this evil from these men, to
have the Calling that they were to enjoy, suppressed; their honors buried, and
their undubitable Rights and Means alienated from them, Prohscelus nefandum,
quod magnum est and mirum! a most wonderful thing, that wickedness should
have no bounds, no stop, no reason, nor moderation in its progression; but like
a stone tumbling down a hill, never leave tumbling till it comes to the
bottom; or like a right Apollyon, and a blind smiter, that will slay the
righteous with the wicked; or rather destroy the righteous, because they will
not be wicked.

And yet, this is not all, we are not yet come to the height of these
persecutors wickedness, Ezekiel. k. 13 15.
or to the depth of their abomination: but, as the Lord says unto the Prophet
Ezechiel, turn thee yet again, and thou shall see greater abominations; so from
the Lord, I will show to you greater abomination; and the greatest that ever
was committed here on earth: For

3. The (...), the be^^^ving and murderring of the first King: Touching which,
three (...) are ^^^^trable.
They have not only persecuted the Prophets, and slain the Preachers and
foreshewers of the coming of Jesus Christ, but they have also, says our
Martyr, betrayed and murdered that just one. For the fuller and more perfect
understanding of which point, I shall desire you to observe these three things.

1. What they are, and how they are styled by the holy Ghost that did this
deed, Traitors and Murderers.

2. Of whom they are the Traitors and Murderers which is here expressed by that
Just One, and we shall find him to be,

1. None of the Plebeians, or common sort of men; but a King, the highest and
the chiefest man in all the Kingdom.

2. Not an alien, as were Caesar and Herod; but their own King, originally and
lineally descended from the Jews.

3. Not an Usurper, as was Jeroboam, and many others of the Kings of Israel,
and Athalia among the Jews, and Rich. the third, and the late Cromwell amongst
us; but he was their own lawful King, without question, lawfully descended
from the Royal line.

4. Not an unjust or tyrannical King, as were Pharaoh, Dionysius, and Nero; nor
yet a lascivious King, as were Sardanapalus, Belshazzar, and Heliogabalus; but
a most just, perfect, and pious King: No better King under heaven.

3. Who they were, that the holy Martyr means by these Traitors and
Murderers, of their King; and we shall find them to be the Lords and Commons,
the People, the Elders, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and the whole Council of
the Jews.

1. Part. 1. Their style and denomination which is twofold. ^. Traytorss.
They that have put this just King to death are here styled, and shall ever be
justly termed Traitors and Murderers.

1. Traitors; that is, to their King: for the word (...), which the Holy Ghost
uses in this place, and is derived of (...), or (...), which signifies prodo,
or trado, from whence the word Traitor comes, does properly, and most usually
signify, both in profane Authors, and in the Ecclesiastical and Civil
writers, the illegal and undutiful demeanor, and the rebellious behavior of
Subjects toward, and against their King: and as the most curious critics, and
best searchers of the Scriptures do observe, this word (...), a Traitor, is
never applied to any King, for any act, be it never so illegal; so foul, so
barbarous, or so bloody, that the King commits agains his Subjects. when as we
find not one text in all the book of God the holy Bible, (that speaks of many
wicked, idolatrous, and tyrannical bloody Kings) where any one of those Princes
or Kings, is signified by this word, or called by this name of Traitor.

And therefore this word, Traitors, that the Martyr uses, does sufficiently
show, that he means thereby, to prove Christ to be King, and the Traitors
that killed him, to be his Subjects, as I shall further declare unto you
hereafter.

2. Murders.
They are murderers, because he was unlawfully put to death; for otherwise, a
lawful Judge may lawfully put a malefactor to death and be no murderer; because
God commands Idolaters, and sorcerers, and others the like malefactors, to be
put to death: and they that legally put such men to death, are never termed
murderers: but when the party executed is innocent, and the Judge condemning
him not vested with lawful authority, the man, so put to death, is truly said
to be murdered, and his executioners murderers. And such was the death of
Christ, because he was most innocent, And so was the death of King Charles.
and the Judge had neither lawful authority, nor a just cause to condemn him;
and therefore they that crucified Christ and put him to death, are rightly
termed murderers: and because Christ was a King, as I showed you from the word
(...), traitors: they were no ordinary murderers, of plebeians, (...)
and of the common sort of men; but, that which is the highest, and the worst
of all murders, they were the murderers of their King: and therefore the words,
(...), which the Martyr uses to express the death of the fore-shewers of the
coming of Christ, and the words of the Husbandmen which they said together, of
the King's Son, Marc. 12.7. and 8.
(...); and the word (...), that comes of (...), Occido, used here to signify
the death of this King, ought properly to be translated, either by killing or
slaying, or murdering, as our last Translation renders the Martyr's words most
rightly, that they were his murderers.

But here, it may be, the Jews will object, and say, That Man, or that King
cannot justly be said to be murdered, which is brought to a public Trial, and
has 1. His Charge given him to answer. Three things seeming topalliat and to
disprove the murdering of this King, discussed
2. The Witnesses ready to prove the Charge. 3. A Lawful Judge to pronounce
sentence against him.


And all this was used against Christ, the King of the Jews, (and against
Charles the King of England, says the long Parliament) therefore neither the
one nor the other can justly and properly be said (...), to be murdered; but
they are unjustly taxed, and this heavy Crime of murdering them is not justly
laid upon them, that brought these Kings to their just deserved deaths:
Therefore, to justify their deaths to be murders, and to clear St. Stephen,
from this unjust taxation laid upon him by the Jews; we are to examine the
three foresaid particulars, how far they can justify the Jews or any others in
the like case, from being murderers: The Charge unjust.
and first for the Charge that was laid against him, we find the same pretended
to be twofold and as I conceive, very like the Charge that was laid against
King Charles: So King Charles was charged with the same Crimes.


1. The abridging of their Liberty, and betraying the same unto the Romans: for
so they say, If we let this man alone, all the World will run after him, and
the Romans will come, and take away our Dominion from us.

2. The corrupting of their Religion, by abolishing their old Rites, and
Traditions of the Elders, and teaching new Points of Doctrine, to profane the
Sabbath, to communicate with Sinners, to justify their slovenly eating with
unwashen hands; and the like looseness and liberties that the precise Pharisees
could not endure, he allowed unto his Disciples and follower, in the service of
God.

This was the pretended Charge that they laid against their King, and against
S. Stephen, as you may see Acts 6.13, 14. and that his adversaries laid against
our good King. But this pretended Charge was most false, whenas he neither
abridged their Liberty, nor corrupted their Religion; but most divinely cleared
the same, The Jew^ murdered Christ; because he was their King. Luc. 23.2^
and purged it from the false glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees. But the true
cause indeed, whatsoever they pretended, why they killed him, was, because he
was their King: for S. Luke says, that when they led him to Pilate, they began
to accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the Nation, and
forbidding to give tribute unto Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a
King: and when Pilate asked them, Shall I crucify your King? (a thing that was
never known among the Heathen, that Subjects should desire to crucify their
King, and especially, that they should so solemnly and judicially condemn him
to death) they answered him flatly, So K. Charles was murdered by his
adverfaries, because he was their King, and would have ruled: them as their
King: when as they desired to be Kings themselves, and to rule as they did,
after they had killed him.
We have no King but Caesar, whom notwithstanding, they loved no better than
they loved Christ, but hated him in their hearts, as their often rebellions
against him do sufficiently testify. And when Pilate, the Judge (and therefore
knew best the Charge laid against him) wrote his Title, and fixed it upon his
Cross, as showing unto all that saw him, the very cause why they put him to
death, which was, Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews: They came presently unto
Pilate, and desired him to alter the Superscription, and not to say, He was
their King, but that he said, He was their King: But Pilate herein, like a
resolute Judge, that knew the truth, and their dissembling, answered them
stoutly, according to the truth, (...), What I have written, I have written.

And therefore, this Charge being so unjust, to kill him, because he is their
King, whose life they are obliged to defend, with the hazard of their own
death; S. Stephen may justly call them murderers.

2. The witnesset are false. Math. 26.59, 60.
For the witnesses, it is plainly said, that they sought many; yet found they
none; but at last, there came two; they could get no more: and of them two, it
is said,

1. That they were false witnesses, and that is apparent, when they add unto
his words, and change his meaning: for he said no more, but (...), Destroy this
temple, John 2.19. v. 21.
and (...), in three days I will raise it up: and he spoke this of the temple
of his body, as the Evangelist testifies: but their witnesses avouch, that
they heard him saying, Marc. 14.58, 59.
I will destroy this Temple, that is made with hands, and within three days I
will build another made without hands, that is, another material and
magnificent Temple, which Christ never meant, and never spoke of it, nor of the
temple of his body as they testify; for he said not, (...), I will destroy
this Temple; but (...), Do you destroy this temple, and I will raise it up. You
shall do the evil, and bring destruction, as you use to do; and I will do the
good, and bring resurrection to them that are fallen.

2. Marc. 14.59.
It is said, that these false witnesses, which did both add unto his words, and
change his meaning, did not agree together; for the one said, he heard him
saying, I will destroy this temple, that is made with hands, and within three
days, Cap. 14.58. (...). Math. 26.61.
I will build another, made without hands; yet the other could not testify
that he said so, but that he said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and
build it in three days: and there is a great deal of difference betwixt, I
will destroy thee, and, I am able to destroy thee; when I am able to do many
things, that I will not do. Even as God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham, but will not raise them: And therefore, seeing these two
witnesses cannot agree together, they destroy one another, and must needs be
invalid to condemn an innocent man, and much less to condemn their King, that
was more innocent than any man. But they were resolved to have done it, whether
they had witnesses or no witnesses; for they said among themselves, What need
have we of witnesses? Then all of them, Math. 26.65. Marc. 14.63, 64 So K.
Charles was condemned without witnesses. Joh. 18.31. Math. 26.4. Marc. 14.1.
And was not K. Charles by craft and subtilty brought to his death?
as they had formerly resolved, did presently vote him guilty of death; not, as
it seems, for the testimony of the witnesses; but because their malice thought
him worthy of death.

Yet they confess, (...), It is not lawful for us, that is, they had no lawful
authority, to put any man to death; and, for all that, S. Matthew tells us, they
consulted how they might take him by subtilty, and kill him: and S. Mark
testifies as much; that they sought how they might take him by craft, and put
him to death.

And therefore, when Traitors have conspired, and resolved to kill their King,
witnesses are but shadows, and the formalities of their proceedings are but
cloaks to palliat and cover their wickedness, and to blind the eyes of the
vulgar people, whom they would persuade to believe, that they do all things
right; when they do the greatest wrongs, and do commit such horrid murders, as
to murder their own King.

3. For the Judge, our Savior seems tacitly to yield, The Judge was corrupt.
that by the permission of God, not his Commission, Pilate through the power of
the sword, and according to the Laws of the Conquerors, had power and authority
granted unto him to be the Judge both of life and death: but according to the
Laws of the Romans, that had then subdued the Jews, and committed this power
unto Pilate, none were to be condemned to death, except he were proved guilty
of the Crimes that should be laid to his charge. And this Judge ingenuously,
and openly confesses, that although, like a good Judge herein, he had examined
the matter thoroughly, John 18.38.
and sifted him and his cause ad amussim, to the uttermost; yet he could find
no fault in him worthy of death; and therefore, being desirous to free him,
whom he found so innocent, by a fair excuse, and to quit himself from
pronouncing so unjust a sentence against a just man, he advised his
adversaries, to take their King, and to judge him according to their Law; that
is, if they had any Law, to crucify their King, that was so just, and had
offended no Law; because the Romans thought such proceedings of Subjects
against their King, very strange, and therefore had no such Law, neither in
their 12. Tables, nor in any of the Acts and Decrees of their Senate, whereby
he might justly condemn him, and justly answer it, if he were questioned for it.

And herein also, this Judge, by this fine device, showed himself witty, and
his counsel honest, as it aimed at a good end, that is, to free the party
accused; but afterward, becoming the Judge of Christ, not by the Roman Law,
which, as himself confessed, gave him no authority to condemn any innocent
person, but by the importunity of the rebellious Subjects, and malicious
enemies against their King, that thirsted after his blood, he forgets his duty,
and contrary to his own conscience, So was King Charles condemned to death, to
satisfy the Parliament, and the people, that still cried, Justice, Justice.
Mar. 15:15. Luke 23.24.
and contrary to the Roman Law, and to all other Laws, he does most unjustly
condemn that Just King to death. And both the Evangelists, S. Mark, and S. Luke
tell us, He did it to content the people, and to satisfy the High Priests and
the Elders, that had over-perswaded him to become his Judge, and overruled him
to adjudge him unto death.

And therefore, the Charge, laid against this King being unjust, the witnesses
being both false, and disagreeing, and his Judge thus corrupted, and compelled,
and so, as it were, newly made by the clamor of the people, condemning him,
contrary to the Roman Law, which was then the Law of their Land, to please the
people: it is apparent to all the World, as I conceive, that both the Judge,
and Witnesses, and all the Complotters, and Contrivers of this Kings death, and
all the whole Parliament and Council of the Jews, that approved and rejoiced at
his death; yea, and all the people that cried to have him put to death, are
justly meant by S. Stephen, and by him here rightly termed murderers; because,
as I take it, the Law says, that in murder, there can be no accessory, but
all, and every one, that has any hand in it, are deemed principalls. And how
far murderers are to be pardoned, I leave it to him that pardons all sins, to
be determined. But if God will pardon murderers, I wish he would not prefer
them to places of Trust and Authority, lest the Woolf lett-go, still continue a
Woolf, to vex the Lambs: And as it is said of the Devil, Demon languebat
monachus tunc esse volebat;
Demon convaluit mansit ut ante fuit.


2. Of whom these T^^ytors were murderers.
Having spoken of the style and denomination of these Persecutors of the
Prophets, that they were traitors and murderers; we are now to confider of whom
they were the traitors and murderers, and the Martyr tells us, it was of that
Just One: and I told you, that we find him to be,

(1.) Of a King proved. 1. By his Birth.
A King: and so proved to be diverse ways; as,

1. At his birth, when the Wise men that came from the East, worshipped him as
King, while he was in his swaddling clouts; and they are, by the constant course
and order of the Church annually, on the twelfth day after the day of his
birth, commemorated, and commended for it.

2. By the ministration of his Office.
In the ministration of his kingly office, when he entered Jerusalem, as Kings
use to do, in a Royal, and a pompous manner, and his disciples, and a great
multitude of his followers did him obeisance, and gave him royal honor, as to
their King, by cutting down the boughs, and spreading their garments under his
feet, and crying, Bl^ssed be the King that comes in the name of the Lord, Luke
19.38. Matthew. 21.15.
and the childrens crying Hosanna, as we use to do, God save the King; and when
the chief Priests and Scribes were displeased at this acceptance of him for
their King, and bad him to rebuke his disciples for this attempt; Christ told
them plainly, that if these should hold their peace, the stones would
immediately cry out, that is, to proclaim him King, and to do him all Royal
homage.

3. At his arraignment.
At his arraignment, when he was to lay down his soul to be a ransom for our
sins, he avouched himself to be a King: for, Pilate demands the question, Art
thou a King? and Pilate understood not any kingdom in this question, but of a
temporal kingdom, when as, in his conception, to speak of a Spiritual King, or
kingdom, was but a vain fancy, and a mere Chimaera; and therefore, ad mentem
interrogantis, to satisfy the demand of Pilate, Christ answers without
dissimulation, aequivocation, or mental reservavation, Mark 15.2.
that he was a King, Matthew. 27.11. or if he did not so, he made no answer unto
Pilate, which, as the Evangelist says, he did.

4. At his death
At his death, he had it written upon his Cross, who he was: Jesus of Nazareth
King of the Jews; so that when they took away his life, they could not deprive
him of his right unto his kingdom.

5. At his burial.
At his burial, he had his grave sealed, as a King.

(2.) ^hey were the murderers of their own King.
We find this just one, whereof this Martyr speaks, to be not only a King,
but also the King of these Jews that murdered him; for he was not a King of
Egypt that oppressed them, nor the king of Syria that sought to subdue them,
but their own King, the King of the Jews; for so the wise men testify, Where
is he that is born king of the Jews? And so Pilate the Roman. Deputy
testifies, -- Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.

(3.) They were the murderers of their own lawful King.
This their King was not like Jeroboam the son of Nebat starting aside, and
stepping in over the right Kings head, nor like Queen Athalia, that usurped the
Regal throne, by suppressing the lawful King, but he was their own lawful King
lineally descended from King David, both in respect of his Putative Father and
his Mother Mary, as both Saint Matthew and Saint Luke do testify, and
sufficient reasons may be produced to prove that by hered^tary right, which is
the ^best and the most undubitable right unto the Crown, he was born the King
of the Jews.

(4.) They were the murtheres of a just King.
And this their King was not like Rehoboam the son of Solomon, that is, a
foolish, or at least an undiscreet son of a most sage and a wise Father, but he
was the wisdom of God, as says the Evangelist, that his wise answers to all
the subile questions of his adversaries, Luke 11.49.
and the malicious objections and remonstrances of his persecurors, satisfied
all wise and indifferent men, and stopped the mouths of many of his greatest
adversaries, when they admired his worth; though they persecuted his person,
John 7.46.
and hated him the more, yet were they driven to confess, that never man spoke
as he did.

Neither was he like Manasses, an Idolatrous and a bloody King, nor yet like
Ahab, an unjust tyrannical intruder of himself into his subjects possessions;
but he was a most pious, and a religious King, going in his own person unto the
Temple, and scourging all prophaners out of Gods house; and he was so pitiful,
so merciful, and so mild, that, as Cicero says of Pompey; and the Historians
say of Titus the son of Vespasian, that, for his courtesies, was termed
deliciae generis humani, never man departed unsatisfied and discontented from
them; Mat. 10.13.8.
so did this good King never deny the just request of any Petitioner that ever
came, or sought unto him: but be went about doing good, healing all that had
infirmities, and releasing all that were possessed of the devil.

And for his own integrity, and the uprightness of his life; he could not only
say with Samuel, Whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? 1 Samuel 2.3.
or whom have I defrauded, and I will restore it? but he could justly demand of
his greatest adversaries, and the most malicious priers into his actions, Which
if you can rebuke me, or reprove me, of sin? for they that thirsted most after
his blood, must needs confess that he was of an incomparable life, in whose
mouth was found no guile, and in whose heart was no deceit. So sp^tlesse he was
in all his actions, that the holy Martyr might justly call this King, that Just
One.

And yet they say, with Martial, Non amo te, Princeps; nec possum dicere, quare:
Hoc tantnm possum dicere; Non amo te.
We love the note, O King; but why, we cannot tell thee:
But this we can assure thee, that we do not love thee.


And therefore, notwithstauding all that I have said, that he was,

1. A King. 2. Their own King. 3. Their lawful king: And 4. A just and pious
King, that desired only their good, And thus they murdered King Charles; that
was. 1, a King. T. Their own King. 3. Their own lawful King. 4 Their just,
wise, and most religious King.
the preservation of their Laws, and the maintenance of the true service of
God amongst them for the salvation of their souls; yet their love is so little,
and their hatred is so great, that they must take away his life, and kill him,
and that in the most barbarous manner, and the most odious kind of killing,
they must murder him.

And he that murders a Christian King commits a fourfold murder, says our
Chronicler Speed.

1. Homicide.

2. Parricide.

3. Christicide.

4. Dei-cide, because the King is Gods anointed, and his Vice-gorent here on
earth; therefore David killed the Amalekite, because he had killed a King,
though that King was most wicked, and none of his own King. Sam. 1.16.16.


And you may conceive what a devellish and hellish fact this is, beyond all
heathenish abomination, for subjects to murder their own King. For Pilat, that
was but a heathen, and a very corrupt Judge, hearing them so fiercely crying
out, to have him crucified; and being amazed at such an execrable voice, says,
Shall I crucify your King? As if he had said, Is it possible, John 19.15.
that you should desire me, to crucify your King? for Reason and Nature, and
the Laws of God, and of all Nations will condemn you for this fact, and detest
you for base Traitors, and the bloody murderers of your King.

But the old Murderer, that has been a murderer from the beginning, John 8.
has surnished his Scholars with two strong, but deceitful arguments, to
justify the killing of their King. 1. From the Law of Nature. 2. From the word
of God.


1. Nature teaches us to defend our selves; and to kill any one, From the Law
of Nature.
rather then to suffer our selves to be killed by him: because every thing in
nature is, s^i conservativum; and therefore to study for a self-preservation,
is an inbred Law of Nature, Quam non didicimus sed exhausimus ex natura, which
we need not learn, when as Nature teaches the same, says Cicero. And
therefore these Jews do conclude, It is expedient that this King should be
killed, lest the Nation, if they let him alone, should be Destroyed: (i.e.)
rather then they should Justly perish, he must be Unjustly murdered; this is
the reasoning of Flesh and Blood.

But to this the Apostle answers in general, that the Wisdom or the reason
of Worldly men is foolishness with God: 1 Cor. 1.20. and chap. 2.14.
and, the Natural man receaveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him. And more particularly we say, that the Holy Scripture
is the best interpreter of the Law of Nature; and then I desire you, as our
Savior advised the Jews, to search the Scriptures, and go through the whole
Book of God; and tell me, if you find not Subjection to our Kings every where
enjoined; and Resistance, even against the Worst Kings, every where prohibited?
And then show me, where you find the least Print of any Precept, or Counsel
given to any Subject, to put their King to death! Or where any Subjects,
mentioned in all Gods Book, did ever allege any Text of Scripture, or produced
any good Example from the Scripture; to warrant, or to excuse such a fact.

I am sure, Saul was a Tyrant and a Bloody murderer, a Demoniak and Prophaner
of Gods service; Varighteous and Irreligious, and sought the life of David
every way, and in every place; and though he was but the First elected King of
the Jews, 1 Samuel 10.
and no Heir by Inheritance to the Crown, and was rejected by Gods Spirit; and
David, by Gods own appointment, was to Succeed him in that Kingdom, 1 Samuel
16.1. and 13.
and was anointed by Samuel to be King in his stead; which was very much: Yet
this Good Subject, when Saul was put into his Hands, and his servants persuaded
him to take the Advantage of that good opportunity, 1 Samuel 24, 24.
and to do justice upon that Wicked King, he would by no means be advised by
them, nor suffer them to Rise against his King; and when Abishai told him, that
God had delivered his enemy (i.e.) Saul, into his hands, and therefore desired;
that, if David would not do it himself, he would suffer Him to smite him; David
answered, No by no means; 1 Samuel 26.9, 10, 11.
and he yields this reason, Who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords
anointed and be guiltless? And he adds, The Lord shall smite him, but God
forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against him; Nay more then this,
when David took the Spear and the cruse of water from Saul's boulster, and then
went a great way from them, he cried unto Abner, and said, Verse. 16.
Wherefore have thou not kept thy lord the King? -- As the Lord lives, ye are
worthy to die, because you have not kept your Master the Lords anointed; Where
you see, David swears a Great oath, As the Lord lives, and therefore he
jesteth not. They are worthy to die, not they Alone that Kill their King; but
they also, that hazard not their own lives, to Protect and preserve the life of
their King; be their King never so Wicked. I am sure in David's judgment, this
is True Divinity.

Yea, more then all this, when Saul had fallen upon his own sword, because he
would not fall into the hands of his uncircumcised enemies, and, being in
extreme anguish, desired a young Amalekite, that was passing by to rid him out
of his pain; and the young man, in favor to him, performing his request; and
out of his respect to David, that was to succeed him, he brought the Crown that
was upon his head, and the Bracelet that was upon his arm unto David, that the
enemies might not have them; and to show, that he took no pleasure in the death
of Saul, he came in a very mournful manner, with his Cl^athes rent, and Earth
upon his head; and likewise to show his Loyal respect unto David, he fell to
the Earth and did Obeisance unto him; and though he was a stranger, and Subject
neither to Saul nor to David, therefore owed no service unto either of them;
yet, because he took away the Life of David's King, the anointed of God, and his
Vicegerent here on earth, David caused one of his young men, 2 Samuel 1.
to fall upon the poor Amalekite, and for his mistaken courtesy unto Saul, and
unwelcome service unto David, to smite him that he died. So dear was the life
of this Wicked King unto this Godly man, that was a man according to Gods own
heart, the best subject that ever we read of, and therefore was honored by God
to become the best King that ever Israel had; So that in the Genealogy of
Christ the King of Kings, he is preferred before Abraham as S. Matthew. 1.1.
Matthew sets it down, The book of the Generation of Jesus Christ, the son of
David, the son of Abraham.

And is it not Strange, that these Jews, that were given so much to read the
Scripture, and had them more readily then our Puritans have them, at their
fingers end; and could tell how many Affirmative, and how many Negative
precepts were in all the Bible, and how many times, every word was therein
mentioned; and yet, that they would not now consider that Job says, Is it fit
to say to a King, Thou art wicked? Job 34.18. Psalm. 105.15. Eccl. 8.4. Numb.
16. Deuteronomy. 33.5. Hos. 1.4. 2 Reg: 21.24.
and that God himself says, Touch not mine anointed; and the wisest amongst
the sons of men says, Where the Word of a King is, there is power; and, Who
may say unto him, What do thou? Or that they could not remember, how
fearfully God destroyed those Rebels that rose against Moses, that was a King
in Jesuron and destroyed the posterity of Jehu, because he had destroyed his
own King Ahab, and stirred the people to slay all them that had slain Amon;
though he was a most wicked King.

But the truth is, that the Old Serpent, the Prince of darkness teaches his
Scholars to reject the Old light, and now to stand altogether for New lights,
new Revelations, and new Divinity; therefore S. Augustine speaks most truly of
these Scripturists, that they had the Bible In manibus, but not In cordibus;
and they had the truth in Codice, but not in Capite; for now Caiphas, contrary
to all the Old Scripture, Joh: 18.14.
has a New Revelation that it is expedient, Pro salute populi, that One man
should dye for the people; therefore Christ their King must needs be Killed,
and all the people cried out for justice, and double their cry, Crucify Him,
Crucify Him. Salus Populi does require it. From the Word of God.


2. To prove it Lawful to put any King to death, Prosalute Populi; he that
has all Scripture ad unguem, can furnish you with a Text of S. Peter, 1 Pet.
2.13.
that affirms the Kingly office to be (...), an Humane Ordinance or creature;
therefore the people, being the maker of the King, Own creature, if he fails
in the End, for which he was created;

To this our True Divines have oftentimes most truly answered.

1. That the Jews held their Royal Government to be (...), 1: Sol.
Immediate from God, and to be in force without the Election of Ordination from
man; and all other dominions and rule to be (...), a Humane Ordinance, because
God had determined, and set down the Platform of their Government, which he
had not done to other Nations; that, as the Prophet says, had not the
knowledge of his Laws; and therefore S. Peter, writing here to the Jews, tells
them, that although the Kingly office should be but, as they held, an Humane
Ordinance; and not, as theirs was, a (...), a Divine Rule; yet his Precept was,
that they should Submit themselves thereunto for the Lords sake; (i.e.) though
the Governors were Heathens, and their Government Heathenish; yet, Obedience,
and not Resistance, is due unto them for the Lords sake, by whom All Kings,
both Jews and Gentiles, do bear rule.

2. That although the Jurisdiction of Kings for Extent, in some Part, Sol.
and in some Degree, might be said to be Humane, from men; yet the power of the
Sword, which has Potestatem vitae and necis, is simply and absolutely Divine,
from God. For who can give power over the Life of man, but he that gave life to
man? Joh. 19.10.
Therefore when Pilate said to Christ, that he had power to Crucify him, and
power to Release him; our Savior answers directly, Verse. 11.
that he could not have This power against him, Except it were given him from
above. And so S. Paul plainly says, that This power of the Sword which is in
the King, Romans 13.1.
as Supreme, as S. Peter says, is from God: and so this is no (...), whether
you place it in the Jew, or in the Gentile; in the hand of a Godly Constantine,
or a Bloody Dioclesian: but it is the Immediate Ordinance of God; and can not
issue or flow from man, but from the Living God, that is the Author and has
the Sovereign power both of Life and Death. And therefore, in the Restoration
of the World after the flood, God Almighty,

1. Re-iterates the Blessing and favor which formerly he had bestowed upon
Adam and Eve, Genesis 9.1.
in bidding them to Increase and Multiply, and so to produce and continue the
Life of man.

2. He confirms that Former Sovereignty, which he had granted unto Adam,
Verse. 2. and 3.
over all the inferior creatures.

3. He establishes the Civil Government, that was to be Observed amongst all
the future Generations of Noah; and therein, as if he now called to mind the
Murder of Innocent Abel; to prevent the like, he does Explicitly, and plainly
challenge to himself the Power of punishing the shedding of man's blood to
death; Verse. 5.
saying, Surely the blood of your lives will I require, at the hand of every
beast will I require it, and at the hand of man, and at the hand of every man's
brother, will I require the life of man. Where you see, the Lord three times
repeats, I will require it, and prefixeth the word, Surely, that you should not
doubt it.

And lest any man should think, that God meant to punish that sin Immediately by
his Own hand, and not rather by his Substitute, and Viceroy, the Lord adds,
Verse. 6.
Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed again, which is the
right reading of the words, fuller then the Vulgar Translation, that says no
more, but Quicunque effuderit sanguinem hominis, fundetur sanguis illius: and
plainer then the Septuagint, that says, (...), Dr. Maxw. page 50.
as the Learned Archbishop of Tuam sufficiently proves.

And the words being Thus, as our English Translation rightly has them; you
see the Sovereignty of the punishing the Slayer of man, is immediately invested
in Gods Deputy, by God himself; that is, in Him, whom God Appoints to do it,
and in none other.

For I hope no man will conceive it so, that Any man whatsoever is invested
with This power, to shed the blood of him that sheddeth man's blood; because
this would be such a Disorder, and produce such confusion, as that nothing
could be more destructive, and pernicious to humane kind, and more repugnant to
Gods Nature, that is the God of Order, as well as of justice.

And therefore, as this Sovereign Power of Life and Death does Principally and
Properly belong to God, so God Gives this power, not to the Community, to all,
nor to Every one that will, or would have it; but to some Particular Deputy,
whom he does Immediately invest therewith, to punish death with Death.

And, as this Sovereign power over life, which is the Head and chiefest part of
Civil Government, is Immediately given by God unto his Deputy to be executed; So
all the Parts of Governments (when as all are Homogenous, that is, In
indivisibili posita, things Indivisible in their nature, such as can no more be
distracted and severed, then a Crown can be a Crown, when any part thereof is
taken away) they must be in like manner granted to be Immediately from God, and
not from Man.

3. Were the Kingly office, an Humane creature, that is, Person of the King is
Gods creature: and therefore, were their false Exposition of (...), True; yet
could they not infer any more from thence, then the dethroning of Him, whom
they had exalted; and not the killing of Him, whom God had created.

But, Quo jure, quaque injuria, let others look, and let him be whose Creature
he will; and his Kingly Office be from Whom you will, of God or of men; they
are resolved to Kill him. And yet they will, as the Evangelist says, do it
most Subtly; and seem to give him a Fair Trial, that the Vulgar people
(which know no more then what is put into their heads, and, as the Centaures
embraced a cloud for Juno, so do they take Shadows for the Substance) might
believe he was Justly, and legally condemned, and not, as he was indeed,
Maliciously murdered.

But Why will they Murder Him, and draw his Innocent blood upon their wicked
heads? For they had Him in their Own hands, He was their Prisoner, and they
could have Him and hurry Him where they would; from Pilate to Herod, and from
Herod to Pilate again. Why might they not have sent Him, and detained Him with
S. John the Evangelist, in the Isle of Patmos, or secure his Person still in
Prison with S. John Baptist.

It may be answered, Nefandum scelus majori scelere adimpletur, Quae scelero
pacta est, scelere rumpatur fides, Senec. in Medea.
every heinous offense secures it self by a More heinous crime, as Seneca well
observes; as the Thief that Robs for love of money, will often Murder the
poor Traveller for fear to be Discovered; and the Lewd woman, that fears to be
Shamed for her lewdness, will not fear to Murder her own Child; so the Cevetous
desire of having what we have no right unto, Why the wicked never leave
persecuting their King, till they kill him.
as it works a Great care and sedulity how to get it, so it begets a Great
fear and jealousy to lose it; therefore seeing there may be an Escape, or
reprisall from prison, and a Return from exile, as it was in Henry
Bullingbrook, afterward King Henry the fourth; they that fear to lose their
Usurped Possessions, or to feel the Revenge of their Treason and Rebellion,
never think themselves Secured, or their usurpation Settled, until their unjust
titles be sealed in the blood of the right Owner, and their own Wicked lives
secured, in the Vnmerited death of their Innocent adversaries.

And this is the Reason that these Wicked murderers of their Own King, never
left to persecute Him, till they had Killed Him.

I should now proceed to the Last point, to discover the Murderers of this Just
One, their own Pious and Religious King: but that before I proceed to that
point, I hold it requisite,

First, Six Special circumstances to be observed.
to show unto you these six Special Circumstances about the Murder of this
King: which Are most Exactly delivered unto us by the Evangelists, and which
very-very circumstances may be Punctually observed in the murder of another
King.

1. The base and Spiteful usage of this Good King by all his wicked
Adversaries.

2. How causelessly and Unjustly they condemned and executed him.

3. How Mildly, and how Sweetly this King behaved and Demeaned himself toward
all his enemies, both at his Judgment, and at his Death.

4. The Speedy execution of his Sentence, when these murderers had Condemned
him.

5. The Place of his execution, and the Number of attendants that followed him
to That place.

6. The small regard and Inhumane neglect of any Funeral Rites and obsequies at
his Burial.

And for the first, The base and spiteful usage of the King.
our Savior fore-shewing his death unto his twelve Apostles, says, that he
should be delivered unto the chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they
should condemn him to death, and should deliver him to the Gentiles, Mar.
10.33, 34.
and they should mock him, and scourge him, and spit upon him, and should kill
him: where you may observe,

1. He is twice betrayed: and

2. He is three manner of ways abused: 1. Mocked; 2. Scourged; and 3. Spit
upon.

1. The word (...), Trado, signifies to deliver up, or to betray, from whence
traditor, Two sorts of Traitors that betrayed this King.
a traitor, is derived. So, our Savior being twice delivered up; once by
Judas, to the chief Priest and Scribes; and then secondly, by the chief Priests
and Elders, and Scribes, and the whole Council, to Pilate; You see there were
two sorts of Traitors, that betrayed our Savior Christ. 1. Judas, that Arch
traitor, as being a menial servant, and of his privy council, Psalm. 55.12, 13,
14. Math. 26.
as the Psalmist notes; and therefore, to his everlasting infamy, is no less
than twelve times termed and proclaimed Traitor in the same Chapter.

2. So was King Charles twice betrayed. 1. To the Parliament. 2. To the
Soldiers.
A whole pack of Traitors, all that conspired, counseled, and consented, to
deliver up this their King to be put to death; close they were, many of them,
and would fain seem clear from the last act, which was his Execution, and
therefore innocent from his blood, and freed from the high and loud crying
Treason: Yet, as close as they were, and because there be no accessaries in
Treason, the Holy Ghost finds them out, and ranks them all under the same Crime
of Treason, and styles them by the same name of Traitors, or traditors, unto
their King.

And the base and barbarous usage of this King from his first apprehension, How
this King was mocked. So was King Charles mocked in these very particulars
following. John 6.15.
to the last moment of his execution is punctually observed by the Evangelists;
as that

1. They should mock him, which though it be worse than death to a generous
mind; as you see Sampson chose rather to die, than to suffer himself to be
mocked and scoffed at by the Philistines; yet did these traiterous rebels mock,
and scoff, and flout at this their King, many ways, and diverse times: as

vote to make him a glorious King; that is, if he will be ruled by them, he
shall reign over them; Luke 19.38.
and because he refused to be this mock-king, they presently vote no more
addresses unto him, and cry, Nolumus hunc regnare super nos; We will not have
him for our King any longer: and yet, when they hoped he would submit to their
desires, they cry, Hosanna, blessed be the King, and we shall have a blessed
accommodation, betwixt the King, and the people. Jo. 19.1.
But within a very few days after, when their chief Leaders like not this, but
vote and declare his death; then they cried out as fiercely, Justice, Luc.
23.21.
Justice; Crucify him, Crucify him.

Royal train, a Band of the rudest Soldiers must not attend him, So was King
Charles led to Westminster Hall.
but must be sent to lead him, not to his Chamber of Presence, but to the
common Hall; there, as a Malefactor, and a Traitor to his people, to be tried
for his life.

Royal Robes, he shall have his own garments stripped off, and he shall be clad
in a Player's suite, that he may be the more ridiculous unto these Raskals.

So they must have K. Charles bend and yield to every thing that they desired.
Instead of a Scepter of Gold, which is the Ensign of Rule, he shall have a
Reed put in his hand, to be bowed by every wind of their own will, and to be
broken in pieces when they will. This is the Rule, that they like of best.

Crown of Gold, beset with the Jewels of Royal Prerogatives, befitting a King,
they platt a crown of thorns, and prick his brows and his brains, So they
loaded K. Charles with all disgraces.
with all the disgrace they could lay upon him; and

Learned Preacher well observes, they invented and practiced a little before, a
fine kind of subtle and malicious mockery, upon this their King. For they
would have him to believe, that Herod, who would be soly King, was purposely
set to kill him; and therefore, Luke 13.31. So persuaded they K. Charles to
save himself by retyring to the Isle of Wight.
out of a seeming care to his safety, they persuaded him, to get him out of the
way, and secretly to depart to some retired place; when as indeed, these very
Counselors were those bloody Herodians that hunted him thus into their net,
thereby the more readily to take away his life; which was a treacherous and a
bloody Mock: and I wish King Charles had as well understood this Mock, when he
believed their false letters, and thereupon conveyed himself to the Isle of
Wight, as this King of the Jews understood this malicious plot of these his
mocking enemies.

2. S. Mark says, they should scourge him: severe enough, no doubt of it.
Scourged, and despightfully handled. And K. Charles was thus spitefully handled
in 8. of the like particulars.
Forty stripes, save one, was the Jews usual manner to lay on him, whom they
hated: but whether Pilate, that now scourged him, laid on more or less, the
Holy Ghost sets not down, and therefore, I will not presume to determine it. S.
Luke adds to what S. Mark says, they should despightfully entreat and handle
him; and so he was indeed, most spightfully used: as

1. When they hunted him, like a partridge, and left him not an house to put
his head in. Math. 8.20. Chap 26.55.


2. When they came to take their King, as against a thief, with swords and
staves.

3. When they led him by a Band of rude Soldiers as a Traitor, Luc. 23.31.
to the common Judgement-hall.

4. When in this Hall, they caused, or countenanced, the scum of the people,
and basest of the Soldiers, to call for justice, and to cry, Crucify him,
Crucify him.

5. When to so mild a King, (that said none otherwise to his servant, Math. 26
6^. So they beheaded King Charles, where they used the baiting of Bears, and
other beasts, in the commonway.
that arch-traytor, which betrayed him, but, Friend, wherefore art thou come?)
they shall scornfully say to him, The Prisoner, or this fellow.

6. When they carry him out to Golgotha, a place fitter to bait beasts, than to
execute Kings; there, in a common highway, to lose his life.

7. When, as they go to Golgotha, they cause him, that was whipped and
scourged, and wearied in posting of him from place to place, to carry his own
heavy cross upon his shoulders.

8. When they, not only numbered him among the wicked, but also crucified him
betwixt two thieves, in the midst of the wicked, as if he had been the chiefest
of all wicked men, When the Colonel that brought him to his execution,
commanded his Soldiers to shoot any one that p^lled off his h^^, or showed any
reverence, or spoke any word, for the honor of the King. 3 How he was spit
upon. Joh. 19.29. And thus they bespitted King Charles, with all kind of
calumnies.
that had none but the wicked on every side of him.

9. When, as now, disrobed of all Royalties, and fastened to an accursed cross,
where he was enduring intolerable pains, not one, that loved him, durst speak a
word; but his enemies flouted him, and wagged their heads at him, and when he
thirsted for our salvation, they filled his mouth with sharp Vinegar, as they
did his ears with shameless taunts.

10. When, after he was dead, they would not afford him a place of burial; but
he must be laid in another man's Sepulcher.

And were not all these, and much more, that might be collected, most spightful
usages of an innocent man, and a glorious King? Yet the Evangelist adds one
thing more, that I must not omit, that they would spit upon him, (a note of the
thing, that we do most abominate); as it seems, their King was the chiefest
thing, that they did most hate and abhor.

But a man may be said to be spit upon, figuratively, when his enemies spit out
their venom against him, even bitter words. And so Christ their King, was most
shamefully spit upon, when by their Declarations and Remonstrances, and other
scurrilous Pamplets, they proclaimed him to the World to be a Deceiver of the
trust reposed in him, and a Traitor, because he perverted the people, and drew
them on to their destruction. So they called him a Samaritane, a Drunkard, a
Demoniak, an upholder of Sinners, a breaker of the Sabbath, a Conjurer, and
what not? Their tongues were swords that killed his Honor, before they
crucified his Person; and they were the poison of Aspes, that spat out all
these slanderous calumnies upon their King: And this was bad enough, and too
much indignity for a King; Yet the Soldiers did not only thus Rhetorically
spit upon him, but Grammatically disgorged the scum of their ulcerous lungs, in
his glorious face: and it is reported, that a Soldier, going under the name of
a Christian, did the like to a most Christian King; which if true, let him
repent, lest God should spue him out of his mouth.

And though it be the rule of the very Heathens, De mortuis nil nisi been, We
ought to speak nothing but good of the dead; because, as the Poet says, --
Livor post fata quiescit: Yet these beasts, like devils, Saeva sed in manes
manibus arma dabant. degenerating from mankind, are not content to kill their
King; but will murder him again, and again, after that he is both dead and
buried: and that, not only in his Lovers and Followers, whom they are resolved,
not to extenuate, but to extirpate; but especially in his fame, his glory, and
his honor, which is to all good men, as the savor of the sweetest perfume,
that is made by the art of the Apothecarie, and which they, like stinking
flies, endeavor by all means to corrupt and defame; and to destroy all those
that truly preach or publish any truth redounding to his honor: as you may
plainly see it in the acts of his Apostles, whom they threatened and terrified
for speaking any good of him: Though, as the Poet says, Tu ne cede malis; sed
contra audentior ito. So, the more these murderers sought to hinder it, the
more the glory and goodness of this King was spread abroad, to their indelible
shame, throughout all the World, when as the virtues of every just and pious
man, are as the palme-trees; the more forcibly they are suppressed, the more
gloriously they will be exalted. So you see how spightfully, and how
traitorously, and bloodily, and basely, these miscreant Jews have used and
abused, killed and murdered, their own King: Now

2. How causelessely they cond^mned him. John 10.32.
You are to consider, how causelessely, and how unjustly, they did all this
unto him; for the Prophet in the person of this King, says, Oderunt me gratis,
They hated me indeed, but without a cause: and himself says unto the Jews,
Many good works have I showed you from my father; For which of them do you now
go about to kill me? So, in truth, there was great cause to love and honor
this good King, that had done so much good unto them; but no cause why they
should either hate or abuse, much less to kill or murder this their own King.

Yet we find several causes set down by the Evangelists, that moved these Jews
to kill their King: and they are of two sorts: 1. Pretended to the people. 2.
Real to themselves: And 1. The pretended causes to murder their King.
Their pretended cause is specially twofold. 1. Cultus Dei. 2. Salus populi.

the usual pretenses of all Traitors; and, if they were true, there could not
be better: And therefore this fair color, deceives the buyers of this bad
cloth; and these pretenses made the people, to commit on Christ, this execrable
Fact, to hate and crucify the son of God, their own King: But to proceed to
examine these fair colors.

1. As generally the raisers of any people to rebellion, Innovation of Religion.
tax their Governors with innovation, or destruction of Religion, because all
men, even the superstitious, and licentious, and profane worlding, would fain
seem to embrace the true Religion; so these persuade the silly vulgar, that
this their King closely and cunningly labors to alter and innovate the true
service of God, as 1. That he was too loose in observing the Sabbath. 2. Too
strict in the reverence to be showed in the material Temple. Mark 2.24. Matthew.
21.12. c, 19. The very same things were objected against King Charles. Matthew.
5.17. 1. Objection answered. Mark 2.27.
3. Too severe in abridging them the liberty of divorces, and the like.


But to this our King answers first in general, that they do wrong him by
this their unjust charge and accusation, because he came not to destroy the
Law, or the Prophets, but to fulfill them; and themselves by their false
Expositions, and new invented traditions, were the innovators and corrupters,
both of the Law and Prophets: and more particularly,

1. For the Sabbath he shows, that themselves are herein too nice and
superstitious, and he no prophaner thereof; because the Sabbath was made for
man, (i.e.) for the good of man, both for his soul and body: of his soul by
serving God, and of his body by those necessary actions, and recreations, that
may conduce for the continuance of his health on that day.

2. For the reverence to be observed in the Temple or Church of God, Objection
answered. Esaias 56.7.
he shows that he was not too strict in driving the buyers and sellers, and
all other prophaners thereof out of the same; because God himself says, even
of this material Temple or Church of stones, My house shall be called an house
of prayer, for all people; for the Gentiles, as well as for the Jews; but they
had profaned the same, by making it a house of Merchandise, and so a den of
thieves, as they do that make it a stable for their horses, or a receptacle for
their plundered and stolen goods.

And in both these points, our Puritans now are just, as the Jews were then,
too much given to profane the Church, and too superstitious to observe the
Sabbath. But,

3. For abridging the liberty of divorces, Objection answered. Matthew. 5.32.
he tells them that he teaches no otherwise then what was from the beginning,
that whosoever puts away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication,
causes her to commit adultery: but you by forsaking the good old way, and
following the traditions of your latter Rabbines, your Assembly of new Divines,
have made the Commandments of God of none effect, and teach for Doctrine the
Commandments of men; Chap. 15.6.
just as they do now, forsake the good old government of the Church, that has
been from the beginning, from Christ his time; and follow the new invented
Government, that is forced from the false and wrested Expositions of our
upstart Rabbines, that never yet saw the age of a man, since the death of
Calvin and Beza, the first Fathers that begat it.

2. As they did thus unjustly tax their King for Innovation, The destruction
of the people. And this madded the people against King Charles. John. 11.48.
and the alteration of their established Religion; so they have another bait
whereby they do as cunningly catch the people, and set them like wild men to
join with them, yea to out-goe them in their desires, to destroy their King,
and that is, Salus populi, the safety and liberty of the people; which they
said would be utterly lost, if they did let Him go; and this madded the people
against their King; though there was no truth in the charge, nor ground to
believe it, but the fears and jealousies of the people, raised only by the
malice of their wicked leaders; for how could it be, that either the safety or
the liberty of the people, should be any ways impaired by that King, that came
to fulfill the Law, and to root out all the false glosses thereof, and was
contented to lose not his Kingdom only, but also his own life, for the safety
and liberty of his people, as themselves confess; that he must die for the
people, (i. e.) for their Laws and Liberties, and so become the Martyr of the
Law, and the Savior of his people.

So you see the pretended charge against this King, Jo. 11, 48.
that he was a tyrant, by indevouring to destroy their Laws, and to alter
their Religion; and a Traitor to the State by forbidding Tribute unto the
Conqueror, whom now they were resolved to honor for their only King, lest
they should lose their place and their Nation.

2. The true causes that moved the murderers to kill their Kings
The true real causes, that moved these murderers to kill their King, were
very many, but especially four. 1. Envy to him. 2. Despair in themselves. 3.
Fear to lose. 4. Ambition to be great.
For

1. Envy. Joh. 7.47. Mar. 7.37.
They perceived, that for his admirable worth, and his divine endowments, when
as never man spoke as he did, and that he did all things well, the people loved
him, followed him, and adhered to him; then, As the glorious rays of the Sun
upon any putrified matter, causes a stench; so his excellent virtues begat the
poysonou^brats of envy and malice in these wicked miscreants; and so Pilate
perceived that for envy they had delivered, or rather, as the word signifies,
betrayed him to death.

2. Despair of pardon.
When they had by their Declarations and Remonstrances, their calumnies,
slanders, and false accusations, sought with all art to render him odious unto
his people, and had in all things opposed him to the uttermost of their might;
Genesis 4.13.
then, as Cain cried out, my sin is greater then can be forgiven; So the guilt
of their malice, and the remembrance of their fore-past wickedness against
him, were of so deep a stain, they they conceived all the water in the Sea
could not wash it away; and all the mercy of man could not remit their sin:
such is the conscience of all unconscionable sinners; therefore, though this
good King could, and would, and did, forgive his enemies, and pray for his
persecutors, yet because their hate and sins were so great, that they could not
believe it, they thought themselves no ways secured, unless he were killed.

3. Fear to lose what they had gotten.
The men were now got into great power, and they had the liberty to be of what
Sect and profession they pleased, Scribes, Pharisees, or Sadduces, or what you
will; and to do what they would: so long as they pleased the Conqueror, no man
could contradict them; but if the right King continue King, they saw he would
not, and could not, endure such an Anarchie of Government, and a Hodge podge,
to remain amongst them; therefore Caiaphas, the second man in power, tells
them, it is expedient that he die, for fear of the loss of their places, and
this their great power and liberty.

4. Ambition to be great men. Matthew. 21.23. M^^ 12.7. Luke 20.9.
This King himself, in the parable of the Vineyard, which is faithfully
recorded by three Evangelists, sets down, as I conceive it, the main cause and
fundamental ground of his death, that is, their ambition and desire to be
great, and to hold all power and authority in their own hands; for so the
wicked husbandmen say, This is the heir, Venite, come, let us kill him, and
then, retinebimus haereditatem ejus, we shall hold his inheritance; His it is
we confess, yet then, We shall hold it, because, as S. Mark says, then
certainly, erit nostra, it will be ours, and no man can keep us from it; and
indeed this desire of bearing rule, And I would fain know, if these four things
were not the very causes that made the Rebels to being King Charles unto death.
this covetousness to get what is none of our own, has been the death of many
Kings, of many men: for what made Caracalla slay his brother Geta in his
mothers lap, and between her arms, but this inordinate desire to reign? What
made Phraharers son of Horodes King of Parthia, kill his own Father, and 29. of
his brethren, but the like desire to reign? And what made Abimelech, the
bastard son of Gedeon slay 70. of his brethren in one day? and Jehn to slay his
Master, even as Zimri had done the like before him? and Absolon attempt to do
so to his own Father, but only this ambitious desire of bearing rule. And if
you look into the 8. c. of the 5. Book of Camerarius, Camerar. l. 5. c. 8.
his historical meditations, you shall find a Catalogue of such wicked
murderers, that have bin the death of many Kings, that they might reign as
kings themselves; and therefore, let the pretenses of these murderers of their
King be what you will, change of Religion, Arbitrary Government, great Tyranny,
or loss of liberty; yet, all these are but forged and fained to blind the
World, and to deceave the people; and the true Cause indeed is this, Haereditas
erit nostra. This Profit, is the point that does the deed.

And, as the desire to reign makes the regicides; Cant. 2.
so this inheritance of the Church, which is signified by the Vineyard, brought
the doctrine of killing, deposing and depriving into the Church of Christ: and
it is as truly, Esaias. 5.
as wittily said by one, that, Quid vultis mihi dare, is the Jews question in
this case, and, Omnia haec tabi dabo, is the Devil's answer, to the
Church-robber. And such a dialogue betwixt the Devil and the Jew, for the
inheritance of the Church is powerful enough, to bring any King, even Christ
himself, the King of Kings unto his death; so I do assure my self, and all the
World may be assured of it, it is not the calling or the office of the Bishops
(or of Deans, and Prebends) which neither they nor their grand Master was ever
able to disprove to be Divine, that they so much detest; but it is their Lands
and inheritance, that they so greedily gape for; and as this made Naboth to
lose his life, so this makes our calling detestable, and this was the cause,
the cause (...), that brought Charles our King, and one special cause, that
brought Christ the King of kings, unto their deaths; because they would not
betray the trust, that God reposed in them, nor surrender up, this their
rightful Inheritance unto the greedy Usurpers; but showed themselves faithful
shepherds that were ready to lay down their lives for their sheep, rather then
to betray the laws and liberties of the people, and the happiness that God had
determined for their subjects; and for this, as we owe to our Savior Christ
our selves, our souls, and our bodies, to honor him, and serve him, to praise
him, and to magnify him for ever, as our only Savior and preserver from
everlasting death and destruction; so this good King, this just, magnanimous
King, King Charles (that rather suffered an ignominious death, then to give
away the inheritance of the Church) or annull the highest calling in the same,
the Calling of the Reverend Bishops, deserves to be everlastingly Loved,
indelibly Chronicled, and universally Published like Mary Magdalen, for a
faithful Martyr, a true Protector, and a nursing Father unto the Church of
Christ; which, here I vow for mine part, ever to do, whenever opportunity
offers it self to do it.

But, as I said before, they had their King in their hands, Prisoner, so they
had his Kingdom in their power and possession already; what needed they
therefore to kill him, that they might have that, which they had? For if Ahab
had had the Vineyard, questionless Naboth had not died.

Saint Mark answers fully, that they killed the Heir, hold it, and continue in
it; An answer specially to be observed.
for covetousness is a sin of Retention and never thinks of Restitution, and
the sin of forcible entrance can not endure to be put out of Possession:
thereforelest, if he lived, he might use some means to Regain it; there is no
surer way for them to hold in Peace, what they unjustly got by the sword, but
by the death of the Just Owner.

And the word (...), as I conceive, signifies not only that we may hold, what
we have, but also that we may have more then we hold; as if they should have
said, Somewhat we have, while we have him our prisoner, and in our hands, but
more we shall get, when we get him dead; for then we shall have all, as much as
we can or will desire. Therefore seeing ambition is like the daughters of the
Horseleech, that still cries more and more, these murderers are like the Whore
in the Apocalypse, that having tasted the blood of the Saints, will never give
over till she be drunk with blood: so will they never be satisfied with any
less than the blood of their King, Apoc 17.
and the death of the right Heir, that they may hold what they have, and have
whatsoever they desire.

So you see the true Causes, why these wicked murderers have put their King to
death. Now,

3. The patient and silent demeanor of this King. Esaias. 53. Act. 8.32.
When his adversaries most maliciously, illegally and falsely accused him, and
laid many things to his charge, contrary to all truth; yet he answered not unto
their charge: but this good King, being reviled, reviled not again; and being
smitten, smote not again; but as a Lamb before his shearer is dumb, so opened
he not his mouth.

The Reason, The Reason of not answering to their charge four fold.
why he answered not, is not expressed by the Holy Evangelists; therefore we
may not curiously pry into that, which is concealed; nor Positively conclude
the Reason, that is not revealed unto us. Yet with Modesty, it may be
conjectured, that he would not answer.

1. wise and satisfactory Answer, might convince Pilate, that was a rational
man and seemed to bear no malice against him, and being satisfied, to let him
go, freed from the accusation of his enemies: and so the Counsel of God, which
he knew, and came to fulfill it, touching the Redemption of mankind by his
death, might thereby be frustrated. So far did he prefer our good before his
own life: A most gracious King!

2. answering might have ministered an occasion to these malicious miscreants,
to suborn more perjurers to bear false witness against him: so careful was
this good King, of the good of his enemies, that they should not heap more
vengeance upon themselves, by committing the more sins.

3. Power, which, at that time, the sword had so unjustly gotten, to be
insufficient and unjustifiable, in his case, to try his person, and to condemn
Him to death; who, in respect of the Hypostaticall union, was Rex universae
terrae, and so King of the Romans, as well as of the Jews; therefore he would
not answer to that charge, that was so illegally charged against him, coram non
Judice, before a Judge, that had no lawful commission to be his Judge; So
Bradshaw had no commission to be King Charles his Judge. Or

4. nothing to the false charge laid against him; because of the illegal
power, authority or right, that his enemies had to require it; when as he,
being their King, was not to answer for any faci that he had done, to any one
of all his Subjects; as the King, that was according to Gods own heart,
shows, when, after he had committed both adultery and murder, he says to
God, Against thee only have I sinned.

And therefore, the Jews being Christ his Subjects; and so, having neither
right nor authority, Math. 27.11.
to lay any charge against Him that was their King: he was altogether silent,
in all that concerned the charge laid against him. Mar. 15.2.
But for any other question, that Pilate, his servant, and now made his Judge,
Luke 23.3.
did ask him, He gave him a full and a sufficient answer, as you may see in all
the Evangelists.

Or else, Joh. 18.34. and 36. and chap. 19 11.
as S. Jerome. comments upon the Evangelists; he spoke nothing, that is, nihil
durum, nihil asperum, nothing, that might offend either the Judge, or the Jews.

But we find, What this King spoke, not to save his own life, but for others.
that neither Jews nor Gentiles, neither High Priest, nor Pilate would condemn
this King, before they gave him liberty to speak, and they were ready to hear,
what he would or could say for himself. Because the law of the Jews, as
Nicodemus, a Counselor of their law, testifies, judged no man before it heard
him: and it was not the manner of the Romans, Jo. 7.51. Act. 25.16.
to deliver any man to die, before he had liberty to answer for himself; as
Festus, another Judge of the Romans, confesses.

And yet, such was the injustice showed to Charles our King, which you may
remember, by his subject-Judge, that contrary to all Laws both of Heaven and
Earth, both of Jews and Gentiles, he would not hear those just Reasons, that he
sought to show for himself, against their unjust proceedings against him: And
therefore no doubt but Annas and Caiphas, and unjust Pilate, will rise in
Judgment to condemn that unjust Judge at the last day.

But though this good King Christ said nothing to their Charge, to save his own
life; yet, at his death, he spoke much, to preserve his enemies from
Everlasting death; as when he said, I thirst: that was, not for the blood of
his enemies, as they and the Soldiers did for his blood; but it was for the
accomplishment of the mystery of theirs, and our salvation, that was to be
effected by his death.

And especially, when, as Bellar mine observes, he prayed for his very
murderers, that were slaughtering and tormenting him; and said, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do: and some of them are simply ignorant of
the wickedness of this fact, being seduced by their false Teachers: and others,
though wilfully blind; yet are they ignorant of the consequents of this act,
that is, the heavy punishment, that is due to them, and, without great
repentance, must light on them, for this wicked deed; therefore, O my Father, I
pray thee, revenge not my death, but forgive them for my sake.

And this prayer prevailed for Longinus, that thrust him through his side, How
mightily the prayer of Christ prevailed with God to forgive his enemies.
to become a Convert, if old Tradition may be believed for truth; and for 3000.
more at one clap, when S. Peter took off the vail, that shadowed the truth, and
showed to the poor seduced people, the horrible wickedness of their malicious
leaders; and for many many more, that returned unto him immediately after; and
would have prevailed for all, the very worst of his murderers, even for Judas,
Annas, and Caiphas; yea, and for the Judges, (the first, and second Pilate)
that pronounced the Sentence against their Kings; if they had had the grace, to
repent them of their evil deed, and to believe in this their Savior.

4. Consider, How Speedily they condemned their King.
I pray you, how speedily they executed and made an end of him, after he was
Condemned; for he was apprehended, but upon Thursday, when as upon Wednesday at
night, he did eat the Passover with his Disciples, and tells them, that after
two days, was the Feast of the Passover, the greatest feast that they had,
Math. 26.2.
solemnized in remembrance of their great and wonderful deliverance out of
Pharaohs bondage; And yet, they would not suffer him to live, till that Feast
was past; but being taken upon Thursday, he must all that day, and all that
night be hurried from Annas to Caiphas, from Caiphas to Pilate, from Pilate to
Herod, and from Herod back again to Pilate, and so from place to place; and the
very next day, which was Friday, by nine of the clock in the morning, which was
their third hour of the day, they fastened him to his Cross, Mar. 15.25.
with nails so large, that, being found, they made a helmet, and a bridle for
Constantine, as it is reported.

And this was a very quick dispatch indeed. King Charle^.
I remember another King that was murdered in like manner by his subjects; but,
though suddenly enough dispatched out of the way, yet had a little more favor,
and a little longer time, before he was beheaded.

But why would not these miscreants suffer their King to live one day, prepare
himself for his death, after he was condemned?

They answer, That the next day, after he was adjudged to die, Resp. Why they
would not suffer their King to live one day longer.
was their Feast day, and the greatest feast in the year: therefore they must
not suffer him to pass over that day, nor to die, on that day, for these two
special Reasons.

1. uproare among the people; because that day, being set apart for an holy
meeting, as the Lord commanded it, and, as our Apprentices are permitted upon
Shrove-tuesday, Servants had liberty on Holy days, and Feast-dayes.
to take their liberty and to go a Shroving where they please; So were their
laborers, and servants, under color of going to the Temple, suffered, on this
day, to gad abroad, and to go where they would. And therefore the raskality of
the people, and the seduced followers of the Scribes, Pharisees, and
Presbyters, cried for Justice, Justice, Crucify him, Crucify him; yet, seeing
all the rest of the honest people, that had well observed his meekness, and his
sweet carriage amongst them, and had received so much justice, and so many
favors from this good King, did exceedingly love him, and said, He did all
things we^l, and were ready to venture their lives for him, the Priests and
Presbyters durst not venture to delay his execution till that day were past,
lest they should attempt to rescue him, and so to save his life on that day:

So you see the subtilty of the crafty foxes, and the greediness of these
Bloody-hounds, to take away the life of their good King, and to hinder al
others to preserve his life.

2. They would not have him to suffer on their Feast day, lest they should be
defiled; John 18.28.
a most damnable hypocrisy, that stumble at a straw, and leap over a block;
that fear to be defiled on their Holy day, and yet fear not the shedding of
innocent blood, the blood of their King, and of the Son of God, on any other
day: Just like our hypocritical Saints, that cannot endure to misie the hearing
of two Sermons on the Lords day, and care not to deceive and destroy 200. of
their neighbors, if they can do it, upon any other day: And therefore these
holy Saints, are none of Gods Saints, but do belong to that Angel of darkness,
The great hypocrisy of these holy murderers.
that can so finely transform himself, as these men do, into an Angel of Light.
And so you see how speedily they executed their King, and the main Reasons, why
they did so.

And this speedy execution of his death, does exceedingly aggravate the
heynousness of the action; for, after they had him in their hands, their feet
were swift to shed his blood, and they ended all proceedings in few days;
their unsatiable thirst for blood, can never suffer these Blood-bounds to rest,
until their thirst be quenched.

But you will say, He was almost four years amongst them, after he was
Baptized, A Question.
and began to dress his Vineyard, and to sway the Scepter of his Dominion; if
they were so greedy of his extirpation, Why stayed they all this while, before
they executed their intention?

I answer, Not because they wanted will, but by reason of some remora's, The
Answer, for three Reasons. Luke 22.2.
that hindered their desires; and they were especially these three.

1. The love of the people, who, for his justice, innocence, and fair carriage
toward all men, and the great good he did to many men, did, for many years,
exceedingly love him, and apologize for him; until these subtle Foxes, by
their Remonstrances, and Aspersions, had wrought this unstable multitude, that
understood nothing right, to a jealous, and a causeless suspicion of this Just
King, and a wicked compliance with these unjust murderers.

2. The want of fit opportunity, made that they could not so safely do it,
until the people, at the Passover, were drawn up to the Metropolis,
Jerusalem; where, by the Law, they were to convene at this Feast, and whereby
you may see how their subtilty made way for their villainy.

3. The factions and oppositions, that were among themselves, and especially
betwixt their chief Commanders, Pilate the Roman Commander, and Herod, the
head-Ruler of the Jews, stayed their purposes, till these differences were
composed, and these two great Opponents, made great Friends; and this, as soon
as ever done, they presently do what they intended, and never rest till all be
finished.

5. When they had thus devilishly condemned, The Attendants that followed
Christ to the place of execution. Math. 27.33. So was King Charles beheaded in
the Highway, where they used to bait Bears and Bulls.
and thus speedily resolved to kill their King, I pray you mark the place where
they carried him to be executed^^ and that place where they would have him to
be executed, I told you before, was Golgotha; that is to say, A place of a
skull, the most infamous place about Jerusalem, where their Malefactors were
hanged, and their bones were scattered and gnawn of Dogs: A fit place, think
you, for a King to end his life? And then

6. Consider, the attendants, that accompanied this great King to this
despicable place of Execution, and we shall find them to be,

Either 1. His friends, Or 2. His foes: And


1. Of his friends, I find but very few that durst be seen to follow him, How
few of his friends. Joh. 19.26. Chap. 18.15.
not any man, that I find recorded, but only one, and that was the Disciple,
that our Savior loved, and that Disciple was known unto the High Priest; and
therefore the bolder to follow him, whom he loved. The rest, I presume, loved
him well; but they saw the malice of his persecutors was so great, not only
against their King, but also against all those that loved him, How cruel the
enemies of Christ were to all that loved him.
that if they were seen to follow him, or heard to speak a word in his behalf,
they had presently been taken for Malignants, and most severely punished, as
most heinous Delinquents: And therefore all the rest of his Apostles and
Disciples, and all others that loved him, were so mightily terrified, that they
durst neither be heard nor seen; So cruel were these Subjects, even unto their
King. Some Women indeed, that loved him well, were permitted to be present at
his death, their Sex was their only warrant: but these Women, and the rest that
knew him, were fain to stand afar off, and durst not come near him; and, it
seems, they durst not speak one word, either of him, or to him: but smote their
breasts, and returned, Luke. 23.48. But

2. For his foes, we read of enough, that followed him; How many of his foes.
a guard of Soldiers, for fear he should be rescued; and the Rulers, that
derided him; and the foolish people, that were the flatterers of those lewd
Leaders, saying, He saved others, let him save himself if he be Christ the Son
of God: Luc. 23.25.
and some no doubt, were present, that betrayed him: Such villainy and impudence
had covered the foreheads of these monsters of men; yet one of these bloody
Soldiers that were the chief actors in the execution of this King, received
here the benefit of this Kings prayer, and was enlightened by his Spirit to
say, Math. 27.54.
Truly this was the Son of God. But for the Priests and Presbyters, the Scribes
and Rulers of the people; they could bring him to his death, and mocked him
upon the Cross, when humanity should have rather taught them to pity him, than
to scoff at him; not one of them, notwithstanding all the wonders that were
then showed (as the rising of many that were dead, the rending of the vail of
the Temple, and the great Earth quake that immediately followed his death) had
the grace to confess their sins, and to bewail his death.

Nay, they were so far from returning, or repenting them, of their wickedness,
that their hearts being hardened harder than Pharaoh's heart, they still proceed
in malice; and because any eulogy of him, they thought obloquy unto themselves,
and his praise to be their shame, they neither permitted him a Funeral Sermon,
nor provided a Tomb, for his burial; and therefore in all likelihood, he had
goue without one, had not providence according to Prophecy provided him a
Sepulcher from an honorable Counselor, which had lodged this King, while he
was alive, in his heart; and now, being dead, he lays him in his own Grave.

But it may be said, That, as S. Peter says, Pilate and the children of Israel
did but what the hand and counsel of God bad determined before to be done; and
therefore this their proceeding against their King, being but a lowly
submission, or a dutiful execution of Gods providence, it cannot be so
offensive unto God.

I answer, secret and unknown unto them, and they had no revelation, nor
commandment from God, to do it; therefore they are inexcusable for doing it.

2. Peter says, God had determined this to be done; yet he does not say, that
God determined to do it by them, and in that manner, and for that cause as they
did it. Therefore, though the counsel of God for the doing of it, had been
revealed unto them, yet this can be no excuse unthem, unless God had commanded
them to be the actors of it.

3. mind, and that his mind was, that they should be the actors of this
Tragedy; yet Gods end being salus populi, the salvation of all faithful people,
and their end being to satisfy their own malice and ambition, to get the
inheritance of the Church, and the Kingdom to themselves; the counsel of God to
do it, cannot justify them in their wicked deeds.

And therefore, all these things rightly weighed, it will appear, that Gods
counsel was most just in it self, and most gracious for us; and their
proceeding most unjust, without warrant, without authority, and will be found
at the last Day, with all other like proceedings, without excuse; and
themselves to be most malicious murderers of their King.

And now, as Apelles, or Timantes, having drawn the sad and mournful
countenance of the Mourners for Iphigenia, to the uttermost height of his
skill; when he came to express the same in Agamemnon, her father, because his
art could go no higher than he had gone, and that it could not reach to express
her fathers grief, he was fain to draw a vail over Agamemnon's face, and to
leave it to the consideration of the beholders to conceive how infinite must be
the sorrow of her dear father, that so dearly loved her. So I, having painted
out the horrible vileness of the murderers of their Just King, to the uttermost
of mine art, and not able to show half the damnability thereof, I must put a
Curtain before my Tablet, and leave it to your thoughts, to consider, if you
can imagine, that it is possible for any Orator to express the unutterable and
incomprehensible damnability of this Fact, and the execrable villainy of those
Traitors, that have murdered their own just King: And now

3. Part. Who were the murderers of this just King.
For the murderers that have killed their Just King, I am to show you, who
these Traitors and murderers were; and we find in this Chapter, and the
precedent Chapter, that they were the people, and the Elders of the people, the
Scribes, and the Priests, and the whole multitude; and the Evangelist adds, the
Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Lawyers, and the Rulers of the people. A strange,
and a wonderful thing, that so many of several Sects, of several Degrees, and
several dispositions, should notwithstanding conspire together, to put to death
their own just and lawful King.

But you have heard of the Treason, and Murder, and the cruel handling of this
King: and you have seen and do know, how our own King has been likewise used;
and all this we can, it may be, patiently hear; but, when Nathan tells David,
Thou art the man, and when I tell these Jews de quibus narratur fabula, These
and these were the men that did it, and were the Actors in this wicked Tragedy;
or if I should name the Actors of the other Tragedy, that our English Jews
acted against their own King, I know not how they would wring, and bite, and
kick against me: Yet howsoever, I will, as briefly as I can, go over them all,
that the Scripture speaks of, that when you find or see any of the Actors of
the other later Tragedy and Regicides, like these Murderers of their King, you
may dislike them, and specially beware of them: And

1. Because the Pharisees were most powerful, and most numerous; The Pharisees
like our zealous, seduced, and hypocritical Saints.
I will begin with them that first began to quarrel with their King; and you
must know, that they were but of yesterday, a new-sprung Sect, not so much as
once mentioned in all the Old Testament, but as soon as ever he peeps out of
his shell, he runs away, like the Lapwing out of his nest, and separates
himself from the Church, (i.e.) the Congregation of his neigbours, Why the
Pharisees separate themselves from all others.
for which cause he is termed, Pharisaeus, quasi segregatus; and the reason of
his separation is, because he thinks all others profane, carnal, and worldly,
and himself with the rest of his Sect, to be the only holy Saints and servants
of God.

And indeed, we find that they exceeded all the common sort of men in five
special things; as, 1. In Tything. 2. In Fasting. 3. In Praying and Preaching.
Their Religion.
4. In a fair Language. 5. In sanctifying the Sabbath.
For

1. For tithes they will not omit Mint and Cummin, nor any of the least things
untythed.

2. For Fasting, they must do it twice in every week.

3. For Praying, they used it often, and made long prayers, Matthew. 6.23.
and openly not caring who did see them, but rather defirous that all men
should take notice, how devout they were in their prayers, and so they were for
the preaching the word of God, and they were most diligent to hear Sermons,
insomuch, that rather then they would be without the word preached, Matthew. 3,
they will go to hear John the Baptist.

4. For their fair language, Christ himself tells us, that they being evil,
yet speak good things, and so, when they came to entrap him, Matthew. 12.24.
Their diffimu^ lation.
they began with fair words, and say, Master; and so in all their carriages,
when they meant to play the devil, they spoke like Saints: as, when they
labored what they could, to be the death of Christ; yet they come unto him as
if they were his greatest friend, and tell him, that the Herodians are his
bitter enemies, and do intend to kill him, and therefore he should do wisely,
to convey himself out of their reach. But of every such Pharisee, Cum tibi
dicit Ave, tanquam ab host Cave.

5. For their observation of the Sabbath, they are so zealous, or rather
superstitious, that the Disciples must not pick an ear of corn, and put it in
their mouth, to assuage their hunger, nor Christ speak a word to heal a lame,
or a blind man on that day, without danger of a C^uncell, to be severely
censured; and we read that if a barrel or vessel of wine leakt, and run out on
the Sabbath, they would rather suffer the same to be all spilt, then stop it on
that day; and Stow writes it in his Chronicle, that one of them dwelling in the
Old- Jury in London, happened to fall into a Privy upon the Saturday, which
was, and is their Sabbath day, and he refused to be plucked out, because he
would not have his neighbor to profane the Sabbath; and his neighbor being a
Christian, denied to help him out on the Sunday, which is the Christian
Sabbath; saying, If thou art so precise to observe thy Sabbath, I will be as
zealous for my Sabbath; and before the Monday, he was stifled with the ill
savor of his lodging.

So religious were these Saints in their superstition, so fair in their outward
holiness of fasting, praying, and hearing Sermons, exceeding all other men, so
far as Religion seems to exceed profaneness.

But he that is (...), the searcher of all hearts, and sees the secrets of all
thoughts, tells us plainly, they were but mere hypocrites, appearing unto men
like silly sheep, but were indeed ravening Wolves, that devoured widows
houses, and plundered all their poor neighbors; not leaving to many of them,
bread to put into their childrens mouths, under the color of their long
prayers, and the pretense of Zeal and Religion; this is the very truth of the
matter. How mighty these hypocrites increased in number, in power, and
authority.


And yet these wicked men, these holy hypocrites by their dissembling, and
feigned holiness, grew so great both in number and power, that they soon
overspread the whole land, and became as it were the only Oracles of the
people and their faction ruled, upon the matter, not only the City of
Jerusalem, but almost all the land of Jury, so far, that as Josephus says,
Herod himself was afraid to displease them, they had so infinitely bewitched
the people with the opinion of their knowledge in the Scripture, and their
zealous profession, that nothing was thought well done, but what they did, or
approved of, as it appears by that question unto the Officers, Have any of
the Rulers or of the Pharisees believed on him?

But let such hypocrites go on in their hypocrisy, John 7.48. ^^arth 5.20.
and let them be deceived, that will believe them; it is not these outward
shows of holiness, and shadows of Religion, that pleases God, who is not
mocked, as the Apostle speaks, but requires truth in the inward parts, as
the Psalmist says, and therefore tells us, and we may believe him, that except
our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the hypocrites, that do but
deceive the world, and bewitch the simple people, we shall in no wise enter
into the Kingdom of heaven.

2. The Scribes.
The next Sect, that were most sedulous to betray Christ, and to murder their
King, were the Scribes, such as were the continual Writers, not of Bills and
Bonds, Like our Presbyterians, in dependants, and Lay-Preachers.
as our Scriveners do, but of the Holy Scriptures, and therefore they pretended
that they alone had the perfect knowledge and understanding of the same, and
consequently that they alone were the only people of God, and all the rest no
better, or but little better, then cast-aways; so censorious were these
scribbling gnostics. But if you would examine their Exposition, you should find
that praeter falsitatem and hypocrisin uihil habent, they were such
Interpreters of the Scripture, as Hogs are dressers of Vines; and when they
stuff their impertinent discourses with more impertinent Texts of Scripture, 2
pet: 3.16.
they do but, as Peter says, (...), wrest it, and pervert it, and, as the word
implies, deal with it, as Shoemakers do with their Leather; stretch it, and
tear it oft-times with their teeth, when it is so, that of it self it cannot
reach, to fit their purpose.

And truly, the Church of God never wanted such Scribes in every place,
Tertullian says, credunt Scripturis, ut credant adversus Scripturas; they
allege Scriptures, to overthrow the Scriptures; and no Scripture shall be
believed, but as themselves interpret it, and to give you a taste of their
Expositions.

1. When the Prophet Joel says, Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy,
Joel 2.28.
they will justify their Revelations, and their special inspiration of Gods
Spirit, when as the Prophet meant it only of the Apostles, and the immediate
disciples of our Savior.

2. When the Prophet Hosea says, The children of Israel shall remain without
King, Hos. 3.4.
and without Prince many days, this is a sufficient proof, they shall be
independent from all Government, but their own: and therefore, being thus
inspired by the lying spirit, they were earnestly set on to kill their King,
and to abjure their Prince, that they might still continue Independents,
without any regal Government.

3. When Obadiah says, Thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end
that every one of the Mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter; Obadiah v. 9.
Malach. 4.2, 3.
and Malachy says, To you shall arise the Sun of righteousness, and you shall
tread down the wicked as ashes under your feet; this is a sufficient warrant to
destroy all Malignants, and to root them out of the world, as the enemies of
Gods people, which they say, are themselves, and none else.

4. Esaias 61.6.
When the Prophet Esaias says, You shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in
their glory shall you boast your selves; this is a good warrant for them that
take all the wealth and possession of their malignant neighbors: they need no
more but take them and seize upon them, and never call them to answer, Whether
they have offended the Law, and so forfeited their estates, or not.

And is the world now free from such Scribes, as do falsify the sayings of the
Apostles, as these Jewish Scribes did the words of the Prophets? No, no; for
you may find many writings and Pamphlets of our Scribes, that have most
strangely perverted the words of S. Paul, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. to cast off all
Regal power, and to establish the Democratical government, and as peevishiy
expounded the words of S. Peter, to prove the lawfulness of deposing, and
decollating their Kings; and many more such Scriptures you may find perverted
by our new-sprung Scribes, if you cast your eye upon the Pamphlets lying on
every Stationer's stall.

3. The next sort of men that betrayed and killed their King, Rulers of the
people.
were not so much a Sect of seduced Zelots, as a company of great Rulers,
Rulers of the people says the Text, or, as they are termed in their rebellion
against Moses, Princes of the Assembly, famous in the Congregation, men of
Renown; Numb. 6.2.
and these were either the heads of several families, as our Lords and
Nobilities are, or else such as in their several countries or cities, by their
wealth or authority had gained power over the people, to like or dislike what
they pleased, as our Knights of the Shire, or Burgesses for the Parliament,
are; and these were very deep in setting forward the Treason and Murder of
their King.

4. The Sadduces were another Sect among the Jews, of pestilent doctrine, The
Sadduces.
denying all Scripture that made against them, and denying the immortality of
the soul, and the resurrection of the dead (like Cromwels Atheistical
Commanders) and all punishment for sins after death; therefore being more
wicked in their tenets, then the Pharisees, and absurder then the Scribes, it
is very like they were more active in the death of their King, then the rest of
the forementioned Murderers.

5. Lawyers like the Chairmen of the long Parliament.
There were some comprised under some of the former Sects that are termed by
the Evangelists, (...), Lawyers, which as Christ says, sat in Moses Chair,
and so were Chair-men, because of some excellent parts that were thought to be
in them, beyond the ordinary sort of men; and these men says our Savior have
taken away the key of knowledge, (i.e.) the Law; and, instead thereof, they
taught the traditions of men, which traditions S. Luke 1.52. Matthew. 15.3.
Ephesians. 2.15.
Paul calls (...), which we may properly term Ordinances, as our English
Translation renders it; and by these new-devised Ordinances of these Chair^men,
they quite spoiled and frustrated the good old Law, both of God, and Man.

6. The (...), which we translate Elders, or, The Presbyans.
as the word properly sounds, Presb^ters had a mighty share in the blood of
their King; and S. Luke says (...), The Priests. Matthew. 27.1. Mark how the
Pr^sbyters are not only called the Elders but the Elders of the people, because
the common people only magnify them, and they only endeavor to please the
people.
the Presbytery were the first that came against him.

7. The Priests joined with these Presbyters to kill their King: for so the
Evangelist says, that when the morning was come, all the chief Priests and
Elders of the people took counsel against Jesus so put him to death; and as,
then, the Jewish Elders and Priests conspired together against their King; so
we find now, the Presbyters or Preaching-Elders and Romish Priests, though
their faces are averse, and seem to look diverse ways, yet like Sampsons Foxes
they are tied together, by the tayls, and both are Anti-Kings, enemies unto
Monarchy, and do like Mars his Priests, called (...), scatter the fire of
Sedition and Rebellion amongst the people, and Sheba-like blow their Trumpets
in all places, even in their Pulpits, to stir up the discontented people to
take Arms against their King, though he be Christ himself. And therefore if
any King would be free from Rebellion, he must banish these Priests and
Presbyters from his Dominions.

8. The whole Pa^liament of the Jews conspired together to put Christ, their
King to death. Mar. 15.1. (...): Nemine contradicente. Esaias. 1.4.
S. Mark says, that these Priests held a Consultation with the Presbyters or
Elders, and Scribes, and the whole Council, and bound Jesus, and carried him
away, and delivered him to Pilate; so here is the whole Parliament of the Jews
against their King; who, had they not been Jews, had never done it; but these
had formerly forsaken God, and therefore no wonder that they do now betray
their King; yet, it might be wondered, that this Council consistings of
Heterogeniall parts, several Sects, as Pharisees and Sadduces, Scribes and
Herodians, Priests and Presbyters, whereof most of them differed in many
things, and hated each other very much; even as much as Papist and Puritan,
Calvinist and Lutheran, do amongst us; yet they can deponere inimicitias, lay
aside all differences, and conspire together, to betray to death their Lord and
King; and our Savior himself tells us how, Videlicet, when they saw the Heir,
they said (...), within themselves, (i. e.) by their wicked thoughts; and then
they said (...), among themselves, (i. e.) by consultation and publishing their
intention one to another, Come, (i. e.) by combination, and making a firm
League and Covenant, with an indissolveable oath; that, although we be of
sundry sects and different opinions among our selves; yet, after we have made
this Covenant, we need not suspect one another, but we may confide in the
Covenanters, and assure our selves of fidelity to assist one another, to the
uttermost, ut occidamus even to kill him; that his Kingdom, and his Vineyard,
both Church and Commonwealth, may be our own; and thus, saevis inter se
convenit Vrsis, these cruel Bears and savage Beasts do consult and agree
together, to put to death the Lords Anointed; Therefore this Counsel, worse
then the worst of the Popish counsels, may rightly be termed a Devilish
counsel, Psalm. 1.1.
even the counsel of the ungodly, the way of sinners, and the seat of the
scornful: when, as Jacob says of his sons Simeon and Levi, The instruments of
cruelty are in their habitations, and their swords are the weapons of violence;
and therefore, O my soul, come not thou into their secret, and let not mine
honor be united unto their assembly. But let thy thoughts abhor all their
actions; For in their anger they slew a man, and through envy they murdered the
best of men, and their own King, even Jesus Christ; and therefore cursed be
their anger for it was fierce, and their wrath for it was cruel; and for their
malice, let all such murderers be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel,
and let due vengeance be speedily rendered, to all such abominable Traitors.

9. Flattering Courtiers.
We read of another Faction, that had their fingers in this Treason, (i. e.)
the Herodians, who were a company of flattering Courtiers, and always followed
the overruling party: And these were subtle Foxes that made use of Policy
without honesty; and therefore Christ, that knew them well enough, Mar. 8.15.
(and I would to God King Charles had known his Courtiers also) advises us to
beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Herodians; (i. e.) the leaven
not of bread, but of the doctrine and practices; when as their Doctrines are
contagious and infectious; and their practices malicious, treacherous and
murderous: ill properties for great Courtiers, that ought to be as well good as
great; else are they but a great shame among men, and a great stain, unto all
their posterity.

10. The common people for the most part had a hand in his death, by a three
fold employment.
As salus populi the good of the people and the liberty of the subjects was one
main pretended cause, why these murderers killed their King; ne gens pereat,
lest, if he lived, the Nation should be destroyed; so the people, upon all
occasion, must be ready at hand to serve their turn, and to do the services,
wherein these their grand Masters shall employ them; and this employment we
find to be three fold.

1. Mar. 14.43.
When their King is to be taken, they must be sent armed with swords and staves
to apprehend him.

2. They must draw petitions for some base and unworthy thing; as they did,
Math. 27.20.
when they petitioned that Barabbas a thief and a murderer might be released,
and their King crucified.

3. They must come to the Judgment-Hall, or place of Judicature; and, for fear
the King should find some favor from him, that knew him innocent; they must
with loud voices cry for justice, and double their desires for execution; and
all this, says the Evangelist, was done by the multitude, Math. 27.20.
Hosi-anna.
as they were persuaded by the Priests and Presbyters; Ah silly people, that
even now cry, Hosanna, serva quaeso, Save Lord, and now presently Crucifige;
that loved their King, as his enemies confess; and yet join with his enemies to
kill their King: and never ask, What has he done? but this we will do to
please them, that set us on the work. Who then but a mad man would repose trust
in a multitude of men, and rely upon a broken reed, a reed that wavers with
every wind. And not only so, but to show the baseness of these base people
(for I know not how to say, their envy, or their malice, that they should
malign their King, who had done them good every way, and no harm, to any of
them) when Pilate, a heathen Judge and a stranger to the Jews, shall profess
him to be a just person, Math. 27.24.
and therefore wash his hands from the blood of the innocent man; this giddy
multitude of rude people, the generation of vipers, that gnaw out the bowels of
their own dams, the brethren of Cain, and the children of their father the
Devil, Joh. 8.44.
that has been a murderer from the beginning, do cry out, as vengeance does
require, Math. 27.25:
His blood be upon us and upon our children. What? Nefandum scelus, a most
fearful thing, when the blood of our own just King, unjustly murdered by so
many sorts of men, that had their hands imbrued with his blood, shall like
Abels blood cry to God for vengeance against us, and our children for ever; O
let us rather repent, and desire of God, that the blood of this lamb Jesus
Christ, may wash away these our bloody sins.

And thus I have showed you the chiefest Actors in this bloody Tragedy; all the
whole Kingdom of Jury, rebelling against their King, and most Traitorously
betraying him to an Ignominious death, save only some few followers of Christ,
of whom this King foretold, what should betide them, some of them should be
killed, and some persecuted from City to City; for, Math. 23.34.
as S. Basil said of Herod (...), his meat was the flesh, and his drink was the
blood of men: so these Regicides will never leave a follower of this King;
until, like the Whore in the Revelations, Revel. 7.6.
they be drunk with the blood of the Saints, and thereby show themselves as
they are, 1. Insatiable, because they never leave till they be drunk. 2.
Unmerciful, because they will be drunk with blood; and 3. Unjust, because no
blood will serve them, but the blood of the Saints, and servants of this King,
the witnesses of Gods truth.


And therefore let all the lovers of this King, look to themselves; because the
branches must needs wither, when the root is plucked up.

And besides these followers of Christ that loved him, we find some others,
that had no hand in killing him; and those were the Samaritans, a people as
much hated by the Jews, as Papists are by the Puritans; and though this King
conferred upon the Jews, beneficia nimis copiosa, multa and magna, and did
nothing at all for these Samaritans, save only to pity them, and hinder the
fiery Z^lots, the two sons of Zebedee, to destroy them by calling for fire out
of Heaven, to consume them; as Elias did the two Captains and their fifties;
yet, we do not read, that either they hated the person, or sought the life of
this King: no more do I find that any Papist joined with the Parliament of
England, and the Conquerors of our King, to put King Charles to death; which I
believe will be sufficient witnesses, to rise in judgment to condemn them, that
have condemned the King, at the last day.

Thus I have passed over all, or most of the acts and scenes of this Tragedy;
and I might here end, but that, as the Prophet says, abyssus abyssum invocat,
and one Tragedy requires another, and the destruction of this King and his
followers, calls for destruction upon the destroyers, that, like Damocles's
sword, hangs by a feeble thread, ready to fall upon their necks; for the
Prophet David demands the question, Shall they escape for their wickedness? And
he does immediately answer, The Lord shall destroy both the blood-thirsty and
deceitful men; and all these men that I have showed, being most deceitful,
and very much thirsting after blood, and that blood, not of the basest people,
but of the best of men, their Prophets, their Preachers, and their own most
just and pious King; it must needs pull destruction upon their heads. Therefore
Christ in the parable of the Vineyard, says (...), Matthew. 21.41.
The Lord will miserably destroy them; that is, 1. Them that plotted to take
away his inheritance. 2. Them that consulted to take away his life. 3. Them
that so unjustly put him to death.


4. Them that abused and wronged his servants, that sought to defend his right.
And

5. I fear me, them, that might have helped to protect both their King, and
his servants, and did not; for, if any where then surely here, that axiom must
hold good Qui non vetat peccare quum potest, ipse peccat, and that
too-ill-applied Sentence, so protect rebels and assist murderers, by our
seducing brethren, in the 5. of Judges, where Debora says, Curse ye Meros,
curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of
the Lord against the mighty, must needs be applied to them, that had ability to
defend their King, and to relieve his oppressed servants; and yet suffered them
to be destroyed by these murderers. All these, says our Savior shall be
destroyed; and so they were; all of them, that repented not, did soon perish.
For,

1. Judas the prime Traitor hanged himself, and that without any regard of his
grand Masters, who, when they saw his disconsolate soul, and heard his
confession of his foul Treason, said no more, but, What is that to us, as if
they said, Be hanged, or be damned, we do not care; thou should have looked
to that thy self.

2. Pilate, that unjust Judge, not long after the execution of this King, was
disgracefully displaced, and exiled his Country, and therefore killed himself
in a strange land.

3. Herod died most miserably, being eaten up with worms.

4. Annas and Caiphas were violently killed, as the Stories do report.

5. The Priests and Presbyters, Pharisees and Sadduces, and many others, that
were Actors in the murdering of this King, lived, I believe, most of them to
see the famous City of Jerusalem besieged, and many of them to see it
destroyed, and at least 1100000. of their Contrymen slaughtered, and all the
rest, even their Children that were unborn, when they killed their King, either
Captivated by their enemies, or scattered, like Vagabonds, over all the face of
the earth. And as the several Factions and the different Sects conspired
together, and agreed, as one man, to kill their King; So their divisions and
differences made way for the Romans to destroy them all; and, which is strange,
by this their wicked act, the very things, that they feared, came upon them;
for their great Prophet Caiphas tells them, it was expedient that he should die,
lest the Nation perish: and by the just Judgment of God, their Nation must
perish, because they did so wickedly put their King to death: And so they were
resolved to kill him, lest the Romans should invade their Land, and change
their laws; and because they did kill him, God sent the Romans to destroy their
Country, to change their laws, and to make such havoc of slaughtering them, ut
nec locus crucibus, nec cruces corporibus sufficerent. And ever since the
murder of their King, they have been hated of all Nations. For Sisibut, King of
the Visigothes, and Dagobert the 10th King of France, commanded them on pain of
death, to depart out of their Dominions. And Ferdinando and Isabella, King and
Queen of Castile, within these seven-score years, 1500. years after the
murdering of their King, handled them very shrewdly, Camerar. l. 5. c. 9.
and put an infinite number of them to death. And Emmanuel King of Portugal,
did the like. So hateful are they for their regicide, to all good men; and so
just is God in all his ways, and so exceedingly hating Rebellion against our
Kings, and much more the murdering of our own lawful, just, and pious King,
that the same never escapes the severest punishment that can be imagined; as I
shall show it, in the next Treatise. For if he who sheddeth man's blood, though
but a poor Beggar, by man shall his blood be shed; then surely, he that sheds
his Kings blood, cannot escape the severe vengeance of God, who peremptorily
says, Vengeance is mine, and I will revenge, says the Lord. And you know,
what the Apostle says, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, who is a consuming fire.

And therefore, if any man has persecuted Gods Servants (the Preachers) or
conspired to take away the life of his King, the Anointed of the Lord, let him
repent, and that quickly, lest God, as He says to the Church of Pergamos, do
quickly come unto him, and fight against him with the sword of his mouth, which
is a two-edged sword, that cuts on every side; the soul with the worm of
conscience, and the body with most fearful plagues and punishments. For if the
blood of Abel, which had no voice while it lived, yet, being dead, cried so
loud, here on earth, that it was easily heard in heaven; and it was as fearful
as it was loud; for it was for vengeance against his brother: then questionless
the innocent blood of a just King, being dead, yet speaks; and speaks
louder for vengeance against his Subjects than the other did against his
brother: which, I fear, without our speedy and deep repentance, will be
abundantly poured out upon this sinful generation; for that we have so
barbarously murdered our own King in such wicked manner, that I never read the
like in any History; nor the Sun, I believe, did ever see the like, since the
devilish murder of the King of kings, from which these murderers took their
pattern, to proceed in like manner in most particulars; and herein therefore,
Licet parvis componere magna, I thought good to parallel the practices of both
sorts of murderers, the Jewish, and the English murderers.

The murdered, I confess, are far unlike, and will admit of no comparison, the
difference and distance betwixt their Persons, being so great, as is betwixt
Heaven and Earth, the Creator, and the creature. King Charles being begotten by
an earthly father, as all other men are, and subject to like passions as we
are: but Jesus Christ, the King of the Jews, was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
and free from all sin, and mastering all affections. And King Charles was King
but of small Territories: But Jesus Christ was Rex universae terrae; and he
was, and is, King of kings, and Lord of lords: King Charles did good, but to
many, and hurt but few, if he hurt any; but the King of the Jews, did good to
all, and wronged none: and so in all other things, I know, how that the one is
finite, and the other infinite, in justice, wisdom, Power, and all other
Attributes of excellencies.

But, if we look how both these Kings were handled by their Subjects, we shall
find the later, not much unlike the former, and King Charles, hated, traduced,
mocked, spightfully used, and causelessely killed and murdered. And all this in
like manner, though not, in every particular, in like measure, by his own
Subjects, as Jesus Christ was, by the wicked Jews. As I hope, I have fully, and
sufficiently, and plainly, declared unto you in this Treatise.

And therefore, that we ought all of us to confess, lament, and bewail, as in
general, all our sins, so more especially, this our great sin of murdering our
own King; and to pray to God, night and day, that for the merits of the death
and passion of Jesus Christ, the King of the Jews, he would pardon and forgive
us our sins, committed in putting to death our own most just and gracious King.
Grant this, O dear Father, for thy dear Son Jesus Christ his sake; to whom be
glory, etc.

THE SECOND TREATISE.
2 Kings 9.31. Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master?


THE Doctrine of Obedience, both to God and to our lawful King, and his
Magistrates, has been so fully and so excellently handled, by the Right
reverend, and most Worthy and Learned Bishop of Downs, that more need not, and
better cannot be said:

But seeing the pressing of Obedience will avail little with the Rebellious, if
the fear of Gods judgments, and the punishments of him that bears not the
Sword in vain, does not terrisie them from disobedience: for, such is the
frowardness of man's nature, that he would never fear God, if he thought God
consisted all of mercy, and were not as just as He is merciful.

Therefore, as you heard, how necessary is obedience, so I intend, by Gods
help, to show you the just judgment of God, and the punishment of the
Rebellious and disobedient, upon the words that you shall find in 2 Kings 9.31.
Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master?

The last Sermon that I Preached in this City, was on the Day of our
Humiliation, for the unnatural Rebellion, and the monstrous Murder of our late
most gracious King, Charles the First.

And that work, I then told mine Auditors, I knew not how to do it, in any
better way, than by paralleling the transcendent murder of Jesus Christ, by
those wicked Jews, that crucified him, which was their true and lawful King,
with that late unnatural murder that our English-Jews have committed, upon
their own just and lawful King, Charles the First: and that parallel I then
prosecuted, a capite ad calcem.

And this Text, that I have now read unto you, seems to be a Question,
demanding, What became of one, and what should become of all others, wicked
murderers, that like him, and like the other two sorts of Jews, should kill
both their King, and their Master?

And the words are a Speech made at the entrance of a brave Conqueror into a
famous City, that is, of Jehu into Jezreel. A custom very often used amongst
all Nations, to make solemn Speeches at the Inauguration of their Sovereign
Kings and Emperors; or when any Noble Person comes to any famous City; as the
University Orator does it in the Academy, and the Recorder in other Cities. And
so Jezabel makes this Speech unto Jehu, as soon as ever he entered into the Gates
of Jezreel; Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master?

And we do read of two special Zimries in the Book of God; and both of them
wicked men. Numb 25.
The first you may read of in the 25th of Numbers, where you may see,

1. Israel, contrary to the Command of God, joined himself to Baal-Peor, and
that one Zimri, a Prince of a chief House among the Simeonites, brought unto
his brethren a Midianitish woman, named Cozbi, the daughter of Zur, that was
Head over a people, and of a chief House in Midian.

2. transgression of God's Command, the anger of the Lord was kindled against
Israel, so that he said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and hang
them up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may
be turned away from Israel; And Moses said unto the Judges of Israel, Slay ye
every one his men that were joined to Baal-Peor: And so they did, that there
were slain 24. thousand men.

3. Phineas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, according to the
Commandment of the Lord, and of Moses, took a Javelin in his hand, and killed
both Z^mri and Cozbi; and that the Lord was so well pleased therewith, that he
rewarded him with the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood, and stayed the
plague from the children of Israel.

And the Prophet David says, that, when the plague was so great among them,
Psalm. 106.30.
then stood up Phinehas, and prayed, and so the plague ceased. And our
Presbyterians, that find such fault with our Liturgy, do say, That we corrupt
the Text; because, in the Original it is said, That Phinehas stood up and
executed judgment, and so the plague ceased.

But their carping at this without cause, has been fully and sufficiently
answered, and may be easily and briefly done; because, he both prayed, and
executed judgment; for the Text tells you plainly, That the people were
weeping before the door of the Congregation, praying to God to turn away his
anger from them; and Phinehas rose from amongst the Congregation, and killed
them; and then the plague ceased.

To teach us, that the only sure way to turn away God's anger, and the plagues,
that we deserve, is not only to weep and mourn, and be sorry for the
wickedness of the people; but we must also execute judgment upon the
transgressors: Deuteronomy. 13.8.
and, as the Lord often sets it down, Thine eye shall not pity them, neither
shall thou conceal them; but thou shall surely kill them: So shall you put away
evil from among you, and turn away the judgments of God from you, which
otherwise, must still lie upon you; because sins, and especially great sins,
such as are Idolatry, Rebellions, and Murders, and their punishments, are so
indiss lubly linked together, that God seldom or never remits the one, without
inflicting the other. And therefore, he would not take away the plague from
Israel, until judgment was executed upon Zimri and Cozbi. And this was the
first Zimri, that we read of, and is not meant here in my Text.

2. 1 Kings 16.9.
For the other Zimri, you may read of him, in 1 Kings 16.9. where you may find,

1. Zimri conspired against his King, and his Master, and killed him, and slew
all the House of Baasha, and left not one, that pisseth against the wall,
neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.

2. murder of their King, and Zimri's possessing the Royal Throne, all Israel
was divided, and most miserably embroyled in Civil Wars, when some of them were
with Zimri, in Tyrza, others with Tibni, and the rest with Omri.

3. What became of this Zimri, and his conspirators, that have wrought all
these Wonders, and most tragical Acts, to kill their King, and all the Kings
friends; how he went into the Palace of the Kings house, and burnt the Kings
house over him, and died; burning himself therein. A just judgment of Almighty
God, against such as would conspire to kill their King.

And of this Zimri, Jezabel demands the Question, Had Zimri peace? As if she
should have said, Is it possible, that either Zimri, or any one of them that
conspired with Zimri, and had any hand with him, in the murder of their King
and their Master; or that very Kingdom, that fostereth any of those murderers;
should have any peace or settlement, or any happiness in the world, until
justice and judgment be executed upon such transcendent Malefactors?

For, she conceived, that, as the wrath of God and his plagues were not turned
away from Israel, until Phinehas stood up and executed judgment upon the other
Zimri and Cozbi; so this Zimri, and the Associates of this Zimri, and all the
kingdom, that abetted him, should never have peace, nor happiness, so long as
judgment was unexecuted upon them: as the example of Achan, and abundance
more, does make it plain, that the executing of justice and judgment upon
Idolaters and Murderers, and the like heinous offenders, and not suffering them
to live still in pride and prosperity amongst us, is the only thing to procure
peace, and to turn away God's anger from any Nation.

And therefore Jezabel does peremptorily demand of Jehu, Had Zimri peace, that
slew his Master? Touching which words, I shall humbly desire you to consider
these two special things. 1. The Speaker. And 2. The Speech. And
And

1. The Speaker is said to be Jezabel, the Wife of Ahab, King of Israel, and
the Daughter of Eth-baal, King of the Zidonians; touching whom you may consider
these three particulars, 1. That she was a Noble woman. Three things observable
in Jezabel.
2. She was a Witty woman. 3. She was a Very-very wicked woman. For


1. She was, as I told you, doubly innobled, by Birth, and by Marriage; and so
she was to be respected; as Jehu, that caused her to be killed, has himself
confessed, that she ought to be honored and regarded, as she was a Kings
Daughter. And the very Heathens testify as much; That, a principibus nasci,
praeclarum est: It is an excellent thing, to be born of Noble Princes. When
with the Poet, we can say, Maecoenas aetavis edite regibus. And therefore
Solomon says, though not altogether Grammatically to be understood, yet
literally very true; Blessed art thou, O Land, Eccles. 10.17.
when thy King is the Son of Nobles. And, on the other side, Most wretched is
that Land, as our Land has lately been, when a rustic Marius, or a Valerius
Armentarius, or a Potter's son, like Dionysius, or any other, of such like mean
abstract, shall either by policy, flattery, or subtilty, come to obliterate the
Nobility, and to sit in the Throne of Sovereignty: as the very Histories, both
of the Greeks and Latins, do afford us store of examples to confirm this
truth. As when Maximinus from a Shepherd in Thracia, became an Emperor in
Rome; and Dioclesian, that had been a Bondsman, and was made free by Aemilianus,
a Senator, became in like manner to be the Emperor, he proved to be one of the
worst, and the most bloody persecutor of all the Emperors. And the Reason
hereof is; because, as the Poet truly faith, Asperius nihil est humili, cum
surgit in altum. Nothing is more cruel, than a mean man raised high; and none
is prouder than the Beggar, when he is mounted on his palfrey; he will then
ride, you knew where, the Proverb says. -- ut fluvialibus undis
Extumuit terrens, fluit acrius amne Perenni.
As the Land-flood swelling high, is ever more violent, than the continual
running stream, So, no kingdom can be more miserable, than that, where, as
Jotham said, the Bramble shall reign over the Vines, and the Olives; or
Abimelech, Judges 9.
the son of a Maidservant, and a Subject, shall suppress and destroy all the
Royal children of Jerub-baal, that had deserved so well at the hands of Israel.

And the examples of Maion, Cleander, and Sejanus, confirm this truth unto us.
For this Maion was of mean parentage, whose father was a Shopkeeper, sel^ing
Oil; but from that mean degree, William King of Sicily raised him to be
Chancellor, and chief Admiral of Sicily, and then enriched him beyond measure,
and favored him above all his Nobles; and he, abusing his wealth and his
power, The notable treachery of Maion.
was insatiable in his lust, spared no cruelty to surther his own designs, and
fell at length into a conceit of a kingdom; and being expert to fain and to
dissemble what he pleased, he began to persuade his friends to depose King
William, and to defend his ambition by the deposition of King Chilperick, and
the choosing of King Pipin, the son of Charles Martel, in his stead; which
proved so fortunate to all the Kingdom of France. And Herodian sets down the
very like proceedings of Cleander, The ambition of Cleander.
that was a Phrygian born, and of that rank of men that are used to be sold
publicly by the Crier; yet coming to the Emperor's Court, young Commodus
takes him for his servant, and raised him to that honor, to be both Captain of
the Guard, chief Chamberlain, and General of all his Forces; and then pride and
ambition pricked him forward to aspire unto the Empire; Herod. l. 2.
and he had dispatched his Master, had not Faxilla, the Sister of Commodus,
revealed his plots unto her Brother. The unparalleld pride and ambition of
Sejanus.
And Valerius Maximus inveighs most bitterly against Sejanus, as Camerarius
explains the passage of Valerius, for his aspiring thoughts against Tiberius;
which if it had prevailed, would have paralleld, yea and out-gone the
surprising of Rome by the Gauls, the slaughter of those 300. of one Noble
Stock, the Allian day, the Scipio's oppressed in Spain, the Trasimene lake, the
Cannae and AEmathian fields swimming in civil blood.

And therefore Sextus Aurelius Victor says, That so far as his wit goes, he
finds it most certain, that the basest men, when they have climbed to any
height, are of all others, the most proud and ambitious. And Camerarius says,
that experience witnesses, That commonly those, who from the stock of
Tradesmen, or sordid Paisants, rise to places of worth, either by their Wit or
Fortune, Who most pernicious to the Commonwealth.
are far prouder, and more pernicious to the Commonwealth, than those of a
Noble and Ancient Race: So that it was well said of old, Porters bear rule, and
the bad are set over the good, I fear lest the floods will sink the Ship; when
these base and ignobly-born, sons of the earth, do envy the Nobles, and sit at
the stern to rule the roste. For, as Claudian observes,

Nothing is more cruel than a mean man raised high,
He strikes at all, while all be fears; lets fury fly,
So far as power can: no beasts such fierceness have,
Or rage, as has over freeman a domineering slave.
But, as the Italian proverb is, Apes, the higher they go, An Italian Proverb.
the more they lay open their shame; so it fares with these insolent fellows,
that at last they will be hated of all, and then come to a miserable end, as it
happened to this zimri, Sejanus, Maion, Cleander, Perennius, and infinite
others of later times, and in our own time. Yet I deny not but some of them,
though very seldom, may prove virtuous, as we find many of them that were the
sons of Nobles, to degenerate, and like this Jezabel, to become very wicked.

2. This woman Jezabel was a very witty woman; for here her speech is, Jezabel
was a witty, and a well educated woman.
sententia brevis, very short; but materia uberrima, the matter is so full, and
so excellent, that no Sage, no Philosopher, no Orator, nor scarce Prophet,
could comprehend more truth, and a more observable Lesson, more briefly, and
more plainly, than she does in these few words, Had Zimri peace that slew his
Master? so that the Spirit of God disdains not to record her speech to all
posterities, among the rest of the sacred Scripture: And so, to show her wit,
when her husband Ahab knew not how to compass Naboths vineyard, she was so
apprehensive, that she presently found out a way, though a most wicked way, to
make him possessor of all his inheritance: 1 Kings 21.6. Former times bred the
daughters in learning.
whereby I do collect, that she was both naturally witty, and also probably
well educated in learning by her Parents; as it was the custom of former
times, and now likewise in many places, for Princes, and Noblemen, to bring up
their daughters as well as their sons, in all good literature. And so we find
not only this woman, but very many other women, that have been famous both for
wit and learning, and many other excellent parts, not much inferior to the
worthiest men: as, in the holy Scripture, you may find how subtle Rebecca was
to get the blessing of Isaac to her son Jacob; how wittily Rachel could deceive
both her father and her Husband, how Debora was a Prophetess, a Poet, and a
Judge, that judged Israel, and how Abigal was so discreet both in her words and
actions, that she could appease the raging wrath of a man of war, that was set
on fire, Judge. 4.
and not without great cause, against her Husband; and how Judith was so
valiant, as to cut off the head of Holofernes, as Jahell had been the death of
Sisera; and how Solomon, that had most reason to know it best, sets down the
wisdom, and the many other excellent parts of a virtuous woman.

And if the time and your patience would give me leave to trace the Histories
of the Heathens, Greek and Latin, I could tell you how great a Prophet was
Cassandra, how discreetly honest was Penelope, and how wisely she deluded all
her woers; what a rare Poet was Sappho, of whom Ovid says, And she says, Jam
canitur toto nomen in orb meum. Saph. epist. Phaoni. Camerar. l. 3. cap. 10.
Nec plus Alcaeus, consors patriaeque lyraeque,
Laudis habet, quamvis grandius ille sonet.


And amongst the letters of Phalaris, there is one written to Peristthenes;
wherein it appears that some women have not much yielded for greatness of
courage, and brave resolutions, to the most valiant men that have been, as
Pentesilaea Queen of the Amazons, whereof Virgil says, Ducit Amazonidum
lunatis agmina peltis,
Pentesilea furens, mediisque in millibus ardet.


And Thomiris Queen of Scythia, that overthrew Cyrus King of Persia, and
cutting off his head, threw it into a tub of blood, saying, Satia te sanguine
quem sitisti, cujus insatiabilis s^mper fuisti: And Vaodicea the wife of
Prasutagus Queen of the Icenians, that overthrew Petilius Cerealis the Roman
Lieutenant, forced Catus Decianus to fly into Gallia, and slew 70. thousand of
the Roman soldiers, and being vanquished by Paulinus Suetonius, would rather
end her life with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, then be suffered to be carried for
a spectacle in the Roman triumph. And Martial says of Claudia the wife of
Rufus, Claudia coeruleis quum sit Rufina Britannis Edita, Lib. 2. Epig. 54.
cur Latiae pectora plebis habet?

And that for her learning and wisdom Rome and Athens might well own her for
their own, when as she was most skillful both in the Greek and Latin Tongues,
and compiled three several Treatises, as Balaeus testifies, both in Greek and
Latin.

And what shall I say of Arria, the most loving wife of Cecinna Petus? of
Artemisia Queen of Caria; that buried the ashes of her husband Mausolus in her
own bowels? But especially of the great wisdom of the mother of King Lemuel;
and of Tecla, that wrote over all the Greek Testament with her own hand, and
that Copy is now lately translated by Mr. Patrick Young; and of Trasilla,
Gorgonia, and the rest of those famous women, that Saint Hierom and Greg.
Nazian. do so highly commend both for wisdom and piety?

But omitting the wise Sybils, and all others worthy of perpetual memory; I
will add but one, that of this Nation ought never to be forgotten, our late
famous Queen Elizabeth, that for above 40. years, could so wisely rule so
unruly a people, as we are.

And therefore I approve not of the French-mens Sal^ick Law, that excludes all
women from the Crown of France; for though women be the weaker vessels, yet, as
the strongest liquor may be preserved and carried in glass vials, so may we
find great experience, and much wisdom, with no small courage and learning in
many women; and therefore, as Job says that he despised not the Counsel of his
Maidservant, when he found it worthy to be followed; so ought not men to
disesteem the advice, and reject the Counsels of their wives. True it is, that
where the wife advises ill, her speech is to be rejected, as Job did put off
his wife's Counsel, when she persuaded him to curse God and die, with the just
term of, a foolish woman; and as Origin adds, said, Tu facta es deterior Eva
in insipientia, sed ego non sum effectus Adam in stultitia, Thou art become
worse then Eve in foolishness, but thou shall not make me like Adam in
sottishness. But when the wive's counsel is wholesome, it is fit the man should
regard it; for so the Lord says unto Abraham, Genesis 21.12. 2 Rings 4.50.
In all that Sarah shall say unto thee, hear her voice; and the Shunamites
husband followed his wife's advice in making provision to entertain the
Prophet; and many men would have preserved their credit, their estate, and
health, if they would have followed the friendly advice of their wives;
therefore we ought not to debar the right and lawful government of wise and
discreet women, Prove. 31.1.
whom God has made heirs, and endowed with good parts, both of wit and
learning, as well as men; and in that regard, as I approve not the French
Salique Law, so I never liked the entailing of inheritances upon the heirs
male, when as God, if he had liked it, might as well have given thee sons as
daughters, and the Scripture tells us how Job gave inheritances to his three
daughters among their brethren, Job 42.15. and so did Caleb to his daughter
Achsah. Josh. 15.19. But the Lawyers by this witty trick, would show
themselves wiser then God, and prevent by this humane Law, what God intended by
his divine grace. And I know they like not this discourse, because the taking
off of this entailing of estates, would take off a great deal of their revenues.

3. You may observe in this Jezabel, that as the was Nobly-born, Jezabel was a
very wicked woman.
well bred, and very witty, so she was also very wicked; for she caused the
Elders of Jez^eel to become the wicked murderers of innocent Naboth; she cut
off the Prophets of the Lord, and fed 400. 1 King. 21.8.
false Prophets at her own Table; and she vowed to be the death of Elias, 1
King 18.4.
and made a wicked King to become far more wicked by her continual instigation
of him to wickedness; and therefore she was a very wicked woman, verse.19.
and the more enabled to be wicked, because she was so Noble and so Witty; when
as there is no wickedness so great and so unavoydable, as armed wickedness,
which is invented by Subtilty, perpetrated by Power, and defended by Authority;
for, And how enabled to be wicked.
as Non nisi ex magnis ingeniis magni errores, Great Heresies never spring from
mean Scholars; and great oppressions, could never be acted by petty Landlords
or mean Gentlemen; so Jezabel could never have gotten Naboth's Vineyard, if she
had not had the wit, to device this plot, and the learning to write these
letters; for so the Text says, 1 King. 21.8.
That she wrote letters in Ahabs name; and the power, as being King Ahabs wife,
to seal them with his seal, and send them, as from him, to the Nobles and
Elders, to execute her wicked will; neither could she have maintained 400.
false Prophets at her own Table, if she had not had the wealth and power for to
do it; and so, if Irene had not been an Empress, she had never persuaded a
whole Council, to set up the worshipping of Images.

And therefore great Scholars ought earnestly to beg, and to pray to God for
grace, to sanctify their learning, that they may be retained within the sphere
of truth, and not to start aside like Arius, Eutyches, Nestorius, and the like
learned Heretics, that thought so well of themselves, that they disdained to
walk in the trodden paths of Orthodoxall Divinity, and therefore invented most
wicked Heresies, and so, as the Lord says of proud Babylon, their Wisdom and
their knowledge caused them to fall; which has been the practice of our
Presbyterians and Jesuits in these very days.

And in like manner, Kings and Princes, Magistrates and Judges, Landlords and
Great men, ought to be very careful of their actions, and more careful then
any other men, that are of a lower station; because they are more enabled, to
do more wickedness. For if a mean man wrong me, I may perchance be able to
right my self; but if a Judge decree against me, or a mighty man oppress me, I
must with patience be resolved to bear it, or, by struggling, in all likelihood
to be much more damnified; And the Devil labors more, to get a subtle
Scotus, or a learned Origin, to become an Heretic, a powerful Nero to become
a Tyrant, and an Assembly of Senators, and a choice Parliament to become
Rebels, and to bandy against their King, (as the Senators of Rome conspired the
death of Caesar, and the Jewish Sanhedrim the death of Christ; and the grave
Judges to become such Judasses as to sell the Truth; or, like the Judges of
Susanna, to condemn the Innocent; and the rich Landlords to turn miserable
Oppressors); I say, the Devil labors more, and rejoices more to have one
such, than twenty other poor Snakes, that want the abilities of Wit, Learning,
Power, and Authority to become his Instruments of wickedness: And therefore, I
say to all such men of good parts and great power, as the Prophet says, Psalm.
2^
for the same cause, Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be Learned, all ye that
are the Judges of the Earth: And do you follow the known common trodden path of
truth all you that are good Scholars; And so much for the speaker Jezabel that
was a noble, witty, and wicked woman.

2. For the Speech of this wicked-wicked woman, The speech of Jezabel.
it is a most Excellent Speech, worthy to be set in Letters of Gold, inter
dicta sapientum, among the Aphorisms or Parables of the wise; As I shall make
it manifest unto you, when I come to explain the same; In the interim, you may
observe, How that many wicked men, and wicked women, Heretics and Tyrants,
have had many times some Excellent sayings, and sometimes most worthy Acts have
proceeded from them; As the Papists and Presbyterians have made many good
Sermons; and written many Excellent Books and Treatises of Divinity full of
Learning, and great Piety; and who better then Bellarmine, his Meditations upon
his Gemitus columbae, How many wicked men have said and done many things well.
Soliloquies, De ascensione animi in coelum per scalas rerum creatarum, and,
Septem verba Christi in cruce. And his Comments upon the Psalms, and the like.
And so Ferus, Granatensis, Drexelius, and many more have done the like; and we
find diverse others that have been great Heretics, to have done so likewise.

And in like manner, we do read that many wicked men have done some special
Acts of Virtue and Piety; As Herod, that sought the Life of Christ, yet did he,
as Josephus relates it, most Magnificently re-edify and beautify the Temple of
the Lord in Jerusalem; and the other Herod, the husband of Herodias hearkened
to John Baptist in many things; and Pilate, that condemned Christ to death, did
many things exceeding well, as in the strict examination of Christ his Cause,
and justifying his Innocence, when he delivered him to be Crucified; and
Claudius Lis^as, though he would not release S. Paul from his bands, yet he
preserved his Life, and delivered him out of the hands of his enemies; and the
unrighteous Judge, that as our Savior says, Luke 18.5.
feared not God, neither regarded man; yet, did he once justice to the
importunate Widow; and Am. Marcellinus tells us, that even fulian the Apostate,
and the bitterest persecutor of the Christians, was adorned with many singular
properties, as being an Excellent Scholar, bred in Athens, at the same time,
with Greg. Nazian: and writing many Epistles, Orations, and Moral sayings, and
behaving himself most mildly and courteously toward all men but the
Christians; and so we read that Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, Trajan, Antoninus
Pius, Marcus Aurelius, and many others of the Roman Emperors, had many good
parts in them, and did many singular acts of Virtue, though they were no
Christians, but some of them very Evil men, and great persecutors of the
Christians; And I could instance in many Tyrants, and other great Oppressors of
Gods people, and wicked men, even in our own Kingdom, that have done some Acts
of Virtue and Piety; And I could name you the men, that have been very
Turbulent in Gods Church, and misled abundance of the people; and yet have
made some good Sermons, and written some good Treatises of Divinity: And what
then? Shall we therefore adore them, and follow them in their factions and
evil ways; because they do or have done some good? By no means: For, as thou
should not drink the Wine, that is mingled with some Po^son, though the Wine
be never so good; so it is not safe for thee, to hear that Sermon that leads
thee to Sedition, though most of it seems never so Pious, and the Preacher
never so Honest; And as one vicious Act, does not presently give the
denomination of a wicked man, to any one; as, to be once drunk with Lot, does
not make a man to be styled a drunkard, as Aristotle truly says; Quia semel
insanivimus omnes; because there is no man living, but he may sometimes fall;
So one virtuous Act, does not make a man Virtuous; one wise word, does not
prove the speaker to be a wise man; and one Act of Piety, whether it be to hear
Sermons, or to Fast, or to erect an Hospital, or the like, does not make a
Religious man; But a good man must have the habit of well doing, and a Godly
Religious man must have respect unto all God, Commandments, and, as the Apostle
says, By continuance in well doing seek Glory, Honor, and Immortality.

And therefore the Judge, that would be deemed a just Judge, must not only once
or twice do justice, but he must constantly administer justice unto all; and
not only unto equals, as many of them many times will do, but also to the
poorest and meanest men, against the Richest and Noblest Persons, wherein the
timorous and corrupt covetous Judges often fail; And the Preacher, that desires
to be a faithful Minister of Christ, must not only, like those Landlords, that
require much and many services from their Tenants, and then bestow a dinner
upon them once a year, bestow a Sermon or two upon his Flock, when he comes to
receive his Payments, and to set his Tithes; but, as the Apostle says, he must
Preach In season and out of season, Volentibus and Nolentibus, upon all
occasions, at all times, in all places, and to all Persons, that will hear him;
And not only some of his Sermon must be good, and the rest factious and
Seditious; but they must be all Pious, for the edifying of Gods people, and
peaceable for the quieting of Gods Church: Or else one Seditious Sermon may do
more evil, than twenty of his best Sermons may do good; but we should all
Preach the Doctrine of Charity and Unity, that, as there is but one God, one
Faith, one Baptism, one Christ, and one Church, here on earth. So there should
be but one and the same Doctrine, and one and the same Discipline in the Church
of Christ. And so he that would be accounted a Charitable man, must not only
bestow his alms to one or two; but, as the Scripture says, he ought to do good
unto all men, and specially to them that are of the household of Faith; for so
the Lord commands us, Give alms of thy goods, and never turn thy face from
any man, i.e. any man, that wants thy help, and then The face of the Lord shall
not be turned away from thee; because, as I said, it is not any one Act of
goodness, but a Continuance in well doing, that does please the Lord, and gives
the denomination of a good man. And so you see, how a wicked man, or a wicked
woman may have some good speeches, and do some good Acts, and yet be no good
man, nor good woman.

But now for the substance of this Speech of Jezabel, we may observe therein;
1. Two Persons. 2. Two things.


1. The Persons are Elah the son of Baasha, and Zimry, Captains of half his
Charets; a Master and a servant; a King, and a subject that after became a King
himself.

2. The things, that are mentioned in this short speech, are

1. Murder, the worst of all the injuries, that can be offered to any man.

2. Peace, the best of all the blessings, that this world can afford unto men.

So you see this Text is the Tragedy of two Kings, and Treats of two of the
greatest and rarest things under Heaven; the one Positive, the greatest Evil,
that can be done to man, which is murder: The other Privative, the want of the
greatest good, that the earth can afford unto men, which is Peace; for so, the
Phrase does not only simply avouch, that Zimri, having slain his Master, could
not have Peace; but it does most forcibly infer, that having done such a wicked
Act, it was impossible for him to have peace; because an Interrogation is the
most forcible, vehement and significant expression, either of Negatives or
Affirmatives that any Orator can use, ascertaining the thing far more
Energetically then could be done by any plain and simple assertion.

And now, let us, by Gods assistance, Treat of these Parties, and Parts in
their order. And

1. Elah was the King of Israel, and the son of a King of Israel, Person is
Elah.
the son of Baasha, that had Reigned 24. years in Tyrza, and himself two years,
in the same Kingdom, and in the same City; and therefore in all reason, he
should either have been sooner dethroned, or now, to have been continued;
especially considering his Title was just, he was no Usurper, and his rule was
not Tyrannical: neither do we read of any great misdemeanour of this King;
save only that he walked in the ways of his Father, and that he was drinking
himself drunk in the house of Arza, 1 Kings 16.9.
that was his Steward. Where you may observe these two things.

1. Not to follow our fathers evil ways. Ezech. 20.18.
That we ought not, to walk in the ways of our fathers, when our fathers walk
not in the ways of God: but as the Prophet Ezechiel says, Walk you not in the
statutes of your fathers, nor defile your selves by walking in their ways.

And therefore, if your fathers have unjustly taken away the Lands and
Possessions of the Church, or of any one else, do not you continue in their
ways, and perpetuate the wrongs that they have done; lest God will destroy
you, as he destroyed Elah, for walking in the ways of his father: for if your
fathers have killed the Prophets, and you garnish their Tombs; if the Usurpers
have taken away our lands, and you still detain them, as you do; Which is
better, or which worse, to us, judge your selves?

2. The bitter fruits of sweet drunkenness.
You may from hence observe, the fruits of Drunk enness, which has undone many
famous men; as some in their drink, have fallen off from their horses, and so
brake their limbs, and some their necks; others fell into the waters, and were
drowned; and others into quarrels and were killed. Noah, though a righteous
man, yet by his drunkenness discovered his nakedness, and thereby occasioned
his son, which he should not have done, to deride his father's folly; and for
this his great impiety, to bring an inevitable curse upon himself, Genesis 9.25.
and upon all his posterity: a most fearful fruit, all springing from this
bitter root of sweet drunkenness. So Lot, being drunk, lay with both his own
daughters, of whom sprang those two ungodly Generations, of the Moabites, and
the Amonites. And so did Armitus and Ciranippus, the Syracusians, plutarcb.
as Plutarch says l. 2. c. 31.

And Alexander the Great, was so addicted to this vice, that many times, in his
drink, he slew his dearest friends, as Clitus and others that we read of in Q.
Curtius; Valued worth 600. crowns.
and making a Supper, on a time for his Captains, he propounded a Crown to him,
that could drink most; and one Promochus drank 5. gallons of wine, but died
within three days after, and 41. more; and so his Crown did him no credit.
Dan. 5.2, 3, 4, 5.
And Belshazar, the son of the Great Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, drinking
and quaffing in the Vessels that his father took from the House of God, espied
the handwriting upon the wall, that his kingdom should be taken from him, and
given to the Medes and Persians. And many men, in these days, drink away their
Lands, their Moneys, their Wits, and all that they have. And therefore most
wisely does the Mother of King Lemuel say, Prove. 31.4.
It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes to drink strong drink. And the son of Syrach says, Eccles. 31.25.
Plin. de viris illust. c. 14.
Show not thy valor in wine, for wine has destroyed many. As here, King Elah
was destroyed in his wine. And Pliny the younger says, that Antiochus was
killed at a Banquet, by his own Minions; because he would have forced them to
drink beyond their abilities, and against their wills. And S. Augustine writes,
that one Cyrillus, a Citizen of Hippo, had an ungracious son, that in the midst
of his drunkenness, killed his own mother great with child, and his father that
sought to restrain his fury, and would have ravished his sister, Aug. 60.10.
Ser. 33. Vt citatur a Beard. p. 491. Eusebius. hist. l. 8. c. 16.
had not she escaped from him, with many wounds. And Eusebius writes, that the
Emperor Maximinus was so often deeply plunged in drunkenness, that he became
many times so mad, that in his drunken madness, he commanded many things to be
done, which he greatly repented of, when he became sober again: and no marvel;
for temulentia, signifies a voluntary madness, and wine is termed, temetum,
quia tentat mentem, it shakes the mind, The notable Story of some young
Drunkards, out of Athenaeus. Athenaeus l. 2.
and destroys the senses; as it appears by that notable Story, which
Athenaeus writes, of certain young men, that drank so much, that they verily
believed, they were sailing in a Gally, and so tossed with the winds, that they
threw all things in the Chamber out at the window, as Mariners use to throw
their ladings overboard, in a Tempest; whereupon some Captains, seeing the
same, came in unto them, and finding them extremely vomiting, asked, What they
ayled? who answered, That they were Sea-sick, and the storm forced them, to
throw all their goods into the Sea; and because they supposed those Captains to
be Tritons, or Sea-gods, they said, That if they would help them at this time,
to arrive safe to land, they would honor them for their Saviors ever after:
such madness is in drunkenness. And Gregorius Turonensis says, that Attila,
which was called, The scourge of god, having married a Wife of excellent
beauty, and having well carowsed, on his Marriage day, fell at night into so
dead a sleep, that lying upon his back, the blood that usually issued at his
nostrils, descended into his throat, and strangled him: and so indeed,
Drunkenness has destroyed many more.

And yet Elah would not follow the counsel of King Lemuels Mother, which might
perhaps, have saved his life; and therefore Zimri takes this occasion, to
conspire his death. So I come to the second Person mentioned in this Text,
which is Zimri.

2. This Zimri was 1. King Elah's subject. Second person is Zimri.
2. King Elah's servant. 3. A servant in an honorable place.


1. Elah was Zimri's King, and Zimri was Elah's subject; A subject.
and the Spirit of God sets down, what honor is due unto our King, Eccles. 8.2.
when he counsels us to keep the Kings commandment; or, as the phrase
imports, to observe the mouth of the King: and that in regard of the oath of
God, i.e. the solemn vow, which thou made, at thine incorporation into Gods
Church, to obey all the Precepts of God, whereof this is one, To fear God, and
to honor the King; or else the oath of allegiance and fidelity, How
straightly. God prohibiteth the subject to offer the least dishonor unto his
King.
which the subject makes unto his King, in the presence and with the
approbation of God, who will most certainly plague all perjurers, that take his
Name in vain. And so the same Spirit of God, has imprisoned and chained up,
our very thoughts, words, and works, in the links of the strictest prohibition,
that they should no way peep forth to produce the least dishonor unto our
King. For

1. He says, Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; i.e. Eccles. 10.30.
Think not any ill, nor to do any evil unto thy King; and therefore the very
thought of Treason was adjudged, by the Court of France, to be Treason; and he
that confessed unto his Priest, that he once thought to kill the King, but
afterward, repenting him of his intention, he utterly abandoned the execution;
yet he was executed for that very thought.

2. The same Spirit says, Thou shall not revile the Gods; i. e. the Judges of
the Land; nor curse, that is, in S. Paul's phrase, (...).
speak evil of the Ruler of the people. And

3. The Lord of Hosts gives this peremptory charge to every subject, Touch not
mine Anointed, which is the least indignity that may be, Psalm. 105.15. 1 Samuel
24.4, 5.
and yet may not be done to our King, by any means. And therefore David's heart
smote him, when he did but cut off the lap of Readiness garment.

And therefore it appears, that Zimri had no fear of God, no regard of his
Laws, nor any thought of his favor, when he fostered so vile a thought, and
committed so horrible an act, as to kill his King.

But is that so transcendent a sin, for a subject to kill his King? Tyrant, or
an Heretic or else, seeks the ruin of his subjects, may not the subjects
then, in such a case, kill such a King? Look into the 9. several Speeches,
delivered at a Conference, concerning the power of Parliament, to proceed
against their King for misgovernment; and there you shall find many examples of
subjects, that have deposed, and killed their Kings, when their Kings, deserved
the same: and therefore Zimri may be excused, if King Elah deserved to be
killed.

I answer, that many Kings indeed, have proved very wicked, justly deserved
some severe censure, but from God, not from their subjects; we need not go far
for proof hereof: but if we may believe Sir Walter Rawleigh, our own King Henry
the Eight was bad enough, and might be numbered inter pessimos, being an
Adulterer, a Tyrant, and a Sacrilegious King, that neither spared man in his
fury, nor woman in his lust; and yet this Kingdom then, had never a Zimri in
it, to take away his life for all his wickedness. Bodinus de repub. l. 2. c. 5.
Not to resist our King, though he should be a Tyrant. Peter Martyr in 1 Samuel c.
26.
And Bodin says, the most learned Divines are of opinion, that it is so far
from being lawful, for subjects to kill their King, under color of Tyranny,
that they are expressly forbidden, to speak ill of them. And Peter Martyr
says, that Religious David made no doubt, but that King Saul was a Tyrant, yet
he abstained from killing him, when he might most easily do it; because he saw
that he could not lawfully do it: and if it was not lawful for him, that was,
by God's appointment, and the ministry of God's Prophet Samuel anointed to be
King after him; then surely no other man might have done it. Camer. l. 2. c. 10.
And Camerarius demands, if there could be a worse Prince than Nero? and yet,
says he, The Apostles, S. Paul, and S. Peter, are so far from advising the
Christians to conspire against him, as they command them, to use all obedience
to him; and that not for fear only, but also for conscience sake. Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Thessal.
And S. Chrysostom says, That Theodosius destroyed Thessalonica, and spared
neither Sex nor Age, neither young nor old, man nor woman, but took upon him so
much as he listed, to satisfy his own furious will; and yet howsoever,
parendum est, obedience must be given him, says this holy father.

And if the King becomes an Idolater, Not to resist our King, though he should
be an Idolater.
and does with Manasses command his subjects, to worship Idols; as Hen. 8.
commanded the observation of the 6. Articles, wherein they were to adore the
Breaden god; yet in this case, no Zimri should presume to kill his King: but
the rule of the Apostles ought to be followed, to obey God, rather than man,
and not to do what God forbids, though the King command it to be done; yet no
ways to take arms against him, but to follow the examples of the Saints and
Martyrs of God, Vt supra.
rather to suffer death, than to offer any resistance, and whatsoever becomes
of our bodies, to possess our souls in patience, says Camerarius.

And though the King should prove a wicked Heretic, yet we must not rise
against him, says the same Author; but with the weapons of prayer, desire of
God, to convert him; for so the true Christians followed the Emperor
Constantius, Not to resist our King, though he should be an Heretic.
that was an Arian, and they followed Julian the Apostata, in his wars and
expeditions, though they were never so far; and never intended to rebel against
him.

And, as the Jews and Christians were of this opinion, that it is not lawful,
in any case, for any subject to kill his King; So the Gentiles also seem to be
of the same mind; for when the Jews cried, to have our Savior crucified,
Pilate demands of them, Shall I crucify your King? as if he should have said,
What? was there ever such a Nation, so wicked, and so abominable before God and
all good men, as to desire to crucify their King? Why? this desire seems,
The Jews confess that no Nation should desire to be the death of their, King.
not only strange, and admirable, but also abominable, and so incredible unto
me, that you should in good earnest, desire to crucify your King: and it seems
by their answer to this question of Pilate, that they rightly apprehended his
mind, and did also approve his sense, that for any Nation or People to desire
to crucify their King, was most abominable and wicked; and therefore they
absolutely deny, that they were his subjects, and say, We have no King but
Caesar: For

They were not ignorant, how the heathens honored their Kings, and how the
Egyptians, Aubanus de Africa l. 1. p 39. Osor. de instit. regis l. 4. P. 106.
whose manners they knew well enough, did bear so much good will and love unto
their Kings, that, as Boemus Aubanus says, Non solum sacerdotibus; sed etiam
singulis Aegyptiis major regis quam uxorum filiorumque aut aliorum principum
salutis inesset cura: and Osorius says, Persae quidom aliquid caeleste atque
divinum in regibus inesse statuebant; and Q. Curtius tells us, that the
Persians had such a divine estimation of their King, and bore so much love unto
him, that Alexander could not persuade them, either for fear or reward, to tell
him whither their King was gone, or to reveal any of his intentions, or to do
any other thing, that might any ways prejudice the life or the affairs of
their King; and Herodotus says, that when Xerxes fled from Greece, in a vessel
that was so full of men of war, that it was impossible for him to be saved,
without casting some part of them into the Sea; he said unto them, O ye men of
Persia, let some among you testify that he has care of his King, whose safety
is in your disposition. Then the Nobility, which accompanied him, having adored
him, did cast themselves into the sea, till the vessel was unburthened, and so
the King preserved. And Justin tells us, that the Sicilians did bear so great a
respect unto the last Will and Testament of Anaxilaus, their deceased King;
Justin. l. ^.
that they disdained not to obey a slave, whom he had appointed Regent, during
the minority of his son. And Plutarch says, that when certain men came to
Tyribastus to have taken him, he defended himself so stoutly, that they were
not able to come near him; but when the apprehenders said, They came from the
King, Plut. de superstit.
he had such a reverent respect unto his Majesty, that he presently laid down
his Cimiter, and yielded himself unto them.

And for the Examples and Precedents, that those learned Orators do produce, at
the conference, to show how diverse kingdoms, as England, France, Spain, and
many more, have cast off some Kings, whom they disliked: and put to death some
others, that had deserved it.

I answer, that I have read all the nine Speeches over and over, and am sorry
that learned men, which have read so many Histories, both domestic and
foreign, should, like the Spider, suck the poisonous examples of those books
and allege them for imitation in such transcendent impiety; and I am more
sorry, that they should pass at a conference of men, that were chosen of their
country for most grave and wise, and did profess themselves most religious,
without a supercilious and a plenary answer, which they might very briefly do,
and with a less then the tenth part of the pains, these Orators, or Lawyers,
if they were such (for divines I am sure they were no^) took to gather those
evil examples, to evil ends; for we are to live by Laws and not by Examples;
and especially by the Laws of God, or otherwise, you may live as you list, and
you may do whatsoever you please; for if a King means to play the Tyrant, That
we are to live by Laws, and not by examples.
he may have examples enough to justify his Tyranny; if he be an adulterer, he
may allege King David, that was a man according to Gods own heart; and 100.
more, that did commit adultery; and if thou please to be a drunkard, thou
have the examples of righteous Noah and of Lot, and 1000. more, that may
justify thee, for being drunk; or, to be brief, if thou would be an
oppressor, or a robber, and a Rebel, and a Traitor, to depose thy King, or to
kill him, thou have a Jeroboam, and a Zimri, and Jehu too, though he had a
special warrant for it, and an infinite other examples, that may be produced
to shelter thee from blame, for committing the greatest Treason, or any other
execrable villainy, if the producing of examples, might serve the turn.

But the truth is, whatsoever other men, whatsoever Councils, Kingdoms, or
Commonwealths have done, contrary to the will and Laws of God, we ought not to
imitate them therein; because their Examples be no excuse for us, that should
have recourse to the Law, and to the Testimony, Esaias 8.20.
as the Prophet speaks, to direct us, what we ought to do.

And therefore no Precedents, no Examples in the world, though you should
produce ten thousands of them, can excuse Zimri, nor any other Zimries in the
whole Universe, for killing their King; but

2. Here is another relation betwixt Ela and Zimri, A Servant.
that should more strictly have tied and engaged Zimri, to be true and faithful
unto Elah; for he was his servant, and his menial servant in ordinary, which
all other subjects could not be; and this is rightly observed by Jezabel; and
therefore she says not, Had Zimri peace that slew his King? but, Had Zimri
peace that slew his Master? And a Master that gives meat, drink, and wages,
means and maintenance unto his servant, is loco parentis, instead of a Father
unto him, and therefore he should be respected and honored of his servant,
next unto his Father; and we find that many true and faithful servants have
done so indeed: I cannot well remember where.
for I remember I read it in Appian, that when Scipio had gained Carthage, or
some other opulent Town, he gave a strict charge that none of the Citizens,
upon pain of death, should hide any of the wealth or treasure of that rich
City; yet one of the wealthiest Merchants, having a great store of Gold and
inestimable Jewels, hid a great deal thereof, so secretly, that no man could
find it, but the Servant that helped him to hide it; and that Servant, like a
false Judas, went and revealed it to the General; who making a strict search
for the Merchant, another of the Merchants servants, seeing how his Master, if
he were taken, should be condemned to death for that fact, goes unto Scipio,
and protests unto him, An excellent story of a most faithful servant.
that it was he which did hide that treasure, altogether unknown unto his
Master; and therefore desired, that his innocent Master might be freed, and let
him lay what punishment he pleased upon himself, that had offended; but the
other servant stood stiffely to his former accusation, that it was his Master,
and not the Servant, that had hid it; then Scipio would needs find out the
Merchant, who being found, confessed the truth, that he himself, with the help of
his accuser, had conveyed away that treasure, and that altogether unknown to
his other servant, who to preserve his Master, was so ready to sacrifice his
own life; whereupon Scipio like a brave Commander, and a Heroic indeed, seeing
the fidelity of the one servant, and the treachery of the other; pardons the
Master for his faithful servants sake, and puts the accuser to death for his
treachery and infidelity; and we read of many other servants that have so
dearly loved, and been so truly faithful unto their Masters, that they have
hazarded their own lives, to save their Masters; as you may read the servants
of King David have done, and as it is recorded, that Mauricius Duke of Saxony,
being in a battle thrown to the ground, his servant casting himself upon him,
covered him, and so defended him from his enemies, until he was rescued by his
friends; and so with his own death, he saved his Masters life. And it is
written of Eros servant to Antonius, that when his Master was overcome by
Augustus, and would have him to dispatch his life, he drew his sword and killed
himself, rather then he would kill his Master: for as a Master, next to his own
children, is to respect, provide, and care for his servants above all other
friends or kinsfolks whatsoever; according to the saying of the wise man, Have
thou a faithful servant, let him be unto thee as thine own soul; so the
servant, next to his Father and Mother, ought to honor, and to preserve his
Master before all other men whatsoever.

And therefore Zimri can no ways be thought any other, than a most Villainous
Traitor, to slay his Master, worse then Ditalcon, and Minuro, that were
corrupted by Capio, Appian. p. 112. Of the Roman wars with the Spaniard. 3. A
servaut in an honorable setvice.
to kill their Master Viriatus, that brave Spaniard, that gave work enough to
the Romans eight years together: Especially if we do confider.

3. Qualis servitus, in what manner of service he was under his Master Elah;
for though the Romans and many others, used most of their servants, that were
their slaves, like dogs, which produced that proverb, Of so many servants, so
many enemies; which ever feared, but never loved their Masters, as the Romans
found it most true, to their cost, when they made the servile War, that proved
so hazardous unto them; Yet, Elah did not so with Zimri, but he preferred him
to a very honorable place, and made him Captain of halt his Charrets, and so a
Master, to keep many servants under him, as you see all Captains have; The
three fold impiety of Zimri.
and therefore for a servant to kill such a Master, that had thus advanced his
servant, is a note, beyond Elah, and does exceedingly aggravate the offense of
Zimri, and makes it to ascend higher and higher, or rather to descend lower and
lower, even to the bottomless pit of hell; To commit murder, as heinous as any
murder can be, to kill his King, his Master; and a Master, that was so l^ving,
and had so honorably preferred him; which was a three fold cord, to bind him in
Obedience, but is soon snapt asunder, by this wicked Traitor, that was a
Traitor, just like Judas, of whom the Prophet, in the person of Christ, says,
If it had been an open enemy that had done me this dishonor, I could well have
born it, but it was thou, my companion, and mine own familiar friend, my
disciple, mine Apostle, my Servant, and my Purse-bearer; and for thee, to
betray thy Master, it is a Treason, beyond all Treason; and a murder more
execreble then any murder; because that, besides their malice toward their
Masters, such servants, as Judas and this Zimri were, do show themselves
replenished with ingratitude, to render so much evil to them, that have done so
much good to them, which is a monster in nature, and a sin most odious amongst
the Heathens, whose proverb was, Ingratum si d^xeris, omnia dixer is; and
therefore, though there is no vice in the World, which has not room and
entertainment in some Kingdom or other, as Pride among the Babylonians, Envy
among the Jews, Anger among the Thebans, Covetousness among the Tyrians,
Gluttony among the Sidonians, Lying among the Cretians, Witchcraft in
Thessaly, Magic in Egypt, and other sins so well known, that I need not name
them, in Germany, France, England, and Ireland; yet ingratitude is such a sin,
that no Country will willingly receive it, nor any man own it, or entertain it
into his house; for, though thy self should be as ungrateful to thy
neighbor, as Pharaohs butler was to Joseph, Laban to Jacob, Saul to David,
Joash to Jehojada, Demetrius to Jonathas, Augustus to Cicero, Carthage to
Hannibal, Rome to Scipio, and many more, that either banished or murdered
those, that protected and preserved them from ruin; yet, thou can not abide,
that any man should prove ungrateful unto thee; but having so well deserved at
his hands, thou will cry out, that he is worst then the brute beasts: as we
must confess an ungrateful person is indeed, for you see the dog will love his
Master, and often venture his life for him, for a piece of bread, and the very
Tigers, Bears, and Lions will love those, that keep them and do feed them; and
they will show their thankfulnness for the benefits, that they do receive; as
it is manifest, by that, which fell to Helpis, the Samian, who, upon a certain
Coast of Africa, having drawn out a bone, that stuck in a Lions throat, was in
recompense of that benefit, fed and maintained by the Lion's hunting, so long
as his ship lay at anchor on that shore; and that which A. Gellius says befell
to Androdus, a Roman slave, who, being banished out of Rome, and wandering in a
Forest, that was full of wild and savage Beasts, met a Lion, that came fawning
upon him, and showing unto him his Pawe, that was wonderfully sore, and
swollen, by reason of a thorn, that was over-head got into it, which the slave
pulled out, and so cured the poor distressed Lion, who, in requital of that
curtesy, accompanied him out of the Forest, and kept him from the danger of
all other Beasts; and afterward that Lion being taken, and carried to Rome,
and the slave, some certain years after, returning to Rome, was apprehended and
adjudged to be thrown unto the Lions; and being cast among the Lions, his
cured patient, presently knew him, and fawning upon him, Gellius l. 5: c. 14.
as congratulating their meeting, he not only did him no hurt, but also
preserved him from all the rest, that they durst not touch him; and the reason
being known, the slave was pardoned, and the people termed the Lion his host;
and him the Lion's Physician; And if brute and savage Beasts were thus
grateful for some small benefits, what Beasts are they, that will destroy
their best benefactors; and what words can be found fit to express this
ingratitude, that goes beyond all other villainies? For to murder a man is most
odious, as I shall anon show unto you; but to murder a King is far more
abominable; and such a King as is our Master, and such a Master as uses us not
like slaves, but, as our Savior says, Hence forth I call you not servants,
but I have called you friends, Joh. 15.15.
like his companions; is a sin most abominable, and so far transcendent, beyond
my capacity to express it, that, as Valerius says of Sejanus, Valor. M. l. 9.
c. 11.
He is now in bell, if the Devil will receive so vile a varlet, and can find
out torments sufficient for his deserts: so will I say of Zimri, and of all
such servants as slay or betray their Masters, I leave them seriously to
consider, what they have done, and to abhor themselves in dust and ashes, or
to expect that fearful judgment, that hangs over their head. And I do
exceedingly honor the honorable House of Commons, and do most Highly commend
the Votes and Orders that I understand they have made, concerning those men,
that had any hand in the death of our late Pious, Just, and most Gracious King,
whereby they have showed themselves to be most Religious toward God, and most
Loyal toward their King.

So I have done with the persons mentioned in this Text, Elah and Zimri, the
Master and his servant.

2. Two Things mentioned in Jezabels speech.
The things, mentioned in this speech are these two, 1. Murder. 2. Peace.


1. Murder, the very worst of all human actions.

2. Peace, the very best of all worldly blessings.

And so here is Zimri's fact, and Zimries punishment.

1. His fact is the slaying of his Master which is Murder. 2. His punishment
is, to be deprived of all Peace, which is the greatest punishment of all
plagues.
1. For his fact, which is murder, before I speak thereof I shall humbly
entreat your Honors, and all the rest of these Christian auditors, not to
mistake my words, or meaning, in any Application thereof, otherwise then I
mean: for in the prosecution of this point, I purpose not to touch upon any of
those, that his Majesty has most graciously pardoned, by an act of Oblivion,
for all their former offenses; nor upon any of them, that were slain in the
war; 2 Samuel 11.25.
when, as David says, The sword devoureth one as well as another, but my
discourse shall reach no further, then my Text goes, that is, those that, in
cold blood, shall maliciously persecute their neighbors unto death, as Cain
did his brother Abell; and Joab, Amasa; and those, that shall treacherously
slay their Master, as Zimri did his King, and his Master Elah. And those also
that shall deliberately and judicially condemn an Innocent person unto death,
as the Judges of Jezreel did Naboth, and the Jewish Sanhedrim condemned their
King and our Savior Christ.

And though the Prophet says, Consolamini populum meum, and the sons of
Consolation are commanded to bind up the broken hearted, and to Preach the
glad-tidings of the Gospel unto the penitent; yet, there must be Boanerges,
sons of Thunder, to sound out the Alarm of Gods judgments against transcendent
and impenitent malefactors, and to lay the axe to the root of the Tree, to cut
down every tree, that bears not good fruit, and to cast it into the fire. And
it is the duty of every faithful Steward, to give to every one, his own
portion in due season, that is, mercy to whom mercy belongs, and judgment to
whom judgment appertains; and not to give that which is holy unto dogs, or to
proclaim peace and pardon to them, to whom the Lord professes there is no
peace; but says peremptorily, He will not pardon them. And therefore I hope
your honorable patience will bear with me, that, as the Prophet David says, My
song shall not be of mercy alone, nor of judgment alone, but of mercy and
judgment together; especially upon Zimri, and all such that, like Zimri, will
slay both their King, and their Master, which is the first thing mentioned in
this Text, that is, Zimri's Murder. And

For murder, you may observe, that the same may be committed three manner of
ways, 1. With the heart. 2. With the tongue. 3. With the hand.


1. The heart kills a man four special ways; 1. By desire. 2. By anger. 3.
By envy. 4. By hatred.
For,

1. The Prophet says, Psalm. 5.6.
The Lord abborreth the blood-thirsty and the deceitful man; (i. e.) him,
which desires and longs for my death; as he that is thirsty desires drink.

2. Our Savior says, Whosoever is angry with his brother, without a cause,
Math. 5.22.
he shall be in danger of judgment.

3. The Apostle, speaking of the wickedness of the Gentiles, says, Romans 1.29.
They were full of envy, murder, debate -- And the wise man says, Alius alium
per invidiam occidit, One man slays another through envy; Sap. 14.4.
as Cain through envy slew his brother Abel, and the Jews our Savior Christ
Qui igitur periere, quia maluerunt invidere quam credere, who therefore
perished, because they had rather to envy him, then to believe in him; Cypr. in
Ser. de livore.
says Saint Cyprian.

4. Saint John says, that, Whosoever hates his brother is a man slayer; 1 John
3.15. Lev. 19.17.
and therefore the Lord says, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart;
for, as he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
in his heart; so he that hates his brother, has killed him, in his heart.

2. The tongue kills many men, yea, Plures lingua quam gladio periere, Jam.
3:6, 7.
The tongue has slain more then the sword; for the tongue is a fire, and a
world of wickedness; it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison: And the son
of Syrach says, It has destroyed many, that were at peace; Eccl. 28.13.
And the tongue kills two ways 1. By flattery. 2. By detraction.


1. Saint Augustine says, that Plus nocet lingua adulatoris quam gladius
persecutoris. And Antisthenes was wont to say, It was better for a man to fall
(...), among ravens; then (...), among flatterers.

2. The Prophet says, Ezech. 22.8.
Viri detractores fuerunt in te ad effundendum sanguinem, In thee are men that
carry tales to shed blood; and Job, saying unto his friends, that slandered his
integrity; Why do you persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
does intimate thereby, that detractors are like cruel Canibals, that eat men's
flesh and drink their blood, Nam qui aliena detractione pascitur, proculdubio
alienis carnibus saturatur; for without doubt, whosoever feeds himself with
detraction, does satisfy himself with man's flesh, says S. Gregory.

And I doubt not but this Zimri, and all other, the like Zimries, that killed
their Masters, had killed Elah, in all these ways, before he slew him with his
hands; because all these murders, of the heart, and of the tongue, are but
steps, stairs, and progesses to the murder of the hand.

For first, we begin to distaste, and to dislike a man; then we grow angry with
him, for some things that displease us; and, if he has any virtue in him, or
any honorable place or preferment, or any love or good opinion from the people,
we will presently envy him, and then hate him; and so hate him more and more;
and then the tongue will begin to play his part: and though in presence it will
flatter him, whom the heart detesteth, yet in his absence, it will lay loads of
scandalous imputations upon his person and upon his actions, Camerar. l. 6. c.
2.
even as Absolon did upon the government of King David: and the forecited
example of Maion against William King of Sicily; and abundance of such Varlets,
that I could relate unto you.

And when they have proceeded thus far, to envy his happiness and to hate his
person, as Cain hated his brother Abel, and the way is thus made by scandalous
aspersions, there wants nothing but the stroke of the hand to effect the
tragical murder of the man whom they desire to destroy.

So Zimri did, when he found his opportunity, slay his Master Elah: so the
servants of King Amon slew their Master. So Phocas did slay his Emperor, and
his Master, Mauritius; So Artabanus Captain of the guard, killed his own King
and his Master Xerxes, Diodorus l. 11.
after he had retired out of Greece; So Brutus and Cassius, with their
associates, murdered Julius Caesar. And so you know who murdered their Master,
and King, Charles the First.

And this is the greatest mischief, that one man can do unto another, to take
away his life with bloody hands; for though he take away my goods yet I may get
more, as Job did, after all was taken from him; if he cast me into prison, yet
at last, with Joseph, I may be set at liberty; and, if I be banished my
Country, yet with the Israelits, I may live to return out of Captivity, as
Henry Bullingbrook Duke of Lancaster did: but when he has taken away my life
and killed me, there is an end of all hope, and that is an evil that can
expect no remedy, and a wound that cannot be cured, nor any ways paralleled by
any other mischief.

And therefore, Number 35.33.
seeing, as the Lord says, that blood defiles the Land, and the land can not
be cleansed of the blood, that is thus shed, but by the blood of him, or them,
that have shed it; I will here, (to persuade the bloodthirsty men to quench
that thirst, and the Magistrates by no means to neglect to punish that sin: and
especially to induce those Magistrates, and all those that transcend the power
of the Magistrates, that have, like Zimri, slain their King and their Master;
or defiled themselves with the blood of their brethren, to a sad and serious
repentance) set down eight special things, that do show unto us the horrible
odiousness and haynousness of this sin of murder; and you may find them all
set down in lib. 3. cap. 2. of the true Church. p. 385. and in the Great
Antichrist revealed, l. 1. p. 81.

1. nature; because every creature loves his life, Et sevis inter se convenit
ursis, and the very Devils will not kill one another.

2. reason, which says, That every man should do unto others, as he would be
done unto himself.

3. devilish sin, and a sin of the Devil, who, though he be not termed an
Idolater, or Adulterer; yet, he is said to be a Murderer from the beginning,
Joh. 8.44.
because it was he, that murdered our first Parents; and he taught Cain to kill
his brother, and this Zimri to slay his Master.

4. beastly sin, quia ferina rabies est, sanguine and vulnere laetari, it is a
point of savage cruelty, to delight our selves with wounds and blood, says
Seneca.

5. one, but it is also the first, and the greatest one, of those four crying
sins, that are only so called in the Scripture: for the other three, Sodomie,
Oppression, and detaining of Servants wages, are but parts and par-, cells of
this great crying sin: Because, that in Sodomie, that seed is spilt which might
have been the matter of humane flesh and blood; and by the other two, i.e.
Oppression, and detaining of the Laborers wages, the life is made to languish
and to be shortened by little and little, for want of means; because the life of
man, and the means to maintain that life, may like Ens and Bonum, Good and
Being, be very well said to be voces convertibiles. And therefore the Wise man
says, The bread of the needy is their life; he that defraudeth him thereof, is
a man of blood: but in murder, root and branch, and all the tree is wholly
destroyed all at once.

6. It is a sin which produces such an irregularity, that although the
murderers should truly repent, and have their sin pardoned by God, which is but
seldom seen; yet they cannot promoveri, be advanced, or proceed on in Gods
savor, and be so acceptable unto God, as other sinners may be, upon their
repentance: as it appears plainly, by what the Lord says to David, that
otherwise was a man according to Gods own heart, and had heartily repented him
of his murder, Thou shall not build an House for my Name; 1 Chronicles. 28.3.
because thou have been a man of War, and have shed blood.

7. It is a sin, which seems by the punishment thereof, to be greater, at
least wise, in some respects, than any other sin whatsoever, except only the
sin against the Holy Ghost; for when Cain slew his brother, the Lord said unto
him, The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me; that is, Vox sanguin^m.
The voice of the bloods, which thou have spilt, i. e. of all the blood, that
should have sprung from Abel, to have replenished the earth, if thou had not
spilt it, does require, that I should take vengeance of thee; and therefore,
Thou art cursed from the earth. And this curse was so great, and of so large
extent, that it reached to the very earth, that bare him up: and therefore the
Lord adds, When thou tillest the ground, it shall not benceforth yield unto
thee her strength; a fugitive, and a vagaboud shall thou be in the earth. Genesis
4.11.12.
Which seems to be a far heavier sentence inflicted upon him for killing his
brother, than that which was imposed upon Adam, for offending Gods own Majesty;
though there was a straight command, and prohibition given to Adam, that he
should not eat of the forbidden Tree, and as yet, no Precept given, to forbid
the shedding of man's blood. For,

1. He does not say to Adam, Thou art cursed for thy sin; but, How Cains
punishment seems heavier than Adams.
Cursed is the ground for thy sake; but unto Cain, he says, Thou art cursed
from the ground: As if he had said, The curse shall not fall unto the ground,
but it shall light upon thine own head.

2. He does not say to Adam, When thou tillest the ground, it shall not yield
her strength unto thee; but, Thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to thee:
That is, naturally, and of it self, the earth, which if thou had not sinned,
would of it self, have brought thee all pleasant fruits; shall now bring thee
nothing else but weeds. But unto Cain he says, When thou tillest the ground,
and manurest it, and usest all the art and skill that thou can to make it
fruitful; yet it shall not yield her strength unto thee. So that the sterility,
and the unfruitfulness of a well-tilled and manured ground, is the punishment
of Guin's murder, and an additional curse, to that, which was formerly imposed
upon Adam.

3. He does not say to Adam, that he should have no resting place upon the
earth; but, that he should eat his bread in the sweat of his face, Genesis 3.2.
until he should return to the earth. But unto Cain he says, A fugitive and a
vagabond shall thou be in the earth. And therefore Cain, that knew well enough
his fathers censure before; and now hearing his own sentence so far exceeding
it, cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear. Genesis 4.12. Why the
punishment of Cains sin seems greater than Adams punishment.


And no marvel, that the punishment of this sin seems greater than the
punishment of Adam's; for in nature, let Reason show you, who does offend you
most, he that disobey eth your voice, and breaks your command, or he that seeks
to take away your life? And in Adam's sin, and in all other sins, there seems
to me, a leaving of the Being of God, to be a God; as in the great sin of
Idolatry, though we make an Idol, a thing that has no being in the world, to
be our god, and fall down to worship that no-Being, with that worship that
belongs to the true God; yet we do not thereby seek to annihilate the Being of
the True God; we rob him of his Honor, but take not away his Life; we leave
him still to Be, though we serve him not. But in murdering, or killing of a
man, we do what lies in us, to destroy, and bring to nothing, the very Essence
or Being of God; because we deface the Image of God; God himself being
invisible, and in nothing of all the things that God made, so plainly seen to
us, as in the face of Man. And therefore of all creatures, Man alone is
principally said to be the Image of God, and in that respect chiefly to be
respected and cherished, and not to be murdered or killed: Because in the Image
of God made he Man; and therefore he that kills man, does his very best to
kill God; because he destroys his Image, when he can see nothing of God, but
his Image. And if, as our adversaries do say, the service, done to a dead
image, which is no ways commanded by God to be done, does presently redound ad
prototypon, to the thing, or person represented by the image; then how much
surer are we, that the defacing of God's living-Image, which God does so
straightly prohibit to be done, is a disgracing of God himself, and all the
contempts done to this Image, do presently redound to God that is represented,
without all question, in this Image. And the City of Thessalonica, besides many
others, can well testify, how severely the Emperors punished the abusing of
their Images, when they deemed all the dishonor, that was done against their
Images, to be Treasons against themselves.

8. And lastly, this killing of a man, not only defaceth the Image of God, but
also robs God of his Temple, which is Sacrilege; and makes none account of,
but trampleth under feet, that which God did so highly esteem, and purchased at
so high a rate, as with his own blood. And, in a word, it is so odious, so
heinous, and so horrible a sin every way, as it is impessible for me to
express the vileness and the haynousnesse of this sin of Manslaughter, or the
malicious killing of a man.

And therefore, to show how odious this sin is in the sight of God, immediately
after the Flood, the great Commandment, and the only Commandment that he gave
to all the sons of Noah was, to abstain from shedding of man's blood: and he
does so pathetically and with such terrible threatenings express the punishment
of the Transgressors, saying; Surely, that you need not doubt it, your blood of
your lives will I require; yea, at the hand of every beast will I require it;
See Exodus 21.28.
and though they be void of reason and understanding of what they do, yet will
I not hold them guiltless if they shed man's blood. And therefore, much rather,
and much sooner, at the hand of man, and at the hand of every man's brother,
Genesis 9.5, 6. See Numb. 35.31, 33. Levit. 24.17. Math. 26.52.
will I require the life of man; and to that end, he did appoint Kings, that
they should ordain Magistrates under them, that whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
by man should his blood be shed. And the reason why God is so severe against
Man-slayers, is here rendered; for that in the Image of God made he man: and so
whosoever kills a man, except it be whom the Law kills, destroys the
Image of God; and God cannot endure to have his own lively Image, which no
painter, but Himself has made, to be defaced. And therefore, in Numbers,
35.31. the Lord says, Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
Murderer, which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death. And
the reason is rendered verse 33. And truly I do not find any sius, I will not
say, that are irremissible, but that are so difficult, so hard, and so seldom
remitted, as these two, Videlicet 1. The abuse of God's Messengers: and 2. The
shedding of Innocent blood; For,


Of the first it is said, that when the Jews mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, 2 Chro. 36.16.
the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, until there was no remedy.

Of the second it is said, 2 Kings 24.4.
that the Lord sent Bands of the Chaldees to revenge the Innocent blood that
Manasses had shed, which the Lord would not pardon.

Also, when God gave his Laws unto us on Mount Sinai, the first Commandment, of
all that does concern men, after the duty that we owe to our Parents, that
bring us into the World, and bring us up, and feed us when we cannot feed our
selves, is, Thou shall not kill. And truly in these respects, I, for my own
part, do so far hate the killing of any man, except it be to save mine own
life, from him that would maliciously take it from me, that I had rather do any
servile work for a penny a day, Greg. and habetur 23. q. 8. si in mortem.
than receive the greatest Salary, Honor, and Preferment, for killing of men.
And I think S. Gregory not far from my mind, when he said, Si in mortem
Longobardorum me miscere voluissem, hodie Longobardorum gens nec regem nec
ducem baberet; sed quia Deum timeo, in mortem cujus^ibe^ hominis me miscere
formido: For he that fears God, will be afraid to be the death of any man,
and will study by all means, -- vacuas caedis habere manus. Ovid. de art l. 1.
to keep his hands clean from blood.

And if it be so unnatural, so unreasonable, so devilish, so beastly, so
heinous, and every way so inexplicable and so detestable in the sight of God,
and all good men, to kill and murder a man; I would fain know, what tongue,
what eloquence, what Orator, though he had the tongue of men and Angels, can
express the haynousness of a subject's killing his own King, and a servant's
killing his own kind and loving Master, as Zimri did his King and his Master
Elah, 2 Samuel 18.3:
and some others did such a King as was worth ten thousand of his subjects? And
therefore, well and wisely might Jezabel demand; Had Zimri peace, that slew his
Master?

But the wit of man is so crafty, that it thinks to find a way to effect his
own end, and yet to evade the hand, and escape the judgment of God, when they
keep their own hands free from blood, but will notwithstanding prosecute the
innocent person whom they hate, either judicially, as the Jews did Christ, by
their high court of Parliament, that pronounced judgment against him, for a
malefactor, which may and ought to be put to death by the Law of God; or else
secretly by others, their assassins, whom they procure to be their instruments,
to bring whom they hate to his untimely death, either by poison, as Alexander
was by Thessalus, and Sir Thomas Overbury by Sir Jervase Eloway; or by some
other secret contrivance, as King David plotted the death of Vrias; and then,
as the Harlot commits Adultery, and wipes her mouth, and is clean; so they will
bring Christ and his servants to their death; and then, with Pilate, they will
wash their hands clean, from their blood.

Truly, methinks these are very fine shifts for murderers and malefactors to
free themselves from blame, if they could as well blind the eyes of the
All-seeing God, as they do many times deceive simple men, that think those
Judges to be just, that have most unjustly beheaded innocence it self; And
those murderers to be innocent, that have killed their neighbors by the hands
of their assassins. But though David's hands were far from that fact, and free
from the blood of Vrias, that was slain by the sword of the enemy; yet God tells
him he was the murderer, and his wit shall not serve his turn, to wipe away his
punishment; and though it was the High Court of Justice that condemned Naboth
unto death, yet the Prophet tells Ahab that God will condemn him and his
posterity for it; for, as the devil (says S. Aug.) is said to be a murderer,
non gladio armatus, non ferro accinctus; sed quia ad hominem veniendo, and
verbum seminando occidit eum; Aug. super Johan.
not because he kills him with weapons, but because he destroys man by
wicked counsels, and by setting on others to dest^oy him; so are they murderers
that take away the life of man by any of these ways; and therefore proculdubio
decipiuntur, says the same Father, they are far deceived that think them only
to be murderers, which lay violent hands upon their neighbors; Idem and
habet^r, de poenit. did. 1. periculose. The hainousness of a judicial murder.
and not them also, per quorum consilium and fraudem and hortationem homines
extinguuntur, by whose wicked counsels and procurements, men are brought unto
their death.

And if any other murder be odious and wicked, The hainousness of a judicial
murder.
then certainly this Judiciarie murder, whereby the innocent person is
condemned to death, as Naboth was by the High Court of Jezreel; and Christ by
the Parliament at Jerusalem, must needs be most transcendently abominable and
wicked above all other kind of murders whatsoever; for that this is not a
single, simple murder, but it is morbus complicatus, a twisted, de-compound,
maltiplied sin, of many-many branches; so that neither Cains malicious killing
of his brother Abel, nor Joabs traitorous murdering of Amasa, nor David's crafty
killing of Vrias, nor Brutus and Cassius his conspiring the death of Caesar,
nor any other kind of murder, is near comparably so heinous, and so abominable
as this, which uno ictu, by one single sentence, does cast an infinite number
of persons into sin, and binds them all together to be liable to the severe
judgment of God; for hereby,

1. In the place.
The Seat of Judgment is made the stool of wick ednesse, the throne of Satan,
and the shambles and slaughterhouse of innocent blood, to do the greatest
wrong, where I should expect the greatest right.

2. The persons, Witnesses, Jury, Judge. Jerem. 5.7.
The persons here offending are many-many persons, the witnesses forsworn and
perjured, the Jury corrupted, and the Judge a devil, that is a liar and a
murderer from the beginning: and does hereby wrong

1. The innocent person that is condemned.

2. The place that is abused.

3. All good people that are scandalized and offended with this unjust
proceeding.

4. All Lightheaded, credulous people, that hold and believe that innocent
condemned person to be a malefactor justly punished; and

5. God himself, that is first cast out of his throne, and the devil placed in
his stead.

2. He is made a liar, to pronounce a false sentence.

3. A murderer, to kill an innocent man, and so lastly a very devil; for he
that does all this, can be none other then the devil; and the Judge stands
here loco Dei, as Gods Vicegerent, in Gods stead; and God himself says, dixi
Dei estis, and commands us to reverence and honor them as Gods; and therefore
this judiciary condemning of the innocent unto death, does as much as lies in
man, make the just God, to seem to be an unjust devil; And it were a less sin
to un-god him, then to make the just God seem to be so unjust a Judge; for, as
Plutarch says, Satius est nullos Deos credere, quam Deos noxios. And may not
God much better say to such offenders, as he does in like case unto the Jews,
only for swearing by them that are no gods; and assembling themselves, in the
har^ots houses: How shall I pardon them for this? As if the heinousness of
this sin of judiciary murder, went beyond the understanding of the omniscient,
and All-knowing God, to find out a way, and the means to pardon it; especially,
if we consider 1. The persons condemned. For 2. The Courts condemning them. For


1. The more considerable, eminent, and excellent, the person condemned is, in
respect of his calling, as are Kings, Priests, and Prophets; and the more
innocent, upright, and religious he is in respect of his life and conversation,
the more odious, and the more abominable is the sin.

2. The more eminent and high the Court is that condemns the innocent, the
more transcendent is the offense. And

You may more that this Judicial murder may be done, either 1. By an inferior
Court of Justice, as the Judges of Jezreel condemned Naboth. 2. By the High
Court of Justice, the highest Court of the kingdom, and the Synopsis of the
whole Nation; as Christ was by the Sanhedrim of the Jews.


And I cannot remember in all the book of God, of any that were thus
judiciarily condemned, but only two.

1. The subject Naboth, by the personal procurement and command of his King,
Ahab; and

2. The King Christ Jesus, by his subjects, and the National malice of the
Jews. And what became of these murderers? how did God pardon them? Elias
tells Ahab the King, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth,
shall dogs lick thy blood, and the blood of Jezabel; and God will bring evil
upon thee, and will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him
that pisseth against the wall; and him that is shut up, and left in Israel: and
so Jehu caused the Rulers of Jezreel, the same town, and perhaps the same
Judges, that condemned Naboth, to cut off the heads of 70. of Ahabs children;
and when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab, until he had
destroyed him, according to the saying of the Lord. And how the Jews have been
destroyed by Titus, and afterward by Adrian, and ever since persecuted and
plagued in all Countries, and by all Nations for killing their King, the time
would be too short, and my papers too scant for me, to relate.

And therefore if any King or Kingdom, Nation or City, be guilty of such a
judiciarie murder, as was the subject Naboth, or the King Christ Jesus; Let
them assure themselves, the heavy wrath of God, like a thick cloud, hangs over
their heads, and is ready to pour down most terrible showrs of vengeance upon
them, if they do not most speedily repent: as I shall by and by more fully show
unto you.

But whether Zimri did kill his Master with his own hands, But we are sure
Zimri did not judicially condemn Elab to death, yet he had no peace^ and what
peace shall they have which shall judicially condemn an innocent person unto
death? which is so compounded a murder, and far more abominable then any other
sin: 1 King 16.29. Acts 25.16.
or by some others of his confederates, (for it is said that he conspired, and
so plotted, with other companions against him) or whether he alone did murder
him, I cannot tell: but because he was the primum mobile, the first and chief
setter on of this murder, it is here only ascribed unto him.

But before we do absolutely condemn Zimri for Elah's death, we ought to hear
what he can say for himself, and not as some Judges, that will hear no reason,
but condemn the innocent against all reason: for as it was not the manner of
them to deliver any man to die, before that he which is accused have license to
answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him; so, it may be, Zimri
will show some good reason, why he killed his Master. And I doubt not but he
had learnt Absolons lesson, that it was for the ill government of Elah, and
propter bonum Reipublicae, for the good of the people, that they might be
better governed, and much eased of many burdens, and relieved of their
grievances; To which, I say, that you must understand all Traitors and wicked
actors to be just like unto Watermen, that row one way, and look another way:
so they pretend one thing, and intend another thing; Thus Zimri pretended to
amend the Government to ease the people, to reform the Laws, and rectify their
Religion; but his intention and his chiefest aim was, to make himself great,
to get his Masters place, and to become a King himself, which was first in his
intention, though last in the execution; otherwise, if his principal aim had
been, as he pretended, the public good, he would have turned and changed the
Kingdom of Israel into a Commonwealth, or else he would have made either Omri
or Tibni whom the people loved, and not himself, whom they hated, to be their
King; sed menrita est iniquitas sibi, but wickedesse, though not always, yet
sometimes bewrays it self; as the action of Zimri, to make himself a King,
discovered his prime intention, and the chiefest occasion that moved him to
slay his Master, to be, his Ambition and desire of bearing rule.

And indeed, this Ambition and desire of bearing rule, has so strangely
bewitched the minds of many men; Camer. l. 5. c. 8.
that, as Camerarius says, it is almost incredible to believe, and most
strange to consider, what inordinate desire men have to reign, and to rule as
Kings; what villainies they have committed, to become Kings, What horrible
things have been done by those that were ambitious of bearing rule.
and what execrable things they have done, to continue Kings; for Amurath the
third, caused five of his younger brethren to be strangled in his presence; and
Ismael the second, son to Te^mas King of Persia, did put to death so many of
his brethren as he could lay hold on, and all the Princes that he suspected to
have any desire to his Kingdom; that so they might reign and rule without fear.
And Solomon, mistrusting his own son Mustapha, when he returned victorious from
the Persian war, and was received with such general applause, caused him
presently to be strangled, and a Proclamation to be made throughout all the
Army, that there must be but one God in heaven, and one Emperor (i.e.)
Himself, here on earth; and Camerarius says, that this is a perpetual custom
in the race of the Ottomans, and among the Turkish Souldans, to put all, that
pretend succession, unto death; Neither is it only a Turkish custom, but it is
also the practice of all such as are bewitched with such inordinate desire to
rule as Kings, to do the like; For Plutarch writes that Diotarus having many
sons, and desirous that only one of them should reign, slew all the rest with
his own hands; and Justin says that Horodes King of the Parthians, killed his
own Father, and after that massacred all his brethren, that he might reign and
rule alone; and the sacred story shows, that the very people of God, the sons
of Israel, were not free, but pestered with this disease, Judges 9.
as Abimeleck, the son of Gedeon, slew seventy of his brethren in one day, and
played many other tragical parts, that he might make himself a King. 2 Samuel
15.16.
And the furious ambition of young Absolon, did set him on fire to seek to end
his Fathers days, and to play the Parracide, that he might reign in his
Fathers place; and so Zimri, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his
throne, he delayed not the time, but presently slew all the house of Baasha, 2
King. 16.11.
as Baasha had formerly done to all the posterity of Jeroboam; he left him not
one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his friends.
And not to go from home for Examples, Did not Henry the fourth put by Richard
the second his own King, and Cosen-German, that he himself might be the King?
and did not Richard the 3d. cause the true King and his brothers chidren, his
own Nephews, the sons of Edward the fourth, that were but children, and never
offended him, to be done to death, that he might wear the Crown himself? And
my papers would fail me, if I should set down all the examples, that I could
produce of this nature; for there is not any thing so sacred, which the great
men of this world, that desire to be made greater, will not dare to violate,
and spare neither King, father, brether, nor friend, to bring themselves to
their desired advancement, to be the rulers of the people, and to have the
power both of our lives and goods in their own hands: as the proof is plainly
seen in the foresaid examples, and especially in Antoninus Caracalla, who, when
he had most unnaturally and barbarously slain his own brother Geta, even in his
mothers lap, and between her arms; and being counseled by some friends, to
Canonize him among the Heroes, and to place him with the Deastri, to mitigate
the thought of so execrable a fact; answered like a vile Caitiffe, Sit divus,
modo non sit vivus, Let him be a god among the dead, so he be not alive among
men; So great an enemy is the inordinate desire of reigning and ruling, to all
piety and right; says Camerarius, l. 5. c. 8.

And for Zimri's pretense, to rectify the government, to ease the people, to
establish the true service of God, which King Elah, and his Father Baasha had
permitted to be continued, as Jeroboam had corrupted it, and to fulfill the
Words of the Lord, which he spoke by Jehu the son of Hanani: 1 King. 16.2.
I say these things were least in his thoughts, and were but mere pretenses and
shadows, to hide and cover his malice unto his King, and his ambitious desire
of bearing rule; for he being a subject and a servant unto King Elah, what
warrant had he, or what command from God, to kill his King? Jeroboam was the
master piece of Idolatry, and the ringleader of them that made Israel to sin;
and yet, I would fain know, where God gives leave to his subjects to kill him,
for this intolerable impiety? But when God sets up Kings, if they prove
wicked, to corrupt his service, and to destroy his servants: he can raise other
Kings to punish them; as he did Pharaoh King of Egypt; and Nebuchadnezzar, King
of Babylon, to chastise and to remove the evil Kings of Judah; or he can take
them away by death, or by twenty other ways, that we know not of, without
making their own subjects to become perjurers, and rebels against their King;
but ambition and impatience are the two hands, that pull down Kings out of
their Thrones.

1. Impatience in the subjects, that can not tarry Gods leisure to relieve them.

2. Ambition in those, that desire the Crown, and are bewitched with the
inordinate desire of bearing rule.

Other things are but pretenses; these only are the causes, that move subjects
and servants to kill their Kings, whom they think do misgovern them, or
Tyrannize over them.

2. Having seen the hatred and malice of Zimri toward Elah, The second thing
meant oned, which is, Peace.
his Treason against his King, his ingratitude to his Master, and his most
horrible sin of Murder, in slaying his King and his Master. We are now come to
the (...), and the second thing, mentioned in this speech of Jezabel, and that
is, Peace, Had Zimri peace? which is a question, what reward he had, or rather
what punishment he suffered, for that tragical exploit to kill his Master? Had
he peace for his pains? And peace, as I told you is the best, and the most
excellent of all earthly blessings; and it is called by the Greeks (...), which
signifies quiet, sweet, gracious; and by the Latins pax, quasi pacata, (i.e.)
calm, gentle, courteous; for so the Apostle means, when he says, that Rahab
received the Spies with peace; that is, courteously. Heb. 11.31.


But you must understand, that this blessed peace is two fold; 1. Perfect. And
Peace two fold.
2. Imperfect.
And

1. The perfect peace is not here to be found on earth, Perfect.
but among the blessed Saints in Heaven, where is pax super pacem, Perm. Sermon.
23. de verb. Psalm.
and pax quae exsuperat omnem sensum, Peace upon peace, and peace which passes
all understanding, peace that shall have no end; but will put an end to all our
labors. And this peace was not meant here by Jezabel, she knew not what
belongs to this peace.

2. The other peace, which Jezabol means, Imperfect and this is threefold.
is that which may be obtained here on earth; and that peace is three fold, 1.
With God. 2. With our selves. 3. With our neighbors.


The first peace is with God; for our Forefather sinning against God, With God.
and eating the sower grapes, has set all our teeth on edge, Esaias 1.24.
and made us all enemies unto God, as the Apostle shows; and God says, He
will be avenged of his enemies: and therefore there is no way for us to be
delivered out of his hands, unless we be reconciled, to be at peace with him;
And at peace with God we cannot be, but by faith in Jesus Christ, who became
peace, to them that were a far off, Ephesians. 2.17.
and to them that were near, (i. e.) both to the Jews and to the Gentiles, as
S. Jerome expounds it.

The second peace is with our selves; With our selves.
for after we became enemies unto God, posuit nos nobis ipsis graves, God did
not only arm all his creatures against us, but he has set enmity within our
selves, and raises such rebellions, wars, and troubles in our own thoughts and
consciences that we can never be at rest, until we find our selves at peace
with God; but when we believe, that our peace is made with God, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, who has paid our debts, and satisfied God for our fins, then
our minds are quieted, and our consciences are at peace; and, as our Savior
says, let not your hearts be troubled, neither fear, for I have overcome the
world; so nothing in the world, troubles them, that believe; they are at peace
with God.

The third peace is with men, With our neighbors.
that are without us, and are our neighbors; for sin has set all the world
together by the ears, Non hospes ab hospite tutus -- But they that are at peace
with God, do obey the precepts and counsel of God, to follow peace with all
men, and to do good to all men; and these be the three kinds of peace, that are
had in this life, and are the greatest blessings in this world.

And this last kind of peace, ( i. e.) peace and concord among men, which is
the more general and the more sensible then the other kinds of peace; was ever
esteemed both of the Jews and Gentiles to be the greatest happiness that men
can enjoy under heaven; Et quia contraria juxta so posita magis elucescunt, As
the horror of the night, commends the brightness of the day; so the miseries of
war do show the benefits of this peace: I will make this point plain unto you.

And war is called by the Greeks (...) of (...) and (...), because of the
abundance of blood that is shed in war; and by Divines it is termed flagellum
Dei, the scourge of God; and God has many scourges, as poverty, sickness,
imprisonment, but especially these three Grand Scourges, 1. Three special
scourges of God.
Famine, 2. Pestilence, 3. Sword.
Whereof war is the worst of all, comprehends them all, and brings them all
upon us, and therefore Homer says, (...)
(...)
He is an unsociable and a most wicked man, that will bring war, which is the
most deadly thing unto the people; for then, as Virgil says, -- Non ullus
aratro
Dignus honor, --


There is no regard of husbandy. Sed multae scelerum facies --
Et curvaerigidum falces conflantur in ensem.
And as Tibullus says, The plow Shares are turned to Swords, Tunc caedes
hominum generi, tunc praelia natae,
Tunc breviter dirae mortis aperta via est.
And you see how in the time of war, the poor infants, that never offended, do
perish upon their mothers breasts, and many times in the womb, before they see
the light; the goodly houses, the stately Palaces, the pleasant gardens, that
are like paradises, the fruitful trees that have been some hundreds of years,
before they came to this perfection, are all burnt, destroyed, and demolished
in a moment; the poor are starved in the streets, the fruitful land is become
a wilderness; and, as Learned Vives, writing to King Henry the eighth, says,
No Commonwealth, is more unstable, then that which is most exercised with war,
as we see how often the Athenians came to their last gasp, when as, a Persis
exustae, a Lacedemoniis oppressae, a Philippo fractae, ab altero Philippo
afflictae, a Mithridate occisae and a Sylla propedum deletae; And warlike Rome
was taken by Tatius, besieged by Porsenna, burnt by the Gauls, terrified by
Pyrrhus, shaken by Hanniball, and at last torn in pieces by her own weapons.

And the like lamentable events have happened to this our own Kingdom, in the
time of the Barons war, and that civil dissension betwixt the two houses of
York and Lancaster, wherein were slain, as Daniel sets down. And now lately in
our own days, we have seen the sad effects thereof.

And these things do sufficiently show what a bl^ssed thing is peace and
concord among men, when, as the Poet says, Omnia pace vigent and pacis tempore
florent. And Xenophon says, (...); peace is the greatest good that can happen
unto men, and war the greatest evil; and Ignatius says, (...): nothing in this
world is better then peace; because, as Salust says, Pace minima crescunt;
bello, maxima dilabuntur, the least things do prosper in peace, and the best
and greatest things perish in war. And therefore the Jews, before all other
things, wished peace; and it was their salutation, Pax vobis; so Christ himself
u^ed it, and left it as his last Legacy unto his Church: so S. Paul in every
Epistle, wishes peace to them he writes unto; and so did our Church
continually pray, Give peace in our time, O Lord, until the Devil destroyed
the same by war; And our fanatic Sectaries began to deprave our Pious
Liturgy, and to trample the same under feet; How thankful therefore ought we
be to God for sending our King, that brought us peace, and that so peaceably
without shedding a drop of blood? And so you see the kinds, and the excellent
benefits of each kind of peace.

Now Jezabel would fain know of Jehu, what he thought of Zimri, 1 Murderers and
wicked transgressors can have no peace with God.
that slew his King, and his Master, whether he had all, or any one of these
kinds of peace; had he peace with God, had he peace with himself, or had he
peace with his neighbors? And her belief was, that he had neither of those
kinds of peace; Et qui tacet consentire videtur; and Jehu, by his silence,
seems to consent unto her, for he answers never a word to her demand; But the
Prophet Esaias gives a full resolution to her question from the mouth of God,
There is no peace to the wicked, says my God; and his God, was no lyeing God,
none of the gods of the Gentiles, that by their oracles gave, either lying
answers or doubtful resolutions unto their Prophets, Esaias. 48 22. and 57.21.
such as the demandants could not tell what to make of them, as the oracle of
Apollo did to Croesus and to the Lacedaemonians when they sent unto it; But his
God was the God of truth, and even truth it self; and therefore we may believe
it, that there is no peace to the wicked; that is, no kind of peace, neither
peace with God, nor peace with men, nor peace with themselves. And Jezabel had
sufficiently, and clearly, and unanswerably proved Zimri to be (...),
transcendently wicked, because he had killed his King, that was his Master: and
therefore Zimri could not possibly come to have any peace, or any kind of
peace; but he must need be in a most wretched case and lamentable condition, to
have a perpetual war with God, with men, and with himself. And therefore well
might he cry out with Aeneas, -- O terque quaterque beati,
Queis ante or a patrum contigit oppetere; For


1. 1 Cor. 10.22.
We may, with the words of the Apostle, ask of Zimri, Is be stronger than God?
And he may remember how soon the Lord destroyed those hundred-handed Giants,
that, as the Poets faign, threw the Thessalian Mountains, Olympus, Pelion, and
Ossa, one upon another, that they might skale the walls of Heaven. Or who did
ever strive with God, and did prevail? for He, and He alone, is properly said
to be the Lord of Hosts; that has both 1. A Celestial; and Army: and so, 2. A
Terrestrial Army: and so,


1. God has his Celestial Army. Genesis 7.19.
By his Airy-Souldiers he destroyed the old World, when he opened the windows
of Heaven, and rained 40. days and 40. nights upon them, until the waters had
swept all the enemies of God away. So, He destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with
fire and brimstone, and the Amorites with hailstones; and the very Stars in
their order, Chap. 19.24. Josh. 10.11. Judge. 5.20.
did fight against Sisera. And besides, the glorious Angels are not only
instruments of Gods mercies toward the godly, but they are also the
executioners of his justice against the wicked: and therefore an Angel slew all
the firstborn of Egypt, Exodus 12.29. 2 Kings 19 35.
and slew an hundred eighty and five thousand, in the Host of Senacherib. And
at the last Day, the Angels shall gather the wicked, and bind them up like
faggots, for everlasting fire. And

2. God has his Terrestrial Army.
God has his Terrestrial Army: as, the Sea drowned Pharaoh, and the earth
covered Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; yea, the frogs, flies, lice, and rats, will
fight for God, and destroy the wicked; as Antiochus and Herod, were eaten up
with worms; Munster, in his Cosmogr. anno 940.
and Hatto, Bishop of Mentz, was still fo^lowed till he was devoured of rats.
And, as Debora says, Those creatures are accursed that fight not with the Lord
against the wicked.

What think you then will be the end, and the success of this War with God? It
must needs be most lamentable to the wicked; for God is a consuming fire, and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the bands of the living God; if his wrath be
kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him;
and w^ be to them that offend him.

When as we find, how he destroyed some with thunderbolts, and lightning, as
the Emperor Carus: others with fire from Heaven, as the two Captains with
their fifties in the time of Elias; 2 Kings 1.10, and 12.
and never any malefactor escaped out of his hands; but when the Magistrate,
that should revenge the innocent blood, neglects the same, He will execute
vengeance with his own hands; as it is observed in the History of France, that
since the year of Christ, 1560. of a hundred murderers, that escaped punishment
from the hands of men, not ten of them escaped the revenging hand of God: As
you may read it in the Theater of Gods Judgments. Mr. Beard p. 288. 2.
King-killers, and murderers can have no peace


2. As the wicked, especially the blood-thirsty murderers, have no peace with
God, so they can have no peace, but a continual War, and a perpetual fighting
and slaughter among men; Nam ut mali semper persecuti sunt bones, it a and boni
semper persecuti sunt malos: hi per justam disciplinam, illi per injustam
superbiam; and he that, like Ismael, will have his hand against every man,
shall have every man's hand against him. Therefore Zimri, after he had become a
Traitor to his King, and had slain his Master, was so prosecuted by the true
and honest subjects of King Elah, and so straightly besieged in Tyrza, that he
burnt the Royal Palace, and himself therein; for the justice of God does
require, that as he gave the Law, so he should have his Law observed, i.e. That
he which sheddeth man's blood, should have his blood shed by man. For the fuller
clearing of which point, I pray you look what the Lord says in Numbers 35.31.
and the reason that is rendered verse 33. for that blood defiles the Land. And
I might here make you a whole Volume, to set forth the declaration of the just
judgment of God upon such Traitors and Transgressors of this Law, as Zimri
was, both of former times, and of these later years: And

You know what the Law says, An eye for an eye, tooth for tooth, Exodus 2.23,
24. Math. 7.2.
life for life. And you hear how the Prophets threaten, that spoilers shall be
sp^iled: and that our Savior says, With what measure you mete, it shall be
measured to you again. And that the Holy Ghost says, He that leads into
captivity, shall go into captivity, and he that kills with the sword, shall
die by the sword; which is lex talionis, the law of retaliation, and is the
justest law in the World; and said to be the justice which the Poetsfaign
Radamanthus executes in Hell, by punishing every offender according to his
demerit. And Adonibezec said, As I have done, so God has requited me, Judge.
1.6, 7.
and has executed the very same punishment upon me, as I had done upon others.
And Justin writes, that Gryphus King of Egypt, had a poisoned cup offered him
by his own Mother, who formerly had betrayed Demetrius into the hands of his
enemies, and had caused one of her own sons to be killed, that she her self
might reign; but Gryphus being forewarned of the mischief, caused her to drink
that potion, which she had brewed for him. And Benzo reports of Attibalipa, a
mighty King of Peru, how the Spaniards having taken him prisoner, and agreed
with him, that for two millions of Gold he should be ransomed; yet after the
receipt of the Gold, did most perfidiously put him to death: but it so fell
out, says mine Author, Berzo in his History of the New World. l. 3. c. 5.
that by the just judgment of God, all they that were consenting to his death,
came to a most wretched and a miserable end.

So Aelian sets down, how Archelaus, King of Macedon, had a Minion named
Cratenas, Elian l. 1. that affecting the Kingdom, murdered his Master; but not
many days after, he was betrayed and murdered himself. And Melancthon shows,
how Arius Axer slew Numerianus, M^lancthon Chron. l. 3.
that he mi^ht attain unto the Empire; but the Praetorian Soldiers,
understanding the matter, rejected Axer, and chose Dioclesian for their
Emperor, that laid hold of Axer, and put him to death, as he well deserved,
for his disloyalty. And further, the same Melancthon shows, how young
Gordian, the Emperor, was teacherously slain by Philip Arabs, whom Gordian had
promoted to great honor; but the justice of God served him with the same
sauce, when his own Soldiers conspired against him, and Decius caused him to
be slain. So Domitian was killed by Stephan, that was the Steward of his house,
and he was slain for his pains in the time of Nerva. Casaubon animadver: in
S^eton. l.
And the Learned Casaubon has observed, that Brutus and Cassius, and all the
rest of the Conspirators against Julius Caesar, were never free from War, but
still followed by Angustus and Antonius, until they slew themselves, with the
same Paniards wherewith they had stabbed Caesar.

But to what end should I tell you of any more such Stories out of profane
Authors, that are so full of the like examples? when the boly Scripture does
sufficiently testify, by the examples that are therein set down, that such
murderers of their Lords and Masters, never had any peace among men; but were
still molested with wars, hatred, and troubles, until they were destroyed. For
Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad, the son of Shomer, that slew their
King, 2 Kings 12.23. Chap. 14.5. And I think he did very well in it, as I would
have done. 2 Kings 15.14. 2 Kings 15.30.
and their Master Joash, were so bated by the people, that the Kingdom was
confirmed to Amazia, that slew these murderers, who had slain his father. So
Shallum, the Son of Jabesh slew his King Zacharia, and reigned in his stead;
but he was therefore himself slain by Menahem the son of Gadi, within one
month after he had slain his Master. So Peka the son of Remalia, conspired
against his King and his Master Pekahiah the son of Menahem, and slew him: and
Hoshea, the son of Ela, made a conspiracy against him, and slew him, even as he
had killed his King; which verified the old Proverb, 2 Kings 21.23, 24.
Proditoris proditor, He became a Traitor of a Traitor. So the servants of King
Amon, that slew their Master, the Lord stirred up the people of the Land to
revenge his death, and to kill all them that had conspired against their King,
i.e. the common people. And so bear, to name no more, Zimri, that slew his King
and his Master, that was a Drunkard, has no rest, nor peace, but is begirt and
brought to that extremity, as to throw himself into the fire to be burned; a
very just, but a very fearful death.

And therefore, let no Zimri, nor any that are of Zimri's mind, Kingkillers and
the Murderers of their Masters, ever think, that they can have either peace or
rest, or any happiness, but envy, hatred, and wars, or some mischief or other,
to follow them at their heels, until they be destroyed, as they have destroyed
their Masters. For the Scriptures must be fulfilled, that wickedness shall
never prosper, and the murderers of their Kings can have no peace, nor any good
success while they live; for having committed such horrible Facts, they can
have no Associats, Patrons, or Protectors, but such vile Varlets as themselves;
and therefore these they must entertain, and these they must advance and
protect. And remember what King Boco said to the Senate of Rome, What King Boco
said to the people of Rome.
Woe to that Realm, where all are such, as neither the good, among the evil,
nor the evil among the good are known: Woe to that Realm which is an
entertainer of all fools, and a destroyer of all Sages. Woe to that Realm where
the good are fearful to do good, and the evil too bold to do evil. Woe to that
Realm, where the patient are despised, and the seditious are commended. Woe to
that Realm, which destroys those that watch for the good, The Dial of
Princes, page 393.
and crowns those which watch to do evil. Woe to that Realm, where the poor
are suffered to be proud, and the rich tyrants. Woe to that Realm, where all do
know the evil, and no man does follow the good. Woe to that Realm, where so
many evil vices are openly committed, which in another Country dare not
secretly be mentioned. Woe to that Realm, where all think that which is evil,
and all speak that which they think; and finally, where all men do what they
list: in such, and so unfortunate a Realm, where the people are so wicked, let
every good man beware, that he be no inhabitant; for, in a short time, there
must happen there, either the ire of the gods, or the fury of men, to the
depopulation of the good, or the destruction of the bad; when as nothing can
betide the people in such a Kingdom, but Oppressions, and Taxes, murmurings,
distractions, and dissentions, until the fire be kindled among them, to consume
and to destroy one another. But if the personal shedding of the innocent blood
be thus heinous, and so severely punished, what shall we say to National
shedding of such Blood, as was shed in these Kingdoms that was so infinitely
more abominable than the other?

But, as Doctor Turner, when he was terrae filius in the University, said to
his Opponent,

Think thou with terrible words, to terrify terrible Turner? So these
monsters of men, that dare to kill both Kings and their Masters, and then to
suppress the good, and to advance the wicked, to silence the wise, and to
magnify fools, will say, these things are but shadows and bug-bears to
frighten Babes, and poor-spirited men, that have neither the courage of
Heroicks, nor the knowledge of Scriptures; for they can tell us well enough,
that although some King-killers have been punished like Zimri, for slaying
their Masters, yet a particulari non est syllogizari, we must not conclude a
General Rule from particular examples; for Baasha slew his King and his Master
Nadab, and yet he reigned 24. years, and died peaceably in his bed. And Jehu
killed Joram, his King and his Master, and yet he reigned 28. years, and
prospered, and died peaceably in his bed: And Menahem slew Shallum his King,
and reigned 10. years, and died peaceably in his bed; and so did many more that
are recorded in profane Authors; and the ambitious hunters after Kingdoms
persuade themselves that they may speed with the best, and not perish with the
worst fortune.

And so likewise those Commonwealths and Kingdoms that have killed their
Kings, which they conceived to be wicked, In the third speech at the Conference
of Parliament. page 15. Eutrop. l. 1.
did not only escape free from punishment, but were prosperous, and had good
success, and were the instruments of much good unto the people. As it fared
with the Senate of Rome, which as Halicar. l. 1. says, killed and cut in
pieces their King Romulus; and afterward expelled Tarquin, and judicially
sentenced N^ro to death, as some do write; (and is the only sentence for
death, that I have read in any history; though, for deprivation, not so;) which
sentence notwithstanding was never executed; yet was it decreed, and, as those
and the like Senators do allege, the Commonwealth prospered after it.

I answer, that una hirundo non facit ver, and though Balaams ass once spoke,
shall we think that all other asses shall be able to speak? So one or two
examples in particular, are of no force in the general: but the truth is, that
G^ds judgments are unsearchable, his ways are in the Seas, his paths in the
great waters, and his footsteps are not known; yet this we may know for
certain, that although a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolong his
days, yet it shall be well with them that fear the Lord; but it shall not be
well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, but be shall be like
a shadow, because he fears not before God; and so the Prophet David
testifies at large, and Job did the like before him. And we may know also,
that although Jehu and some others, that had special Commissions from God, to
fulfill his will, prospered, and escaped the hand of judgment, for their zeal
to Gods service, and their repentance for their transgression; Psalm. 37.9.10.
yet is it a most certam truth, that murderers, King-killers, and all other
like wicked malefactors, shall never escape unpunished; and yet God does not
always punish them in like manner: Either in respect 1. Of the time, or Either
in respect 2. Of the punishment, or Either in respect 3. Of the persons, -- for


1. In respect of the time, he reserveth the punishment of some, though they be
never so wicked, for the next life, and suffers them to prosper all their
days in this world, as he did the rich glutton, what evil soever he did; and
this both holy Job, and the good King David, do sufficiently prove; and
examples enough might be produced of most wicked tyrants, and murderers, and
the like malefactors that escaped the hand of God in this life; but how they
escaped the next, I cannot tell, themselves by this time know; and this future
punishment, is the heaviest punishment in the world, and the prosperity of such
malefactors, is the worst, and the unhappiest prosperity that can be.

Others he punishes in this life; and yet those, not all alike, in respect of
the time of their punishment; but some presently, as Achan, Cosbi, Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram; Nadah and Abihu, Ananias and Saphira, and the like; others
have some time given them, to see if in that time they will confess their
sins, repent them of their wickedness, amend their lives, and make
satisfaction to the parties wronged; Zimri 7. days.
so Zimri, had 7. days given him before he was punished. Shallum that slew
Zacharia, had one month given him. Otho that caused Galba to be slain, had
leave to reign four months before he suffered for his murder; Otho 4. months.
Vitel. 8. mon. Phil. Arabs 5. years. Decius 2. years. Niceph. l. 18. c 58.
Phocas 8. years. 2 Kings. 15. Peka 20. years.
and Vitellius that was the destruction of Otho, had 8 months before Vespasian
brought him to death; Philip Arabs that slew young Gordian, had 5. years given
him, before Decius revenged the death of Gordian; and Decius that was the death
of Philip reigned 2. years, before he was punished for the death of Philip:
Phocas had 8. years after he killed his Master Mauricius, before he had his
punishment; and Peka reigned 2. years after he killed Pekahiah, before Hoshea
revenged the death of Pekahiah; so the Prophet tells the Nintvites they should
have 40. days, before they should be destroyed; the children of Israel 40.
years in the wilderness; and Jerusalem was not destroyed in 40 years after they
had crucified Christ; the Son bearing with them just so long as his Father bore
with them in the wilderness; the old world had 120 years given them to repent,
before they were destroyed; and the wickedness of the Amorites remained
well-nigh 400. years before it was revenged, having continued from the wandering
of the Israelites in the wilderness, even till the days of King Saul.

And therefore let no man wonder, that we see not adulteries, oppressions and
murders presently punished; neither should we think, that because they prosper,
bear rule, and reign in a flourishing stare for some years, they shall
therefore flourish for ever, and never be punished; because the Lord is flow to
anger, and comes to punish on leaden feet, using much patience toward the
most wicked reprobates; to see, if his long sufferance can lead them to
repentance. But if they be such as the wise man speaks of, that, Because
sentence against an evil work [treason, Eccles. 8.11.
or murder, or the like] is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the
sons of men is fully set in them to do evil; Te peccare sinit, siquidem divina
potestas Temporis ad spatium parcit quandoque nocenti: Sed gravius tandem
tormentum rector Olympi Injungit, torquetque magis delicta nocentum. Obadiah v.
15.16. Exodus 1.22. and 15.5.
then will God recompense the slownesse of his coming with severity of
vengeance, and smite then home with iron-hands: for this law is irrevocably
enacted in heaven, that murders, adulteries, oppressions, perjuries, and other
such wickednesses, shall not always prosper, but shall undoubtedly be punished,
though the times and the manner, are not by us to be known.

2. For the punishment of malefactors, it is

1. Sometimes (...), and they shall suffer the same strokes, and receive the
same measure as they have measured unto others: As thou have done, it shall it
be done unto thee. Even as Pharaoh drowned all the malechildren of the
Israelits in the waters of Nilus; so was He, and all his Host drowned in the
red Sea; and as the sword of Agag had made many women childless; so did the
sword of Samuel make Agags mother childless among women; and as all the
foresaid examples, that have proved Traitors, and have killed their Kings, have
been killed themselves, just as the Lord had said, Whosoever sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed.

2. Sometimes (...), they shall suffer some punishment, that shall be somewhat
like to the sin, 2 Chronicles. 12.5.
that they have committed; for so the Lord says, You have forsaken me, and
therefore I have also left you, and so it happened to Solomon, that, as he
divided Gods service betwixt God and the Idols, so God divided his Kingdom
betwixt Rehoboam his son, and Jeroboam his servant.

And this likeness of the punishment has a reference, sometimes 1. To the
Subject, 2. To the Place, 3. To the Time, of our sinning; for


1. 1 Kings c. 11. etc. 12.
As Adam sinned in eating the forbidden fruit, so his punishment shall be, to
eat the fruit of the ground, in the sweat of his face: and Hezechias for
showing his Treasure, was punished with the loss of his treasure: 2 King 20.
as many other men, for being proud of their wealth, do lose their wealth, some
one way and some another.

2. The Lord says, that, 2 In respect of the place. 1 King. 21.20.
In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine; which came to pass accordingly, you may see in 1 King. 22 38.

3. Sometimes the punishment has reference to the time of our sinning, In
respect of the punishment.
as the spies that searched the land of Canaan 40 days, and sinned by their
false report, were punished by wandering in the wilderness 40 years; and it is
observed, that Pompey was killed by Septimius and Achillas, as upon the same
day, wherein, he had formerly triumphed for the spoil of Jerusalem: and the
Jews had their City utterly destroyed by Titus, at the same time of the year,
and, as some think, on the same day of the month wherein they had crucified our
Savior Christ.

3. In respect of the persons sinning and punished, we are to observe, The
persons sinning. 2 King. 14.6.
that although the Lord says, The fathers shall not be put to death for the
children, nor the children be put to death for the fathers, but every man shall
be put to death for his own sin, and the soul that sins, that soul shall
die; and God will not have them say, The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge. Yet, it is most certain, that many times,
the wickedness of the fathers is remembered in their posterity; and the
punishment of that wickedness, is oftentimes delated, and after a sort both
deferred, and, in part, transferred, as well to the children, and to the
childrens children of them, that walk in the same steps and follow the same
courses, as their fathers did, and sometimes upon the very innocent Infants, as
upon the wicked fathers, that are murderers, and malefactors themselves.

For so the Lord says, that for the sin of Jeroboam, therefore (behold, and
mark it well) I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.10, 11.
and will cut off from Jeroboam him that pisseth against the wall, and him that
is shut up and left in Israel, and will take away the remnant of the house of
Jeroboam, asa man takes away dung till it be all gone.

And so, Baasha the son of Ahijab smote all the house of Jeroboam, 1 King.
15.29.
he left not to Jeroboam any that breathed, until he had destroyed him, 1
King. 16.3, 4.
according to the Word of the Lord; and the Lord threatens the very same
punishment, and the rooting out of all his posterity to Baasha, 1 King. 16.11,
12.
that killed his King Nadab, and did other evils in the sight of the Lord; and
this, Zimri the servant of Elab, brought to pass according as the Lord had
threatened; and the very like punishment happened to all the posterity of Ahab
even for Naboths murder, and other sins of Ahab; 2 King. 9.9. and c. 10.17.
and too many more murderers and wicked men, that by their sins and desire to
reign, and unjust preferring of their children, have pulled down vengeance upon
themselves, and rooted out all their posterity.

And for Romulus, Tarquinius and Nero, I say neither of them were either good
or honest; and yet the holy Scripture does not allow the killing or sentencing
of them to death; and the proof of the Senat's killing Romulus, or sentencing
Nero to death, is not Authentical; nor the examples by any means to be
followed, when they are so apparently contrary, to the practice and precepts of
the holy Apostles; and the success which followed Neroes death, proved so
lamentable, Corn. Tacit. l. 20. and 21.
as the Tragical butchering of three of their succeeding Emperors, Galba,
Otho, and Vitellius, that had been three most famous Captains, and had done
very worthy exploits for their Country.

And therefore, whosoever thinks by murder and slaughter to usurp another
man's Kingdom, Inheritance, or Possession, and thereby to raise his house, and
to advance his children, as Zimri, Baasha, Shallum, and others thought to do,
or thereby to benefit the Commonwealth, as they pretend to do, he deceives
himself; because this is the only way to bring wars and troubles unto himself,
and to the Commonwealth, and a curse at least, if not a rooting out of his
posterity; while the innocent blood, that he has shed, or caused to be shed,
does continually cry to God for vengeance against him or them that did it: And
so you see that neither Zimri, nor any other killer of his King, and of his
Master, or of any other man, can have any peace, either with God or with men.

3. King-killers and murderers and the like wicked men, can have no peace with
themselves.
The murderer and wicked man can have no peace with himself, nor any rest, or
quietness in his own thoughts and conscience; for, as Lipsius says, Cognatum,
immo innatum, est omni sceleri sceleris supplicium, Sin bears its own
punishment always on his back; they are so inseperably knit together, that the
one cannot be committed, but the other will be inflicted; because, as S.
Augustine says, Jossit Dominus, and ita est, ut animus inordinatus sit sibi
ipsi paena; Lipsius de constantia l. 2. c. 13.
the Lord has ordained it, and it is so, that a wicked disordinate mind,
should be a punishment unto it self; for, as God said unto Cain, so it is with
us; if we do ill, sin lies at the door, that is, the reward of sin, Gen 4.7.
or the punishment due for that sin, is always at hand, like a wild Beast, to
dog us, and to bite us, wheresoever we go; and the conscience of sin,
especially of these bloody sins, bears forth such bitter fruit, as that
nothing in the world can be more grievous, or more miserable to a mortal man;
for, as Menander says, (...), The conscience is as a god to all men, to be a
witness of our debts, a judge of our deeds, and a tormentor of all our
transgressions: and the wise man says, The spirit of a man will bear his
infirmities, that is, all the sad calamities and misfortunes, that may happen
unto him, a brave mind and a Heroic spirit will bear them all; but a wounded
spirit who can bear? For, as the Poet says, Strangulat inclusus dolor, Ovid.
Trist. l. 5.
atque exaestuat intus.

And the Examples that might be brought hereof are infinite, beyond number; I
will name to you but a few. Oedipus that bloody incestuous King of Thebes, is
said to be led to Athens by his daughter Antigona, (i.e.) to be doggd up and
down by his own conscience, and to be buried in the Temple of Erinnys, (i.e.)
to be overwhelmed with sorrows, and perturbations for his lewd forepassed life;
and his wife and mother Jocasta, in like manner, strangled her self, says
Sophocles.

And Procopius writes that Theodoric King of the Goths, after he had most
unjustly put to death Symmachus and Boethius, two noble Senators of Rome; his
own thoughts and conscience did so molest him, that, as he was at Supper, with
many friends about him, and a Fish his head of great bigness, being set on the
table, his imagination conceited, It was the head of Symmachus, that with angry
eyes, grinned upon him, whereby he was so oppressed with fear and trembling,
that he suddenly rose from the table, and could never afterward be comforted;
but his conscience did continually so torment him, that he pined away most
miserably, till he died.

And Polydore Virgil says, Polydor. l. 25.
that Richard the third of this Kingdom, after he had slain his two Nephews,
had the like tormenting conscience, till he was slain by Hen. 7. at Bosworth
Field. And we read that Tiberius, after he had been the death of very many that
he hated, was so vexed with such grievous torments of his wounded spirit, that
he desired all the gods rather to destroy him all at once, then to suffer him
thus to pine away with the continual sting and stripes of a tormented
conscience; wherein the just God dealt with him, as he had done to many others,
to suffer many deaths, before he put them to death, as the subtle Fox was wont
to say; and Nero the monster of men, when he had most unthankfully put to death
his own Master, and Tutor, Seneca; and most unnaturally caused his own natural
Mother to be killed, with many others of the faithful servants of Christ; he
was so grievously vexed in conscience, that he could not be comforted by any
means: but thought in his mind, that he did always see his Mothers Ghost,
still crying for vengeance against him.

And to pass over those infinite examples that might be produced of this kind;
I will only allege that one of Apollodorus the Tyrant, who dreamed, that he
was flayed by the Scythians, and that his heart, thrown by them into a boiling
Caldron, should say unto him, I am the cause of all this thy miseries my self;
so the heart and conscience of every malefactor, especially the shedders of
innocent blood, will perpetually tell them, where they are, and what they must
expect; and howsoever, they may put on a seeming countenance of peace, and a
quiet mind of no disturbance, yet indeed, they are but like the glowworm, that
in a dark night, makes a fiery show, but being pressed, you shall find nothing in
him, but cold moisture; for the worm of conscience, does always gnaw their
wretched souls within them, when their faces seem to smile without.

But, it may be, some will object that, all sinners have not such unquiet
minds, and all murderers and King-killers have not, as we see, wounded spirits.

I answer, that some indeed are of such brazen faces, that they can laugh their
sins out of countenance, and smile, with the fool, when they go to the gallows;
but lassure my self, their hearts bleed, when their faces counterfeit smiles,
and they are like Dives, that saw Lazarus a far off in Abraham's bosom, but was
himself tormented in Hell; for the heart and soul may be sorrowful, when the
face and countenance may seem cheerful. And it is a thousand to one but it is
so with all murderers, and the like heinous transgressors; for that it is
unpossible, that such men should ever want furies, so long as they have
themselves: or if they could find a way, to run away from themselves, and to
cause their souls to forsake their bodies, as Saul, Zimri, Achitophel, and
Judas did; yet their consciences will not fly away from their souls, nor their
sins from their consciences; but let a murderer, King-killer, or Master-killer,
or any other man-killer; fly, ab agro in ^ivitatem, a publico ad domum, a domo
in cubiculum, from the field into the City, from the City into his house, and
from the house into his bed, and thence like those impatient fishes, that leap
out of the frying pan into the fire; from the private hell of their own
breasts, into the public hell of damned souls; yet, Ecce hostem inveniet a quo
confugerat, behold, there he shall find the enemy, whom he feared, that is, a
tormenting conscience, joined to the burning flame, for their worm dies not,
says our Savior.

Or if, it may be, that this Vermis Conscientiae, this tormenting spirit, and
wounds of conscience, do not vex and affright these wicked men; then must you
remember that, as Saint Bernard says, there are four kinds of consciences, 1.
A good, but not a quiet, 2. Both a good, and a quiet, 3. A quiet, but not a
good, 4. Neither a good, nor a quiet, Conscience.


But of these, I shall further speak, in the next Treatise.

So you see the resolution of Jezabels question; Had Zimri peace? And what
application will you make of it? but to demand, Shall they have peace, that
have most butcherly massacred their brethren? and especially they that have
most maliciously, and in the highest degree of wickedness, judiciall^ murdered
the best of all Christian Princes, and their own most just and pious King? or
shall we suffer them to jet up and down in pride, and pardon those shedders of
innocent blood, whom the Lord will not pardon? That I should delight in any
man's blood, God forbid. Yet; If there be any Zimri living still in peace,
either by the favor of friends, or the ignorance of his fact, I say, Nunquam
sera est ad justitiam via: And, as Saint Ambrose said to Theodos. in a case of
blood also; Quod inconsulto factum est, consultius revocetur, If any thing be
done inconsiderately, let us more advisedly amend it; and it is no
disparagement to us: quia secundae cogitationes sunt saniores. And if you
desire peace, let Justice be done, and Judgment be executed; and then you
shall have peace, because righteousness and peace have kissed each other, or
otherwise, where righteousness is not, but unrighteous men flourishing, and
the transgressors walking still in pride, and unjustly detaining what they
have most unjustly possessed; we may preach of mercy and pardon, and of charity
and peace, but I fear that peace will not long continue, if Justice and
Judgment go not along with it, because there is no peace to the wicked, says
our God; and the cry of the oppressed still calls for vengeance against them,
but righteousness exalts a Nation, and just judgments do prevent and
preserve us from the judgments of God.

THE THIRD TREATISE.
Esaias 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God:


In which words you may Observe 1. A Proclamation. 2. The Proclaimer.


WE do read that Aristotle (the Schoolmaster of Alexander the Great, and the
Prince of Philosophers, The Proclamation.
so much admired for his Logical wit) has been characterized by Scholars, in
three especial Epithites, as

1. That he was (...). a lover of Vniversalities, and to deal in Generals. 3
Excellent properties in Aristot^es


2. That he was (...), a great lover of Method.

3. That he was (...), a subtle searcher out of causes.

And these three exquisite points, we find here expressed in this short
sentence of our Prophet; for

1. The Proclamation is general, No peace, to no wicked man, in no place, at no
time.

2. Here is the Cause of it fully and plainly expressed, the wickedness of men.

3. The Method is clear without ambiguity; There is no peace to the wicked,
says my God.

First then I say, the Proclamation is general, and therefore more grievous;
The generality of the Proclamation:
for you must understand that there is, 1. Nulla pax, no peace. 2. Nullo loco,
in no place. 3. Nullo tempore, at no time. 4. Nulli impio, to no wicked man.


And Peace is the most excellent of all earthly blessings; so the Jews
thought; and so the Fathers of the Church have ever taught; for, as the Poet
says, Omnia pace vigent, and pacis tempore florent.

And therefore Virgil says, Pacem nos poscimus omnes.

And yet the Lord says, There is no peace to the wicked; no peace, or not any
kind of peace; for we do read of a threefold peace, whereof each one is
exceeding good, and is desired by all, but not one of them is obtained by the
wicked: Peace is threefold.
as, 1. Peace with men. For 2. Peace with God. For 3. Peace with our selves. For


1 Wicked men are neither Peacemakers, The wicked have no peace with men Math.
5.9.
nor Peace-takers: Our Savior says, Blessed are the Peacemakers; but wicked
men are so far from making peace, and reconciling neighbors, that they are
rather like a pair of bellows, to blow the coals of contention, and to set them
further together by the ears; and if any be at odds with them, then, as the
Prophet says, when we speak unto them of peace, they make themselves ready to
battle; and, as it was with King Charles, and some others, the more he sought
and labored for peace, and accommodation, the more averse were they from all
reasonable conditions: so it is with all wicked men, the more we desire to live
peaceably among them, the more will they prepare for war, and make themselves
ready for battle.

But for the war, that both we and they should make, they are farthest from it;
Tertul. l. ad Martyrs.
for, though we all desire peace; yet, as Tertullian saich, Pax nostre, bellum
est contra Satanam; Our peace consists, and is obtained, by our war against
Satan: and we shall never have peace, unless we do, as Christ did, and as the
Church of Christ must do; that is, to suffer in this war, and to overcome, in
medio inimicorum: even as the Jews did, when they were re-edifying the Temple,
Neliem. 4.17.
and building up the City of God; they wrought with one hand, and held their
weapon in the other: For, we have enemies enough on every side; as Satan on the
one side, the world before us, the wicked behind us, and our own carnal lusts
within us; Contra quos viriliter pugnare, est pacem consequi; To fight against
these, is to obtain the true peace. Yet the wicked, the worldlings, and the
hypocrites, will never fight against any of these their enemies; but think to
escape all dangers, in that they are Neuters, and do hold of neither side. But
that can never be; for the godly will never cohere with the wicked; neither can
the wicked indeed, agree among themselves: Esaias 9.21. and chap. 19.2. and 21.2.
but Ephraim will be against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim; an
Egyptian against an Egyptian, a transgressor against a transgressor; and
Proditoris proditor, one sray tor will betray another. As you may observe it
now, amongst many of our great Commanders, and our late King's enemies. Less
peace is betwixt them, than betwixt the ^rute beasts; for of the little Bees,
S. Ambrose says that, aegrotante una lamentantur omnes. Ambros. H^xam. l. 6.
c. 4.
And we say, that Saevis inter se convenit Vrsis; and the sheep can live in
amity without the least hurt, of the one to the other. Yea the Lions, the Hogs,
and the Dogs, qui mori pro dominis parati sunt, which for a crust of bread, are
ready to die for their Masters, can love their kind, and live in unity among
themselves, and do good service unto man, and show themselves kind and courteous
unto him; as the Ravens brought food unto Elias; and the hungry Lions did no
hurt unto Daniel, when he was thrown into their Den, to be devoured by them.

And yet wicked men will plunder, rob, fight, wound, and kill one another.
Wherefore the holy Martyr, Cyprian. in sermon. de oratione Dom.
S. Cyprian, cries out, O detestandam humanae malitiae crudelitatem; aves
pascunt, ferae parcunt, homines saeviunt! O the most hateful cruelty of humane
malice; the fowls of the air do feed us, and the wild beasts do spare us, and
serve us, and men that are of our own flesh and blood, perhaps our kindred, or
our brethren, will destroy us, and prove Wolves and Lions one to another. And
so, as our Prophet says, The wicked have no peace with men; but are lawing one
with another, and our fighting, and our warring, makes this point plain enough,
that we are a wicked generation; because there is no peace amongst us.

2. As the wicked have no peace with men, The wicked have no peace with God.
Esaias 1.24. Aug. Confess. l. 10. c. 43.
so they have less peace with God; for he professes that they are his
enemies, saying, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies: and whereas Christ came down from Heaven, to be our peace, and to
become the Mediator between the mortal sinner, and the immortal God, and so to
make our peace with God; And, as the Apostle says, to be peace, as well to
them that were afar off, as to them that were nigh; that is, as S. Hierom
expounds it, Hierom. in loc. Ephesians. 2.17.
as well to us that were Gentiles (and so, far from the Covenant of Grace) as
to the Jews, that were the children of Abraham, to whom the Covenant was made,
that he would be his God, and the God of his seed. Genesis 17.17.


But Christ is no Christ to the wicked; for if any man has not the Spirit of
Christ, the same is none of his: and the Spirit of Christ flies from deceit,
and dwells not in the body that is subject unto sin. And Christ tells us
plainly, that if we be his sheep, and would have him to be our Christ, our
Mediator, and our peace, then we must h^ar his voice, and follow him; that is,
John 10.27.
to be as he is, meek and lowly in heart, loving one another, and ready to lay
down their lives, the one for the other, even as he laid down his life for us
all.

But the wicked will neither hear his voice, to believe it, and to obey it, nor
follow him in any grace or goodness: but as the Jews followed him to Mount
Calvary, to crucify him, and to take away the life of his members, and true
followers; as now you may see they do, in every place.

And therefore, as Linacrus, reading the Sermon of Christ in the Mount, set
down in the 5th 6th and 7th Chapters of S. Math. and considering the wicked
lives, oppressions, and wrongs, that were practiced among the people in every
place, by all degrees of men, he threw away the Book, and cried out, Certe aut
hoc non est Evangelium Christi, aut nos nonsumus Christiani: Either this is not
the Gospel of Christ, or we be no Christians. So I, seeing how wickedly men do
live, and do proceed in their wicked ways, from bad to worse, from worse to
worst of all, must needs conclude, they neither have, nor can have any peace
with God; for, there is no peace to the wicked, says my God: and especially so
long as they do thus continue wicked.

3. As the wicked will have no peace with men, The wicked have no peace with
themselves. Bernard. l. de conscient. sect. 2. fol. 1784. That there are four
kinds of consciences. 1. The good, yet not quiet conscience.
and can have no peace with God; so they have no peace with themselves; that
is, no quiet minds, nor peace of conscience. Where not with standing you must
observe, that, as S. Bernard says, there is a fourfold conscience: as 1. A
good, but not quiet. 2. A quiet, but not good. 3. Both good and quiet. 4.
Neither good nor quiet.


Whereof the first, that is the good conscience, but not quiet; and the third,
that is, the good and quiet conscience, do both belong unto the godly, and the
true servants of Jesus Christ, that have made their peace with God; and yet may
they sometimes be troubled with many doubts and fears for some offenses and
infirmities, which, their consciences tell them, have offended God. And though
these doubts and fears may disturb their consciences, The fears of the godly
produce very good effects.
and abate their joy, and lessen their assurance of Gods love, and their peace
with God for a time: yet will they bring no great damage unto them; but rather
produce very good effects and fruits of grace, as, to make them sorry for those
offenses, that are past, and do now trouble them; and to be more careful to
prevent the like to come. But,

2. They that have a good conscience, and a quiet one, have, The good quiet
conscience. Ho^atius. Greg. super Ezeck. hom. 6.
as Solomon says, a continual feast, and a Heaven upon Earth: And the very
Heathen can tell us, that Murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi. And therefore,
S. Gregory says, Quid poterit obesse, si omnes derogent, and sola conscientia
defendat? What hurt is it to us, though all men blame us, if our conscience
does defend us? Aug. cont. lit. petil.
For, Vt malam conscientiam laudantis praeconium non sanat, ita nec bonam
vulnerat conv tium: As all the praise in the world cannot heal a bad
conscience; so all the aspersions and dispraise can no ways wound a good
conscience.

But, as these two kinds of consciences do appertain unto the godly, so the
other two appertain unto the wicked: that is,

1. A bad conscience, and yet quiet, which is a seared conscience, that tells
them the truth, like Cassandra, and shows them what evils they have done, and
what they are like to suffer for it; but they like the careless Trojans, will
give no ear thereunto. And this conscience is like that sickness, that takes
away from the patient, all the sense of his sickness, which is therefore the
more dangerous, because it is insensible, and we cannot persuade the sick man,
Aug. confess. l. 1. c. 13.
which is ready to die, that he is sick at all. And quid potest esse miserius
misero, non miserante seipsum? What can be more miserable, than a miserable
man, Bern. Epist. 2.
not understanding his own miseries? And therefore, S. Bernard tells his
friend, that, Ideo dolet charitas mea, quod cum sis dolendus, non doleas; and
inde magis miseretur, quod cum miser sis, miserabilis tamen non es; And S.
Hierom says, in like manner, to Sabinian, Hoc ego plango, quod te non plangis.
This do I bewail in thee, that thou do not bewail thy self. For, as our
Savior says, when a strong man armed keeps his house, the things that he
possesses are in peace; So are these wicked men in peace and quiet, while the
strong man Satan keeps their hearts, as his house, to reside in; but this
secret peace with Satan is but an open war with God: Hierom ad He liodorum de
vita eromit:
and as S. Hierom says, Tranquillitas ista tempestas est. This calm, is a
cruel storm. And nothing can be more miserable, than these senseless sinners,
that perceive not their miserable condition. But, as Josephus says, The
wickedest men in Jer^s^lem, that were the destruction of the City, professed
themselves to be the only Zelots: So these wicked men think themselves the only
Saints of God, walking toward Heaven, when as their wicked deeds do show, they
ride post to Hell: And as the Lord tells Cain; If thou do ill, sin lies at
the door. So will their sins lie at the door, and like wild beasts dog them,
wheresoever they go, and perhaps awaken them at the last, to let them see their
miserable condition. And then

2. The bad tormenting conscience.
Their tormenting consciences will be a hell upon earth here unto them; for, as
the godly have the joy of a good conscience, as the earnest of the heavenly
happiness: So the wicked have this vermis conscientiae, the vexation of a
tormenting conscience, as the earnest of hell torments wheresoever they are.
Isidor. l. 2. soliloq.
And, as Isidorus says, Nulla poena gravior, quam poena conscientiae, quiae
nunquam securus est reus animus: for, as Solomon says, The spirit of a man can
bear his infirmities; but a wounded spirit, who can bear? And Lucan says,
Lucan. pharsal. l. 7.
that a wicked man does Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem; And that
Hunc omnes gladii, quos aut Pharsalia vid it
Aut ultrix visura dies stringente Senatu,
Illa nocte premunt; bunc infera monstra flagellant.


And as Ovid says, Ovid. de ponto. lib. 1.
Impia perpetuos curarum pectora morsus
Fine quibus nullo conficiantur, habent.
Nec prius himentem stimuli, quam vita relinquet:
Quique dolet, citius quam dolor ipse, cadet.


And Pictorius, in his Epigrams, says Istud habet damni vitium inter caetera,
quod men's
Palpitat assiduo flagitiosa metu.
Semper enim velsi non deprendatur, in ipso
Sese deprendi p^sse putat scelere.
Deque suo, alterius quoties de crimine sermo est,
Cogitat, and credit se magis esse reum;
Inque dies timor hinc crescit --


And S. Augustine renders to us the reason of all this, saying, Jussisti
Domine, and ita est, ut animus inordinatus sit sibi ipsi poena; And, as the
Poet says, Heu quantum misero poenae men's conscia donat!

For we do read how Theodoricus, being troubled in his conscience, imagined
that he saw, as he sat at Supper, the visage of Symmachus, Procopius lanquet.
Chron. fol. 146.
whom he had unjustly slain, in a fishes-head; and after that he could never
rest quiet, nor be comforted by any means, but pined away most miserably.

And Sleidan writes, how Crescentius, Sleidan com. l. 23. in fine.
the Pope's Vicegerent in the Council of Trent, being conscious of many ill
carriages in that Council, saw the Devil, in the likeness of a black dog. And
Polydore Virgil writes of Richard the Third, that after he had caused his two
Nephews, the sons of Edward the Fourth, to be secretly murdered, he could never
have any rest or quiet mind while ne lived; but would be still starting, and
clapping his hand on his Dagger.

And, to be brief, so it is with all wicked men; that either they have a seared
conscience, void of all sense; or, if it awakes, a tormenting conscience, that
vexes and plagueth them continually. For, my Text is most true, that there is
no peace to the wicked, neither with men, nor with God, nor with themselves.
And therefore, howsoever they deem us for their enemies, yet in very deed, they
are the greatest enemies, that can be found on earth, unto themselves.

2. As there is no peace to the wicked, so they have no peace in no place; The
wicked have no peace in no place.
but, as S. Augustine says, Fugiet ab agro in civitatem, a publico in domum, a
domo in cubiculum, and a cubiculo in lectum; ecce hostem suum invenit, a quo
confugerat, seipsum scilicet, a quo fugiturus est.

3. They have no peace, ullo tempore, at any time; but, The wicked have no
peace at no time.
as I said before out of Lucan; the wicked do Nocte dieque suum gestare in
pectore testem. both night and day, early and late, bear in their bosom, a
relator, that does accuse them, and a witness that does testify against them,
the great and horrible wick edness that they have done, and a Judge that does
continually condemn them.

And therefore, the Text says not, non erat pax, nor non erit pax; but, non
est pax: and in the Original, the Text is set down indefinitely, without a
verb, as naming no time; that, as soon as ever we have sinned, we might fear
Gods judgments presently, and expect our punishment instantly, and at all
times thereafter. Because, as Lipsius says, Cognatum, imme innatum, Lipsius do
constantial. 2. c. 13.
omni sceleri est sceleris supplicium; And S. Paul says, The wages of sin is
death, to show, that as the work is present, so the payment must be present,
nec aufertur, nec defertur; it shall neither be remitted, nor deferred: But as
the Lord commands, not to detain the laborers wages until the morning, but
presently to pay him, as soon as ever he has done his work, before the Sun
goes down; So, when the sinner has done the sin, the punishment lies at the
door waiting for him.

So you see, here is no peace, in no place, at no time, after the wickedness
is done, and the sin is once committed. And

4. There is no pea^e to no wicked man.
To make the generality of the sentence full, there is no peace, to no wicked
man; that is, not to any man that is wicked; for with God there is no respect
of persons: but if Coniah the Prince do sin, though he were as the signet upon
my right hand, I will cut him off, says the Lord. The Jews were Gods own
peculiar people, of whom the Prophet says, You only have I chosen of all the
Nations of the earth; yet when they became wicked, God cast them off, and
scattered them among all the Nations of the earth.

And therefore, whether thou be Jew or Gentile, Prince or peasant, young or
old, rich or poor, if thou will walk in thy wickedness, presume not of any
prerogative, to exempt thee from Gods judgment; for the Lord has said it, and
he will perform it, There is no peace to no wicked man, let him be whom you
will.

But here, object, that we are all wicked, -- ergo, pax nulli.

I answer, all wicked, and there is none that does good, no not one; but, that
we are not all alike wicked: for

1. There are diverse kinds of wicked men.

2. There are diverse differences betwixt the wickednesses of wicked men: as

1. There are some that commit wickedness through ignorance, others of
knowledge; and some that commit wickedness, through weakness and infirmity,
and others do offend of malicious wickedness.

And so there are some wicked men less heinous than others, both in the sight
of God, and men. And there are others more odious, and more transcendently
wicked: and, I conceive, that the Prophet principally means, Those high
abominable sinners, have not, nor can have any peace: such as are, Murderers,
Regicides, Rebels, Traitors, Idolaters, Adulterers, and the like wicked men;
and especially if you consider,

2. That there is a threefold difference betwixt the sins and wickedness of
the godly that are wicked men, and the sins and wickedness of the other
abominable wicked sinners; whereof the Prophet speaks; as 1. Before they sin.
2. When they sin. 3. After they sin.
For,

1. Difference.
The godly purpose not to offend God, but do intend to serve him, and to keep
his Commandments; but the wicked do imagine mischief upon their beds, their
feet are swift to shed blood, and they resolve to proceed from one wickedness
to another: And, as Seneca says, Scelera sua sceleribus tueri; To protect and
hedge about their wickedness, with greater wickedness; as their lies with
perjuries, their malice with murder, and their disobedience with rebellion,
treachery, and treasons.

2. Difference.
The godly, when they do sin, they do it with a great deal of reluctance; and,
as the Apostle says, the evil that they would not do, and what they hate, that
they do, by reason of the frailty and weakness of their flesh, and the
greatness of their temptation. But the wicked sin with greediness, and do
rejoice in the works of their hands, and make a sport of their sins.

3. Difference.
When the sin is committed, the godly are sorry for it, and do repent them of
it, and resolve to do so no more: and therefore do pray to God, to forgive
them, what is past, and to give them his grace to preserve them from the like;
but the wicked never repent them of any wickedness that they do, nor pray to
God for grace, to amend them; but think they do God good service, when they
persecute the righteous, and destroy his servants.

And therefore the godly endeavoring to be at peace with all men, they are for
their part in peace with all men; Ephesians. 4.3.
and being justified by the faith which they have in Christ Jesus, they have
peace toward God; and having peace with God, and so leading a godly life, they
have peace with themselves, which is the peace of conscience, which is a
Paradise of pleasure, as S. Aug. Aug: super Genes.
terms it, and as the Poet says, -- Audebit dicere, Horat.
Pentheu
Rector Thebarum, quid me perferre patique
Indignum coges? --


But the wicked, whose hands are like Ismaels hands, against all men, His
thought sees his punishment and his fear overwhelms him with miseries.
shall have all men's hands against them: and being without fear in offending
God, and without any true faith in Christ, they shall have God for their
professed enemy; and so being at war with God, and thirsting after wickedness,
they have no rest, nor peace; but Supplicium exercent curae: Statius l. 3.
Thebaidos.
tunc plurima versat
Pessimusin dubiis augur, timor.


And so there is no peace to no wicked man, especially to these transcendent
and resolved irrepentant wicked men, Sed bella, horrida bella; wars, wars,
and rumors of wars. And these our wars, and preparations for war, our
fightings, and our plundering, our oppressions and insupportable taxations, and
especially this our unnatural rebellion against our own just and pious King,
and above other horrible wickedness, the barbarous murdering of so just, so
innocent, and so godly a King, do sufficiently show that we are a wicked
generation; and, as this our Prophet says, a sinful nation, a nation laden
with iniquity, corrupt children, and the seed of evil doers; that have wholly
forsaken the laws of our God.

And this our wickedness, vice versa, does as apparently show, that there is
no peace intended for us; and that we do but expect peace in vain, until we
fully intend to forsake our sins; because our sins and wickednesses, our
unjustice toward men, and our profaneness in Gods service, have made, and
will make, a separation betwixt us and God; and, how can we hope for peace
among men, when God proclaims war against us? Quia conscientia mala been
sperare non potest. Because a conscience guilty of such wickedness, Aug. in
Ps. 32.
as the men of this Nation have committed, knows not how to hope for any good.

2. This shows that our sins and wickedness is the cause of all our
miseries, our sickness, our wants, our wars, and of all our troubles; Prove.
14.4.
for man suffers for his sins, and, as Solomon says, Miseros facit populos
peccatum. It is our sins that make us miserable, and therefore, if we would be
freed from troubles, eased of our burdens, delivered from these wars, and
healed from our diseases, let us forsake our sins, and then God will turn all
these evils from us.

2. Having heard the particulars of this general Proclamation, The proclaimers
of this truth. 1. The Prophet.
we are now to consider of the Proclaimers; and they are two, 1. The Prophet,
as Gods Herald, and his messenger. 2. God himself, who is the chief sender
forth of this Proclamation; for there is no peace.


1. The Prophets, Apostles, and Preachers of Gods word, are Gods Heralds to
declare his will, and to proclaim his Messages unto the people; and, as one
says very well, they are Gods mouth, in preaching to the people, and therefore
they say, Os Domini loquutum est, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; and
they are the peoples mouth, in praying for them, unto God, even as Mediators
betwixt God and the people; as Moses says unto the Israelites, I stood between
the Lord and you, Matthew. 23.2.3.
to show unto you the word of the Lord.

Which should be a warning to us, that, as the Apostle says, If any man speak,
he should speak the words of God; And

It should teach the people to esteem of their Preachers, as of the Ministers
of Christ, and as Legati a latere, the Ambassadors of Christ, and the
dispensers of the manifold mysteries of God; and it should likewise move them
to hear our words, not as the words of men, but, as the words of the true
Preachers are indeed, the words of God:

Therefore Christ says to his Disciples, that while the Scribes and Pharisees
do sit in Moses chair, and so teach the doctrine that Moses taught, all
whatsoever they bid you observe, Aug. advers. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 6.
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: Dicunt enim quae Dei
sunt, and faciunt quae sua sunt: for they say the words of God, while they
teach the Doctrine of Moses; but they do the works of their own Wills, when
they do what Moses forbids them, says Saint Aug. And that should persuade the
people, to hear the Preachers words with more reverence, and to believe them
with less doubting.

2. God himhelf.
As the Prophet is Gods Herald and Ambassador to proclaim Gods will, so God
himself is the chief Author of this Proclamation, and the principal
proclaimer of this war against the wicked; for there is no peace to the wicked,
Psalm. 62.2.
says my God. And God has spoken it once and twice, and the Prophet heard the
same; That power belongs unto God; and he has said it once and twice, that
there is no peace to the wicked; as you see here in this Text, Aug. ad Pollent.
l. 2. c. 4.
and in c. 48.22. Et verba toties inculcata vera sunt, viva sunt, planae sunt;
therefore we may be sure, we need not doubt it; there is no peace unto the
wicked, because God, which proclaims this war, is able to make it good against
them, because he is, as he is styled, the Lord of Hosts; And his Host is both
1. Celestial. And Part of Gods Host threefold.
2. Terrestrial. And 3. Infernal. And


1. Regiment of Gods Army, Aietie.
His Celestial Host is threefold. 1. Aerie. And 2. Starry. And 3. Glorious. And


By the first, he drowned and destroyed the world, for the Windows of heaven
were opened, Gen 7. c. 19 24 Josh. 10.
-- and by the same Host he destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah with fire and
brimstone, and the Ammorites with hailstones; and we see great winds destroyed
many on the Seas, and great frosts do devour many on earth; Psalm. 147.17.
for if God sends forth his Ice like morsels, the Prophet demands, Who is able
to abide his frost?

The second part of his Host is the starry heaven, Regiment starry.
that is called Caelum, quasi caelatum, engraven, and enameled with such
glorious aspects. And this Host, as it speaks for God, and declares the glory
of God, as the Psalmist says, so they fight for God, Psalm. 19.1.
as the stars in their order did fight against Sisera, and the Sun stood still
at Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon, to assist Joshua to overthrow
Gods enemies. Josh. 5.20. c. 10.13. 3. Regiment glorious, which is threefold.


The third, and most powerful part of Gods Host, which is most glorious,
resideth in the Empyreal heaven, and they are 1. Saints. And 2. Angels. And


1. The Saints blessed souls. Raynold. de Idol. l. 2. c. 1.
The Saints and blessed souls departed, says Raynold, De sua faelicitate
securi, de nostra salute solliciti sunt; and without question, they do pray for
the Church in General against the wicked: and their prayers are very available.

2. The Holy Angels are instruments of Gods love and mercy, The Holy Angels.
Act. 5.19.
to help the faithful servants of Christ; as you may see, how the Angel helped
Tobias, and brought the Apostles out of prison: and they are the executioners
of Gods justice against the wicked; as you may find, how an Angel slew all the
firstborn in Egypt; and an Angel of the Lord went out, Exodus 12.19.
and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians an hundred fourscore and five thousand;
and when they arose early in the morning, Behold, they were all dead Corpse: 2
King. 49.35.
And if one Angel was able to slay so many, what cannot millions of Angels do?
And we read, what a glorious King was Herod, and how he was magnified by the
people, as a god, and not as man; but, because he gave not the glory unto God,
the Angel of the Lord smote him, Act. 12.23.
so that he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost; and our Savior
testifies unto us, Math. 24.31.
what service, the Angels shall do to God, and for his servants at the last day.

2. Gods terrestrial Host is both Part of Gods Host, two fold.
1. The Sea. 2. The Land.
And all that are contained therein: and you know,

1. How the Sea drowned Pharaoh, and all his mighty Army, thousands since; and
you cannot forget

2. How the Earth opened her mouth, Corah and his companions. So the frogs,
flies, and worms do fight for God, Number. 16.32.
against the wicked; and, as the Prophet says, The stone shall cry out of the
wall, Ps. 106.17.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, Woe to him that builds his
house with blood; Hab. 2.11.
and so all the parts of the earth shall fight against the wicked.

3. Gods infernal Host, are the very Devils and damned spirits, Part of Gods
Host.
that can do nothing without Gods leave, and must do all that he commands them;
For so we read that an Evil spirit from the Lord troubled Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14.
and vexed him for his wickedness. And so they will do to all wicked men, vex
them and plague them for their wickedness.

And so you see, how it is impossible for any transcendent wicked man,
Murderer, Rebel, Idolater, or the like, to have any peace, either with himself,
or his neighbor, or especially with God; that is so powerful a God, so able
to destroy all his wicked enemies; And therefore let all such wicked men
repent, and all others take heed of being wicked; because, my God, which is the
true God, and the God of truth, proclaims this truth unto the world, that,
There is no peace unto the wicked.

THE FOURTH TREATISE.
Jer. 14.10. Thus says the Lord unto this people, Thus have they loved to
wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord does not accept
them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins.


WHAT our Savior says of the Prophesy of Esaias, Esaias. 61.1.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: which was a very joyful
fulfilling of it indeed; Luke 4.21.
so I am afraid, I may say of this Prophesy of Jeremy, that in these days,
you may see this Scripture fulfilled amongst us; because this Text seems to me
to be, The lively picture of these lewd times. Which must needs be a sad
fulfilling of it to all good men.

The Principal points to be considered are these four, Four Points to be
considered.
1. A Message, thus, or this, which follows. 2. The Author, or sender of the
message, the Lord. 3. To whom it was sent, unto this people. 4. The Messenger
by whom it was sent or showed, viz. 1. The word of the Lord that came to
Jeremiah.


Touching which points, as Christ says in another case, so I will do herein;
begin with the last and so proceed unto the first. And

1. I told you, the Messenger, Point the Messenger.
by whom this message was sent unto this people, is the Prophet Jeremy; and he
was, 1. A Man, and no Angel. The Messenger was a man like themselves.
2. A Jew, and no Gentile. 3. A Lover, and no hater of this people.


And yet for all this, we find that he was mightily hated, and exceedingly
persecuted by them.

1. When God delivered his Laws upon Mount Sinai, he was pleased to be his own
messenger, Exodus 20.1.
to write them with his own hands, and to utter them with his own mouth; Heb.
12.29.
but our God being a consuming fire, as the Apostle says, and if he does but
touch the mountains, they shall smoke, says the Psalmist; therefore his
descending to deliver that Law, was so terrible that Moses himself said, Heb.
12.21.
I do exceedingly fear and quake; And they, that saw the Mount burning, and the
blackness, darkness, and tempests, and heard the sound of a Trumpet, and the
voice of the words, entreated, That the word should not be spoken to them any
more; Verse. 19.
that is, by God himself; because they were not able to endure the great and
glorious Majesty of the deliverer.

And yet in very deed, God being an Infinite incomprehensible spirit, that has
neither hands to handle, Gal. 3.19. Heb. 2.2.
nor mouth to speak, this delivery of the Law was ordained by Angels, and the
Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, says the Apostle; And therefore, it being
above our Capacity, to understand the Language of the Angels, The Language of
the Angels we know not what it is.
which the great Angelical Doctor, the best of all the Schoolmen, could not
yet determine, what it is; and it being likewise beyond the ability of our
weakness, to endure the sight of those Celestial spirits; God was pleased, out
of his great goodness, to condescend unto the infirmities, and to yield unto
the request of this people, and to send his messages unto us, by such as dwell
amongst us (i. e.) men like our selves; that we need, neither to fear their
faces, nor to shun their presence.

So that now, The Hearers condition safer then the Preachers condition. Galat.
4.16.
as S. Augustine speaks, Tutior est conditio audientis quam dicentis, the
hearers are in a safer condition, then the speaker; and the fear is only of the
Teacher's side, who must now take heed what he says, and is oftentimes become
your enemy for saying the truth, as S. Paul shows, when as you may freely
hear, whatsoever is spoken, without fear, as you do many times without faith,
when our words, though never so true, shall yet be received but as Cassandra's
Prophesies, that were ever true, but never regarded; Esaias 53: 1.
so that, we may justly cry out with the Prophet, Who has believed our report?

2. He was their own Countryman. Act. 19.24, 25.
This Messenger, that God now sent unto the Jews, was himself a Jew, and no
Gentile, no Grecian, no Barbarian; and it is natural for all men to love those
of their own Country; Even as we see Crafts-men, love those of the same Trade,
as you may find in Act. 18.3. Therefore, that they might the more readily
embrace him; the Lord says, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you
of your brethren, like unto me, in countenance, in favor, in faithfulness, and
in all meekness and gentleness, Him shall you hear in all things: Deuteronomy. 18.15.
and you ought the more readily to hear him, and the more undoubtedly to
believe him, and to love him, because he is of your brethren: for, though the
Schools have determined, that there is no love in hell, nor charity among the
damned; yet, for his own sake, Dives seems to have a care of his brethren, Luke
16.28.
that they should not come into that place of torment: Act. 22.2.
and though the Jews hated Saint Paul, yet when they heard that he spoke unto
them, in the Hebrew Tongue, which was their own native Language, they kept the
more silence.

And for this cause, the sooner to gain favor, and to win the more goodwill,
Act. 22.25.
this prudent Apostle tells the Roman Captain, that he was a freeborn Citizen
of Rome; Act. 23.6. That men of the same Country should love one another.
and he tells the Jews he was a Jew, and a Pharisee, of the tribe of Benjamin;
and so accordingly, when the men of Israel were angry with the men of Juda for
receiving David, and conducting of him home again to his Throne, after he was
driven out of his Royal City, by the rebellion of Absolon; the men of Juda
answered most justly, that they had very good reason so to do, not only because
he was their King; but also, because he was near of kin unto them, and of their
own Tribe, the Tribe of Judah; 2 Samuel 19.42.
therefore why should they not receive him, and love him, that was of their own
Country, and of their own flesh and blood? Which shows unto us, what a shame
it is, for a Prophet to be without honor, among his own Countrymen, and in his
own Country, where he should be honored most of all? And what an abominable
thing it is, for a Prince, or a Prophet, to be treacherously betrayed and sold
into the hands of their enemies, by their own Countrymen, and their own
familiar friends?

But as our Savior Christ, coming amongst his own, as the Evangelist says,
and his own receiving him not, but slandering, persecuting and betraying him
unto death, says, If a stranger had done me this dishonor, I could well have
born it; but I think very much, that I should be thus used by my Countrymen,
and by mine own familiar friends. So this holy Prophet, going not to the
Persians, and preaching not to the Grecians, but to the Jews, his own native
Countrymen, and his own kindred, could not choose but be exceedingly troubled,
to be so used as he was amongst them. For that it is a greater shame, and a
more intolerable sin, for the servants of God to be persecuted and rejected by
their own Countrymen, and those that profess and seem to serve the same God,
and to believe in the same Savior as they do, than if they were expelled and
deprived of their means, or persecuted unto death, in any other Country, where
they should be but like Jonas among the Ninivites, mere strangers. Yet thus was
Jeremy used, and thus are we.

3. This our Prophet, was not only a Jew, preaching unto the Jews: He was a
dear lover of them.
for so many a man, as Cateline among the Romans, Vortigern among the Britains,
Speed, l. 7. c. 4. and Simon, Jason, and others among the Jews, and some others
nearer home, have betrayed their own Country, 2 Machab. 4.
and the trust that their Country reposed in them: but he was a faithful
Patriot, a hearty lover, and no hater of his people. Tertullian notes, how
dearly Moses loved this Nation of the Israelites, when rather than God should
destroy them, he earnestly requested, that his own name might be blotted out of
the Book of Life. S. Paul shows the like love unto the Jews, when he says,
he could wish himself accursed from Christ, Romans 9.3.
for his brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh. And this our Prophet
shows no less love unto them than the other, as you may easily see, by this
his Prophecy, and his Preaching to them, and his Lamentation for them. Yet all
the love of these men, and put all together, was not comparable to the love of
Christ, who gave himself for them, and prayed for them, when they Crucified
him. And therefore, well might he say, Greater love than this has no man, John
15.13.
that a man lay down his life for his friends; which none of all the Prophets,
nor of the Apostles, nor of the Martyrs, that died all for themselves, and
suffered death for their own sins, did lay down their life for others; as our
Savior Christ did, lay down his life, not for himself, but for his enemies:
and yet they loved them very much, and very dear, as I showed to you before.

And so must all the Messengers of Christ, and Preachers of God's Word, How the
Ministers, and Preachers of Gods Word, should love their people.
imitate these holy men, to love Gods people; for that the people can hardly
reap any good from them, whom they perceive not to love them: but as we suspect
the gifts of an enemy, to be as the Belt of Ajax was to Hector, and Hectors
Sword to him in like sort, the death of each other; So we dis esteem and regard
not the words of them that love us not.

But you see how the true Prophets and Servants of God loved this people, and
labored all that ever they could for the good of the people, to bring them
unto God, and to turn away Gods anger from them. And what reward did this
people render to these, and to the rest of Gods Messengers and Teachers, for
all the love that they showed unto them, and the pains they had undertaken for
them? The very Heathen tells us, that Amor amoris magnes, and durus est qui
amorem non rependit; Love is a Loadstone to draw love again: and if we will do
nothing else, yet we can do no less, than love them that do so dearly love us:
The very publicans and sinners do the same.

Yet behold, The ingratitude of the Jews.
O Heavens, and wonder, O Earth, at this ungrateful people, who rendered to
Gods Messengers evil for good, and instead of loving them, stoned them. For
they murmured against Moses, rebelled against David, persecuted Elias, beheaded
John the Baptist, and, as our Savior says, they killed the Prophets, Luke
13.34.
and stoned them that were sent unto them. And it is no strange thing, for us,
to find many men, walking in the same ways, and treading in the same steps, as
these Jews have done; but it were very strange that we should be used any
better than those better Messengers, that were sent before us. Luke 10.3.
For our Savior tells us, with an Ecce, Behold, and consider it well, I send
you forth as lambs into the midst of wolves. And you know the Fable, how the
silly lamb, procul infra bibens, for drinking far enough below the wolf, was
notwithstanding torn all to pieces, by that cruel wolf, upon pretense, that he
stopped the current, which was impossible for him to do.

2. The parties to whom this Message was sent.
The Parties, to whom the Message was sent, are showed in these words, this
people; and that is, the people of the Jews, that were then flos florum, and
medulla mundi, the choicest, and the noblest, of all the people of the world;
for, You only have I known; that is, acknowledged for mine own people, Amos 3.2.
and mine own peculiar inheritance, of all the families of the earth, says the
Lord. And God showed his great love toward them, by the wonderful works that
he had done for them. For, as the Prophet says, He eased their shoulders from
their burdens, Psalm.
and their hands from making the pots; and he delivered them out of that
Egyptian-bondage, and from the tyranny of cruel Pharaoh. The great favors of
God unto the Jews.
Then he gave them such Laws, so holy, and so just, as neither Solon nor
Lycurgus, nor any other Nation of the World had the like. And he fed them in
the Wilderness, 40. years together, with Manna, that was the bread of Heaven,
and the Angels food: and after that, he thrust out 7. other Nations, to make
room for them, and he gave them the labors of the people in possession, and
planted them in Canaan, which was a Land that flowed with milk and honey; and
there he hedged them about (as we were of late hedged here) with all kind of
blessings; beneficia nimis copiosa, most ample benefits: And, as the Schools
say, Privativa and positiva; for they had plenty in peace, and victory in war:
and, what was it not, that this people had not?

And yet this people, this peculiar people of God, must hear this hard Message;
and they must undergo this sharp censure. For, as the Lord says of Coniah,
Jeremy 22.24.
were he as the signet upon my right hand, yet would I pluck him thence, and
give him into the hands of those that seek his life. So will he do with this
people, and with any other, when they do prevaricate and offend him. He will
cut them off, and cast them from him, were they formerly never so precious in
his sight; How God deals with his dearest children, when they depart from his
service.
for, no privilege, no prerogative, no former piety, can prevail with God, to
prevent his judgments; when, with this people, they love to wander, and
refrain not their feet from their evil ways: But, as these, his dearly beloved
people, the Jews, were cast off when they did cast off the true service of God;
and as those seven Churches of Asia, Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos, Thyatira,
Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea, that were planted by the Apostles, and
watered with the blood of Martyrs, had their Candlesticks removed, and
themselves delivered up, to groan under the Turkish tyranny, and to have the
blasphemous Alcoran of that accursed false Prophet Mahomet, for their Bible,
instead of the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ; and all this, because they had
forsaken their First-love to the true service of their God: So will the just
and jealous God do with any other Church or people, that seems never so dear
unto him, when they are so wavering, and so ready to wander, with this people,
from the true service of God, and to forsake their first-love, with those
Asiatick Churches, and to derogate from the first faith that they have received.

And as the Jews protestation, that they did all for the worship of God, and
therefore cried, The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.4.
three times re-iterated in the same Chapter, could not preserve them from this
just judgment: So the pretense of erecting a Gospel-discipline, and the
gathering of pure Churches out of Christ his Church, contrary to the Doctrine
of the true Church, will hardly serve the turn, to turn away Gods anger from
us, when, upon these, and the like pretended shows of sanctity more than
ordinary, we love to wander from the old way of Gods true Worship.

3. The Person, that is the sender of this Message, is the Lord; for, The
Person that is the sender of this Message.
thus says the Lord unto this people; and that is, the Lord which professes
himself to be, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, and in truth, and that
his mercy endures for ever, and is like the boundless and the bottomless
Ocean, that cannot be drawn dry. Yet here this gracious God does, as it were,
disrobe himself of his mercy, and lay aside his loving kindness, and put on
judgment as a garment, that he might render vengeance to them that abuse his
patience, and prefer their own humors, before his holy Worship; and like the
Scribes and Pharisees, persuade themselves, and the world, that they are the
only Saints, when Christ knows, they are the only hypocrites, and so the vilest
in Gods sight, of all other sinners whatsoever; as it appears by those many
woes, that Christ denounces against these holy hypocrites, more than against
all the Publicans and Sinners; which, though they be open and apparent
offenders, yet are they sooner converted, and brought to Christ, and shall
sooner obtain mercy at the hands of God, than these outward Saints, that
inwardly are Devils; That, as our Savior says, do come unto you in
sheeps-cloathing, with fair speeches, and nothing but Scripture-phrases in
their mouths; but inwardly they are ravening wolves, and devour the poor, the
fatherless, and the widows, under these holy shows.

But here, as we know, the Lord is merciful in his judgments, and, Ezra 9.13.
as Ezra says, punishes us less than our iniquites deserve, and is also just
in his mercies, because he is, righteous in all his works, and holy in all his
ways. So, we must remember, and we may assure our selves, the Judge of all the
earth will do right, and will not destroy the righteous with the wicked. Genesis
18: 25.
And therefore, you must understand,

1. Cui bonus, to whom the Lord shows himself merciful and gracious.

2. Cui justus, to whom he will show himself angry and just. For, To whom God
shows himself merciful, and to whom just.


As Christ says, that we must not give the childrens bread unto dogs, nor a
Scorpion to those children, that call for Fish, nor a Stone to them that desire
Bread; but we must give to every one his own portion, and that in due season;
that is, mercy and favor to the godly, and to pardon the penitent sinner: and
so in like manner, indignation and wrath, and the heavy judgment of God upon
the oppressors of their brethren, and upon those that offend of malicious
wickedness; and that, with this people here spoken of, do love to wander out of
the right way of Gods service, to worship him after the new Mode, and direction
of the false Prophets.

And this may serve for an exceeding comfort unto the godly, and constant
worshippers of God, that the Lord is so gracious and so just, How God
preserves his servants in the midst of judgments.
as not to to destroy the righteous with the wicked: But, as he preserved Noah,
when all the World perished; and delivered Lot out of Sodom, when he rained
fire and brimstone upon it, and upon the other Cities; So when a thousand shall
fall besides thee, and ten thousands on thy right hand, yet will he give his
Angels charge over thee, Ps. 91.11.
and they shall keep thee in all thy ways, that thou hurt not thy foot against
a stone.

Or if it be, as it sometimes happens, that the good and godly men, living
among the wicked, do partake of some punishments and afflictions with the
wicked, The different effects of Gods punishments upon the godly and upon the
wicked.
as the good and bad sailing in the same Ship; must be liable to the same
Tempest; yet, the same troubles, crosses and afflictions, whether they be
Plague, Famine, War, or the like, do not proceed from God, either in the same
manner, or for the same end, against the godly as they do against the wicked;
for they are but his fatherly chastisements unto his children, but they are the
signal testimonies of his wrath and fury against the wicked; and therefore,
they drive the Godly to repentance and amendment of life, or do translate them
to everlasting happiness; but they fill the wicked with rage and fury, and
drive them with despair, from one sin to another, until they descend to
eternal torments.

4. The message comprehends two things.
The message that God sends unto this people, contains two special things,
1. The doings, of this people. 2. The doom, of this people.


1. The doings of this people.
In their doings, you may observe these four particulars. 1. Their Errors, and
transgressions; they wandered. 2. Four things wherein are considerable.
Their Love of Errors; they loved to wander. 3. The Manner of their wandering,
thus; that is, from one sin to another, from one error to another, from bad to
worse, from worse to worst of all. 4. Their Greediness to proceed without any
stop or stay in their wicked ways: They refrained not their feet.


1. Their wandering.
Diligrunt evagari, says Tremelius; And a vagrant is he, that knows not
where he is, nor whither he goes; diligunt errare, says the vulgar Latin,
they love to err. And, Errare est extra viam ire, to wander is to walk or to
run out of the way; and I take the word wandering here in the largest sense,
What M. Calvin takes their wandering to be.
and not restrain it, as M. Calvin does, to one particular sin, which he
understands to be their wavering minds, and unconstancy in Gods service: now
serving him after the old manner, set down by Moses, and prescribed by God
himself; and by and by serving him after the new fashion, devised by the false
Prophets: now serving him in his Temple, and consecrated house dedicated for
his worship; and presently serving him in Chambers, in the Groves, and under
every green Tree.

But I conceive, that the Prophet means, according to Tremelius translation,
that they erred from the right service of God, and from the performance of
their duties unto their neighbors, and so straid, like lost sheep without a
shepherd, The Law of God is the way wherein we ought to walk.
both from the way of piety, and from the rules of equity: and the further they
go on, the harder it is for them to return to the right way: for you must know,
that the way, wherein we ought to walk, is the Law of God, even as the Prophet
David shows, saying, Blessed are they that are undefiled in the way, Psalm.
119.1.
that walk in the Law of the Lord, and not in the way of sinners, which is the
transgression and aberration from the right way, that is, the Law of the Lord.

And this people, The Jews and ourselves, like the Egyptians, and why.
the Jews, were, as we are for the most part of us, like unto the Egyptians
that received the most plentiful benefits of the river Nilus; and yet they
knew not the fountain from whence it sprang; so did they reap all the favors
of God, his Oracles, his Prophets, and his blessings, more then any other
Nation of the World; and yet they neither knew God, nor the will of God; Hos.
4.1. Vide Esaias. 1.3.
for, as the Prophet Hosea says, There was neither truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the Land; and therefore, they wandered indeed, and wandered
far out of the way.

But you will say, it is very strange, that the Jews of all other people,
should be ignorant, either of God or of the law of God, when, as the Apostle
says, Unto them were committed the Oracles of God; and, Rom 3.2. and chap.
9.4. Psalm. 76.1. What great means the Jews had to understand and learn the true
service of God. Amos 3.7.
as the Prophet says, In Jurie is God known and his name is great in Israel;
and he gave unto them, Priests and Levits, Scribes and Pharisees, that should
continually expound his Laws, both to them, and to their children for ever; and
when they failed to do their duties, he raised up his Prophets to direct them
to the right way, and to show them, how they should both worship God, and love
their neighbor; and, as the Prophet Amos says, Surely the Lord God will do
nothing, but he reveileth his secrets unto his servants the Prophets; and
therefore, How could this people be ignorant of God, or wander out of his ways?

To this, the Prophet answers, in the next point; and shows the true cause
of their wandering, and of all their deviation and starting aside from the
right service of God; for

2. He says, They loved to wander; therefore what wonder is it, Where the Jews
erred.
that they should err, and go out of the right way, when they loved, desired,
and were well pleased to go out of it? but it is strange, and a great deal more
strange, for men to love to err, then it is to err; For humanum est errare,
God alone is truth, and every man a liar, the best of us all is subject unto
error: when as ever since the fall of Adam, there were four things, Four things
imposed on Adam, and on all his seed, for his transgression.
says Beda, most justly imposed upon all his seed for his unjust
transgression; 1. Ignorance. 2. Impotence. 3. Concupiscence. 4. Malice.


For the healing of which four maladies, the second Adam was made unto us, as
the Apostle says, 1. Wisdom. 2. Righteousness. 3. Sanctification. 1 Cor. 1.20.
4. Redemption.


Therefore, seeing ignorance is incident unto all men; and every man is born
blind, every one may well say with the Eunuch, How can I understand without a
Teacher, or, Act. 8.31.
how can I walk in the right way without a guide?

But for a man to put out the light, or for a blind man to refuse a guide, and
for an ignorant man to refuse knowledge, this is the condemnation, whereof our
Savior speaks, That light is come into the world, Joh. 3.19.
and men love darkness more then light.

And yet this was the Epidemicall disease of this people, and it has continued
among all Nations to this very day; for, as the Scripture testifies of the
ungodly, Noluerunt intelligere ut been agerent, but they say to God, Depart
from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways! So it is true of too too
many; they will not understand the truth, that they might do right; they will
not hear the true Preachers: Job. 21.14. 2 Chr. 18.7.
but as the King of Israel would not hear Micaiah, but hated him; so will not
many men hearken to the true Prophets, but they will do, as Ahab said he did to
Micaiah, hate them; and as the Jews dealt with the teachers of Gods true
worship, that is, stone the Prophets and kill them that were sent unto them; as
Samuel was rejected, Esaias sawed in pieces, Jeremy thrown to a filthy dungeon,
Zachary the son of Jeh^ida was stoned with stones, even in the court of the
House of the Lord; Micheas thrown down by Joram to break his neck, because he
rebuked him for the sins of his fathers; Amos killed with a club, Ezechiel
slain, Vrias the son of Semeiah for Prophesying against Jerusalem was killed by
Joakim; Jer. 26.23.
Elias persecuted and threatened to be killed by Jezabel; and the spirit of God
demands of the Jews, Act. 7.52.
Which of the Prophets had not their fathers persecuted? Even so do many men in
many places, and in most Countries, use the true Preachers and teachers of Gods
true worship, and the repairers of their errors, in these very days; and if
the true Preachers say, with this Prophet, Jer. 6.16.
Ask for the old paths, where is the good way and walk therein, and you shall
find rest for your souls. I am afraid, our people will answer with the words
of this people, and say, We will not walk therein.

But to proceed, to show unto you the doings of this people; the Prophet tells
us, they have not only rejected the true Prophets, and refused the bright
shining light of the truth, and right service of God, offered unto them by the
legitimate messengers of God; but, as our Prophet speaks, they have committed
two evils, 1. Jer. 32.33. and chap. 7.25.
They have forsaken the Fountain of living waters. 2. They have hewed them out
Cisterns, even broken Cisterns, that can hold no water.


And these two evils do commonly go together: to silence and deprive the old
and true Preachers, and to advance and magnify the young novices, that are
fitter to be taught then to teach; yea, to forsake God, and then to adore the
Calf; to throw away the service of the Lord, and then to set up the service of
Baal; to persecute the true Prophets, and then to magnify the false teachers;
400 of them must be royally fed on Jezabels table, when she would not entertain
one true Prophet. 1 King. 18.19.
And when, as the Prophet says, corruit in platea veritas, truth is fallen,
and shall be trodden down, as mire in the streets; then lies and falsehoods,
errors and heresies, and all blasphemies shall be generally apprehended, and
the broachers thereof, not worthy the name of Preachers, shall be liberally
maintained, as they were by Queen Jezabel, and are now by our
Parliament-governours in every place.

Therefore, though the Prophet says, It was a wonderful and a horrible thing,
Jer. 5.30.
that the Prophets should Prophesy falsely; yet, I think it was a greater wonder
for the people to love to have it so, to hire them so dearly, and maintain them
so bountifully, for Prophesying falsely, and teaching lies unto them: For, if
Ahab and Jezabel had not magnified, and so bountifully maintained those false
Prophets, and the people had not loved to hear them Prophesying lies and
falsehoods unto them; it is like enough, they would not have been so ready to
broach so many errors, and heresies unto them.

But what wonder is it for men to wander, when they love to wander; and to
err, when they desire to err, for, as Theognis says, (...).

So we may as truly say, (...).

For, as another says, Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam. He that
loves a Black-moore thinks her to be as fair as Venus; he that loves an Idol,
makes it his good god; and he that loves lies, errors, and heresies, embraces
them for divine verities.

But is it not a wonderful, and a horrible thing, that men endued with reason
and understanding, and men that pretend and seem to be wise and religious,
should notwithstanding be so brutish and sottish, as to love to wander, and
love to be deceived and guided out of the service of God, to follow after the
vain fancies of the false Prophets?

Yet you see our Prophet tells us, it is so with this people, Why the people
love to follow their false teachers, rather then the true Preachers.
and you shall find it so with many more: for as the wicked love the world,
better then the godly do love the Lord; so the Schismatic and Heretic, the
Quaker, the Anabaptist, the Presbyterians, the Independants, and the Papists,
are more ready to maintain, and more affectionate in their love to the false
teachers, then the true Protestants are, to relieve the true and faithful
Preachers. And the reason hereof is twofold.

1. Because the false Prophets are more sedulous to gain Proselytes, Preachers
are to make Christians; for so our Savior tells us, that while the husbandman
slept, the envious man sowed tares; Matthew. 13.25.
and while the faithful disciples slumbered, the traitor Judas was very
watchful, and ran from Christ to the high Priests, and from them back again
into the garden, and never rested until he had finished his intended treason,
and delivered the King of heaven into the hands of his own sinful subjects, to
be crucified.

And the second reason of this their more eager desire, to error, then love to
truth, is; because, as our Savior says, The children of this world are wiser
in their generation, then the children of light: For though, as our Prophet
says, This people were foolish and sottish children, that had no understanding
to do good, yet they were wise to do evil; Je. 4.22.
And so are all the children of this world; and that makes them more secret in
their plots, more studious in their doings, and more subtle in all their
actions, then are the children of God: and when they have done any foul fact,
and committed some great offense, then, as the Tragedian says, Scelera
sceleribus tuenda, their horrible acts are upheld by far more horrible
projects; and as thieves, to conceal their robberies, do commit murder; and
liars, to justify their lies, will forswear themselves; so will all wicked men
uphold, and maintain their wickedesse by greater wickedness: and as Medea
says, Quae scelere pacta est, scelere rumpatur fides, the covenant which they
have wickedly made, they will as wickedly break, and the faith which they have
deceitfully given, they will as readily frustrate.

And thus, as Demodicus said of the Milesians, that they were no fools, but
they did the very same things that fools did; so the wicked politicians, and
the hypocritical Saints of this world, they are no Jews, but they do the very
same things that those Jews did; they wander and err from the truth, because
they love to wander. And I would to God we would take as much pains to go to
heaven, as they do to run to hell; and that we would as zealously love the true
service of God, as they love to wander from this right worship of God.

3. For the manner of their doings, it is set down in the word, thus, The
manner of their doings
or after this sort; and it is likewise employed in this word, wanders; for he
that wanders, stands not still; but still goes on from the thickets unto the
briers, and from the briers unto the bogges; and so from one error unto
another.

So you see we are here in a wilderness, where this people went astray, and I
must follow them with the best Method I can to declare unto you their wandering
courses: but as Moses sets down only their principal stations; and not every
step, that they made in the wilderness of Sinai; so will I follow his example,
and show you only their principal aberrations in the wilderness of sin: and
because their sin is morbus complicatus, a twisted and a decompound
wickedness, containing many several branches; I will rank them into these
three heads.

1. Their aberrations, principally consisted in three things.
Their abuse of Gods service. 2. Their rebellion against their Governors. 3.
Their injuries unto their neighbors.
The which threefold sin, is circulus diaboli, the very circle of the devil,
wherein he drives the wicked to run their round.

1. The abuse of Gods service.
Their abuse of Gods service was in their idolatry and idolatrous worship of
God; for so the Prophet says, According to the number of thy Cities, were thy
gods, O Juda, and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem, Jer.
11.13.
have ye set up altars to that shameful thing. Where you may observe,

That, as there is but one God, so this God should be served in every City, and
in every street of every city: and, as God is the same in every place, That the
same God should have the same worship in all places.
in every city, and in every street of the city; so should his service be the
same in every place. And to that end, the Lord gave unto his people the same
Law, the same Sacraments, and the same Gospel, that the same God might have
the same worship in all places, and that his people might believe the same
faith, use the same prayer, receive the same Sacraments, and do the same
public service unto God in every City, and in every place; that so they might
attain unto the same end, which is the kingdom of heaven.

And therefore the Reverend Bishops, and Governors of Gods Church, were so
careful herein, to preserve the unity of the Church, and the uniformity of Gods
service, that they prescribed the same prayers, the same Psalms, The set form
of prayers and service of God, justified 1. By the people of God.
the same Chapters, and the same Service, to be used in all Churches, that all
the world might know, we worship the same God; And to justify this their
practice, of a set form of Prayers and Service of God, they have

1. The Precept of God himself, saying unto Moses, Speak unto Aaron, and to his
sons, saying, On this wise, ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto
them, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee; the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, Numb. 6.22.
and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and
give thee peace; and so likewise he prescribes unto them the very prayer that
they should make, and the very words that they should use, both as they went
forth, and as they returned home from Battle; for when the Ark set forward,
Moses said, Rise up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee, flee before thee; And when the Ark rested, Numb. 10.35.
he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel: and the Prophet
David uses the very same prayer, and the same words saying, Let God arise,
Psalm. 68.1.
and let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him, flee before him.

2. By the Precept of Christ. Luke 12.2.
They have the Precept of Christ himself, that bids us to use that prayer
which he taught us saying, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in heaven,
etc.

3. By the practice of the godly people in the Old Testament.
They have the practice of the godly people of the Old Testament, as you may
see the very words that they were to use in Gods service, when they offered
their first fruits, and the very prayer that they were to make in Deuteronomy. 26.
from the third verse to the tenth, and verse 13. And so the very words that the
Priests were to use unto the people when they came nigh unto the battle; as you
may see in Deuteronomy. 20.3. And the godly King Hezechias made certain Psalms, after
his recovery from his sickness; and says, We will sing my songs to the
stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of the Lord; Esaias
38.20.
and when he reformed the service of God, that the people had neglected, and
the wicked Kings had corrupted, he prescribed a set form of Gods worship, and
commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord; not as every simple Priest,
2 Chro. 29 30.
or silly Levite pleased, but with the words of David and Asaph the Seer.

And Mr. Seldom in his Notes upon Eutychius shows, Seldom in Eutych. page 41.
did. ad pagin. 25.
that since Ezra's time, when after their return from Babylon, the true Service
of God was restored, the Jews constantly used a set form of Gods worship in all
their Synagogues; every Synagogue using the same Service.

4. They have the practice of all the Saints under the New Testament: By the
practice of all the Saints, under the New Testament. Luke 11.1. Matthew, 26.44.
Psalm. 22.1.
as

1. Of John Baptist that taught his disciples a Set form of serving God, and a
set form of Prayer.

2 Of Christ himself, that used the same form of prayer, and repeated the same
words three times together, and commanded us to do the like; and when he was
upon the Cross, he used the very words of the Psalmist, changeing only the
Hebrew phrase into the Syriack Dialect.

3. Of the Primitive Church, as the Lyturgy of Saint James, Saint Basil, S.
Chrysostom, and the short Form of serving God, which Saint Peter left at Rome,
and the other, which Saint Mark left at Alexandria, do sufficiently testify

4, Of the whole Catholic Church, as it appears out of Cassander, and other
Writers of the Lyturgica. And

Therefore the religious Emperor Constantine, (...), Eusebius. de vita Constable. l.
4 c 17.
rendered Set Forms of prayers unto the Christians, says Eusebius; and his
Nobles used (...), Prayers that the Emperor liked; and they were all brought
(...), to pray the same prayer; yea he prescribed a Set Form of Service for his
soldiers, Idem l. 4. c. 20.
as the same Eusebius testifies.

And Saint August. says, that Sursum corda, lift up your hearts, are words ab
ipsis Apostolorum temporibus petita, used in the Church of Christ even from the
very times of the Apostles, and are agreeable to the Constitutions of the
Apostles. L. 8. c. 16.

5. They have the practice of the Heathens that were so wise herein, By the
practice of the heathens. Plato de legibus. l. 7. Alexand, ab^ Alexand. l. 4.
c. 17. Why the Gentiles used the same set prayers in their service.
as to use the same Service to every false god, as both Plato and Alexander ab
Alexandro, do bear witness; and they caused their prayers to be read out of a
Book.

1. That so the people might learn to repeat the same Prayers with the Priest,
when the same Prayers are constantly used in Gods service, which they shall
never be able to do, when they shall have a new Prayer, and a new Service upon
every new day.

2. Their Prayers were prescribed and read, lest the simple and ignorant Priest
should ask of God any evil thing, that should not be asked; and

3. Ne quid prepostere dicatur, their Petitions were set down, in verbis
conceptis, as we use to send messages to great persons, in these, and these
very words, lest we should offend either in the matter, or in the manner; in
the thing requested, or in the words wherein we have requested it.

Out of all which you may perceive how necessary it was for the Governors of
Gods Church, to see that the same God should have the same Service; and that
very Service which himself prescribes, and not what new Prayers and new
worship, in what Form, and under what words soever, every ignorant Priest
should extemporarily pour forth to the Almighty God: For if we ought to be very
careful to keep our feet, when we go to the house of God, Eccles. 5.1. then
how much more careful ought we to be, to keep our mouths, and look to our
words, which we come to speak in the presence of God.

And yet you hear what our Prophet says of this people, that according to the
number of their Cities, were their gods; and, according to their streets, so
were their altars, that is, new gods, and a new Service of God, in every City,
and in every street; go to this street, and to this Church, and you shall have
such Prayers, and such Chapters, and such a Service used unto the people; but
go to that other street, and to that other Synagogue of Jerusalem, and you
shall have another Altar set up, another Sacrifice, and another Service, as if
they served another god. Such was the deplorable condition of the Jews; and I
only wish, it may not so be amongst us.

2. How this people rebelled, and always resisted their Kings, and their
subordinate Magistrates.
Their Rebellion against their Governors, is the second branch of their
deviation; and this did ever accompany their abuse of Gods service; for, the
King, that is the Supreme Governor under God, is Custos utrinsque tabulae, The
keeper of God Laws, and to have a care that God should be rightly served;
therefore, they that will serve God, as they list, will never obey their King,
nor submit themselves to his under-Governours as they ought; for while the
highest wheel of the Clock is put out of temper, and thrust out of place, all
the rest must be disordered.

And therefore, as this people were most prone to Idolatry, and most greedily
desirous of changes, and new forms of Gods Service; So were they most frequent
in their disobedience unto their lawful Governors; as you may see how often
they murmured against Moses, against the sons of Gedeon, against Samuel, and
David, and Solomon, and Rehoboam, and almost against all the rest of the
succeeding Kings, even to Zedechias, that governed them at this time, when our
Prophet lived; and was so terrified, and domineered over by his Nobles and
Princes, that he could do just nothing, either for the Service of God, or the
protection of Gods Servants. For they said, We have no King, because we fear
not the Lord, what then should a King do to us? Just as I told you, Hos. 10.3.
No regard to Gods service, and to obey his Precepts, no obedience to their
King, and his under-Magistrates.

And yet, Chap. 8. v. 4.
if you look but two Chapters before, the Prophet tells us, the Lord says,
They have set up Kings, but not by me; and they have made Princes, and I knew
it not: as now we have done, set up those for Kings, that God never set up.
Where you may observe, what the Lord utterly disliketh in this people, and what
they principally desired; for he blames them for rejecting the Monarchical
Government, Chap. 10.3.
and saying, We have no King, or, What shall we do with a King, or a Monarch?
We cannot endure that any one man should rule and govern us. Chap. 8.4.
And then you see how (Chapter 8.4.) he blames them a great deal more, for
affecting the Aristocratical Government, and making many Kings and Princes to
govern the people; which is the greatest plague that can happen to any people;
and which none but the Tribe of Issachar would suffer to rule over them.

And therefore I say, these Dominions are herein infinitely obliged to his
Highness the Lord Protector, for dissolving, and disabling those many Kings and
Princes, that tyrannized, or were such Tyrants over us, and reducing our
Government again, to be as it is, most acceptable unto God, and most excellent
among men, Monarchical, under the Rule of one supreme Governor.

And we should all be doubly obliged to his Highness, if God should put it into
his heart, and he submit himself to Gods will, for his own honor, which he
might gain thereby, and for the tranquillity and happiness of all the people of
these Kingdoms, to bring, and settle our Government, which I believe he might
easily do, in the right Line, and on the right Heir, which God and Nature have
designed for it. For,

When God has designed a King, to be the Governor over his people, as he did
Moses and David, over the Israelites, and other Kings successively over his
people, how odious and how abominable is disobedience to any of those Kings in
the fight of God, you may easily perceive, if you mark how God seems to be more
angry with the contestation and rebellion of Corah and his confederates against
Moses, and of Absalom against David, and of this people against Z^dechia, than
he was for the Idolatry and impiety they committed against himself; for if you
weigh the haynousness of the sin by the severity of the punishment, which is
the only balance that we can judge by, you shall find, that Absoloms rebellion
against his King, 2 Samuel 18.14.
that was his Governor, was more severely punished, than his Idolatry, 2 Samuel
18.18.
or any other his impiety against God. And lest you should deny Absalom to have
committed any idolatry, by that Pillar which he reared in the Kings dale, you
may see, that the first and greatest Idolatry of the Israelites, when they
worshipped their golden Calf, was punished, but with the death of about 3000.
men; Exodus 32.28.
and yet when they disobeyed Moses, and rebelled against him, and it was but a
privative rebellion, no taking up of arms, no plotting of his death, but the
very embrio of a rebellion, and the beginning of disobedience, Numb. 16.49.
We will not come at thee; there died in the plague, fourteen thousand and
seven hundred men; besides them that died about the matter of Corah, How
severely God punishes the rebellious, and disobedient people.
which were no less than two hundred and fifty men. For God having appointed
the Emperor or King, to be the Sovereign Magistrate, and commanded him to be
the Governor of his people, and to have a special care of his Worship, and to
be the Defender of the Faith of Christ, What can this Governor do, to uphold
the Faith, and to hinder the service of God to fail and to fall to the ground,
when the people disobey him, and refuse to be ruled by him, and spurn against
him? as our people have done against our King.

And therefore, though this disobedience to the Magistrate, and rebellion
against our King, that is Chief Governor, in it self, if you consider the
object of either sin, is not equivalent, nor so heinous, as Idolatry; yet, Why
God is so angry with them that rebel against their Kings.
because Government is sustentaculum, the prop and stay of the true Religion,
and disobedience, against our lawful Governors, has always produced the
corruption of Gods true Service, as you may see in the rebellion of Jeroboam,
who no sooner fell from his obedience to his King, but he presently fell from
his duty to his God, and corrupted his Service with gross Idolatry; Therefore
is God so extremely angry, and does so severely punish the rebellion and
disobedience of the people, as here, because Zedechia was not suffered by these
stubborn and disobedient people, to follow the advice of this our Prophet;
therefore they were all delivered into seventy years Captivity.

And as the Lord is extreme angry with those rebellious people, that disobey
and labor to displace the Kings and Governors that he sets over them; So he
shows abundance of his love and kindness to them, that submit themselves to
his ordinance, and behave themselves dutifully and loyally toward those Kings
whatsoever they be, that God places over them; as you may see it in the whole
course and Story of King David and Saul: for as he was the most dutiful and
most faithful subject, that ever we read of; so God was pleased to raise him to
be the best King that ever reigned over Israel; for, his King, and his
Governor was Saul, the very first of that Order among the Jews; and he was an
hypocrite, a persecutor, a murderer, a tyrant, and a mad man; yet when David,
whose life he thirsted after, had him at his mercy, and could as easily have
taken off his head, as to cut off the lap of his garment, he said, The Lord
forbid, 1 Samuel 24.6.
that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords Anointed, to stretch
forth my hand against him; and his heart smote him, because he had cut off his
skirt.

And when he had him again in the like trap, he said unto Abner, Art not thou a
valiant man, and who is like thee in Israel? wherefore then have thou not kept
thy Lord the King? this thing is not good, that thou have done; As the Lord
lives, you are worthy to die, because you have not kept your Master, the Lords
Anointed, and his oath; As the Lord lives, shows, Sam. 26.16.
that he spoke it in good earnest, and jested not.

And if they be worthy to die, that defend not, and protect not, such a wicked
King, especially in going about so vile an action, as the murdering of so good
a man, and so dutiful a subject as David was; then what shall become of them,
and what are they worthy of, that murmur, and grudge, and plot against the life
of such a ^ood King, as maintained peace and j^stice amongst his people, and
offered no special injury to any particular man of us all?

Surely, if I had the wisdom of Solomon, and the eloquence of Demosthenes, I
were not able to express the odiousness of their sin, that conspired against
the person, and proceedings of such a King, as is inoffensive before God, and
all good men.

But to go on to show unto you, how faithful this good subject was to this bad
King, when the young man, that was an Amalekite, and none of Saul or David's
subjects, came of his own accord, to bring tidings unto David of Saul's death,
and of the good service, that he thought he had done unto Saul, at his own
request, to put him out of his pain; David presently caused him to be put to
death; Sam. 1.15.
because he durst presume to offer any violence, though that violence seemed to
be a favor, unto the Ruler of the people, whom we are straightly forbidden to
revile, Exodus 22.28.
or to speak evil of him.

So dutiful and so loyal, a subject was David, to so evil a Governor, and so
wicked a King as Saul. And this his loyalty and fidelity unto Saul, was one of
the chiefest virtues that we find commendable in him, before God had, according
to his fidelity to his King, raised him to the Rule and Government of his
people.

And I wish that all, and every one of us, would strive and study to imitate
this good man in our obedience, fidelity, and loyalty, to our King and
Governors, that God has placed over us.

But here, it may be, some troubled and discontented spirit will say; I could
willingly yield all due respect and obedience unto our Kings and Governors,
could I be satisfied, that God appointed them to be the Kings and Governors of
his people; Jeremy 23.21.
but as the Lord says of the false Prophets, They run and I sent them not; So
he says, They have set up Kings, but not by me, Hosea 8.4.
and they have made Princes, and I knew it not: And, should we be obedient and
faithful to such Kings and Governors, that ambitiously set up themselves, and
are not righteously set up by God?

To these men, that stumble at this block, I answer,

1. That the Prophet speaks there, as I showed to you before, not of any
Sovereign Monarch, but of the Aristocratical government of many men, that will
all be as Kings and Princes, ruling and domineering over the people; for so you
see, the Prophet speaks in the plural number, of many Kings, that in all the
whole Scripture, you shall never find, to be either appointed or approved by
God to be the Governors of his people; for indeed those many Kings and
Governors of equal auth^rity, are none of Gods Governors, neither are they
set up by God, nor, as I find, approved by God, in any place of all the
Scripture: But as God is One, and the only Monarch of all the World; so he ever
appoints one Monarch only, to be his Deputy, to govern the people or nation
that he commits under his charge.

2. I say, that this Monarch and Governor, whom God raises to govern his
people, attaineth unto his Throne and right of Government, even by the
ordination of God, diverse ways: as

1. Sometimes by Birth, which is the most usual, best, and surest way, and most
agreeable to Gods will.

2. Sometimes by Choice, and the election of the people; as Herodotus says,
the Medes chose Deioces, to be their King; and the Princes of Germany, now
choose their Emperor, and they commonly choose him that is by Birth the eldest
son of the deceased King.

3. Sometimes by the power of the Sword, as God gave the Monarchy of the Medes
unto Cyrus, and the Kingdom of Darius, and of many others unto Alexander, and
the Empire of the Romans unto Augustus; and many other Kingdoms unto others,
that had no other right unto their Dominions, but what they purchased with the
edge of their Sword. Which right, though it be nothing else but Usurpation and
Intrusion, in these ambitious hunters after rule and dominion; yet
notwithstanding, it must needs be a very good right, as the same comes from
the just God, who is the God of war, and gives the victory unto Kings, when as
the Poet says, -- Victrix causa diis placuit. And he having the right and
power Paramount, to translate the rule, and transfer the dominion of his
people to whom he will; he has oftentimes, for their sins, thrown down the
mighty from their seat, and translated the government of his people unto
others; whom some ways he thought fitter to effect his Divine will; as, he did
give the Kingdom of Saul unto David, and of Belshazzers unto Cyrus, and the
like.

4. Sometimes by the wit wisdom and policy either of themselves or of their
friends, as Darius, by the policy of his horse-keeper, Justin. l. 1. versus
finem.
attained to the Kingdom of Persia, as Justin writes.

5. Sometimes by the Sword or Policy, and by the choice and election of the
people together: as David, 2 Samuel 2.4. and chap. 4.1.
both by warring against Ishbosheth the son of Saul, and by the choice and
election of the men of Judah, attained to the government of the Kingdom of
Israel; and so many others, when either by their wisdom or valor they
prevailed against their opposers, were elected and confirmed by the people, as
were William the Conqueror, and Henry the 7. in this Kingdom.

And which way soever of these ways, or any other way, the Lord God sets up
a Prince to rule and govern his people, or suffers the God of this world to
set up an Usurper, and a wicked Tyrant, to domineer over them; it is not safe
nor wisdom for the people, so long as that Usurper has the commanding power,
and the generality of the people weak and unarmed, tumultuously and
undiscreetly to disobey such commands as may, without offending God, be
lawfully performed; but as the high Priest Jehoida, and the people in the time
of Athalia, did most patiently endure that Usurpation, until, in a fit
opportunity, God gave them strength and power to shake off that yoke, so should
we and all other people do in the like case; and not to stir, before a fit
time, to undo our selves, and to do no good.

And therefore, as our Savior Christ, when the young man came unto him, and
said, Bid my brother to divide the inheritance betwixt him and me: Answered,
Who made me a Judge, of these temporal things, or a divider over you? Luke
12.14. for mine office and calling is, to save your souls, and not to divide
your lands; So should every one of us say, in such desperate times as these,
Who has made me a Judge to determine, whom God has been pleased to make the
governor of his people, or to inquire what interest the governor has, or by
what means he came to that interest, in his government? For my duty is, not to
rebel, but in all things, to study to be quiet; And our Lawers say, this
Doctrine is agreeable to the laws of our Land: that say, Possessio Coronae
tollit omnes defectus, and requires all obedience unto the present powerful
governor; and they tell you, how an Act of Parliament confirmed this truth in
Henry the 7, for the adherents of Richard the 3. And in such a case, and at
such times, of a powerful Usurpation; it seems, that our good God will excuse
us, for our passive, unwi^^ing and inoffensive obedience, when we cannot
possibly do otherwise.

1. Because the Prophet tells us plainly, that the most high God, bears rule
over the Kingdom of men, and he appoineth over it, whomsoever be pleases; Dan.
4.14.
and he places them over it, which way soever he pleases, unknowen, and
perhaps unlikely in our eyes, and it may be, unjust in our judgment; yet, most
just to him and in his sight; because his ways are not as our ways, nor his
thoughts as our thoughts; but his ways are in the Seas, his paths in the
great waters, and his footsteps are not known.

2. Because Christ himself, by his own example has taught us to yield this
obedience to our governors; whosoever they be, and whatsoever they be, good or
bad, and which waysoever they came into their government; by the true and
lawful right of Succession, or the unjust and powerful Usurpation; For when
the Jews, that thought the Romans, especially Tiberius that was but the second
Emperor, after that Julius Caesar took the government from the Senate, had no
right in the Kingdom of Jurie, came unto him, and asked, If it was lawful to
pay tribute unto Caesar; he does not say, He was an Alien, and Usurper, and a
Tyrant, the which things as I conceive, were all true; but leaving him as he
was, and no ways meddling with his right or interest, Math. 22.21.
he bids them Give unto Caesar, what was Caesar's, and to God, what was Gods. So
when he stood to be judged before Pilate, and before Herod, he said to neither
of them, that they had no right unto their government, nor any lawful
Authority over him; but he tells Pilate, that He could have no power at all,
except it were given him from above; whereby he shows that Pilate's power,
Joh. 19.11.
over the Jews, by whomsoever, or by what means soever he came to it among men,
was notwithstanding a power given to him, and a government committed to him, by
God.

3. Because the Apostles of our Savior Christ, and the Fathers of the
primitive Church, did all of them teach the same Doctrine of such obedience, as
I showed, unto the present powerful governors, and never intimated unto the
people, that they should either foolishly revolt or simply conspire against the
powerful present Ruler, be he what he will, either Tyrant, or Usurper; for,
though Nero was such a monster of men, as that infamous libell publicly
written of him, does declare, Quis neget Aeneae magna de stirpe Neronem?
Sustulit hic matrem, sustulit ille patrem.
Who can deny, of great AEnea our Nero sprang to be
That rid his Mother of her life, as Sire from fire did he?


Yet S. Paul never questioning what he was, good or bad, nor by what right he
came to be the Emperor, to go vern all the Provinces, by the subtilty of
Agrippina, as the Historians testify; but considering that, as Daniel says,
God places whom he will, and which ways he will, and for what time he will,
upon the Throne of Supreme Majesty, He exhorts every soul therefore
cordially, and not hypocritically, to be subject to the highest power; and he
shows the reason why they should do so, videlicet because there is no power
but from God; Romans 13.1. 1 Pet. 2.13.
and the powers that are, are ordained by God; and S. Peter confirms the same
Doctrine.

And so, according to this example of Christ, and these instructions of his
Holy Apostles, all the Martyrs, and all the Holy Fathers of the primitive
Church, never resisted, but were always dutiful and obedient in all things,
so far as the Law of God gave them leave, to the worst, the most Tyrannical,
and greatest Usurpers, of all the Emperors, as well as to the best; they never
examined what they were, nor how they came unto their government, but whom they
found to possess the Imperial Robes, to have the Crown on his head, and the
Scepter and Sword in his hand; to him they readily yielded their inoffensive
obedience, and served him in his wars against his enemies, as they did unto
Nero, Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian, Julian, Phocas, and others; whereof some
were unlawful, some unjust, and some ungodly and most wicked Usurping
Emperors. For they wisely considered, that if the war was unjust; yet, as S.
Augustine says, Aug. contra Manich.
Reum facit regem iniquitas imperandi, and innocentem militem ostendit ordo
serviend; the iniquity of commanding makes the commander guilty, and the order
or duty of serving shows the Soldier to be innocent; because that being
commanded, he may not refuse, and he must not resist, nor lift up his hand
against his Governor, but tolerate whatsoever is inflicted upon him, unless
he can by a fair and lawful means prevent it; because it is far better to be a
Martyr, then a Traitor; and, as the Prophet says, Obedience is better then
Sacrifice, and Rebellion it is as the sin of Witchcraft.

And if the Apostles and Martyrs, and the Primitive Christians were thus
dutiful, obedient and loyal subjects, to such Tyrants and Usurpers, and
Persecutors, as the aforesaid wicked Governors were; how much more dutiful,
and obedient, (and thankful to God for him) ought we to have been to such a
loving, mild, and godly Christian King, as wronged none of us, but did preserve
peace in these dominions, and upheld Justice and Judgment among us, until
that Antichristian long-Parliament rebelled against him?

And so the premises being well considered, to the boiling spirits of
discontented persons, that distaste all meats, that suit not with their palats,
and have not the patience to tarry Gods leisure, and to espic a convenient
opportunity to do the work that is just, and ought to be done in its due time;
but will inconsiderately, and unseasonably, like Brutus and Cassius, attempt to
do good service uuto the Commonwealth, by taking the usurper out of the way; I
say their intention is very good, and their desire most laudable: yet, lest
with Brutus and Cassius, they disturb the Common wealth, and lose their own
wealth, and destroy themselves by their unseasonable prosecution of their
commendable design; I would advise them, and all of their mind, in all places
where such Usurpations are maintained, to follow the example of Jehoiada, to
watch their opportunity, and then to do it thoroughly, and not to fail; which,
as I conceive, is both a just, and a wholesome counsel.

But this people, whereof this our Prophet speaks, murmured, and spurned,
and, like our Parliament, rebelled and kicked, not against an Usurper (which
had been commendable in them) but against their own lawful king, which was most
displeasing unto God.

And therefore these Jews, and all that imitate these Jews, are here justly
threatened to be rejected and cast off by God, for their stubbornness, 1 Samuel
15.22.
disobedience, and rebellion against their lawful King For, as Samuel says,
that obedience is more acceptable to God then sacrifice; so I say, that
obedience to our lawful King and his Magistrates, is the best thing that we can
do to procure the peace and tranquillity of the Commonwealth.

3. The last branch of their wandering from the right way, Branch of their
wandering threefold.
was their injuries and oppressions against their neighbors, and this was
threefold. 1. The robbing of their goods. Robbing their neighbou^s of their
good. Jerem. 22.17.
2. The imprisoning of their persons. 3. The taking away of their lives.


1. The Prophet tells us, the heart of this people was for covetousness, and
for oppression, and for violence; they builded their houses by
unrighteousness, and their chambers by wrong; C. eode. v, 13.
they used their neighbors service without wages, and gave him not for his
work; and this they did, says the Prophet, that they might build them wide
houses, or stately Palaces, V. 13.
with large chambers, and great windows, cieled with Cedar, and painted with
Vermilion; They cared not what wrongs they did to others, so they might get it
unto themselves; they had no regard to justice, as you may see it in the 15.
and 16. verses; but whatsoever they did to enrich themselves, and from
whomsoever they took it, it must be reputed just, and none dare speak against
it.

And yet the Prophet tells us, that as a Cage is full of birds, so are their
houses full of deceits; Jer. 5.27.
and therefore they are become great, and waxen rich; yea, they are waxen fat
and shine, and do overpasse the deeds of the wicked.

And, Amos 8.6.
as the Prophet Amos says, they bought the poor for silver, and the needy for
a pair of shoes: So greedy was this people to scrape together the wealth of
this world, and had no regard to equity, honesty, or good conscience.

And which is more wonderful, from the least of them even to the greatest of
them, every one is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet even to the
Priest, Jerem. 6.13. Esaias 56.1.
every one deals falsely; and the Prophet Esaias calls them greedy dogs, that
could never have enough.

And whether any such covetousness and oppression be amongst our men, and
especially amongst our Levites in these days, let them that are oppressed with
over-heavie Taxes, Customs, Excise, etc. judge. I leave it to you that have
best experience of these times, to determine; and I will not be the accuser of
my brethren; as some Duns Scotus of them, have been of me, though to no purpose.

But whether it was the love of Justice to punish us for our sins, or
covetousness, to enrich themselves, and their associates, that made our
Grandees of late years, to take away the reward of our labors, even of all our
labors, from our very youth to our decrepit age; I leave it to the Judge of
all the world to detetmine: for they have done it, and he knows best, why
they did it; only we profess it to all the world, that our consciences cannot
tell us of any thing that we have done, to deserve to be deprived of it; And
therefore we presume to pray to God, though we tax them not, that the woe
which the Prophet denounces against this people, Jerem. 22.13.
for their covetousness, and injustice, may not light upon any of them, that
took away the bread out of our mouths, and our childrens, and left many of the
most painful laborers in Gods Vineyard, to dig, or beg, or starve.

2. Imprisoning their persons. Jerem 5.26.
This people laid wait, as he that sets snares to catch men, (i.e.) they had
spies in every corner; and if they found any that spoke any thing against them,
or against their covetousness, or injustice, though it were never so true;
then, as they did with Jeremy, they would throw him into the dungeon; so Herod
did with John Baptist, and with S. Peter, and with the rest of Gods Servants,
that reproved their injustice, and spoke the truth to them. And do I say, that
any of our men in these day es did so, or does the like?

But, as when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, in
the days of Job, Satan came also among them; so I fear, that when the children
of God do now come to present themselves in his Church, Satan has some of his
Emissaries amongst them, that come as the Scribes and Pharisees came to hear
Christ, not to be instructed by him, that they might be saved, but to catch at
some things in his words, that they might accuse him.

3. Taking away their lives Jer. 19.4. c. 22.17. Jer. 2.34.
They filled Jerusalem with the blood of innocents, and that which was a great
deal worse, even the worst of all, In their skirts was found the blood of the
souls of the poor innocents; which I take to be not only an Hebraism, but also
to show unto us, how they sought to destroy both the bodies and the souls of
men; and that is, as I conceive, by forcing them, for fear of being undone, and
to have all their livelihood taken from them, to forswear themselves, as the
Prophet Hosea shows; they have spoken words, swearing falsely, Hosea 10.4.
in making a Covenant; and, shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord?
For, though they pretended this, out of zeal to Gods service; to compel men to
such a Form of Gods worship, and to profess such and such a Religion, as they
conceived best, or else to deprive them of their possessions; yet I find the
best Divines protesting, that this is contrary to Gods will, that would have
faith wrought in us, by preaching, and not by fighting, and Religion settled in
us by persuasion, and not by compulsion. For, as Lipsius says, Lipsius polit.
l. 4. c. 4.
The greatest thing that any Prince is able to bring to pass, by his terror,
is, to make that he, who does most of all seem to be obedient, does in outward
show consent, but never in his heart; for as, Lactantius demands, Who can
compel me, either to believe what I list not, Lactant. l. 5. c. 14. Faith, and
Religion, not to be forced. Eccles. hist. l.
or not to believe what I will? And therefore, constraint brings
dissimulation, and not Religion, and makes Hypocrites, and not Saints, when
the constrained persons do worship the power of the constrainer, and not his
God: which made King Theodorick to say, That he could not command Religion,
because no man could be enforced, to believe against his will: and there is
nothing more free than Religion, which the mind no sooner withstandeth, but
forthwith it vanishes, and is no more Religion; says Lactantius. quo supra.
Hosea. 10.4.


And yet these Jews, whereof the Prophet Hosea speaks, sought with all rigor,
to compel men to swear unto their wicked covenant; and thereby, says our
Prophet, Their skirts were filled with the blood of the souls of the poor
innocents; when, to save their estates, they believed their faith, and became
such hypocrites before God, for fear of men, as made them most liable to Gods
heavy judgments; which must needs be no small offense in this people, and in
all those, that imitate them herein.

But let this wickedness, and the sin of this people, be what it will, it
proceeded all from the Assembly of their Divines, and false Prophets; The
Assembly of their Divines, the chiefest cause of their wickedness. Jer.
23.13.14,
For they caused my people Israel to err, and they strengthened the hands of
the evil doers, that none does return from his wickedness, says the Prophet.
For indeed, we that are the Teachers of the people, are just like Jeremy's
Figs, They that were good, were very good, and they that were bad, were very
bad: So are we, either the best, or the worst of men; and we either bring men
to Christ, or send them to the Antichrist; either make them Saints, or make
them Seditious and Heretics; and through our pride, covetousness, and
ambition, we lead them, like fools as they are that follow falsehood, into all
mischief.

And therefore from the King to the peasant, from the highest to the lowest,
all men ought to be wary whom they affect, and choose to be their Teachers; For
it is most true, that, as the Prophet says, Like Priest, like people; unless
it be, as S. Bernard says, That now, the Priest is worse than the people. For
we know, the Arian Bishops made Constantius an Arian Emperor; and the false
Prophets, made Ahab and Jezabel so zealously affected to the service of Baal.
So the Anabaptistical Priests, make their followers Anabaptists, and the popish
Priests make Papists.

And therefore all great men, Kings, Princes, and Governors, ought to have a
special care, to choose Orthodoxal men to be their Chaplains, and all men ought
to have the like care, to follow the Doctrine of the true Preachers, and to be
as willing to hear the Orthodox and true Preachers, as the Heterodox and false
Prophets. For if Ahab and Jezabel, would have hearkened to Micaiah as well as
they did to the Prophets of Baal, it is very likely Baal had not been so much
worshipped, nor the true Service of God so much neglected. But S. Gregory l. 4.
Epist. 38. says most truly, Rex superbiae prope est, and, quod dici nefas,
sacerdotum ei praeparatur exercitus.

And herein this City, and this Kingdom, is now very happy, that God has sent
them so Religious, and so Noble a King, as does favor and countenance the true
Protestants, and is not apt, to believe the aspersions, that the false brethren
are so ready to cast upon them.

But to proceed, to show to you, how this great wickedness of the people
proceeded from the Priests; our Prophet says, That from the Prophets of
Jerusalem (which was in Judea, as London in England, and Dublin in Ireland,
Lishon in Portugal, and Paris in France, the chiefest City of the Kingdom) is
profaneness gone forth into all the land; Jer. 23.25.
that is, they of the Head-City were the cause that all the other Cities of the
whole Kingdom do so prephanely, The Head-City is the Leader of all the other
(...) of the Kingdom.
and so irreverently serve the Lord. And therefore the Prophets of the
Metropolis, ought to be very careful and circumspect, what example they give to
other Cities.

And this our Prophet further shows, How this great mischief, of profaneness,
covetousness, injustice, and all other wickedness, happened to become so
general among this people; and that was, When the unity of the Clergy, and
uniformity of Gods service, was divided into many Sects, and different sorts of
serving God; Jer. 12.10.
for, many Pastors have destroyed my vineyard, says the Prophet: not because
they were many, had they been all of one mind; but because they were of many
different minds; as were the Scribes Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians, Esseni,
and many other inferior Sects among the Jews; as now Presbyterians,
Independants, Anabaptists, Papists, Quakers, Dippers, and many Sects and
Factions are among us: when the Church of God that should be, tanquam Acies
ordinata, like a wellordered Army, as Solomon says, ( i.e.) governed by the
General, and his subordinate Officers, and not be commanded by a multitude of
unequal, and all dissenting Commanders, shall be instructed by a company of
disagreeing Preachers; whereof most of them shall be like Jeroboam's Priests,
and each one of them an Independent, to command in Chief, to gather a Church
for himself, whereof no man else shall have any interest from them; and then
only Gods pleasant portion as the Prophet calls the Church, Jer. 12.10. Chap.
4.26.
becomes a desolate wilderness, that brings nothing but thorns and briars,
errors, heresies, and all wickedness.

And therefore questionless, great is the account that these Prophets have to
answer for, at the last Day; not only for their own sins, which they never look
into, but do reprove others for their covetousness, and are more covetous
themselves; and do most eagerly inveigh against the pride, hatred, and malice
of the people, and never look into their own pride, nor consider of their own
fouler faults, but especially for those sins also, which either by their evil
example, or their false Doctrine, they are the cause thereof in the people.

But will you hear what the Lord says of this assembly of false Prophets, or
these many Pastors, that by their discord, and dissenting from their
Governors, Jeremy 23.21. Chap. 27.14. Chap. 29.8. Chap. 12.6. Chap. 14.14.
destroy the Church. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they run; therefore
thus says the Lord, Hearken not unto them; and though they speak fair words,
yet believe them not. And so Moses, and our Savior Christ do give the same
counsel unto us, that we should neither believe them, nor hearken unto the
smooth words of the false Prophets; for if the people did not love to hear
them, and so love to be deceived by them, they would not be so ready to
prophecy lies, errors, and falsehoods unto them. And therefore I could wish,
the people would follow the counsel of Christ, and our Prophet, not to hearken
unto the Sermons of those Prophets, that God professes, he has not sent them.
And so you have heard, 1. How this people wandered. And now rests, 2. How they
loved to wander. And now rests, 3. The manner of their wandering. And now
rests,


4. Their haste or greediness to proceed in their wickedness.
The last thing considerable in the doings of this people is, their haste and
greediness to preceed in their wicked ways; for they refrained not their
feet; but as the Prophet David says, Their feet were swift to shed blood, and
they would have no delays in their dealings, but cried out with the Poet, --
semper nocuit differ paratis. Lucan.
Nothing is so dangerous in great affairs, as to lie lingering about the
matter; therefore our Savior says to Judas, Quod facis, fac cito: and when he
bad his disciples go to Preach the Gospel, he bids them to salute no man by the
way, not that he disliked and prohibited civil respects, and courteous
salutations, as, Good morrow, God be with you, or, God speed you, and the like:
But that they should not stay complementing, and neglect the great and weighty
business that they were sent about, to Preach the Gospel of God.

And so the wicked, having a greater desire to do evil, then the godly have to
do good, do make all the haste they can, to bring their work to pass, and to
effect all their projects: and they are very active, and very nimble in all
their actions; I remember Horace speaks of Lucilius that, -- in hora saepe
ducentos Horatius Sermon. l. 1. p. 212.

Vt magnum, versus dictabat, stans pede in uno;
He would power out two hundred verses in an hour; but in his book De art
Poetica, he reprehendeth the verse, -- quod non Idem de art; Poet. p. 369.

Multa dies and multa litura coercuit, atque
Perfectum decies non castigavit ad unguem.
which had not taken up many days, and undergon a ten fold correction, Our new
Preachers can power forth their sermons as fast as Lucilius his verses.
before it came to be perfect. For you know the old proverb, Canis festinans
caecos parit catulos, the hasty bitch brings forth blind whelps: and it is
the soft fire that makes the sweet malt; and therefore, as the faithful
Christian, Qui crediderit, non festinabit, will not presently believe all that
he hears, when, as Solomon says, Sultus credit omni verb^, he is a fool that
believes every word he hears: but the wise Christian, with the noble men of
Beroea, will examine and search what things are true, Act. 17.11.
and what are not; so the wise and careful Preacher cannot power forth his
Sermons as fast as Lucilius could do his verses, or as our Enthusiasts, that
speak all by the spirit, which teaches them in illa hora, in that instant,
what they should say: so that they do far exceed those, whereof Bosquierus
speaks, Septennes pueri concionantur in Ordine Francisci: quarta naufragii
tabula, in dominica post Pentecost. page 241. that at seven years old, What
children could do in the order of S. Francis.
they could Preach in the order of S. Francis; but the true Preachers think,
they ought to be more careful to correct, and weigh every word of their
Sermons, before they Preach them than the Poet ought to correct his Verses,
when as the Prophet flatly pronounces, Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently: for the negligent Preachers, make negligent hearers; and that
must needs be negligence when they do so hastily power forth, quicquid in
buccam venerit, what comes first into their mouth.

And yet, as the children of Israel would not stay for Moses, his coming down
from the mount, though he was all that while preparing and providing good laws,
and instructions for them, but they must presently change their good God for a
golden Calf, and as Jeroboam after his revolt from the house of David, and his
dislike to the true service of God, in the Temple of Solomon, must presently
frame a new Religion; So must all Innovators and all other transgressors
speedily, without any consultation, either with God or good men, overthrow what
they dislike, and establish what they please; as in former times, I will not
say of late, we have had most woeful experience of this hasty ruinating of the
Orthodox Doctrine, and erecting the heterodox; and the sudden plucking down, in
an hour, what had stood one hundred years; and the sudden setting up of things,
like J^nah's gourd, which perhaps should fall under the like fate, as being but
the emblem of such fiery Prophets.

But the words are yet more Emphatical then this making haste to proceed in
their evil doings; The wicked cannot endure to be hindered to destroy
themselves.
because they not only made haste, speedily to finish all their evil-begun
work; but, They refrayned not their feet, says the Prophet, that is, they
could not endure any remora, or any means that might hinder their own hasty
destruction: but, as Jeroboam was enraged against the man of God, and Ahab
against Elias, because they sought to preserve them from ruin; so were this
people mad against Jeromy, and cast him into the dunge^n, and adjudged him to
be put to death; because he sought to stop them in their Peg^sine race unto
their own destruction.

And therefore, seeing they were so impatient to be reproved, and so violent
against them that sought their preservation, there was no means used to prevent
and hinder their evil deeds, and the progress of their transgressions; for, as
our Prophet shows,

1 Their Prophets and Preachers flattered them, Their Preachers were flatterers.
and reproved not their wicked ways; but they sowed pillows under their
elbows, and so, strengthened them in their wickedness. And those other
Prophets, that did not flatter them, yet were they silent for fear of them,
following the counsel of the Poet, Dum furor in cursu est, currenti cede
furori:
Difficiles aditus impetus omnis habet.


To give place unto their fury, to prevent their own calamity. Which
notwithstanding was but to escape the smoke and fall into the fire; but to
avoid man's anger by not reproving them, and to be liable to Gods wrath, for not
reproving them.

2. Their judges were corrupt.
The Judges and Magistrates did not execute the laws against them; for though
the Lord commands them, to execute true judgment, and show mercy and
compassion every man to his brother, Zech. 7.9.
and oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, nor the stranger, nor the poor;
yet, as our Prophet testisieth, Jer. 5 28.
they judged not the cause of the fatherless, and the right of the needy did
they not judge; and the Prophet Esaias says, Their Princes were rebellious, and
companions of thieves; every one loved gifts, and followed after rewards, and
judged not the fatherless, neither did the cause of the widow, come unto them;
Ezay 1.23.
but they suffered oppressions, robberies, and murders to go unpunished: and so
the Laws lay as dead; because the execution of the law, is the life of the law;
and I fear not, I care not, to be condemned by the Law, so I be freed by the
Judge, and saved from the Execution of the Law.

And this twofold remisseness, and double error of the Magistrates, and
Minislers, did exceedingly multiply the sins of the people; and as highly
provoke the wrath of God, The sin of one man does often bring a plague upon
many.
not only against the offenders, but also against the whole Nation, and
especially against those that were so slack, in the punishing of these offenses
and performance of their duties; For if you search the Scriptures, you shall
find, that the sin of one man, which is left unpunished, brings a plague upon
many, and the execution of justice upon a transgressor, does avert Gods
judgment from a multitude: As when Achan sinned, Josh. 7.21. 1 Chr. 2.7. Numb.
25.8.
all Israel was troubled, and he was called the troubler of Israel; who
transgressed in the thing accursed. And when Zimri and Cozbi offended, the
whole people suffered, so that twenty four thousand of them died; but when that
Phineas executed judgment, then the plague ceased, Psalm. 106.11.
says the Text; and when Achan suffered, the wrath of God was pacified.

And therefore Moses very often, Numb. 35.31.
and in many places exhorts the children of Israel, that whenever any man
committed Idolatry, or Murder, or Sodomy, or any other heinous crime, Deuteronomy.
17.12.
they should take no satisfaction for his offense, but the transgressor should
be put to death: The not punishing of transgressors incourageth others to
transgre^s.
their eye should not spare him, neither should they have pity upon him; so
should they turn away evil from Israel. For it is most certain, as the wise man
says, that because sentence, or judgment, against an evil work is not speedily
executed, but deferred, though not pardoned, yet the heart of the children of
men is altogether, or fully, set in them to do evil; and it is the greatest
encouragement that can be for wicked men, to proceed on, in their wickedness,
Eccl. 8.12.
to see other wicked persons pardoned and not punished.

And I pray God, the judgments of God, as sicknesses, death, wars, and the
like, may not proceed on us for our not proceeding to the execution of justice,
against Profane oppressors, the Kings murderers, and other like wicked
offenders, the murderers of the Kings Loyal subjects. For we know how Saul
spared Agag, that was destined by God for his wickedness to be put to death;
and how, for sparing him, he lost both his life and his Kingdom, and had all
his posterity rooted out; and we know how the Israelits spared the Canaanits,
whom God commanded to be slain, and how for sparing them, they became thorns in
their eyes, and briars unto their sides; And I beseech you to consider what the
Prophet says unto Ahab, Thus says the Lord, because thou have let go out of
thy hand, and so pardoned, a man whom I appointed to utter destruction, that
is, to death, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people, for his
people. 1 King. 20.42. So hateful it is to God, that we should pardon such
transgressors, as he will not pardon.

And it is no wonder, that God should thus deal with them, that thus spare the
transgressors; for as he, Qui non prohibet peccare cum possit, jubet; which
does not hinder a man to sin, when he can hinder him, spurs him on to sin,
says Seneca; so, Qui justificat impium, he that justifies the wicked, and
spares a transgressor whom he ought and can punish, is partaker of his
transgression; and is as abominable before God, as he is, Prove. 17.15.
that condemns the innocent: says Solomon.

And these are the two chiefest sorts of evil, The two things that God chiefly
hates in the doings of men toward other men.
that the Lord hates in the doings of men toward men; that is, 1. To oppress,
condemn, and wrong the good and godly men. 2. To promote, justify, and free the
wicked men, and suffer them to flourish, notwithstanding all their bloody sins
and transgressions.


And against these evils, we the Preachers of Gods Word, are enjoined still to
denounce the judgments of God; and if we tell not the people of their faults,
and reprove them not for these doings, they shall die in their sins, and their
blood shall be required at our hands; as the Lord says unto his Prophet: And
therefore as S. Clement says, Nos quod vobis expedire novimus, Clement.
recognit. l. 1.
tacere non possumus, We cannot, but we must tell the people of their doings,
and the more abominable we see their doings, the more bound are we to cry aloud
and spare not, to cry against their wickedness. And so much for the doings of
this people.

2. In the doom, and due desert of this people for their doings, The doom and
judgment of this people for their wickedness.
you may observe these three things.

1. Their renunciation, The Lord does not accept them. 2. Their compensation,
or reward; which is two fold: 1. Privative, in the discussion of their deeds,
He will remember their iniquity. 2. Positive, which is an infliction of
punishment, He will visit their sins. 3. The time of their judgment, which is
very near, for he will now remember their iniquities, and visit their sins.

1. Their Renunciation.
The not accepting of them is a most fearful judgment against them, and one
of the heaviest conditions that can be incident to any man; for when the Lord
does not accept the person of any one, the actions of that person, whatsoever
they be, can never be acceptable unto God; for so the Scripture testifies,
that the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering; No work is
acceptable, when the person is not accepted.
that is, the Lord seeing Abel to be just and honest, he accepted and approved
of his work: but to Cain and his offering, he had no respect; that is, seeing
he was but an hypocrite, and his service was rather to deceive men, then to
please God, the Lord had no regard to any thing that he did, nor respected any
offering that he brought unto him. So he tells the Jews, that their incense and
their sacrifices, their burnt-offerings, and the fat of sed beasts, Esaias 1.13.
were an abomination unto him; because the doers thereof were abominable and
wicked: All the best deeds of the wicked, are abominable before God.
which is a very fearful thing, that the very prayers and preaching, the
fasting, and the Alms-deeds, and all other things, that hypocrites, oppressors,
and unjust men do to please God, are most hateful in Gods sight.

And if it be a lamentable thing that God refuses their prayers, and hates
the zeal of the hypocrites, and abhors their pretenses to do Him service, O
then, how doleful a thing is it, when God not only refuses their service, but
also renounceth their persons? For, as, non datur vacuum in natura, there can
be no vacuity or emptiness in Nature, but when one body passes away, another
presently supplyeth the place; so man cannot be without a Master: but when God
refuses him, the devil presently seizes upon him; M^n cannot be without a
Master.
as you may see in Judas, who no sooner parted with Christ, but he was
immediately possessed by Satan; And this is the first part of the Tragedy of
this people, that for their abuse of Gods service, their disobedience unto
their Governors, and the wrongs they did unto their neighbors, one to
another, the Lord does not accept them, but gives them a Writ, De justa
abdicatione, and a bill of divorcement, that he will be their God no longer,
and they shall be no longer his people. And if this were all, it were bad
enough, but here is somewhat more: For,

2. The remuneration, or reward of their wickedness, twofold. 1 The denial of
his reward.
Here is the reward of their wanderings, and the wages of their iniquity
expressed unto us: and that in a double form.

1. He will remember their iniquity. And 2. He will visit their sins. And
The first of these I call a Privative punishment, because the Lord intimates
hereby the denial of his reward, that is, the reward that he would have given
them, if they would have faithfully served him; for, as he says unto those
hypocrites, that fasted and prayed, and gave alms, and pretended to be the
only Saints, that so they might be seen, and be so taken of men, for the only
true servers of God, Matthew. 6. 2.
they have their reward; that is, habent mercedem suam, sed amiserunt meam,
they have the reward which they aimed at, the applause of men; but they lost
that which I intended to bestow on them, that is, eternal life: so here, when
he says, that he will remember their iniquity, he plainly infers, they
shall have none of those good things, which he prepared for those that truly
serve him, though they seem not so among men.

And what a fearful note of Gods hatred against these men is this, that he will
remember their iniquity? For the first argument that our Church heretofore used
to invite sinners to repentance, and to return to God, is, that whenever a
sinner does repent him of his sins, from the bottom of his heart, the Lord has
promised, to put out all his wickedness out of his remembrance; and howsoever
the late wise Reformers of Gods service, have now cast off that godly course,
yet was it the first request, that the true Protestant testant Church made to
God in their Liturgy, saying; (...) stateq^ther our Church makes to God.
Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance on our sias; because vengeance must then presently light
upon us, when our sins are called into Gods remembrance, and the Lord says
unto us, as he does unto the Israelites; Are not these things laid in store
with me, Deuteronomy. 32.34.
and sealed up among my treasures?

And therefore, as for God to remember his holy Covenant that he made with
Noah, and with Abraham, and with all his faithful servants, that he will be
merciful to them that fear him, and blot their sins out of his remembrance, is
the greatest comfort of the godly; The good Thiefs prayer. Luke 23.42. N^hem.
13.14.
which made the good Thief to say no more to Christ, but, Lord, remember me
when thou come into thy Kingdom. And N h^miah for all the good service that
he did to Gods Church, to say no more to God, but, Remember me, O my God,
concerning this; so the Lords threatening, that He will remember the iniquity of
the wicked, should be ^ mighty terror unto them; for this is the inference
that the Prophet Amos makes of this doctrine, when, after he had told the
Jews, that the Lord had sworn by the excellency of Jacob, saying, Amos 8.7, 8.
Surely I will never forget any of their works; he presently adds, Shall not
the Land tremble for this, and every one mourn, that dwells therein?

And so I conclude this point against the prephaners of Gods service, and the
oppressors of their neighbors, as Nehemiah does in the like case; saying,
Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the Priest hood, and instead
of the true Prophets, and Reverend Fathers of the Church, Nehem. ult. 29,
and Reverend Fathers of the Church, have with Jeroboam entertained Priests
without Orders, and Prophets without learning, which have caused the people to
wander out of the way, and of whom the Lord professes, They run, but he sent
them not.

2. The Lord says, that he will visit their sins, The inslicting their
punishment.
and a visitation is either for the consolation of the distressed; as when
Zachary says, God has visited and redeemed his people: or for the correction
of the delinquents, as here, when the Lord says, he will visit their sins;
that is, to punish them for their transgressions; for as God is most merciful,
in retributione Bonorum, Great sins and o^^ences never escape unpunished.
in blessing them that serve him, so he is most just, in punitione Malorum, in
the punishment of evil doers; and you shall seldom or never find that profane
men, and great sinners, did escape their just deserved punishment, without
great repentance; nor so, many times, for that part of their punishment, which
concerned this present life.

And therefore, when this people listened to the false Prophets, and rejected
the right way of Gods service, tanght them by the true Prophets, and rebelled
by their disobedience against their King, and his under-Governours, and then
oppressed, robbed, and killed their quiet, poor, and feeble neighbors; the
Lord says unto this our Prophet, Pray not for this people, for their good;
for, though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward
this people, but I will cast them out of my sight, Jer. 15.1, 23, 4. etc, 19.7.
such as are for death, to death, and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity; and I will appoint over them four kinds, or four
families, says the Lord.

1. The Sword to slay. 2 King. 24.25. Chap. per totum 2 Chronicles. 36. per totum.
2. The Dogs to tear. 3. The Fowls of the heaven; and 4. The Beasts of the
earth, to devour, and destroy.
And all this happened unto them, according to the Prediction of the Prophet;
and that, because they have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, as says the
Prophet.

And shall we think that people, which exceeds them in all transgressions,
shall be freed from all punishment? It is an old Rule, and a good counsel, Vt
quorum vitia imitamur eorum exitum perhorrescamus, That we should be afraid of
their end and punishment, whose ways and vices we do follow and imitate;
because the same way, will ever bring men to the same end; and the like sins,
without repentance, can expect none other than the like punishment. And I
beseech you mark, what the Lord says to the King of Babylon, and to the King
of Egypt, and to all the Kings of all other Nations; Lo, I begin to bring evil
on the City that is called by my Name, Jer. 25.29.
and should you be utterly unpunished? 1 Pet. 4.17.
You shall not be unpunished. And consider what S. Peter says, The time is
come, that judgment must begin at the house of God; and if it begin at us,
What shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?

And therefore, if this people, the Jews, that knew not the Gospel of Christ,
that had not such knowledge of God, as we have, and at whose hands God required
not such piety, and so much charity of one toward another, as he does at our
hands, were thus severely punished, for their profane serving of God, their
disobedience to their lawful Governors, and their injuries, oppressions, and
wrongs, done to their poor neighbors, and their persecuting of the true
Prophets; What shall we think of those Nations that profess Christianity, and
yet do exceed this people in all kind of the like impiety, iniquity, and
wickedness? Shall they escape unpunished? No, no, they shall be sure of
punishment, unless they do speedily repent, and restore the King to his Right,
the Bishops to their Offices, the Service of God as it was formerly used, and
make satisfaction to their poor neighbors, whom they have so causelessely, and
so abundantly wronged: Because it cannot stand with the Justice of God, to
suffer such transcendent sinners to go unrepented, and so unpunished.

And therefore the expectation of peace, and prosperity to the unrepentant
transgressors, is but just like the persuasion of the false Prophets, in the
time of this our Prophet; for they still cried Peace, peace, unto this people,
when the Prophet Jeremy protested from the Lord, there could be no peace to
such wicked sinners as they were: For though they might think -- quod illos
Defendit numerus junctaeque umbone phalanges; Juvenal. Satyr. 2.

their strength and number, with their wealth and wit, is able to preserve them
from all dysaster; yet as Jehu answered Joram, when he demanded, Is it peace?
What peace, so long as the whoredom of thy mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts
are so many? 2 Kings 9.22.
So say the true Prophets unto the wicked, What peace or happiness can you look
for, so long as you continue profaning Gods Service, keeping out your King,
suppressing your Bishops, and abusing your neighbors? Prove. 11.29.
For, as Solomon says, Though hand join in hand, yet the wicked shall not go
unpunished, if you still continue to do these things.

4. Time when the punishment shall light upon th^s people. Now presently.
When this punishment shall light upon them, it is expressly set down in the
word, Now; I will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. And this
now, shows the time present; not only because, as the Philosopher says,
There is no time, but (...), that which is present; but especially, because, as
the Divines say, all times are present with God, apud quem nec prius est, nec
posterius, in whose sight nothing is before or after another, as the Schools
rightly say, but the things that are to come, are as present with him, as if
they were already past.

Yet the punishment of our sins in respect of the time, God hears not, and
relieveth not, his servants always alike.
quoad nos, is not always the same, nor alike; but as God does sometimes
presently relieve his distressed children, and sometimes deferreth his aid, and
makes as though he hears not their cries, that he might try their faith and
their patience, and their constancy in his service, Et ut diu desiderata
dulcius obtineantur, and that being for a long time desired, they may seem the
sweeter when they are obtained; and sometimes hears them not at all, but lets
them die in their wants and miseries, as he did to poor Lazarus, So the
punishment of the wicked is not always alike.
for reasons, best known, unto himself; so the punishment of the wicked, which
God imposes upon them in this life, is, Aut sero aut citius, sometimes
presently inflicted, and sometimes for a long time delayed; For as he dealt
with Nebuchadnezzar, while the word was in his mouth, he was Metamorphosed from
man to beast; so he dealt with the Israelits, Psalm. 78.31.
while the meat was in their mouths, The heavy wrath of God came upon them,
and smote down the chosen men that were in Israel; so he did with Zimri and
Cozbi, with Corah, Dathan and Abiram, with Vzzah, Ananias and Saphira, and with
abundance more, that we read of in Profane Histories, which for their sins
were suddenly destroyed, and their punishment was not delayed, that others by
their example, might be afraid to offend God, lest his wrath should as
suddenly consume them, as it had done the others, before they had any time to
cry for pardon.

Yet sometimes he bears long before he seems to be angry, as the punishment
of the Ninivits was to be deferred forty days, which forty days were extended
to forty years, before Ninivy felt the smart; and of the Israelits the Lord
says, Forty years was I grieved with this Generation; and to the old world he
gave one hundred and twenty years to repent, before he punished them; and to
the Amorits 400 years; and, which is more to be admired, that the punishment of
such a transcendent sin should be so long deferred, The Jews, that murdered
their King the son of God, remained full forty years, before Jerusalem was
destroyed; and the death of Candaules, slain by Gyges, was not punished until
the days of Craesus, which was four Generations after; as Herodotus says, out
of the mouth of the oracle; as the Prophet says the like of Jehu, for the
slaughter that he committed: so the Murderers of King Charles, and of his
Loyal subjects, may perhaps escape for some time, and yet their punishment may
come at last, and it may be with them as it was with Joab for the murder of
Amasa and Abner.

So wounderfull is the long suffering, and the patience of our God, which he
uses as the Apostle shows, that he might lead them, by that great patience,
unto repentance; or, if they repented not, that they might be without excuse,
and that, as Lactantius says, the long sufferance of God in expecting their
amendment, might be recompensed with the severity of vengeance in their
punishment; for the offenders must not think, that because their payment is
deferred, therefore it shall be lessened, or that the Lord has forgotten it,
because they think not of it; but, as the longer you keep the Usurers money,
the more interest he expects, and the more debt is on your score; and the
higher you lift up your hand, the heavier the blow will fall; so the longer God
bears with the wicked transgressors of his laws before their punishment
comes, the sorer and the severer will be their punishment, when it comes. The
deferring of Gods help no argument of Gods hate.
And therefore the long deferring of Gods aid, and help to relieve his
distressed servants, and their often over-throws in their just defense, is no
argument, that God has forsaken them, and will not help them, no more then he
forsook holy Job, when he seemed, to leave him destitute of all help, or the
ten Tribes, when they fought, and were twice beaten by the Tribe of Benjamin;
and the long flourishing of the wicked, their good successes in all their bad
causes, The long prosperity of the wicked, no argument of Gods special love.
Job 21.13.
their prevailing against the righteous, and their freedom of all punishment
in this life: but especially the deferring of their punishment, is no token of
Gods love unto them, or especially of his acceptance of them; no more then it
was to Dives, that, without any rubs, ran all his race in pleasure; or to them
whereof Job speaks, that spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down
to the grave, because God deals with the wicked herein, as Claudian says he
did with Ruffinus, -- Tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviore ruant --
God lifts them up, and, they abusing that favor, he casts them down and
destroys them.

But the Prophet David seems to tell us the very set time, The very time.
when God most commonly uses both to help and to relieve those that serve him,
and to punish and destroy those that profane his fervice, and continue in
their wickedness under the Hypocritical show of holiness: for he says, that
the Lord is Deus in opportunitatibus, a God in the needful time of trouble;
that is, as a holy Father expounds it, Tum incipit auxilium divinum, When God
helps his servants.
cum desinit auxilium humanum; God will then help us, when we cannot help our
selves; and when we are, as Moses was, at the red sea, betwixt two huge
Mountains, and the raging sea before him, and Pharaohs mighty host behind him,
ready to be destroyed, either drowned in the waters, or slain by the sword, or
break their necks if they assaid to climb those rocky Mountains; or as the
disciples of Christ were in the ship ready to perish, as themselves confess.
When they see no hope of any human help, then will God show himself, and send
them help, out of his holy place, as he did to Job to restore his health, when
all his friends could not ease his pain; and delivered Daniel out of the Lions
den, when the King himself could not free him from it; And so will he do to all
them that serve him, and put their trust in him, send them deliverance, when
man sees no hope of assistance; as he does many times raise the sick, when the
Physician gives him over.

And the reason of this manner of his proceeding, Why God deserreth.
and the long deferring of his help, is, to teach us with Moses, Gideon,
Daniel, Job. Jonas, and the rest of Gods servants, to ascribe all the glory of
our wonderful, and extraordinary deliverances to God, and not to our selves,
nor to any other creature, but to God: Psalm. 115.1.
and so to say with the psalmist, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name
give the praise.

And for the time, When he punishes the wicked.
when God usually punishes the transgressors of his Laws, the same Prophet
says, When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish, then shall they be destroyed for ever; Psalm. 92 7.
that is, when they have brought all their projects to their own wished ends,
subdued their adversaries, trampled the just and harmless men under feet, and
perhaps, with Ahab, killed and taken possession too, of poor Naboth's Vineyard;
and, with the rich man in the Gospel, pulled down their old barns and cottages,
and builded large Palaces; filled their coffers, and laid up store for many
years, and now thought to eat, drink and be merry; then suddenly, when they
look not for it, will the Lord awake as a Giant out of sleep, and will smite
his enemies upon the cheek bone, and put them to perpetual shame, and say unto
them, as he did, to that fool in the Gospel, This night shall they fetch away
your souls from you, and your lives shall pay for the lives of them that you
have murdered; and then, Who shall have those treasures, that you have so
unjustly scraped together, and those possessions that you have so wrongfully
plucked and detained from the right owners? And you your selves might have
observed within these few lustra's many famous men, that have been suddenly
taken away from those great treasures and possessions, which they had suddenly
attained unto.

And therefore, let not the righteous, that rightly serves God, fret himself
because of the ungodly, neither let him be envious against the evildoers, when
he sees them in such prosperity; for, when God sees the time, Psalm: 37.1.2.
they shall soon be cut down, like the grass, and be withered even as the green
herb; But, as the Poet says, -- animum servate secundis. And as the Prophet
says, Let them that serve God, put their trust in the Lord, and tarry the
Lord's leisure, and pray with the words of our rejected Liturgy, O God make
speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help us: And in his good time, he will
deliver us, out of all our troubles. Amen.

THE FIFTH TREATISE.
1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.


IT is an old received Rule, consented unto by all, and contradicted by none,
that all the Commandments of God, are 1. Brevia. 2. Levia. 3. Vtilia. That is,
1. Few and short. 2. Leight and easy. 3. Sweet and profitable. For,

1. They are not many, like our Laws, or the precepts of the Alcoran, or the
Popes Canons, that are multiplied above number; for these are but ten in all:
But two, but one. Ten says Moses. Two says Christ. One says S. Paul; and all
say the truth; For the Ten Precepts of Moses contain nothing else but, First
our duty to God; And Secondly our duty toward our Neighbors; as our Savior
says: And both these duties are comprised in this one act and affection of
Love; as S. Math. 22.37. John. 15.12. 1 Cor. 13. Romans 12.10.
Paul says. For thy duty to God is, to love him with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul, and with all thy mind: and if you love me, keep my Commandments,
says our Savior Christ, and my Commandment is, That ye love one another. And
love works no ill to his neighbor, says S. Paul; therefore is love the
fulfilling of the Law.

So all the Commands that God gives unto us, is but one word, one syllable,
Love. So he gave to Adam but one Precept, to abstain from one Tree; and
therefore you need not burden your memories, nor take the pains to learn the
Art of Memory, for fear you should forget it; God has thus provided to prevent
this excuse, That the multitude of Precepts have caused you to forget your
duties.

And as God, so all good and wise men, imitating God herein, have given short
Precepts, and brief Rules unto their Scholars, which we call Aphorisms, or
Dicta sapientum, The words of the wise; as the seven wise men of Greece left
seven brief Sentences unto their Followers: For, Dicta septem sapientum.
1. Cleobulus said, Keep the mean. 2. Chilon said, Know thy self. 3. Periander
used to say, Restrain wrath. 4. Pittacus said, Nothing too much. 5. Solons wise
saying was, Remember the end. 6. Bias was wont to say, The wicked are many. 7.
Thales's saying was, Flee suretiship.
And Solomon uses the same Method of teaching men, in his Proverbs, and Book
of the Preacher, which is, Eclesiastes. And so does S. Peter here, in this
first Epistle to the dispersed Jews. (...).
His Sentences are very short, but exceeding pithy; Inest quoque gratia parvis:
and abundance of worth may lie in a little thing; as you see a little Diamond
is of a great value. And therefore as Democharis says, (...), Ne despice
parva; Slight not the smallest things. Nam verbum sapienti sat est, A word is
enough to the wise: And the longest Sermons do little or no good to the wicked.

2. The Commandments of God very easy and light. Math. 11.30. 1 John 5.3.
Psalm. 119.
As the Commandments of God are short, so they are leight and easy; for, my
yoke is easy, and my burden leight, says our Savior; And Mandata ejus gravia
non sunt, says S. John, His Commandments are not grevious; but they are so
leight and so easy, that the Prophet David says, I will run the way of thy
Commandments. And S. Paul says, he can do all things through Christ that
strengthens him. And our God is not so tyrannical, as to give such
Commandments as are impossible to be observed, especially in the outward acts,
and the inward also, if we consider the aid and assistance of Gods Spirit, that
Christ gives to them that seek it.

And therefore, if our hearts be endued with grace, and we desire the Spirit of
Christ, we need not murmur, and lie down with Balaam's Ass, for the great
weight that is upon our backs, or complain of the heavy yoke that Christ has
laid upon our necks, and say with those drones in the Gospel, Durus est hic
sermo; Love makes all labors easy.
This is a hard saying, Who is able to endure it? For if Leander did so much
for the love of Hero, and Pyramus for Thisbe; then certainly, the Commandments
of God are leight and sweet enough to every one, that loves God; Da amantem,
and sentit quid dico; And if you bring me one that truly loves God, he will
confess this truth, says S. Augustine. Even as the Prophet David does Psalm.
119.

And such are all the Precepts of this our Apostle, you may observe them
without pain, without loss, without abating your strength, and without wasting
your wealth. And

3. The comman dments of God bring great profit to them that keep them. (Psalm.
119.)
They are not so leight, and so easy in themselves, as they are beneficial and
profitable to those that observe them; for, Great is the reward of those that
keep thy Laws, O God, says the Prophet David, and Moses sets down the many-
many blessings of the Israelites, if they would observe Gods Commandments. And
so these short Sentences of S. Peter, and these leight Precepts of our Apostle
have abundance of wisdom in them, and do bring an infinite deal of commodity
and profit, unto the true observers thereof. And therefore, if nothing else,
yet the benefits of keeping Gods Commandments, should persuade us all, to be
ready to hear, and willing to obey, these Precepts of the Apostle, which he
delivers from the Spirit of God; for we are naturally given to love our own
profit. And, as the Poet says, Et reditus jam quisque suos amat, and sibi quid
sit
Vtile sollicitis computat articulis.
Every man respects his own advantage, and loves his own benefit; And I do
assure you, there is nothing in the world, that any of you all can do, and let
him do what he can, that shall bring him more profit, than the right observance
of these few Precepts. Honor all men, etc. Wherein you see, there are four
special Precepts.

And these four Precepts are like unto the four Rivers of Eden, that watered
the Garden of Paradise, to make the same both profitable and pleasant.

The 1. concerns all men, (...); Honor all men.

The 2. concerns all Christian men. (...). Love the Brotherhood.

The 3. belongs to God, (...). Fear God.

The 4. belongs to the King, (...). Honor the King.

That is, Honor all men in general; Love all Christian men, more especially
than any others; Fear God above all things; And Honor your King next to God.
And if you do these few things, these easy things, you shall never fail, but
you shall be for ever happy.

The first Precept is, Honor all men: touching which, two things are to be
observed, 1. The Act. 2. The Extent.


And 1. this word Honor, does properly signify that reverence and respect,
which we owe, and do render to any one, for any cause.

And because there are many things for which we yield and exhibit honor, What
is meant by Honor.
it follows that this word Honor does not signify the same thing in all
places; But pro diversitate diversae materiae, diversa significat; it
signifies diverse things, according to the diversity of the subject matter: As,

Among profane Authors it is taken many ways.

1. Sometimes for the beauty, and comeliness of any thing; as where the Poet
says, Frigidus and sylvis Aquilo decussit honorem. The cold Northren wind,
shook off all the honor, that is, all the beauty and grace of the Wood.

2. Sometimes it is used for that Observance and worship, that we yield unto
our Superiors, for the good that we receive from them; as when the Poet says,
Semper honor meo, semper celebrabere donis. I will always worship, or serve,
and respect you.

3. Sometimes it is taken for the reward, that is given for any thing; as where
it is said, Ipsis praecipue ductoribus addit honores. And specially, he
rewarded the Captains and Commanders. And

4. Sometimes it is put for the Rites and Ceremonies of our Funerals; as where
Virgil says, Cernit ibi maestos and mortis honor earentes. Virgil. Aeneid. 6.
And there he beheld them sad, that wanted the due Rites and honor of their
Burials; which now, many Worthy men do want, among our new Prognostics.

So in the holy Scripture, it is likewise taken several ways. As

1. Sometimes for esteem and worth, as where the Apostle says, Those
Ceremonies, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, are not in any honor; Colos.
2.23.
that is, of any worth.

2. Sometimes for an honest care, and provision for one; as where S. Peter
says, That the Husband should give honor to the wife; that is, to care and
provide for her, as for the weaker vessel. 1 Pet. 3.7.


3. Romans 13.7.
Sometimes it is put for that reverence, worship, and service, which is due to
our governors and magistrates, as where S. Paul says, render to all their
dues, honor to whom honor belongs; that is, render to every one that honor
which is due to him, and is not due to another; and so it is taken here, in the
last Precept, Honor the King, that is, with such an honor, as is due to the
King, and is not due to all others; because all men are not to be honored
alike; and to have the like honor, as well the one as the other: otherwise the
King, or the Father; the Pastor, or the Master is to have no more honor, then
a beggar; and therefore, when the Apostle says, Honor all men, he does not
mean, 1 Timothy 5.17.
that all men should be honored alike, when the Apostle tells us, The Elders
that rule well are worthy of double honor. And

4. Sometimes this word Honor, signifies any kind of duty, reverence,
obedience, relief, and quaelibet charitatis officia, and all other offices of
love and charity; Romans 12.10.
as where the Apostle says, Be kindly affectionated one to another, with
brotherly love, in honor preferring one another.

And so here, We are to help all that are in need of our help.
honor all men, signifies esteem, love, aid, and help all men that have need
of help, so far forth as you are able to help them; comfort those that mourn,
relieve those that want, instruct them that are ignorant, and so help all that
are in need of your help; for, as Boethius says, Omne hominum genus in terris,
Simili surgit abortu;
Vnus enim rerum pater est, Boethius de cons. l. 3.

Vnus cuncta ministrat;
Ille dedit Phaebo radios.
Dedit and cornua lunae.


God at first made but one man, and all the generation of men proceeded from
that one man, to teach us what unity and love ought to be among all men. Cicero
de Offic. l. 1.
Quia homines hominum causa generati sunt, ut ipsi, inter se, alii aliis
prodesse possent; because men are born, not for themselves, but for men's sake,
that they might help and benefit one another among themselves; and even Nature
it self teaches this, says the Orator, Vt homo homini, quicunque sit, ob eam
ipsam causam tantum, Idem. l. 3.
quod homo sit, consultum velit; that a man should not be strange to any man,
but should help him, and further him in any thing that he can, only for this
cause, though there were none other, that he is a man, that is, Lactant. divin.
instit. l. 6. c. 10.
of the same nature as himself is; and therefore Lactantius says, that
Lucretius erred not, when he said, Denique caelesti sumus omnes semine oriundi,
Omnibus ille idem Pater est;


That we are all sprung from the same caelestial seed, and are all brethren,
that have the same God, the same Father of us all; Et ita conjunctiores animis
quam corporibus, and so more nearly allied in respect of our minds and souls,
then of the form and shape of our bodies:

And this was the ground of Jobs respect unto his servants, Job 31.13.
saying; Did not he that made me in the womb, make him? And this is the
argument the Prophet uses against the deceitfulness of men one toward
another, saying, Have we not all one Father, has not God created us? And why
then do we deal treacherously every one against his brother? Mal. 2.20.
Yea, rob and kill his brother.

And therefore Lactantius concludes, that those men are to be deemed, pro
belluis immanibus, qui contra jus humanitatis homines spoliant and exterminant;
no better then brute beasts, or savage creatures, which contrary to the rules
of nature, and the rights of humanity, do spoil, and rob, and root men, their
brethren by creation, out of house and home.

And if nature teaches this, and mere men, that had no more knowledge but what
the light of nature taught them, do thus persuade us to this duty; what wonder
is it, that grace and the children of God, much more, should teach us to love,
honor, help, and esteem well of all men; for the more universal our love and
our kindness is to our brethren, the more conformable we shall be to God, who
loves all men, as they are his creatures, and does good to all men, by making
his Sun to shine upon the good, and upon the bad, and sending rain upon the
just, and upon the unjust; and so, they that imitate God, in loving all men,
and doing all the good they can unto all men, do hereby show themselves to be
the children of their Father, which is in heaven; as our Savior says, Matthew.
5.45.

And therefore seeing we are all brethren, Aug. and habetur 24. q. corripiuntur.
and the same God is the father of us, Sic affici debemus charitatis affectu,
ut omnes velimus salvos fieri; we ought so charitably to affect all men, as not
to separate our selves from them, and to exclude them from our Churches or
societies, but to wish the health and salvation of all men, and to do our best
help and furtherance to save and to relieve every man; which is, as the Apostle
says, To honor all men.

And this our love, honor, and esteem of all men, The love and honor that we
owe to all men. 2 ways to be considered.
must be especially considered, 1. In respect of the manner of it, for 2. In
respect of the matter of it, for


1. It must be showed really and truly from the heart, without Hypocrisy, and
not as worldlings and wicked men do, that, In respect of the manner of it.
as the Poet says, -- front politi
Astutam vapido servant sub pectore vulpem;
That is, in the Prophets words, do speak friendly unto their brethren, and
imagine mischief in their hearts; like Joab, that said to Amasa, Is it peace my
brother? and while the tongue thus anointed him with oil, the hand stabbed him
to the heart: for we should love our neighbors, as our selves; that is, as
truly and in as true a manner, though not in as great a measure as we love our
selves: yea, this is the commandment, that I give unto you, Joh. 13.34. How
Christ has loved us.
ut diligatis invicem sicut ego dilexi vos; that ye love one another, even as I
have loved you; And how has Christ loved us?

1. It was Amore vehementi, non mediocri, with no small nor mean love, but with
the greatest affection that could be; Joh. 15.13. Romans 5.10.
for greater love then this has no man, that a man should give his life for
his friend, says our Savior; and he gave his life for his enemies, says the
Apostle.

2. It was Amore vero, non ficto; with a true sincere love, and not with a
seeming affection, and a dissembling heart. And

3. It was Amore perseveranti, non finienti, with a continual and lasting
love, for whom he loved, he loved unto the end; and not for a short space.

And therefore our love to one another should be great, true, and lasting love;
and not like the worldlings love, that seems fair and full, while we are in
prosperity, but will fall away like water, when we fall into adversity: and so
verify the Poets saying, Donec eris faelix multos numerabis amicos,
Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes.


2. This true honor and unfaigned love, In respect of the matter of it, which
is two fold.
that we owe and are enjoined to show and render unto all men, in respect of
the matter consists in two things.

1. No ways to hurt, or wrong them. 2. Every way to assist and to help them.
1. No ways to hurt them.
He that offers injury unto his neighbor, or does wrong to any man, An
injury what it is.
does contrary to the rules of nature, says Cicero; Et injuria est verbo vel
facto cum a^iquo injuste agere; and an injury is to deal unjustly with any one,
either in word or deed, says Isidorus; and you know, that, besides the breach
of natures law, such a one, as either of these ways wrongs his neighbor,
breaks the commandment of the Almighty God, who does expressly forbid us, to
defraud or oppress, or any ways to wrong one another, or the stranger, that is
amongst us; as you may see it in Moses and Jeremy full y expressed; for Moses
says, Thou shall not steal, nor deal falsely nor defraud thy neighbor; and the
wages, of him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night until the
morning; Lev. 19.11.13.
and the Prophet Jeremy says, Thus says the Lord, Execute ye judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppress r, Jer.
22.3.
and do no wrong, do no violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the
widow, neither shed innocent blood; for the very heathen Poet can tell you,
that Quaelibet extinctos injuria suscitat ignes, Ovid. l. 3. de art amandi.
Wrong and injuries stir up striffes, and do kindle the flames of unquenchable
fire; and though, as Aristotle says, Melius est injuriam pati, quam alteri
nocere, it is better to suffer wrong, then to hurt another, and, as the Comic
says, (...),
(...).
That man is to be deemed most excellent, which knows how to suffer most
injuries; yet because the frailty of flesh and blood is such, that, as the
proverb goes, Scribit in marmore laesus, they that register benefits and good
turns done unto them in the sands, will ingrave all wrongs and injuries done to
them in marble, never to be blotted out of memory; and Solomon tells us, Eccl.
7.7.
that oppression makes a wise man mad: and if wise men can so hardly brook to
be oppressed, then surely fools and simple men will be stark mad to see
themselves injured, and will be ready to be revenged upon every advantage.

And therefore we ought to take great heed, that we do no injustice, nor offer
any wrong to any man; because dealing righteously one with another, is the
mother and preservative of love amongst neighbors, Esaias 32.17.
and of peace amongst all men; Injustice and wrongs the cause of all mischief.
for, as the Prophet says, The works of righteousness shall be peace, and the
effects of righteousness, quietness, and assurance for ever. Whereas injustice,
oppression and wrongs, are the causes of Laws, Murders, Wars, and all Mischiefs

And yet I demand, if any thing in the world be now so common, and so public
as wrongs, injuries and oppressions? Especially of them, whom, we ought most of
all to honor and to love: for though S. Paul bids us, to esteem our Governors
and our Teachers that are over us, 1 These. 5.13. How fairly Pharaoh dealt with
the Priest. Genesis 47.22.
and do admonish us, very highly in love, for their works sake, and the very
heathens did no less; for when Pharaoh bought all the Lands of the Egyptians,
throughout the whole Kingdom of Egypt, he bought not the Lands of the Priests,
but assigned a portion of corn, to sustain them, so that they needed not to
sell their lands; And A^taxerxes, King of Persia, certified to all his
Officers, in all Provinces, that touching any of the Priests, Levits, Singers,
Porters, Nethinims, or Ministers of the House of God; Ezra. 7.55.24.
it shall not be lawful to impose tole, tribute or custom upon them; and
Jezabel, that painted harlot, could have so much show of piety, as to feed four
hundred Prophets at her own table; yet now, What Bishops lands are not sold,
and taken from them? What Priest or Church man is free from taxes and
contribution, and not more heavily taxed than any others?

And therefore, if any Jew, Pagan, or Infidel were demanded, Whom he thought to
be the more religious, and the better lover of God, either Pharaoh that
preserved the Priests-lands, or they of the long Parliament that took away and
sold the Bishops lands? Either Artaxerxes, that freed all the Churchmen from
all taxes, and Jezabel that fed so many Prophets at her own Table; or they that
now over-load the poor Ministers with such unreasonable contributions, as they
are scarce able, to provide bread for their own Table? What answer would he
make, think you? or, whom would he think the better Saints, and most acceptable
unto God? Judge you, that are the Parliament men.

But, letting these men, thus dealt withal, in their patience, to possess
their souls; some man, that is moved to see oppression, and the oppressors
flourishing, and to behold villainies committed, and no justice executed, will
say, perhaps, Should not the Magistrate the King punish their villainies, and
revenge the wrongs of Gods servants? or, Have not some of them, you speak of,
neglected their duties, and others committed strange outrages? and should
these be loved and helped, and not rather stripped of their estates, and
punished in their persons? as these men are.

To this I answer. 1. That, for the Magistrates punishing, in due measure, both
the Omission of just duties, or the Commission of unjust offenses in all men,
of what calling, quality, or condition soever they be, the law of God commands
it, every Commonwealth requires it, and no wise man speaks against it. And if
the Magistrate neglects it, as Saul neglected the punishment of Agag, or cannot
do it, for some just reasons, that do hinder him: as Zedekia, for the Rebellion
of his Lords and Commons, had not the power, to do justice; and to hinder the
wrong and indignities that were offered to the Prophet Jeremy; and as our good
King for the same reasons, cannot hinder the wrongs of Gods Messengers, and
others of Gods servants, Collos. 3.25.
then I say with S. Paul, He that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong that
he has done, and there is no respect of persons with God; Deuteronomy. 32.35. et
deinceps.
for the Lord has said it, and he will perform it, Mea est ultio and ego
retribuam; To me belongs vengeance and recompense; and their foot, that is,
the foot of the oppressors and wrong-doers, shall slide in due time, that is,
when God shall see the time fit; for the Lord shall judge his people, and he
will judge righteously, and then he will repent himself for his servants, when
he sees that their power is gone, and that there is none shut up or left, but,
as it were, all beggered and destroyed by their oppressors; and he shall say,
where are their gods, their rock, that is, the Saints, which did eat the fat of
the sacrifices, and drink the wine of the offerings, and so got all the best of
all the land unto themselves; let those gods, and those holy saints, in whom
they trusted, rise up and help these Tyrannical oppressors of my servants. For
I, even I am he, and there is no god with me, that kill and make alive, that do
wound and heal, that is, my servants; for it is I, that have wounded them and
killed them for offending me, otherwise, you that are their enemies, could
never hurt them, and I will heal them and make them alive again; and I will
avenge the blood and wrongs of my servants, Verse. 43.
for I lift up my hand to heaven and say, I live for ever, and I will whet my
glittering sword, and my hand shall take hold on judgment, Deuteronomy. 32. from the
35. verse. to the 44. v.
I will render vengeance to mine adversaries, and the oppressors of my
servants, and be merciful unto my people. In all which excellent expression of
Gods just judgments, you may plainly see, both the relief and deliverance of
Gods corrected and dejected servants, and the punishment of their proud and
flourishing oppressors; And our Savior Christ, Luke 18.7.
in like manner says, Shall not God avenge his own Elect, that cry day and
night unto him, though he bears long with them? Yes, I tell you, that he will
avenge them speedily. And though, as Plutarch says, There be certain Rivers
that do suddenly hide themselves under ground, as the River Nigar does in the
Abissins Country, Abbats page 184.
yet eo perferuntur q^o tendunt, they go thither where they intended; So,
though the wrath of God against wicked oppressors, and other transgressors of
his Laws, lies hid for a time, and his judgments seem to be forgotten; yet,
in extremas calamitates aufert aliquando nocentes, He will at sometime or
other, punish them severely enough with iron hands, though he comes on leaden
feet: as he did the Amalekites, for the wrongs that their forefathers did to
the Israelites four hundred years before.

And therefore, seeing God Almighty challenges vengeance, was a peculiar
right, and properly belonging to himself, and promises that he will avenge the
blood, and all the wrongs, injuries, and oppressions of his servants; I say
with Moses, Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of
thy people. Levit. 19.18.
And with Solomon, Say not thou, I will recompense evil, but wait on the Lord,
and he shall save thee, Prove. 20.22. And as our Savior says, Resist not evil,
but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
Math. 5.39.


Or, if you cannot do this, yet as S. Paul says, See that none of you render
evil for evil, or revenge wrong with wrong: For as the son of Sirach says, He
that revengeth, 1 These. 5.15.
shall find vengeance from the Lord, and he will surely keep his sins in
remembrance. And therefore the only way for us, is, to follow the counsel of
the son of Sir ach; Ecclus. 28.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done unto thee; so shall thy sins
also be forgiven thee when thou prayest; for otherwise, That we should be ready
and willing to forgive al wrongs done unto us.
one man bears hatred against another, and does he seek pardon from the Lord?
he shows no mercy to a man which is like himself, and perhaps, not so bad as
himself, and does he ask forgiveness of his own sins?

Alas, alas, says the Heathen man. Si quoties peccant homines, sua fulmina
mittat Jupiter, etc. which I may well render in the words of the Prophet, If
thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide
it? Or as the Apostles demand, Who then can be saved?

But the Lord bears long, and forgiveth much, iniquities, transgression, and
sin; Upon what condition God forgiveth our sins. Math. 6.14, 15.
and yet he forgiveth nothing, but upon this condition, that we ask forgiveness
of our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; for if ye
forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but
if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses. As you may see it plainly exemplified and showed in the Parable of
the unmerciful Steward; And every Talent is 375. l.
for, when his Lord forgave him a thousand Talents, and he would not forgive
his fellow servants a hundred pence, his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to
the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him. Math. 18.34.
So that he, which remitteth not the offenses done unto him, must never hope to
have his offenses remitted unto him by God, says our Savior Christ. Verse 35.


And what then shall we do? shall we be like James and John, that when the
Samaritans would not receive their Master, would presently have called for fire
out of Heaven, to have destroyed them all? Or shall we be like their Master,
that, when the Jews, like so many Cannibals, were about him, to ^ear him, and
to crucify him, and to lay such loads of abuses and indignities upon him, as
the like were never laid on any other man; yet was he so far from being
incensed against them, that although the least breath of his mouth could in an
instant, have blown them all to be destroyed; yet his only revenge was, Luke
22.34.
Father forgive them, (...), for they know not what they do. And his servant S.
Stephen, imitating him, when he was stoned to death, desired none other
revenge; but, kneeling down, Act. 7.60.
cried with a loud voice; Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

And if, notwithstanding all this that I have said, men will be still
transported with the spirit of Revenge, I shall only wish them to remember what
Erasmus says, for a worldly counsel, seeing they refuse the counsel of God,
that some remedies are far worse than the disease; yea, so far worse, Vt satius
sit oppetere mortem, quam his aucupari salutem; Better to suffer wrongs, than
to repel them, with far greater damage.
That it is better to suffer the Patients to die, than to go about to compass
their health and recovery, Veluti sugere sanguinem e vulnere recenti
gladiatorum morientium; As when we go about to save their lives, by sucking the
blood, from the new-made wounds, of the dying Gladiators. And so, says he,
Melius est far pacem, etiamsi parum commodam, quam bellum cum immensis malis
suscipere; It is sometimes better to conclude a peace, or accept of peace,
though with some disadvantage than to undertake a war, with far greater
inconveniences. As it was better for David to bear a while with the sons of
Zervia, than presently with the hazard of his Kingdom, to go about to punish
their insolences. And so likewise, Satius est aliquando far injuriam, quam
majori incommodo ulcisci; It is sometimes far better for a man to take some
wrong, and injuries, than to revenge his wrongs with the suffering of far
greater mischiefs.

And therefore touching fore-past injuries, and wrongs done unto us, I say with
Juvenal, -- minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas Juven. l. 5. Sat. 13.

Vltio; c^ntinuo sic coll^ge, quod vindicia
Nemo magis gaudet quam foemina --
Revenge, is the badge of a Coward, and the argument of a feeble-mind,
befitting rather weak women, than any man of a Heroic spirit; especially such
as are endued with the Spirit of God, whose Precept is to forgive, and whose
language is peace, as the Prophet testifies, He will speak peace unto his
people, and to his Saints, that they turn not again; that is, to revenge, to
war, and fight again; but to forget all former injuries, and to honor all men;
and therefore not to revenge our selves upon any man.

And according to this Precept of S. Peter, to honor all men; S. Paul to
enforce this Duty a little further, Heb. 12.14.
and to show the meaning of it somewhat clearer, bids us, to follow peace
with all men. Wherein you may observe: 1. The large extent of our peace, (...),
with all men. Two things to be observed.
2. The great desire that we should have, to get peace, (...), follow peace,
that is, just as the Psalmist says, Seek peace, and ensue it.


1. It must be with all men; for it were a strange thing, The large extent of
our peace with men, and love to men.
that men should not live in peace with good men, with Christians, and with the
Saints of God; but that, as in Moses time, an Israelite fell out with an
Israelite, about the bricks and strawes of Egypt. So we, that profess the same
Faith, live under the same Head, and dwell in the same Kingdom, or perhaps in
the same City, must, for the toys and trifles of this world, go to Law, one
with another; or for some mistaken conceits, and different opinions in our
Faith, fall out, and war, and rob, and spoil, and kill one another; When as the
Apostle bids us, to honor all men, and to follow peace with all men, good or
bad, Jews or Gentiles. For as Lot served God, and lived in peace among the
Sodomites; and Joseph did the like among the Egyptians; and Daniel likewise,
served the true God in Nebuchadnezzars Court, and lived peaceably among the
Idolatrous Chaldeans: and all the true Saints and servants of Christ, do keep
themselves undefiled, in the midst of a crooked, and a froward generation. So
should we endeavor to live in peace, and to honor and love, even those, that
profess themselves enemies unto peace, and to be of a different Faith and
Religion from us; that is, not only the Papists, Puritanes, and the like
Sectaries; but also with the Jews, Infidels and Pagans, and as the Apostle
says, (...), with all men: Because we are bound to love our enemies, and to do
good to them that hate us, and to pray for them that persecute us: And
therefore much more bound are we to be at peace with them, and yet not to be
corrupted or seduced by them; but still to retain the true Faith, The praise of
Gods servants is to live holily among the wicked.
and to serve our God aright, as we ought to do: otherwise, What thanks to
them, that live holily in heaven, among Saints and Angels, where there is no
provocation to evil? or to serve God aright, where there is neither Sectary nor
Heretic? But the praise of Gods servants, is to live among the wicked, and yet
not to follow their evil examples, and to be in the midst of Heretics, and all
kind of Sectaries, and yet not suffer our selves to embrace their false
opinions, or to approve their wrongserving of God; and yet still to honor
them, to love them, and to be at peace with them. And

2. The great desire we should have to peace.
That we should not fail in this duty, the Apostle says (...); follow after
peace. As the Greyhound follows after the Hare, that he may catch her: So do
you follow after peace that you may have it; and that is, not only to accept of
peace, when it is offered; but also to purchase peace at any reasonable rate,
and upon any reasonable terms.

And we have an excellent example of this great desire of peace that should be
in us, The most excellent example of Abraham. Romans 4.13.
in Abraham; who though he was told by God Himself, that he should be the Heir
of the World, which was a Title and interest good enough, when God gave it him:
yet rather than he would strive with his inferior, his Nephew Lot, he was
contented cedere de jure, to wave his right, and to let him take his oboice of
all the land, what he would, and where he pleased. Genesis 13.8, 9.


And the like desire of peace, we find in Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt, when he
sent Ambassadors to Josias, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou King of
Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house, wherewith I
have war; 2 Chronicles 35.21.
for God has commanded me to make haste; forbear thee from meddling with God,
who is with me, that he destroy thee not: and so he was destroyed, for refusing
to live in peace.

And the reason, The reason of this great desire of peace, is twofold. 1.
Because war is the greatest of all the plagues of God.
why we should love and honor, and thus labor to live in peace with all men,
is, because wrongs and injuries, breed hatred, suits and wars; and war will be
the death of many men, and God made not death, neither can he endure that any
one man, should malicio^sly destroy another, God making not men, to kill one
another. And therefore we find, that the Sentence of Cain's punishment for
killing his brother Abel, is far heavier than Adam's punishment for eating of
the forbidden fruit: when God said unto Adam, Cursed is the ground for thy
sake, and so forth: But to Cain he said, Cursed art thou from the earth; which
is a far greater curse than the former, as is the rest of his censure, in very
many particulars; whereupon Cain perceiving the heaviness of his Sentence, so
far exceeding his fathers curse, Genesis 4.13.
said, My punishment is greater than I can bear. And after the Flood, the first
Precept, and the strictest charge, that God gave to man, was, to prevent and
hinder the shedding of man's blood, which, being shed, he would require at the
hand of man, and at the hand of every beast, which should be put to death, if
they were the death of any man. And the Prophet says, That God will make
inquisition for all the blood that shall be spilt; that is, search and find out
them, Murder shall never escape undiscovered.
that have been the death of any man; yea, though they should do it never so
cunningly and secretly, yet rather than they should escape undiscovered, and so
pass unpunished, the Birds of the air, as they did the death of Ibicus, should
betray their wickedness, or the very blood that they have spi^t, if there be
none other witness, shall with Abels blood, cry out of the earth for vengeance
against them; because bloody men that delight to kill their brethren, are an
abomination to the Lord, who, as the Prophet says, abborreth both the blood
thirsty and the deceitful man; for, Psalm. 5.6.
Quem videris sang^ine ga^d ^te^ lupus est, says S. Chrysostom hom. 19. opef.
imperfect.

And therefore War, which is a Feast celebrated to the honor of Death, and is
M^ter omnium malorum, The mother of all miseries, the greatest shedder of blood
upon the earth, and the unjustest instrument of death that can be found; when,
contrary to all Law, and beyond all Justice, nothing else is to be seen in war,
but fire, robberies, treasons, tortures, War the worst of all the plagues of
God.
and slaughters inflicted, as well upon the innocent, as the nocent; is deemed
the worst of all the plagues of God, the most direful, and most destructive
unto mankind. For when the Lord with rebukes does chasten man for sin, and is
sore displeased with any Kingdom, he whippeth it with one of these threefold
scourges, Plague, Famine, and War; And the first two, Plague and Famine, do but
take away the men, and take them so, that most commonly they have time to
repent, and to humble themselves under the Mighty hand of God; but the war
casts down houses, burns Cities, subverteth Castles, The many mischiefs
that war brings.
destroys the creatures, and shakes the very foundation of all earthly
happiness: and not only suddenly cutteth off the lives of many thousands, and
sometimes Infants and Innocents, from the earth; but also introduces Famines
and Plagues after it, at the heels.

And therefore David, when he was necessitated to undergo one of these three
scourges, and had the favor to take his choice of them, 2 Samuel 24.14.
he would not choose war by any means. And truly, it were a happy thing, that
there were neither Soldier nor War, nor cause of any war in all the World; but
that the people should beat their swords into Plow^shares, and their Spears.
into Pruning Hooks, and that Nation should not lift up a sword against Nation,
neither learn war any more, as the Prophet speaks; Because, Esaias 2.4.
as one says, God made Soldiers, the worst of men, as he made the Devils the
worst of spirits, to plague the World, and to be the Executioners of his anger
and just judgments against his children, when they do offend him; That is, for
the generality of them; otherwise, many of them are very just and religious, as
the Scripture testifies. And the very Heathen man could say of the Soldiers,
Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Lucan. Phars.


2. As War is such a dismal Apollyon, Because peace is the greatest of all
earthly blessings.
and so furious a destroyer of all mankind, the poison of Religion, and the
hated enemy of all creatures; So on the other side, the love of neighbors, and
peace among men, is the greatest, the best, and the most excellent of all
earthly blessings. And as Ignatius says, (...), There is nothing in this world
better than Peace; for, as the Poet says, Omnia pace vigent, and pacis tempore
florent. All things do prosper in the time of peace. And, as the Prophet says,
Our garners are full and plenteous with all manner of store; our sheep bring
forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets; our oxen are strong to
labor, and there is no decay, no l^ading into captivity, and no complaining in
our streets; Psalm. 144.14.
but our houses are repaired, our Cities enlarged, our Fields tilled, and the
poor are relieved, which the Soldiers cause to starve, and to die at their
doors, which have nothing to help them.

And therefore the very heathen man could say, Cicero.
Iniquissimam pacem justisfimo bello antefero; that he preferred the worst
peace before the best and justest war; and the only outward blessing that
comprehended all the other blessings which the Israelites desired, was peace;
their only salutation was, Peace be unto you; John 20.19.
when Christ arose from the dead, the first word that he spoke to his
disciples, was, Peace be unto you; and when he was to leave the world, the
chiefest Legacy that he left to his Apostles was, My Peace I give unto you;
and so the Apostolical wish to all Saints, in all their Epistles, is, Grace and
Peace be unto you; and the most frequent Counsel, and most principal Precept
that is given, 2 Cor. 13.11. Colos. 3.15. Phil. 4.7. Luc. 10.3. To love one
another, to honor all men, to live in peace with all men, the same thing in
effect. Which was Cromwels, that Arch-souldier's Motto.
and is to be earnestly urged, to be observed in all the New Testament by all
the Ministers of Christ, is, to love one another, to honor all men, and to
live in peace with all men, which are the very same things in effect, though
expressed in diverse forms; and where this bond of peace is broken, our Savior
says, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be termed, and called, the
children of God, which is the God of Peace.

And what think you then of the soldiers that fight and war, and break the
bands of peace, and the golden chain of unity and concord all to pieces, whose
children be they, and may they not fear to be accursed? Yes certainly; and
therefore they pretend, that Pax quaeritur bello, they make war, to purchase
peace.

To whom I may justly answer, as Cyneas did to King Pyrrhus, when the wise
Orator demanded of him, what he would do when he had conquered Italy, and
Sicilie, and Africa, and Macedon, etc. Pyrrhus answered, we will then be quiet,
and make peace, and eat, drink, and be merry; to whom Cyneas replied, And what
lets us, my good Lord, but that we may do so now, before the shedding of so
much blood, as must be spilt in these enterprises? So I say; if you make War,
to procure peace, why will you disturb the peace? and not rather now, when men
do live in peace, embrace it, and suffer it to continue, before you purchase it
with the slaughter of so many men, as must be killed in war?

But would you know the reason, All the graces of Christ without the this
grace, will avail us nothing.
why they are so blessed, that do procure peace, and do embrace it; and why we
are so earnestly, so often, and in so various terms solicited by Christ and
his Apostles, to observe this duty? Saint Augustine tells us, it is, because
all the graces of Christ, without this grace of loving all men, and living in
peace with all men, will avail us nothing at all; Namsicut spiritus humanus
nunquam vivificat membra nisi fuerint unita; ita Spiritus sanctus nunquam nos
vivificat, nisi sumus in pace conjuncti. For as the Soul and humane spirit does
not quicken and give life unto our members, unless they be joined together; so
the Spirit of God will never quicken us, to become members of Christ, unless
we be united together with love, and in the bond of peace, as the same Father
speaks; and Saint Paul plentifully proves the invalidity of all graces, 1
Cor. 13. per totum.
without this grace of love and charity toward all men: and what love can be
in them that kill their neighbors?

And therefore, not only of our peace and reconciliation with God, or the
peace and tranquillity of our consciences, but even of this peace among men,
Esaias 52.7.
the Prophet says, How beautiful are the feet of the Emb^ssadours of peace?
and our Savior does so earnestly persuade us to embrace this peace; without
which, we can never attain unto any peace with God, or to any quiet mind; for,
as Saint John says, he that loves not his brother; and I may add, 1 John
4.20.
and is not at peace with his neighbor, whom he has seen; how can he love
God, and be at peace with God, whom he has not seen?

And therefore, The piety of our Liturgy and Letany
howsoever they that think themselves to be the holy brethren, and yet are the
incentives of war, do exclaim against our Liturgy, and cannot endure the
Letany, yet our Church does most piously pray, Give peace in our time, O Lord;
and again, That it may please thee, to give unto all (...) peace, and concord.

(...) the first part of that honor, which we owe to all men, that is, to do
(...) wr^ng, to shed no blood; to hate no man in our heart, to traduce no man
with our tongues, and to smite no man with our hands; but to love, and to live
in peace with all men.

2. As we are no ways to hurt, or to wrong any man; so we ought, Every way to
assist, and help them, that need our help.
to the uttermost of our power, to be always ready to relieve, help, and
succor every one that is oppressed, and that stands in need of our help, and
nihil est tam egregium, tam liberale, tamque munificum, quam opem far
supplicibus, excitare asf^ictos, dare salutem, and homines a periculis
liberare; and there is nothing more royal, more liberal, and more munificent,
then to help the poor supplicants, and distressed Petitioners, to raise up the
afsticted, and to free the oppressed out of the hands of their oppressors,
says the Orator; C^cero Orat. 1.
and in his Oration for Ligarius, he says, Homines ad Deos nulla re propius
accedunt, quam salutem hominibus dand^; men can by no way be made more like
unto God, than by doing good, and by yielding health and deliverance unto men:

Therefore Solomon says, withold not good from them to whom it is due, when
it is in the power of thine hand to do it; and say not unto thy neighbor,
Prove. 3.27. and 28.
Go and come again, and to morrow I will give it thee, when as thou have it by
thee; because, as Lucian says, (...), Celeres Gratiae dulciores sunt; sin
autem tardaveris, omnis gratia vana sit, neque dicatur gratia.

(...).


The swiftest graces, or the favors soonest done, are the sweetest; and the
slow grace loses all grace, and deserves small thanks: being like unto him,
says, Seneca, that gives not his bread to the poor, until it be mouldie, and
mustie, scarce worth the taking up; but he deserves most thanks, that does
good unto his neighbor, with most speed; Quia bis dat, qui cito dat; because
he doubleth his favor, that hasteneth to do it; and therefore, That the good
we do, we should speedily do it.
as our Savior says to Judas, Quod facis, fac cito, What thou do, do
quickly; so say I to every man, Either do good, and help thy neighbor quickly,
or deny him quickly; and keep him not in suspense, which is far worse then the
denial; because, as Solomon says, spes quae defertur affligit animam; the
hope that is deferred, afflicts the soul; and, as the Poet says, Morsque
minus poenae quam mora mortis habet.

The expectation of a delayed death, has been worse to some, then death it
self; so the lingering and long-looking after any good, is more tedious to many
men, then the absolute denial of that good. And so I read it in the French
History, that when a certain Petitioner besought the King of France for some
Office that he desired, in requital of some service that he had done unto the
King; and the King told him, He should not have it, A pretty story of one of
the Kings of France.
he fell down upon his knees, and said, I do most humbly and heartily thank
your Majesty for this favor; the King replied, thou mistakest me, for I tell
thee, Thou shall not have it; yes, said the Petitioner, I do so understand your
Majesty, and therefore I do thank you, that you have so soon dispatched me, and
not done, as one of your Lords did, to delay me a whole twelve months, in hope
of a place, and then put me off with a sleevelesse excuse; then the King, like
a King, seeing him so thankful for his denial, did freely grant him his
request.

And so, if you intend to do any help to any one, remember what the Poet says,
Toll moras; semper nocuit differ paratis. Lucan. in Pharsal. l. 1.


Delay not your favor, but speedily help him, because your delays destroys
your good; and makes it not half so good, and sometimes no good at all unto the
receiver: but is as the physic, that is administered to the patient, that is
past recovery, (...).

But if you would approve your selves to God, then, as the Apostle says, to do
good, Heb. 13.16.
and to communicate, or to distribute unto the poor, as Tremelius Translates
it, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased; and if we do not
this, then, as Lactantius says, Non meremur in periculo liberari, si non
succurrimus; nec meremur auxilium, si negamus auxilium; we deserve not to have
our selves freed from dangers, if we do not our best, to help and free them,
that are in dangers; neither do we deserve, to be relieved in our wants, if we
aid not, and relieve those that are in want, and in need to be relieved. And
if we had helped our King, when men rose up against him, we had freed both him,
and our selves from many miseries.

And therefore, that God may be merciful unto us, when we are in dangers, and
help us when we are in want, we ought to yield our best assistance to deliver
them that are in dangers, and to do good, and to help all those men, that are
in want; as holy Job professes that he did, saying, I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to to help him, Job. 29 12.
and 17. Chap. 31.17. and 20.
and I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth;
and then he shows, how he did not eat his morsels himself alone, but the
fatherless did eat with him; and the loins of the poor were covered with his
clothing, and warmed with the fleeces of his sheep.

And so should we do, hinder the oppressor to wrong the poor, and stop the
violent proceeding of the wicked; and then, according to our ability, cloth
the naked, feed the hungry, and visit those, that are sick and in prison:

But, wicked, and did such and such villainies; as, to kill my children, rob my
friends and rebel against their King etc. And therefore, they deserve rather
to be suffered to perish for their iniquities, than to be relieved in their
necessities.

To this we answer, deal with us, as we deserve, we should all be soon undone;
because we have continually provoked him to wrath, and our sins are more in
number, then the sands of the sea and heavier in weight, than we are able to
bear; and yet God is so good and so gracious toward us, Math. 5.45.
that he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain
on the just, and on the unjust. Even so, if we will be the children of our
Father, which is in heaven, we must not only love our friends, honor the
wealthy, do good unto our brethren, and relieve those that are godly; but we
must honor all men, love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them
that hate us, pray for them, which despitefully use us, and persecute us; and
relieve them which perhaps have robbed us: for herein we are not to consider
their wickedness but their wants, By relieving the poor, we benefit our selves
more then the poor
and so do our best, to relieve their misery, and not to uphold their mischief;
and by such courteous and tenderhearted carriage toward these evil men,
(...), the godly men do gratify, and do good unto themselves, as we may
interpret the words of the Apostle, (...). So that indeed we pleasure not
these-poor so much by our giving, Ephesians. 4.32.
as we do benefit our selves by their receiving of what we give them.

And therefore we are to do good unto all men, and to the wicked, though they
be never so wicked, that we deprive not our selves of that good which, for
relieving them, we shall receive from God; Quia manus pauperis est
gazophylacium Christi, Qui attendit ad attenuatum; faith Tremelius.
the hand of the poor is the treasure-house of Christ: and whatsoever we give
unto the poor, we lend unto the Lord, and we shall receive it again, in the
time of need; and the Prophet David says, Blessed is he that considers the
poor and needy; Qui prospioit oppresso, says the vulgar Translation; blessed
is he that looks to the oppressed, The second branch. (...).
the Lord shall deliver him in the time of trouble; much more blessed shall he
be, that helps and relieveth the oppressed; and especially those, that have
formerly, wronged and oppressed him; he shall be doubly blessed.

1. Because he relieveth his wants. And 2. Because he remitteth his faults, and
revengeth not his own wrongs.
And so you see how we are to honor, to esteem, and to love all men.

2. As we are to honor all men in general, What love we owe to the
Brotherhood.
so more especially we are to love the Brotherhood in particular: where
observe, 1. The Act. 2. The Extent.


1. The Act is love, and love; says the Schoolman is, Been velle amato: but
that is no more then Amor affectivus: and the Apostle speaks not here, de amore
affectivo tantum sed de amore effectivo simul; of the inward affection only,
but also of that love, which is declared by the effects, in outward actions;
and therefore (...); Arist. Aethic. l. 9. c. 5.
To love is to will that, which we esteem good to any one, and, to the
uttermost of our power, to procure that good unto him: as Aristotle says.

So that this our love to the brotherhood, comprehends

1. An hearty affection, without dissimulation; 1 John 3.18.
not only in tongue and in word, but in deed and verity ( i. e.) from the heart.

2. An actual performance of all the good, that we can do unto them: as,
praying for them, comforting them and administering to their necessities, not
only with our purses, but also with our words, with our labors, Crysost. in
To. 12. ho. 21.
and with any thing, that lies in our power, to stand them in any stead. This
is the act, that we are to do; And

2. For the Extent of it, we are to do it most especially, says the Apostle,
to the Brotherhood.

Touching which point of Fraternity or Brotherhood, you must observe, that
there is a two fold Brotherhood, whereof, you must hate the one and love the
other. That there is a two fold fraeternity.
As The 1. Is in Evil, and from the Devil. The 2. Is in Good, and from God. For


1. Simeon and Levi were brethren, but it was in the evil, The evil
Brotherhood.
says the Scripture: when the instruments of cruelty were in their
habitations; and therefore cursed was their brotherhood, G^n. 49.5. and 7.7.
and their unity was to be divided in Jacob, and to be scattered in Israel. And
so the wicked, at all times, Faciunt unitatem coutra unitatem, do, as S.
Augustine says, unite themselves together against verity, and against the
unity that should be among Cristians, Psalm. 2.1, 2.
which is, the unity of faith and religion; and, as the Prophet David says,
the Heathen do furiously rage together, How the wicked, like the Scots and the
Parliament, do combine and covenant together.
and the people do imagine a vain thing; and all take counsel together, and
plot against the Lord, and against his anointed: so Pilate and Herod, though
at ods among themselves for other things, yet they can be reconciled, and agree
together to crucify Christ. And so Solomon tells us, how the Congregation of the
ungodly do confederate and Covenant (as now they do) together, to strengthen
themselves in their wickedness, saying one to anothe, Come, let us cast our
lots together, let us have but one purse, that is, one common treasure amongst
us all; Prove. 1.11. and 14.
and let us undergo the same fortune, be the same good or bad.

And therefore, it is no new thing, for Traitors, Rebels, and Robbers, and
other the like wicked men, though of different sects, and several opinions;
yet to unite themselves together, and to take oaths and make covenants,
confederacies and conspiracies, against the professors of the true Religion,
and against those that they are bound, Salust. Conjurat. Ca^el. X ^^^ph^n. de
ascend. Cyri.
by former oaths, to obey as it was in the conspiracy of Cateline, which Salust
relates, and in the confederacy of the Grecians, when they went up with Cyrus
the younger, against Artaxerxes, which Zenophon sets down at large, and the
covenant of the holy leaguers of France against their King, and the like.

But you must remember, to do, what God commands you to do, in such
confederacies, saying, My son, walk not thou in the way with them, resrain thy
f^ot from their path; Prove. 1.15.
for their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood; as you may read in
the foresaid Authors, what abundance of innocent blood, those wicked covenants
and confederacies have caused to be spilt. And therefore this being not the
Brotherhood that you should love, if you love God, and your own souls, you
must hate the same, as you do the gates of hell; because that, as the Psalmist
says, in covenanting against right, and against the truth, they are
confederates against thee, O God, and against thy servants.

And what created power under Heaven, How hard it is to esca^e the mischief of
subtle confederates.
is able to unty that knot, and to escape that malice, which villainy, subtilty,
and cruelty have combined to bring to pass? Or what man is able to withstand a
multitude of united enemies, that have strength and wealth enough, and have
covenanted and sworn to fight against him, until they have destroyed him?

Surely, when their plots are so subtle, their power so great, their wealth of
Gold and Silver so much, and the confederates of sworn brethren so many, it is
impossible to prevent their mischief, and to escape out of their hands, if the
Lord himself does not stand, to help his servants, and, as the Prophet says,
if he that dwells in heaven laugheth not these covenanters to scorn, if the
Lord have them not in derision; yea, if he speaks not to them in his wrath, and
vexes them in his sore displeasure.

2. The good Brotherhood.
The other brotherhood is good, among the good, and in good, in faith to God,
in obedience to our King and in love toward all men, and this brotherhood is
many fold, as specially 1. Is four fold.
Natural. 2. National. 3. Political. 4. Spiritual.


1. The natural Brotherhood.
Natural brethren, begotten of the same parents, bred in the same house, and
after the same manner, should not be like the offspring of Cain, that killed
his own, and his only brother Abel; and as Romulus killed his own brother
Remus, and Antoninus murdered his brother Geta in his mother's lap; 2 Chr. 21.4.
and King Joram slew six of his own natural brethren, the sons of Jehosaphat,
J^seph de Ant. l. 14. c. 2. and deinceps.
with the sword; when as such miscreants are unworthy to live on earth; neither
should they jar, hate, or envy one another as Jacob and Esau did, and Jacobs
children did their brother Joseph; and as the dissension of Hyrcanus and
Aristobulus made way for Herod, an Idumean, to become King of Jurie: The great
love and humility of Scipio Africanus to his younger brother Lucius Scipio.
but they should live like Moses and Aaron, and should love one another, as
Plutarch relates, P. Cornelius Scipio Africanus, and his brother Lucius Scipio
did; for notwithstanding he was the African by name, that had overcome
Hannibal, and had triumphed over the Carthaginians, and excelled all others, in
the praise of Martial discipline, yet of his own good nature, he made himself
inferior, and was contented to be Lieutenant to his younger brother, Plutarch.
in vita Scip. Afr.
that his brother might have the honor, of obtaining the Government of that
Province from Laelius, that was his fellow Consul: and the like love, or rather
more fervent we find to be in Castor and Pollux, for when Castor was slain by
Ida, How deerly brethren loved one another in former times.
Pollux besought Jupiter, that he might impart half his own life unto his
brother; which being granted, the Poet says, Sic fratrem Pollux alterna morte
redemit. And these celestial signs, that have their denomination from these
brethren, do shine in heaven, Alternis vicibus, by turns, as the Astrologers do
observe, in token of that great love of these brethren.

And, if the time would give me leave, I could tell you of two Roman Brethren,
whereof, the one was in Sertorius Army, and the other in the adverse Party, and
of many others, that did so exceedingly love one another in former times, that
each of them loved the other as himself: But now Rara est concordia fratrum, in
our time, the love of Brethren is waxen cold, and so frozen, that many of them
are degenerated and become most unnatural one toward another, that it is even
a shame to see it.

2. There is a National Brotherhood, a brotherly love, The National
Brotherhood. Exodus 2.11.
betwixt those men that are born and bred in the same Country, and are, as it
were, sprung from the same Stock; for so Moses is said to have gone to see his
Brethren, and spying an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his Brethren, he
slew the Egyptian; and when he saw an Hebrew striving with an Hebrew, he said,
Sirs, Act. 7.26.
you are brethren, Why do ye wrong one to another? And the Lord shows, that
all the children of Israel, though strangers one to another, yet were they
Brethren: for he says, If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen in decay with
thee, then thou shall relieve him, yea, though he be a stranger, Levit. 25.35,
36.39. Deuteronomy. 23.19.
or a sojourner, that he may live with thee: And so in many-many places, the
Lord calls all the Jews, and all the Israelites Brethren. And the very
Heathens deemed their Countrymen, that were of the same Nation, to be Brethren,
and loved one another, even as Brethren. And the Romans held the Trojans to be
their Brethren, because they were descended from them. And Scipio Africanus
esteemed better of him that preserved the life of one Roman, his Countryman,
than of him that had slain ten of his enemies that were Barbarians.

And what a shame is it then, for men, of the same Country, of the same Nation,
yea, and of the same kindred, to be set, as the Scripture speaks, of an
Egyptian, against an Egyptian; or, as the Soldiers in Senacheribs Army, when
the Angel caused them, to bathe their swords in the blood of each other. Is it
not a pitiful thing, to see, an Irish man killing Irish-men, or an Englishman
making his sword drunk in the blood of Englishmen.

Surely any War is lamentable; and as the Poet says, -- heu miseri, qui bella
gerunt. They are wretched men, that do wage War; But of all Wars, Lucan.
Pharsal. l. 2. And therefore Claudian says, Cum Gallica valgo, Praelia
jactaret, tacuit Pharsalica Caesar: Namque inter socias acies, cognataque
signa. Vt vinci miser m, nunquam vicisse dec^rum. Claud de 6. consulat.
Honorii. 3. The Political Brotherhood.
Summum, Brute, nesas civilia bella fatemur. That is the worst, and most
lamentable, when a Kingdom is divided against it self, and the men of the same
Nation shall fight and kill one another like enemies, that should love and live
together like brethren.

And therefore, what pretenses soever they have, I know not how those men in
our Kingdoms, that to make themselves great, have, and do involve these Nations
in their own-blood, will answer for it, Cum surrexerit ad judicandum Deus, When
God shall come, and shall make inquisition for all the blood that they have
caused to be unjustly spilt.

3. The Political Brotherhood is, when either two or three, or more Friends,
or Cities, or Nations, shall covenant and confederate to help, and assist one
another, in all just and honest things, against all those that shall seek
unjustly to wrong them, and oppress them. And this is a commendable
Brotherhood, and ought to be loved, and inviolably to be observed; as it was
by Damon, and Pythias, Pylades, and Orestes, and by the Ancient Romans, to all
their Colleagues, and Confederates.

4. 4 The Spiritual Christian Brotherhood.
The last, best, and chiefest, Brotherhood, is that which is spiritual, and
which therefore ought to be preferred, and loved, rather than any other
Brotherhood whatsoever. For, as there are degrees and difference in Gods love,
when, though he loves all the things that he has made; yet he loves Man,
better than any of all the things that he made; yea better than he loved the
Angels, when he is styled (...); but is no where found to be termed (...). And
among men, though he loves them all, as they are his creatures, and the works
of his hands; yet he loves the godly far better than all the rest, that are
wicked; and of all that are godly, he loves best his well-beloved Son, in whom
he is well pleased: and next to him, he loves them best, We ought to order our
love, as God loves.
that are most conformable to the Image of his Son; that is, in goodness, in
holiness, and righteousness. So we ought to order our love toward all men, and
to each Brotherhood, that they may have the best share in our love, which
ought to have the best; and that is, the Brotherhood which is spiritual. For,
though the Apostle bids us, to do good unto all men, and so to love each
Brotherhood; yet he tells us, that we ought to do it more especially, Galat.
6.10.
to them that are of the household of faith; that is, to relieve the good sooner
than the bad, a Christian before a Pagan, and a Saint rather than a sinner.

And therefore, though we may, and ought, to love each of the foresaid
Brother-hoods, that is in good, and especially the Brotherhood of flesh and
blood, which nature teaches every man to do, when they are like Hypocrates
Twins, and should have idem velle, and idem nolle; and the Scripture shows,
how good, and joyful a thing it is, for to see such brethren to love one
another, and to live together in unity; yet the Brotherhood, whereof the
Apostle speaks, and is to be loved above all other Brother-hoods whatsoever,
Christians ought to love one another, better than natural brethren that are not
Christians.
is to be understood, de fraternitate Spiritus, of our spiritual Brotherhood,
whereby we are regenerated and made all the sons of God, and so Brethren by
adoption and grace. For this fraternity of the Spirit unites men more, and
tyeth them better to love one another, than the fraternity of flesh and blood.
Because, as S. Augustine says, The natural Brotherhood similitudinem corpor
is refert, shows the likeness, and coherence of the body; but this
Brotherhood of the Spirit unanimitatem cordis demonstrat, declares the unity
and unanimity of the heart, and that is interdum sibi inimica, sometimes
breaking out to deadly hate, as it did betwixt Cyrus the younger, and
Artaxerxes. But this is, sine intermissione pacifica, always remaining in
perfect love.

And therefore, ut Religio derivatur a religando, as Religion is so termed,
because, Religion tyeth all that are of the same Religion to love one another.
it tyeth and knitteth men together by fervent love among themselves, and by a
constant faith to God. So we find that men of the same Faith and Religion, have
loved, and relieved one another, and stuck together better and firmer, than any
other kind of men whatsoever. And so they are here required and commanded to do
by the Apostle, Love the Brotherhood, that is, love them especially, and above
all others, that are of the same faith and do profess the same Religion of
Jesus Christ as you do. For you see, all Heretics, and Sectaries, and the
professors of false religions do so; and why should not you, that are true
Christians, and do profess the true Religion of Christ, much rather do the
same?

But here we ought to be very careful, A special Observation.
and to take special heed, that we be not too censorious, and too rash judges,
to set down the bounds of this Brotherhood, and so straighten the extent, and
diminish the number of the Brethren, by our determining, who be those sons of
God in Christ, which we may, and ought to love and relieve, rather than the
rest of men, which we suppose, we are not to love so well.

For you must know, which our precise Saints will not know, that the
Brotherhood, which the Apostle means here, Who are here understood by this
Brotherhood.
and those that S. Paul terms the household of faith, and, in other places,
the Saints of God, is to be understood of all Christians, and does comprehend
all those, that were baptized, and did profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ. And
these might then, as they may also now, be easily discerned and distinguished
from the rest of the P^gans and Infidels, that did not believe the Gospel of
God: Because the one sort had the Fathers name written in their foreheads, when
they were baptized, and so received the outward sign and badge of Christianity,
Revelat. 14.1.
which they professed, and were not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: Romans 1.
And the other sort refused the profession of Christ, and would not embrace the
Gospel, and receive the badge of Christianity; but either persecuted the
Christians, or at best slighted and rejected the Faith of Christ.

But where all men are baptized and do profess to believe the Gospel, and to
do service unto Christ, to distinguish the sound branches of the true Vine, and
the faithful members of Christ's body, from the rotten boughs, and hypocritical
professors, and so to determine, which are the Brother hood, and which not, is
such a presumption of men, as can no ways be warranted by the Word of God:
for, Conscientiae latebras hominibus scire non permissum est; We cannot search
into the hearts of men, and God suffers not men to know the thoughts of other
men, and the secrets that are lurking in their consciences, which is the proper
work of God, who only is (...), Hierom. epist. 5.
The searcher of the heart and reins, says S. Hierom.

And therefore, we must confess, that as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.19.
The Lord only knows who are his, and can discriminate the lively branches
from the rotten boughs, and the truly regenerated Brotherhood, from the soly
outward professors of the Faith of Christ. And we can judge no otherwise of any
men, than by their fruits; that is, by their actions and outward appearance: We
are often deceived by the outward appearance of things.
and that appearance, when we judge of inward things by the outward, does
oftentimes deceive us; when as, Multa sunt, quae non videntur; ita multa
videntur, quae non sunt, Many things are, which are not seen; so many things
are seen to be, which are not: As the falling-Stars, seem to be Stars, and yet
are not. And the hypocrites, that like Watermen, do row one way, and look
another way, seem to be good Christians, and yet are not: So, many men have the
fear of God in their hearts, and do love God, and are the true children of God;
though these graces are not seen, but are, as we see the Sun is sometimes,
over-clouded with those sins that proceed from the frailty of the flesh. And
therefore our Savior bids us, not to judge according to the outward
appearance, that is, not to judge of the inward things by the outward; John
7.24.
but to judge righteous judgment.

But you will say, How can that be? righteous judgment, if we can judge no
further than the outward appearance? or if Interiora non cognoscuntur per
exteriora, The inward things may not be known by the outward signs?

I answer, That many times indeed, inward things do cohere with the outward
appearance; as the heat shows there is a fire, which we see not; but this is
not always; and therefore not infallible. And I say, that when our Savior
bids us, to judge righteous judgment, he means not hereby, that we should
enter into the hidden things of the heart, How we ought not to judge of our
Brethren.
or search into the secrets of God, and so positively, and rightly, to
determine and judge, as our Gnostick Sectaries seem to do, who are Gods chosen
Saints, and who are wicked Reprobates; Who are the Brother hood that are to be
loved, and who are the limbs of the Beast, that are to be rejected; which we
cannot do: But he means, that we should not judge of inward, hidden, and
secret things, by the superficial show of outward things: Or, that we should
not judge of the secret intention of the heart, when we see but the outward
action of the hand; or, as Saint Augustine says, he wills that we should not
judge de actionibus mediis quaevel in malo vel in bono animo fieri possunt, of
such actions as may proceed, and come either from an evil mind, or from a good
heart; or else, de futur is contingentibus, of future things, what may happen
to any one, because that in all these things, we may easily be deceived; as we
see some man, like unto S. Paul, de quo desperamus, subito convertitur and fit
optimus, of whom we despaired, is suddenly converted, and, as he was, from a
persecuting wolf, became a holy Saint; so is this other man from a deboist
drunkard, become a devout Christian: and we see other men, like King Saul, and
Judas, and Simon Magus; de quibus multum praesumpseramus, defecerunt and facts
sunt pessimi; of whom we conceived much good, have suddenly relapsed, and
became most wicked; so that, nec timor noster certus est, nec amor, neither our
fear of the one, nor our hope of the other, can have any certainty at all.

And on the other side, he would have us to strive and study to the uttermost
of our power, by the ways and means that are left unto us, to know the truth of
outward things, and to search for the understandiug of those things that God
has revealed unto us, Of what thing ^ve may judge.
and so, to judge righteous judgment in those things, wherein we are allowed
to judge; and that is, de praesentibus externis and apertis, of things present
or past, and the things that are manifest and external; as to discern white
from black, light from darkness, good from evil, and a sober man from him
that is drunk; or a true subject from a false Traitor, and the like; so far as
their outward actions do appear. Which may be done without entering into the
hearts and thoughts of men, or diving to deep into the secrets of God; for our
Savior tells us, that as the tree is known by his fruit, that is, cujus
generis sit, of what kind it is, an apple, or a crab, The words and works of
every man do testify wh^t he is. Judge. 12.6. John 10.25.
a fig tree, or a thistle, so we may know men by their words, and by their
works, whether they be therein good or bad, the blessers of God or the
blasphemers of God; for as the damsel said to Saint Peter, Thy speech
bewrays thee; and the pronouncing of Shiboleth discovered, who was an
Israelite, and who not; who a Gileadite, and who an Euphraimite: And our
Savior says, The works that I do, do bear witness of me; so the words and
works of every man else, do sufficiently testify what he is for the present,
good or bad.

But though I do know by the fruits, of what kind the tree is; yet I know not
thereby, whether the tree be rotten at the root, or not: so, though I know by
the words and works of men, whether they be therein virtuous, or vicious,
Saints, or sinners; yet I cannot judge thereby what kind of hearts they have,
good or bad; or what will become of them, for the time to come.

For you know what the Prophet says, Many give good words with their mouths,
but curse with their hearts; and the Israelites drew near unto God with their
mouths, and honored him with their lips, but their hearts were far from
him; and therefore, seeing that virtus consistit in action, virtue consists
in action, in our works rather then in our words; our Savior tells us, Matthew
7.21.
Not he that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of his Father, which is in heaven; and Saint Paul says
directly, Romans 2.13.
Not the hearers of the Law, though you should hear a Sermon every day in the
week, but the doers of the Law shall be justified; because our works do more
fully, and more certainly show, what we are, rather then our words; for, quid
audiam verba, cum videam contraria facta? to what purpose shall I hear good
words, Our words like the leaves, and our works like the fruit.
while the tongue, like Joab, says, I^ it peace, my brother, and the hand
stabs us to the heart? they will avail us nothing, being like the Spiders web,
that will make no garment for us, because our words are like the green leaves,
that make a fair show upon any tree, and our works are like the solid fruits,
whereby we discern the sweetness, and the goodness of the tree.

And yet I told you how far we may judge of the fruits, and works of men; so
far as (...) see, and no further; because we may as easily be deceived by the
specious works of the hypocrite, as by the scandalous deeds of the
transgressors, which perhaps, for ought we know, may have better hearts toward
God, then the others that have far more glorious works, in the sight of men.

And therefore I say, that we ought not to make a distinction among Christians,
and gather Churches unto our selves, to be a congregation of Saints separated
from the rest of the wicked, as the Apostles gathered Churches from the
unbelieving Jews, and the Idolatrous Gentiles.

Because all those that are baptized, and are received as the children of the
Church, and do profess the Faith of Christ, are comprehended in this
Brotherhood, and is not to be rent in pieces, like Jeroboams garment, but ought
to be kept entire, like the Coat of Christ, and to be loved and and cherished,
as this our Apostle advises us.

But then, seeing this brotherhood, which we are thus chiefly to love, is not
the brotherhood of society, which reason persuades, nor of consanguinity,
which nature teaches, nor of our Election and Adoption to be the Sons of
God, which we know not; but of the profession of the faith of Christ and
receiving of the signs and badges of Christianity, which are visible to our
eyes of flesh, and credible to the judgment of charity; unjustly resolved;
whether all, that are baptized, and do thus profess the Christian Religion,
and are not cut off from the Communion of the Church, for some detected and
apparent iniquity, are comprehended in this brotherhood, and are thus specially
to be loved. To which our rigid Saints do absolutely deny it, because we see so
many Sects, and so many kinds of men, that do thus profess Christianity, and
say. They do all believe in Christ, and do wear his badge, and do him service;
as Papasts, Puritans, Brownists, Anabaptists, and the like. And therefore, if
this be true, that all these are contained, and united within this bond of
fraternity, and with a Christian love to be embraced, you will make the way to
heaven very broad, and this bond of brotherhood of a very large extent.

But I answer, that I must not shut the gate of heaven against those, opened
it, nor make the way thither narrower then God has made it; and therefore I
say, that the bond of this Christian fraternity, which we are commanded to
retain, and to love all that are comprehended within it, though it be woven,
like Joseph's coat, Genesis 27.3.
with some diversity of thread, and threads of many colors; yet ought it not to
be easily broken, and soon cut in sunder; and the mercies of God should not be
too narrowly contracted; for why should men be more rigid, then God? or why
should any error exclude men from the Churches- Communion, which will not
deprive them of eternal salvation? and we find that in the Apostles time, the
Corinthians denied the Resurrection of the flesh, which is a principal Article
of our Christian faith: and the Galathians erred as fowly, in one of the
chiefest, and most fundamental points of Christianity, which was the point of
our justification so far, that S. Paul tells them, if they be circumcised, as
many of them would be; that is, after they had embraced the truth of the
Gospel, they were fallen away from grace, and Christ should profit them
nothing; and many other foul errors they had amongst them: and yet the holy
Apostle, in regard of their profession, to be Christians, and their Christian
conversation, to lead a just and an upright life, calls them Saints,,
brethren, his children, and the Churches of God; Chillings p. 220.
And so the seven famous Churches of Asia, were infected with many errors, and
accused of foul corruptions; and yet the holy Ghost denies them not to be
Christians, and disdaineth not to call them the Churches of God.

And therefore I say, though the Papists, and Puritans, Anabaptists, and
Brownists, and the like, differ from us that are the true Protestants, in many
particular points of our Religion; yet, while they profess to believe in
Christ, What are the chiefest points of charity.
and to live like Christians, in the fear of God, in true obedience to their
King, and in unfeigned love and charity toward their neighbors, which I
conceive to be the chiefest points of Christianity, and the parts and parcels
of our wedding garment; I say, they are our brethren, and to be deemed our
Christian brethren; and we ought to love them, and are obliged to live in peace
with them, and to suffer them unwronged to live peaceably with us; and not to
do, as, in the madness of their misguided zeal, too too many men are bent on
either side, to hate, persecute, rob and murder one another, because they will
not be of the same opinion, as we are, or they are of; which is a thing
impossible in nature, because Faith cannot be compelled, either to believe what
I list not, or not to believe what I list, as Lactantius says, and it is
inconsistent with the very Principle of our profession, that we should rob men,
and take away their estates^s because they will not profess the same Faith and
Religion that we do; for compulsion may make men hypocrites, but not Saints;
and you know the chiefest points of our Christian Religion are, Faith, Hope,
and Charity,; and the Apostle tells us, the greatest of these is Charity;
because our love and our charity, as they are of a far greater perpetuity, so
they should be of a far greater latitude, and extent, then our Faith and Hope
can be.

And therefore, What we are to hate, and what to love in all Sectaries, and
professors of Religion.
though my knowledge and my judgment will not suffer me to be of the same
Faith, either with the Papists, Puritans, Anabaptists, or the like erroneous
Sectaries; but persuades me to hate and detest both their Positions and their
Practices: yet my Religion teaches me to love their persons, and in my
conversation to live in Peace, and to join the right hand of Christianity with
them, and rather desire to exceed them, in all the Offices of love, then any
ways to show the least hatred, or do the least injury to any one of them all;
and withal, to pray for them, and to use all loving means to bring them to
repentance for their errors, and to embrace the truth.

This which I profess, is the readiest way to win them: for as the Scripture
says, Prove. 10.12.
Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers a multitude of sins: and is the
readiest way to convert the sinner.

And I think, if men did this, and not break the bond of love, nor straighten
the extent of this brotherhood, they might the sooner be reduced to embrace the
same truth, and to be united in the same faith, because true love is the most
attractive thing in the world, and the want of love is the cause, that so much
wickedness does abound, even as our Savior testifies.

And therefore it is most requisite, that we should be very earnest, and very
often to insist upon these points, and to urge these duties, to honor all men,
and to love the brotherhood.

And so having heard, that no Christian, that is baptized, and professes the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, is to be excluded from this Brotherhood; We are now to
confider, wherein the love of this Brotherhood consists; and what this
Extensive love includes in it: and upon survey, we shall find it to comprehend

1. An Unfeigned affection of good will unto them, without dissimulation, to
wish them all happiness and prosperity, not only in words, but even from our
very hearts.

2. An Earnest endeavor to procure them all the good that their necessity
requires, so far as it lies in our power to help them. As

1. To pray for them, that God would bless them, and preserve them from all
evil, and save them, even as S. Paul says, Brethren, Romans 10.1.
my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might be saved.

2. Most cheerfully to administer to their necessities, in all that lies in
our abilities; for that is the Apostle's meaning, both in his Epistle to the
Romans, chap. 12.13. And in this 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. Chrysostom. in loc.
as S. Chrysostom shows, saying, Non solum pecuniis, sed and verbis and rebus
and corpore and aliis quibuscunque modis, vult nos juvare egenos; the Apostle
would have us to help the needy, not only with our purses, but also with our
words, in speaking for them, and with our labors, to do them good, and to
preservs them from all manner of damage in their estates; yea, Romans 12.20.
without any difference of friends or foes: for so the Apostle bids us, If
thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink. And so the Lord
says, if thou meet est thine enemies Ox, or his Ass going astray, thou shall
surely bring hem back again to him; Exodus 23.5.6.
and if thou see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his burden, and
thou would forbear to help him; thou shall surely help him, or, leave thy
business to help him; O most heavenly and divine love! how happy were we, if we
were filled with such love! and how miserable are they, that in stead of doing
such friendly offices unto their enemies, as to bring home their straying
cattle, will rob their friends, and drive their Christian brethren both from
house and home, and leave them neither Ox or Ass? And I remember that I read
of Linacrus, how he was reading the fifth, six, and seven chapters of S.
Mathew's Gospel, and then pawsing a while, he laid the book aside, and cried
out, Certe aut hoc non est Evangelium Christi, aut nos non sumus Christiani: So
I say to those that rob their Christian brethren, and expel them from their
estates, and deprive them of that Means that God has given them upon what
pretense soever; Certainly to do these things are not the commands of God, and
they do high'y offend God, in transgressing his commands; or, I do not know,
Gal 6.10. Math. 5.44.
what it is to transgress his commandments. For S. Paul bids us, to do good
unto all, and our Savior Christ bids us to do good to them that hate us: and I
think I am sure, that to rob us, and to deprive us of all that we have, is no
good to us, though it may do good to us, as it comes from God, when by our
patience, and our prayers for our persecutors, we shall possess our souls,
which is a better possession then all that which our enemies do or can take
from us.

And therefore, let the wicked still do wickedly, let the fi^thy be filthy
still, and let thieves and robbers rob us still, and if they please take away
that little pittance, which is yet left unto us; but let us do as the Apostle
bids us, love the Brotherhood, and as our Savior bids us, love our enemies;
and if we hear them swear, or see them drunk, or commit any other foul
offenses, let us rather, friendly, advise them, to amend, as our brethren, and
not censoriously exclude them from our societies, and reject them as reprobates
from Gods people, as those, that make a separation from us, do with us.

The third branch of this Golden Text is, Fear God. Wherein you are to observe,
1. The Act, Fear. 2. The Object, God.


1. Fear, which the Latin's call Metus, or Timor, Cicero Tusc. q. l. 4.
and in Greek is termed (...), Est opinio vel expectatio mali impendentis,
says the Orator, The opinion or expectation of some evil, hanging over our
heads: and it is sprung in us, says the Philosopher, Per totius caloris ex
frigore contractionem ad cor ipsum undique decurrentis utpote ad suam sedem
tanquam in regiam vel in arcem; Fear, what it is and how defined.
by the irregular contraction of our natural heat, from the other parts of the
body unto the heart, as unto the royal Tower; whereby our hearts panting with
incessant motion, are succored, and our blood deprived of that heat, Sap.
17.12.
freezeth as it were in the other veins; or, as the wise man says, Fear is the
betraying of that succor which reason affords.

But for your better understanding of this point, you must know that the object
of fear is to be considered, before it can be rightly defined what it is; And
it is agreed on all sides, that, Objectum timoris malum, evil is the proper
object of all fear, and that must be evil to come, for that which is past we
call (...), heaviness or sadness; but that which is to come, we call (...),
fear: for we do always love, and never fear, that which is good, or that which
we conceave to be good at least. And the fear of this evil is either, 1. Fear
two fold.
Human or, 2. Divine.


1. Human.
As fear is naturally ingraffed in every Beast, as we see, says S. Bernard,
Bernard. in quad. Epist.
that the trembling Sheep does run away for fear, when the Woolf comes,
Abscondit se columba tremens, accipitre viso; and de caverna mus non audet
esuriens exire, ambiente cato; the hungry mouse dares not peep out of her hole,
while the Cat walks by her; so, ever since Adam sinned, this fear of evil is
naturally ingraffed by the heart of every man; for I heard thy voice in the
garden (says Adam) and I was afraid; and so ever since we are all afraid: so
that the strongest and most assured courage cannot hinder us from shutting our
eyes, at the sudden surprise of a flash of lightning, or the withdrawing and
turning aside our head, from the sight of a fearful precipice, or to be
terrified at any great and unexpected noise; because it is not in our power to
resist these first motions, or first fears of evil.

And this human fear is the effect of sin, and the object of it is neither God
nor good, but want, sickness, dangers, death, or the like bitter fruits, which
the tree of knowledge has produced.

And therefore this fear is not to be desired, because, as the Poet says,
Degeneres animos timor arguit -- It is an argument of a poor dejected and
degenerate mind; and, as Ovid says, -- vires subtrahit ipse timor, It takes
away that strength, which we had; and leaves us able to do nothing: and not
only so, but as Lucan says, -- multos in summa pericula misit
Venturi timor ipse mali, fortissimus ille est
Qui promptus metuenda pati --


The fear of evil to come, This human fear is a very ill companion for brave
Soldiers.
has cast many men to many evils, to many sins, to many dangers: Et stultitia
est timore mortis mori; and it is a great deal of folly, or mere foolishness,
to die for fear of death; and yet, as the sound of an empty sling does terrify
the birds, so we many times are afraid of the shadow of evil; Seneca Ep. 75.
Et non ad actum tantum sed ad streptium excitamur, and inter suspecta male
vivitur: infirmus animus, antequam malis opprimatur, queritur; praesumit illa
and ante tempus cadit. And what a miserable thing is this, Futuris angi, nec se
tormento reservare sed accersere sibi miserias? to be vexed with those things
that are to come, and to make our selves miserable before they come? because
the fear of such things makes us the less able to undergo, and to overcome the
things that we do fear, as the fear of Flaminius ad Trasimenum, and of Crassus
apud Carras, and of Pompey in Thessalie, did greatly further their great
losses; because Pessimus in dubiis augur timor, Fear is the worst Prophet that
can be in any doubtful thing; Q^ando affectus qui tecum erit contra te
dimicat, and tui ipsius adversus te metior pars rebellat; when we carry in our
bosom that which fights against us.

And therefore the very Heathens dissuaded us from this base and effeminate
fear, especially when we go against our enemies. (...)
(...). Euripid. in Meleagro.

Fearful men are of none account in the war, but are absent while they are
present, which is the cause, says Cicero, Cicero pro Aul. Caecinna.
Quod exercitus maximi saepe pulsi ac fugati sunt terrore ipso, impetuque
hostium sine cujusquam non modo morte, verum etiam vulnere; Fear destroyed
great Armies.
great Armies have been overthrowen with this vain fear, not only without the
death, but also without the hurt of any man, and therefore reason it self
persuades us to cast off all fear, and to arm our selves with courage, when we
go against our enemies; for though, as the Comic says, (...). Many evils
spring out of rashness: Yet, Fors juvat audentes, prisci sententia vatis;
Claud. ad probinum.
And, as old Homer says, -- (...)
(...). Homer Odyss^x.

Omnibus in rebus potior vir fortis and audax,
Sit licet hospes, and e longinquis venerit oris.
The stout courageous man is best in all affairs; when as the timorous man,
omnia tuta timet, does oftentimes fear his own shadow, and there is no receipt
against fear.

But though fear is an ill companion, and male cuncta ministrat, and orders
all things very ill; It is sometimes good to fear dangers, and how.
yet sometimes this fear of dangers is of an excellent use, especia ly when it
is joined with a provident care, to prevent it; for it is a point of great
wisdom in doubtful things, to fear the worst, when the best will save it self,
and we see many men have been suddenly destroyed, because they feared not the
dangers, that were imminent over their heads; whereas he, Qui insidias timet in
nullas incidet, nec cito perit ruina qui ruinam timet; quia semper metuendo
sapiens vitat malum; and inimicum quamvis humilem, docti est metuere; he that
fears the snare falls not into the snare, and he that fears ruin, is not
suddenly ruined; because a wise man avoideth evil by fearing it, and a learned
man will not be fearless of the hurt that may happen unto him from his meanest
enemy, when according to that of the Poet Parva necat morsu spatiosum viper a
taurum,
A cane non magno saepe tenetur aper.
Causa pusilla nocet, sapiensque nocentia vitat.
A small thing may do much mischief. Yet this fear of danger, without a care
joined with it to prevent the danger, or at least to lessen it, is rather a
vexation to be avoided, than a virtue to be embraced. Therefore this fear is
only good, as it makes us wary to prevent the evil; as the fear of the Thief,
makes the good man of the house watchful to defend his house, says our Savior.

And as this humane frailty, The humane Fear, has driven many me^ to great
sins.
and the fear of future dangers has been the ruin of many a man, and the
loss of many great Armies; so, the like fear has driven many men to great
sins. As Pilate, for fear of the people, and of their complaint against him to
Caesar, condemned to death, the Lord of Life. Judges, for fear of the rich and
powerful men, do many times decree unjust judgment. And the Preachers of Gods
Word, do sometimes pervert the truth, and preach placentia, for fear of
dangers; either loss of Livings, or of Liberties: And in many other men, this
humane fear is the cause of many inhumane acts.

Therefore the holy Ghost prohibiteth this fear in every place; Moses injoyneth
Judges to be men of courage. Luke 12. Jerem. 1. Esaias 51.7. Ezech. 2.6.
Our Savior bids his Disciples, not to fear them that kill the body, and after
that can do no more. And the Lord often commands his Prophets, not to fear
the faces of men, nor to be afraid of their threatenings: As the Prophet Esaias
says, Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart
is my Law: Fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their
revilings; for the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool. And the Angel bids the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.10.
to fear none of those things that they should suffer; that is, neither
poverty, nor sickness, nor reproach, nor imprisonment, nor yet death it self:
And the reason why we should not fear these things is set down by the Lord
himself, saying, Thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that
formed thee, O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee
by thy name, thou art mine: when thou pass^st through the waters, Esaias 43.1, 2.
I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee;
when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the
flame kindle upon thee; Rom 8.31.
because God is with us, and if he be with us, Who can be against us? N^m quid
timet hominem homo in sinu Dei positus? Aug. de verb. Dom.
For why should any man, that is in the bosom of God, and upheld there by Gods
hand, be afraid of any man, or of any thing? Tu de illius sinu noli cadere, and
quicquid ibi pass^s fueris ad salutem valebit non ad pernitiem. Do thou
continue in Gods favor, and thou shall not need to fear any man's fury. And so
you see how the humane fear of all worldly evils, is, as much as we can, to be
shunned, and no ways to be embraced: But

2. The Divine fear God the object of this fear, in two respects.
The Divine fear is that, which we are commanded here, and in all other places
of the holy Scripture, to seek for it, and to embrace it; And though, as I said
before, the proper object of fear, is said to be evil; yet God, which is the
chiefest Good, may be said to be the object of this fear, in two respects.

1. body fears the parting of the soul, which is the life of the body; so the
soul fears the departing of Gods favor, which is the life of the soul; and
that parting of Gods favor from us, is the greatest evil that can happen unto
us.

2. As a Malefactor fears the good and just Magistrate, lest he punish him
for his evil deeds; so every sinner does, or should fear God, lest he should
render vengeance unto him for his sins.

And from these two respects, springs a twofold kind of Divine fear.

1. The servil-fear, which is a fear of punishment.

2. Filial-fear, which is a fear to lose the love and favor of God, which
grieves them more to lose it, than to suffer all the punishment that they can
endure.

And both these fears are wrought in our hearts by the finger of Gods Spirit,
when as the wicked neither respect Gods love, nor fear his justice; but will
notwithstanding all the promises of the Gospel, and all the threatenings of the
Law, most fearlessely run to all kind of wickeduess.

And although the servil-fear has for its object malum poenae, Of the
servil-fear.
the evil of punishment, and the filial-fear has malum culpa, the evil of sin,
Q^ia in illo timetur, ne incidatur in tormentum supplicii, August.
in isto ne amittatur gratia beneficii; because that by the first, we fear the
torments of Hellfire, and by the second we fear to lose the joys of Heaven;
Gregor. in pass.
Et quem a prava action formidata poena prohibet, formidantis animum nulla
spiritus libertas tenet; nam si poenam non metueret, culpam proculdubio
perpetraret; And he that abstaineth from evil, only for fear of the punishment,
is not refrained by the freedom of Gods Spirit; because he would certainly
commit the sin, if he were not withheld by the fear of punishment. And so, as
S. Augustine says, Aug. l. 2. cont^a pelag.
Qui timore poena non amore justitiae fit bonus, nondum been fit bonus; nec fit
in cord, quod fier^ videtur in opere, quando mallet bonnm non facere, si
posset impune; He that does good for fear of the rod more than for the love of
goodness, does not that good so well as he ought to do it; neither is that done
in the heart, which seems to be done in the work, when he had rather not do it,
if he might leave it undone without punishment.

Yet this servil-fear is very good, and very necessary for most men; That the
servil fear is good, and how.
because that, as the needle draws the thread after it; so this fear, entering
first into the heart, makes way for the other fear to follow after; and when
this keeps us from the evil, it makes us by little and little, to fall in
love with the good; for as nemo repent fit pessimus, but the sinner falls
into Hell by certain steps and degrees; so we ascend to Heaven per scalas
gratiarum, by passing on from faith to faith, and from one grace unto another;
that is, from the weaker, still unto the stronger, and from the less perfect,
unto that which is more excellent. The Scripture persuades us to this
servilfear. Exodus 20.20.


And therefore we are persuaded to this fear, both in the Old and New
Testaments. As,

1. Moses says unto the Israelites, God is come to prove you, that his fear
may be before your faces, that ye sin not. And the Prophet Esaias says,
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, Esaias 8.13.
and let him be your dread. And the Prophet Jeremy says, Fear ye not me, says
the Lord? and Will ye not tremble at my presence, Pavor vester and terror
vester. Jer. 5.22.
which have placed the sand for the bound of the Sea, by a perpetual decree,
that it cannot pass it, though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet can
they not prova^l, though they roar, yet can they not pafs over it?

2. Our Savior says, Fear not them which kill the body, Math. 10.28.
but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell: Which very thing is further amplified,
Luke. 2.5.
and the Precept reiterated by S. Luke. And S. Paul, says, Heb.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And therefore
the Prophet bids us, to kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so we should
perish from the right way.

And yet, such is the nature, and so great is the sottishness of foolish man,
that he will be afraid where no fear is; he will startle at his own shadow, he
will suggest fears, and raise jealousies unto himself; as we see the English
Rebels have done out of nothing; We fear every vain thing, more than we fear
God.
for they dreamed they were undone, when they were most happy; and they made
the World believe, the King raised War against his Parliament, when we saw, the
Parliament caused the King to flee away to save his life: Thus we fear flies,
and tremble at the sight of feathers; and the great God, that is a consuming
fire, whose voice teareth the Mountains, dries up the Seas, and shakes the
Wilderness, we are no whit afraid to provoke him every day; for though he
charge us with a sub-paena, as we shall answer it at his dreadful Judgment,
To honor all men, to wrong no man, to obey the King, and to do to all men, as
we would they should do to us; yet Revenge against our neighbors, Rebellion
against our King, Robbing the poor, Killing the innocent, and the like, are
things of no more account, than killing flies; So much do we fear our God!

But against this, every man will say, that he fears God; and what he does,
he does it for his service. So the grand Rebels, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram tell
Moses, All the Congregation is holy. So that Arch-hypocrite Saul says, I have
performed the Command of the Lord; and when Samuel reproved him, that he had
not obeyed the voice of the Lord, he stiffely justifies himself, 1 Samuel 13.15,
20.
and says; yea, I have obeyed the voice of the Lord, and have gone the way
which the Lord sent me; and if any thing be amiss, it is not I that am to be
blamed for it, but the people which took of the spoil; and they took it to none
other end, but for the service of God, that they might sacrifice unto him in
Gilgal. Even so, all Rebels, and all hypocrites, justify themselves under the
sp^cious pretexts of doing all for Gods honor, and the good of the Gospel; and
if any thing be amiss, it is that, which they cannot help; it is the fault of
their unruly followers, which also cannot so much be condemned, because they
intend all, for the glory of God, and, by the spoil of the Bishops, and
Recusants, to set up a Preaching-Presbytery, which will be a very acceptable
sacrifice unto God, and a far better service than now is used. And therefore I
do very ill to tax them, that they fear not God. And so the case stands;
Marcus ait, Scaurus negat; I affirm it, and they deny it. But in truth, though
it is the property of all hypocrites to cloak their wickedness, under the
pretense of bettering things; Yet God likes better of what Himself requires,
than of what these Will-worshippers think to be more honorable for him: And as
Samuel was faign to convince Saul by the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing
of the oxen; so to prove these Rebels to be void of the fear of God, I must
say, Si non creditis oraculis, credit oculis; If you will not believe my
words, look into their deeds; for as the Tree is known by the fruits, The two
things that the fear of God does. 1. To suppress sin. Prove. 3. Chap. 15. Chap.
16.
so we may know where the fear of God resideth, by the fruits that it brings.
I will name but only two, that are the inseparable effects of the fear of God.

1. Per timorem Domini declinat omnis a malo; The fear of the Lord expels
sin, which can no more stand with the fear of God, than light and darkness can
agree together, or the Ark and Dagon can stand upon the same Table; for sin is
like a deluge, and the fear of God is like the bank of a River, which hinders
sin to overflow in any man; Or, sin is like dross, or stubble, and the fear of
God is like the flames of fire; for so the very Pagans depainted fear, like
unto love, environed about with fiery-flames; because all fear, as well Divine
as Humane, scorcheth and consumes us, as long as it remains within us: And
therefore as the fire consumes all dross, rectifieth the crooked, and
purifieth all Metals; so the fear of God, drives away all unlawful lusts,
cleanses our hearts, and makes straight all our ways: For so Joseph says,
he would not wrong his Brethren, because he feared God. And so Job would not
injure the fatherless and the widow, because he feared God.

Wherefore, if with their tongues the Rebels have used deceit, if their feet
are swift to shed blood, and if they have not, and will not know the way of
pe^ce, but refuse all the fair offers of a most gracious King, then I may truly
conclude, with the Psalmist (and I have S. Paul to justify it) that there is
no fear of God before their eyes, let them pretend to do what service they
please unto God.

2. Qui timet Deum, facit bona, mandata Dei observat, and nihil negligit; To do
all good. Ecclus. chap. 15. Chap. 12. Chap. 7.
The fear of God does all good, says the son of Sirach: Because as S. Gregory
says, Timere Deum est, nulla mala quae fugienda sunt facere, and nulla quae
facienda sunt bona praeterire; The fear of God does none of those evil things,
that are to be shunned; but does all, and neglects none of those good things,
that are commanded.

And what are those good things, that are commanded, which the fear of God
neglects not?

I answer, They are very many, and yet the fear of God will have a special
respect unto them all. As the Prophet David testifies, I have respect unto all
thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. For he that fears God, must not do as Agrippa
did, almost to become a Christian; or, as Herod did, to hear John gladly, and
in many things, to follow his counsel: But as Moses, when Pharaoh yielded the
children of Israel should go to sacrifice unto God, so they would leave their
cattle behind them, answered, That one hoof should not be left behind: He would
not condition to omit the least jot of Gods Precept, or to leave the least
Command unobeyed. So, he that fears God, will not purchase peace, nor
compass his own desire, though it were with the Israelites to be freed out of
bondage, or with David, to gain a Kingdom, with the least transgression of Gods
Will, or the connivence with the least breach of Gods Precepts, or the least
alteration in Gods own Ordinances.

And therefore if these men fear God, they will prefer his ways before their
own, and they will have a special care to all his Precepts. I will only name
those that are contained in my Text. Honor all men. Love the Brotherhood;
which I have already handled; And, Honor the King. Which I shall, by Gods
help, treat of by and by, and without which, we cannot be said to fear God;
because these are as inseparably joined together to make a Christian-man, as
the soul and body are to make a natural man: as you may see in Hos. 10.4. where
the people say, We have no King, because we fear not the Lord. Therefore, as S.
John says, He cannot love God, which be has not seen, that loves not his
neighbor which he sees. So he cannot be said to fear God, who is the King of
kings, that does not honor the King, who is the Vice Roy, and the Livetenant
of God.

And now I demand, how they have performed these things? For if that to rob,
pillage, imprison, and kill, be to Honor men, and to love the Brotherhood, and
if to rail, slander, rebel, and fight against our Sovereign, be to Honor the
King, then do they truly fear God; if otherwise, I may truly conclude with the
Psalmist, They are corrupt and become abominable, and there is no fear of God
before their eyes.

But it may be, they will object, love God with all their heart, and with all
their soul, and with all their mind: and S. Math. 22.37. 1. John 4.18.
John says, There is no fear in love, but perfect love casts out fear, and
he that fears is not made perfect in love; Therefore these perfect Saints,
that r^b their neighbors, kill their brethren, and fight against their King,
for the great love they bear to God, and because the King will not suffer them
to have what they list, they need not fear God's wrath, nor be afraid of his
judgment.

I answer, some Divines say, the true love of God casts out the servil-fear,
which is only the fear of punishment; but does not cast out the filial
reverence, and the awful fear of losing Gods favor. But I think rather, the
time is to be distinguished, and not the fear; because the Apostle says,
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment; and then adds, that perfect love casts out fear. But our love is
not, nor cannot be perfect, until the Day of Judgment: We may strive and
labor for perfection, but cannot possibly attain unto it, while we are in this
vale of misery; otherwise then that which is termed Perfectio viae, and which
is indeed but imperfecta perfectio: therefore our love cannot be without fear;
as well the fear of his wrath and vengeance, as the fear of losing his love and
favor. For, if I lose his favor, I may fear his wrath, and where there is a
commission of any sin, there must need be a diminution of love; and where there
is an extenuation of love, there must of necessity follow an occasion of fear.

But, as it was said of old, that Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit
matrem; So we may say, That sin brings forth the fear of Gods judgments, and
the fear of Gods judgments does, in all the godly, prevent and cast out sin.

And therefore, not only to the wicked, but also to his dearest servants, God
does usually express himself by those titles and epithets, which might work in
them, as well a fear of his Majesty, as a love to his goodness; as in lege
operandi, in the Decalogue, he says, I am Jehova, thy God, that we might fear
him; and he adds, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, that we might
love him; And in lege precandi, he teaches us to say, Our Father, that we
might love him; and he adds, which art in Heaven, that we might fear him; And
in lege credendi, we are taught to say, I believe in God the Father, that we
might love him, and to add, Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, that we might
fear him.

And besides all this, we find, that these two Graces, Fear and Love, 1. Are
enjoined by the same Law. 2. Do proceed from the same Cause. 3. Do produce the
same Effects; And 4. Shall obtain the same Reward.
For,

1. Moses, that was faithful in all Gods house, says, And now Israel, What
does the Lord thy God require of thee, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love him? Where you
see, fear and love, so equally required, that whosoever neglects the fearing
of him, though he should love him, or omitteth the loving of him, though he
should fear him, if he could do the one, and not the other; yet he is a
transgressor, and liable to the breach of this Commandment.

2. As none denies, but mercy should procure love, (therefore Moses, after he
had rehearsed the great mercies of God toward the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 10.11, 21,
22. Josh 23.9, 11. Psalm. 130.4.
adds, Therefore thou shall love the Lord thy God, And Joshua does the like)
so David, after he had considered his own vileness, says, With thee there is
mercy, therefore shall thou be feared. Where you see the mercy of God, is the
foundation of this fear of God, as well as of the love of God.

And as the mercy of God, so the justice of God produces both ^ffects, the one
as well as the other. For, my flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid
of thy judgments, says the Prophet; And though justice seems as oil, to
continue the burning of this lamp of fear, and as water to quench the fire of
love; yet, as lime, which is naturally cold, does notwithstanding retain a
fiery quality, and ex aqua incenditur, ex qua omnis ignis extinguitur, and is
inflamed by water, which does extinguish all fire; So the love of the Saints is
kindled by the judgments of God; Therefore the Prophet says, Seven times a
day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous judgments; Psalm. 119.164. Psalm.
119.52.
And again, I remembered thy judgments of old, and have received comfort.

3. As love inflameth the desire to do what is acceptable unto God, so fear
hates to do what is abominable unto him; and as love keeps his Precepts, so
fear loatheth to break his Commandments; and as love mitigateth the sorrow
which fear causes, so fear qualifieth the joy which love produces. And as S.
John says, God is love; so Jacob calls him, the fear of his father Isaac.
And, as S. Paul says, Love is the fulfilling of the Law. Gal. 6.2. Eccles. 12.
So Solomon says, The end of all things, is the fear of God, and the keeping
of his Commandments.

4. As the mercy of God is showed upon thousands of them that love him, Exodus
20. Luke 1.50.
and keep his Commandments; So it is no less upon them that fear him; But, as
the Psalmist says, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he shall be
mighty upon earth, Gloria and divitae in domo ejus. And as the son of Sirach
says, Timor Domini, gloria, and gloriatio, and laetitia, and corona
exultationis: Because as the Prophet says, Dat haereditatem timentibus nomen
suum: Yea, Psalm. 61.5: Psalm. 145.19.
he will fulfill the desire of them that fear him; and look whatsoever they do,
it shall prosper. And as eternal life is promised to them that love God; So
eternal death shall never seize on them that fear God. And, in brief,
whatsoever attends the one, becomes a follower of the other; and no marvel,
because, that in love fear is included, and in fear love is implied. And while
we are in this world, both grow together in the heart of every true Believer:
And, as the Poet says of another kind of love, so I may more truly say of this
Divine love, Res est soliciti plena timoris Amor. This love of God is full, not
of distrustful, but of careful fear. Quia timentes Deum non erunt incredibles
verbo Illius, says the son of Sirach. Ecclus. 2.


But the wicked have neither true fear, nor perfect love. For, though Cain,
Esau, and Judas, had a kind of fear; yet was it false, because it wanted love.
And though the Pharisees and Simon Magus, had a kind of love, yet was it but
counterfeit, because it wanted fear: for if the former had had love, they would
have desired favor, and should have obtained grace; and if the other had had
fear, they would have aimed at Gods glory, and not have sought their own
praise, which did work their own confusion.

And therefore, well might S. Peter enjoin every Saint that loves God, to fear
God: And as the love of God, so the fear of God, is sometimes put for a part of
Gods Service, and sometimes for the whole Service of God: and so it is in this
place, as in the first of Job; and in Luke 1.50. and in the Psalms in many
places: As, where he says, Come ye children, hearken unto me, and I will teach
you the fear of the Lord; where the fear of God signifies the whole Worship of
God, to honor him, obey him, trust in him, pray unto him, and what duty soever
else we owe unto him. And thus the fear of God is the rarest Jewel, and the
most excellent thing in the World: No riches, no honor, no preferment like
unto it. No evil shall happen to them that fear the Lord, but God shall
preserve them in temptation, and liberabit eos a malis, Ecclus, 33.
says Siracides. And his mercy is on them that fear him, from generation to
generation: but mischief and unhappiness, and all evil, shall continually
attend and overtake them, that fear not God, to bring them to shame, beggary,
and confusion: as you may see it manifested in the Story of the sons of Israel,
who, while they feared God, were replenished with a thousand blessings,
preserved from a thousand misfortunes, and delivered out of the Egyptian
slavery by a thousand prodigies; the Lord dividing the Sea, to make way for
them, and closing the same again, to destroy their enemies. Drawing waters out
of the Rocks, to quench their thirst, and feeding them with the food of Angels.
But when they did cast off the fear of God, then God sent flying Serpents, and
stirred up enemies, and powered down his vengeance upon their heads, still
plaguing them more and more, until they should be either quite consumed, or
happily reduced, to embrace the fear of God again.

And not to search far for any further presidents, How happy we^e we while we
feared, and served God.
we may easily perceive, if we be not wilfully blind, how we our selves, that
live in these Kingdoms, while we feared God, and observed his service, were
more happy then any of all our Neighbour-Nations, both in regard of those many-
many deliverances, that God has wonderfully wrought for us, far beyond usual
fav^urs, both in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and of King James, as that
Reverend Bishop Carleton, has collected and compiled them together, and also
in pouring down so many inestimable blessings upon us, b^^a si sua norint
Agricolae, had we but the grace to acknowledge them, as I dare confidently
affirm it of our selves, as Moses does of the Israelites, no Kingdom under
heaven had the like; as chiefly the purest preach^ng of the G^spel, the most
learned Clergy, the gravest, and, I believe, the most uncorrupted Judges, the
wisest and the meekest Governors; and, above all, the upholder of all, the
best and most pious Protestant King, that ever these Kingdoms enjoyed; O that
we were wise, and would consider these things, and would understand these
loving kindnesses of the Lord.

But when, How miserable did we be come, when we did cast off the fear of God.
as Moses said of the Israelites, dilectus meus impinguatus, -- we began to
surfeit of these great blessings, to loath Manna, and to cast off the fear of
God, to deem the highest of Gods messengers not worthy to eat with the dogs of
our flocks; not fit for any thing, but to be trodden under feet, as mire and
clay in the streets, when we make our strength to become the Law of Justice,
when we despise Governors, and speak great swelling words against authority;
yea, and raise a Rebellion as odious, as I showed our King is pious; then you
see, and I pray God you do not still feel what mischiefs and miseries do
succeed, and are like to continue in the chiefest of these three Kingdoms; the
house of God is made a den of thieves; the Priests are made out of the basest
of the people, the Pulpits are filled with Heresies, Treasons, and Blasphemies;
the highest Courts of Justice are turned to be the shops of all oppressions and
wrongs, and Gods Anointed is persecuted more then any other; yea, and the
whole Kingdom is made the butcherie and slaughterhouse of the Kings best
subjects, and Gods most faithful servants, and all this and much more, because
there is no fear of God before our eyes.

And therefore let not these holy Rebels under the pretense of their great love
to God, cast away the fear of God, and let them not think they do him service
by persecuting his servants, or that that is Christian Religion, which breaks
forth into Rebellion, because they cannot obtain their Petition, but, as
Solomon begins his Proverbs with the fear of the Lord, and the beginning of
wisdom, and ends his Ecclesiastes with, Fear God, and keep his Commandemets; so
I say, that we and they should begin and end all that we take in hand with the
fear of God, and then all of us shall be blessed, and whatsoever we take in
hand, it shall prosper.

But as S Gregory says, Probatio dilectionis exhibitio est operis, and our
love to God must be manifested by our love to our neighbors; so our fear of
God must be principally proved by that honor which we show unto the King;
because, as S. John says, it is impossible for us to love God, and to hate his
Image; so it is impossible that any man should fear God, which does not honor
the King; because the same Spirit that says, fear God, says also, honor the
King: and therefore S. Peter knowing how inseparably these duties go together,
after he had bidden us to fear God, does immediately add, honor the King,
which is the fourth branch of this Text.

4. Honor the King, where I desire you to observe, Branch. 1. Point.
and to observe it carefully, when you had never more need to observe it then
now.

1. Who is to be honored. 2. What is the honor that is due unto him. 3. Who
are enjoined to honor him.
And all these are included in these word, Honor the King.

1. It is the King in the singular number, and not Kings, Homer Iliad. 2.
that every man is bound to honor, for one man cannot serve two Masters, much
less can he honor two Kings, but he must despise the one, when he cleaves
unto the other; And therefore as it was like false Latin, when Lamec said,
Hearken unto me ye wives of Lame^, so it had been very incongruous for the
Apostle to have said to any man, honor thy Kings, because, as the Poet says,
(...), Isocrat. in Nicol.

(...). --
Nec multos regnare bonam, Rex unicus esto.


And so, not only Isocrates, Lucan. l. 1.
after he had disputed much of all sorts of governments concludes peremptorily
(...); that no kind of government is better then the Monarchy; but also,
Plato-Aristotle, Plutarch, Herodotus, Philostratus, Cassius, Patricius,
Sigonius, and all the wisest men, that have written of Government, have proved
Monarchical Government to be the best form agreeable to nature, wherein God
founded it, and is the first Government that ever was, most consonant to Gods
own Government, and the most universally received throughout the whole world,
even from the beginning of the Creation, to this very day; C. 3. p. 20.
as I have most fully proved in my Treatise of the Rights of Kings.

Therefore Ser^nus writes, that when Craesus reigned over the Lydians, he
would have taken his brother to be his associate in the Government: but one of
the wisest Lydians rose up and said, Or all the good things, O King, that are
in earth, there is none greater or better then the S^n, without which nothing
could be seen, nothing could remain on earth; yet if there were two Suns,
periculum immineret ne omnia constagrantia p^ssum irent, we should find the
danger, to have all things consumed with too much heat; even so the Lydians do
most willingly embrace one King, and most faithfully believe and acknowledge
him to be their Savior and deliverer, duos vero simul tolerare non possunt,
but they can no ways endure two at once; and Plutarch says that Alexander
gave the like answer unto Darius, when he sent word, that he should reign with
him; saying, nec terram duos Soles, neque A am duos Reges far p^sse; that
Asia could no more abide two Kings, then the earth could endure two Suns:
because, as Caelius says, Nulla sancia societas nec fides regni est, Caelius.
l. 24. c. 11.

Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit.


And I believe this very Kingdom has found the difference betwixt two
Lords-Justices, and one Lord Lieutenant, even as the Poet says, -- Tu causa
malorum
Facta tribus Dominis communis Roma, Lucan. l. 1.
nec unquam
In turbam missi, flor ali^ faedera regni.


And yet, when God and nature, and Scripture, and all the wise men in the
world, and our own reason and experience tells us, it is better for us to
honor the King, then Kings; to obey one, then many; when as the wisest of men
tells us plainly; that for the transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes
thereof; Prove. 28.2.
but by a man of understanding, the State shall be prolonged. Shall we be so
mad, as to rebel against our King, whom God commands us to honor, and choose
unto our selves 400. Kings, which God never appointed over us, and never
advised us to obey them? which if you do, I say, it is not vanitas vanitatum,
but it is the folly of follyes, but and iniquity of all iniquities, and
therefore deserves justly to be punished with the misery of all miseries.

Wherefore, I beseech you my brethren, to follow the counsel of the Apostle,
and to obey the Precept of God, to honor the King; the King which he has
placed over you; and leave the other Kings, the usurping and imaginary Kings to
their own shame; But

2. As we are to honor the King, and not Kings, so we are to consider among
other things, 1. Quem, and 2. Qualem,
Regem. Both what King, and what manner of King we are bound to honor; for we
are to weigh in every King, 1. Modum assumendi. 2. Normam gubernandi.


1. The manner, or the ways, how any King comes to his Kingdom.

2. The rules by which he governs, and guides the people that shall be under
his charge.

1. Hos. 8.4.
God says of many Kings, They have reigned, but not by me; As many men do
Preach, whom he has not sent; these are Usurpers, and come to their government
without right; And therefore we are not to honor them: because, though they
should govern justly, yet, they have unjustly attained unto their government,
and I know not where we are commanded, to be voluntarily obedient to Usurpers.

Others there are, that do attain unto their Dominions, and yet not all the
same way; for 1. Some come by the Sword. 2. Others by the peoples choice. 3.
Others by the right of their birth


And though the last is best and most authentic, yet we may not reject the
other two, so far forth as they are from God; for when rightful Kings become
with Nimrod, to be unjust Tyrants, God many times, disposes their Crowns as
pleases him; as he did the Kingdom of Saul unto David, and Belshazzars unto
Cyrus, and the like; and this Right is good, as it proceeds from God, Who
gives victory unto Kings, when as the Poet says, -- victrix causa Deo
placuit. And, as Daniel says, he removes Kings, and sets up Kings, Dan.
2.21. and Job 34.24.

And when Kings neglected their duty so far, that the people knew not, that
they had any King, or who had any right to be their King; or when the people
were so miserably handled by such foes, as invaded them, that they could not
tell how to withstand them; then, as Herodotus says of the Medes, that chose
Deioces, (which is the first elective King that I read of) to be their
Protector, the people made choice of the chiefest man amongst them to be their
King. Or, as we read of Abimeleck, when he, that had no right unto the Crown,
would cloak his Usurpation, by the election of the people; this popular choice
was held for a good way, to maintain that Usurped Authority.

And though I deny not the right of some Elective Kings; because God out of his
infinite lenity to our Human frailty, rather then his people should be without
Government, does permit, and it may be approve, the same, when it is orderly
done, as he did the Bill of Divorcement unto the Jews; yet, if we should justly
weigh the case of Abimeleck, and (as some say) of Jeroboam, who of all the
Kings of Israel and Judah, were only made by the suffrage of the people, how
unjustly they entered, how wickedly they reigned, and how lamentably the first,
that was without question, the creature of the people ended both his life and
his reign, it would show unto us, how unsuccessefull it is to admit any other
makers of our King, then He that is the King of kings. And the time will not
permit me to set down, the great and many mischiefs that happened to the
children of Israel by these Elective Kings; no less then, at all times to cast
off the service of God, and in the end utterly to destroy themselves, when by
Salmanazar they were carried Captives unto Assyria, never to return again to
this very day.

But against all this, the brood of Anabaptists will object, as they do now
positively teach, that to be a King, is but an ambitious intrusion into
Authority; when as Nimrod rather by humane violence, Genesis 10.8.
then by any Divine Ordinance became to be the first King, that ever was in
this World, and therefore S. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Peter calls the establishing of Kings to be the ordinance of man.

I answer, that the Scripture shall determine this question; for Solomon says,
Hearken, O ye Kings, hear ye that Govern the Nations, Sap. 6.1, 2, 3.
for power is given unto you by the Lord, and principality by the most high:
And S. Paul says, There is no power but from God, and whosoever resists the
power, Romans 13.5.
resists the Ordinance of God; And Daniel says to Nebuchadnezzar, O King,
thou art the King of kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom,
Dan. 2.37.
Power, Strength, and Glory; and the Wisdom of God says, Prove. 18.15. Esaias
45.1.
Per me reges regnant; And the Lord says as much unto Cyrus, and no less to
Nebuchadnezzar.

And to make the point more plain by Examples: I would demand, Jer. 27.5, 6.
whether Moses his government over Israel was by his own intrusion, or by the
Ordinance of God? And what shall I say of Saul, when he sought his father
Asses, and of David when he fed the flock of Jesse, was it their desire, or
Gods design, that made them Kings? And you may see how little, Jehu dreamed of
a Kingdom, when Elisaeus sent one of the children of the Prophets, To anoint
him from the Lord to be King over Israel; 2 King. 9.
Therefore S. Augustine says, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
that the greatness of Empires comes neither by chance nor by destiny; by
chance, he understands (as he says) the things that happen beyond our
knowledge of their causes, or without any premeditated order of reason,
assisting their conception and birth; and by destiny, he understands (as the
Pagans deemed) what happens without the will, either of God or men, by the
inevitable necessity of some particular order; (which opinion, is most
injurious to Gods providence) but we must certainly believe that Kingdoms are
constituted and established simply and absolutely by the Divine Providence of
God; and in another p^ace he says that the same true God, which gives the
Kingdom of Heaven; to his children only; gives the Earthly Kingdoms, both to
the good and to the bad as he pleases; yet always justly. And for Nimrod I
say the words bear no more, then he became mightier then other Kings, or began
to Tyrannize more then all the other Kings: And for S. Peter's words, I say he
means it only of Elective Kings; Which in another place, I showed more fully
than the time will now give me leave, in what sense he calls them, (...).

Therefore I say, the calling of Kings, is the proper Ordinance of God, as it
is fully and most learnedly showed, by a most Reverend Prelate of our Church,
lately published and entitled, Sacro-Sancta Regum Majestas. Howsoever (as I
said) we condemn not as unlawful, the right of all Elective Kings; yet, we
ought to acknowledge how much more bound we are to God; that himself, in a
rightful line of succession, has appointed our Kings to reign over us, so
that we need not fear the error of our Election, if there be no error in our
submission.

2. As we are to consider quem, whom, so we ought to remember qualem, what
manner of King we are commanded to honor; for as the unjust Usurper may govern
the people justly, as they do sometimes, and in some places; so they that have
just Titles to their Crowns, may prove unjust in their Governments, as too too
many, both of the Kings in Israel and Judah, and I fear many other Kings have
been; And yet, if they be our lawful Kings, be they what they will, Cruel,
Tyrannous, or Idolatrous, or if you will, put all together, I say we are bound
to honor them, and no ways to Rebel against them; for if thy Brother, the son
of thy Mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own soul, shall
entice thee to Idolatry, and to serve strange gods, thine eye shall not spare
him, neither shall thou have any pity upon him: but for the son to rise up
against the Father, the wife against her Husband, the servant against his Lord,
or the subject against his King; here is not a word, and we are not to do what
the Lord does not command, as Tostat. well observes upon this place.

Therefore though Jeroboam made Israel to sin, by setting up his calves to be
adored, N^buchadnezzar commanded all his people, to worship his Golden Image;
Ahab, Manasses, Nero, Julian, and the rest of the persecuting Emperors, did
most impiously compel their Subjects to Idolatry, and exercised all kinds of
cruelty against Gods servants; yet, you shall never find, that either the Jews
under Jeroboam, or Daniel in Babylon, or Elias, in the time of Ahab, or any
Christian, under Julian or the rest of those bloody Tyrants, did ever rebel
against any of those wicked Kings; for they all considered the law of God, and
I beseech you all to consider it likewise,

1. Exodus 22.28.
Moses says, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, yea, though
he should be evil, yet must thou not speak evil of him; for as thou art to
honor thy Father, not so much because he is good, as because he is thy Father;
and therefore the son of Noah was accursed because he despised his Father, when
his father sinned; so we are to honor our King and to speak no ill of him,
though he should be never so ill; for, Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art
wicked? And to Princes, Ye are ungodly? Job. 34.18.

2. Not to do the least indignity unto our King.
As we are to bridle our tongues, so much more ought we to refrain our hands
from offering the least violence unto our King, When the Lord says
peremptorily, Touch not mine anointed; where he does not say, Non occides or
ne perdas, the worst that can be, but ne tangas, the least that may be; neither
does he say Sanctos meos, my holy ones, but Christos meos, my anointed ones,
whether they be holy or unboly, good or bad; therefore though Saul was a wicked
King, and a heavy persecutor of David without cause, hunting him like a
Partridge upon the Mountains, and seeking no less then to take away his life;
yet, when the men of David said unto him, Behold the day, of which the Lord
said unto thee, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou may do
to him, as it shall seem good unto thee; what seemed good unto him? Truly, no
ways to hurt him, nor to do the least indignity unto him; for his heart smote
him, because he had cut off the skirt of his robe; and therefore he said unto
his men, 1 Samuel 24.4, 5, 6,
The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master, the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him: And why so? because he is the
anointed of the Lord; that is, not because he is a good man but because he is
my King.

Nay, we are not only forbidden to offer violence, That we are to protect our
King with the hazard of our lives.
but we are also enjoined to give our best assistance to protect the persons of
our most wicked Kings; for David, not only staid his servants, with the former
words, and suffered them not to rise against Saul, but, when Saul lay sleeping
within his trench, and David and Abishai took away his spear, and had the
power to destroy him; What, says David unto Abner, Art not thou a Valiant man?
And who is like thee in Israel? Wherefore then have thou not kept thy Lord, the
King? This thing is not good that thou have done: as the Lord lives, 1 Samuel
15.16.
ye are worthy to dye, because you have not kept your Master, the Lords
anointed; And if this thing is not good, and David jesteth not, but swears,
As the Lord lives, they are worthy to dye, that preserve not the life of their
King, be he never so wicked; then certainly, this thing is not good, and they
are more then worthy to die, that not only refuse to assist, but also rise in
Arms to persecute, and to take away the life of a most Pious and a Gracious
King. So you see the person whom we are to honor, the King, whatsoever he be,
good or bad.

2. The Honor, that we are to exhibit unto him is to be considered out of the
word (...), a word so significant, that it not only comprehends all the duty,
which we owe to our Father, and Mother, but it is also used to express most, if
not all, the service of God, when he says, If I am a father, Malach. 1.5.
where is my honor? And therefore, when Ahassuerus asked Haman, What should be
done unto the man, Whom the King would honor, he answered, let the Royal
apparel be brought, which the King uses to wear, and the Horse, that the
King rides upon, and the Crown Royal, which is set upon his head, and Let him
be arraied therewith, and ride through the streets of the City, and one of the
Kings most noble Princes shall Proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to
the man, whom the King delights to honor; Hester 6.8, 9.
Wherein you see, that by honor this great Favorite understands, to devise
all the means that may be, to advance ones credit, and to increase his
reputation throughout all the World; And though the same word is used in the
first sentence, (...), yet as in human sciences, The difference betwixt the
honor, which we owe to all men, and the honor that we to our King.
so in the Divine Precepts, they are more or less esteemed, according to the
Excellency of their Object; For as that love, which we owe to our neighbor,
must, without comparison give place to that far greater love which we owe to
God; so that honor, which we are to exhibit to all men, is far inferior to
that which we owe unto our King; because his Dignity is elevated above all
other men, and therefore to be honored above all other men.

And if you look into the particulars of that honor, which we owe unto our
Parents, and to our King, you shall find many things included therein; Three
things comprehended in the honor that we owe to the King.
but especially these three things.

1. Reverence. 2. Obedience. 3. Assistance.
1. We owe a great deal of Reverence, A Reverent respect of our King.
and respect unto the Person of a King; because the King is a man second from
God, and Solo Deo minor, and inferior only unto God: Kings being, as the
Scripture calls them, The gods of the Earth; or earthly gods, because they
are Gods deputies, and his Vice-Royes here on earth; and, as they have
Potestatem vitae and neois, they are the most lively Image, and representation
of God himself. Whereupon Tertullian says, Deus est solus, in cujus solius
potestate sunt Reges, Tertull. in Apolog.
a quo sunt secundi; post quem primi, super omnes homines ante omnes Deos; And
therefore seeing the reverence that is due to any one, is due according to the
Dignity of that one, we ought highly to esteem and Reverence our King, above
all other men on earth, and they that have any base thought of their King, must
needs be most base in Gods sight; The time will not permit me, to show how
Reverently the Persians, and the rest of the Heathens esteemed of their Kings,
and as it were adored them, as if they had been gods, which I propose not, as a
pattern for us to imitate, but allege them as a witness to condemn those that
Reverence their King, the clean contrary way, by a most abominable Rebellion
against him. Obedience to our King.


2. The next branch of that Honor, which we owe unto our King, is Obedience;
which is a virtue (as Samuel says) more acceptable unto God then sacrifice;
Quia per victimas aliena caro, per obedientiam propria voluntas mactatur, when,
as Damascen says, Obedientia est voluntatis propriaesu jectio, Obedience is
the submitting of our wills to the commands of another; Alexand. de Alexand. l.
1. c. 20.
Therefore Cyrus King of Persia is said to have commended a Soldier, who
having drawn forth his sword, to kill his enemy, and hearing the Trumpet
calling him away, Prove. 15.28.
refrained his blow, and let go his adversary; because he made more account of
obaying his military law, Plant. Trin.
then he did to take away the life of his enemy. Idem in Sticho. Principib^s
pare In Deuteronomy 17.10. Math. 23.2. Romans 23.1, 2. 2 These 3.14. Heb. 13.3. Tit. 3.1.
1 Pet. 2.13. Phil. 2.
And Solomon says, Men's justi meditabitur obedientiam; as the vulgar has it.
And as the son says in Plautus, Pater adsum, impera quidvis, neque tibi ero in
mora, neque latebrose me abs tuo conspectu occultabo; O Father here I am, bid
me do, what you will, I will not refuse it, nor hide my self out of your sight;
Quia faciendum est id nobis, quod parents imperant; because the children ought
to do, what their parents command them. So Periander says, (...), and (...),
Obey thy Prince; and not only the Heathens enjoin us to obey our Princes, but
also God himself does most strictly command us, to obey our King, and those
that have the rule over us; as you may see it most plainly in these Scriptures
set down in the margent.

But the height of all the difficulty consists to know how far, and wherein
we are to obey our King; for all sides agree that we ought to obey, but how far
we are to obey, it is not yet agreed upon by them, that disobey the King. The
question would require more then an hourglass to discuss it, but the few sands
that are yet unspent, do call upon me, to decide it briefly; Therefore I say,
that if you look into the first Chapter of Joshua, you may there find in plain
terms, how far you are to obey your King; In all Civil things we are to obey
the King, and in all Divine things that God prohibiteth not by his Divine Law;
or brieffer, We are to obey our King, as we are to obey our Father, in all
things, wherein God does not flatly and expressly forbid us: for if the King
forbids me to do what God commands; and I cannot omit it without the breach
of Gods commandment; Act. 5.27.
or commands me to do, what God forbids; then the Apostle's rule must
always hold, in such cases, that It is better to obey God then man.

And yet in this case two special Cautions ought to be observed.

1. That every Private, Illiterate, and Unauthorized man make not himself a
judge in Divine things, to determine all particulars what God forb^ddeth, and
what he commands; because, as David says, the Law of God is exceeding broad,
Malach. 2.7.
and admits of more explanations and limitations, then every weak head is able
to comprehend; and therefore God has appointed as well Interpreters, as
keepers of his Laws; for the Priests lips should, or must, preserve knowledge;
And S. Chrysostom says, that Sicut cor sapientiae locus est, ita sacerdotes
sunt receptacula sapientiae spiritualis, in Matthew 21. homil. 38.

And truly, this has bred abundance of the children of disobedience, that
though Hoc erit artis opus, yet every one will be such a Doctor as to determine
the height and depth, the limitations and conditions of every one of Gods
precepts, they know when, where, and how God commands every thing, and this
is to be the Judges of Gods Precepts. and not the keepers of Gods
Commandments, to prescribe them, and not obey them? whereas S. Bern. says,
Non attendit verus obediens, quale sit, quod praecipitur, sed hoc solo
contentus, quia praecipitur; he that is truly obedient to him, whom God
commanded us to obey, never regards what it is that is commanded, (so it be
not simply and apertly evil) but he considers, and is therewith satisfied,
that it is commanded, and therefore does it, because, as S Aug. says, The
command of the Superior is a sufficient excuse for the inferior.
Mandatum imperantis tollit peccatum obedientis, (i.e.) in all things not
apparently forbidden.

And therefore, as Julians Christian-Souldiers, would not sacrifice unto the
Idols, which was an apparent evil, at his command; Sed timendo potestatem,
contemnebant potestatem, but in fearing the power of God, regarded not the
wrath of man; yet when he led them against his enemies, they never questioned,
who they were that they went against, nor examined the cause of his war; but
they went freely with him, Et subditi erant propter Dominum aeternum etiam
Domino temporali; and in all such civil commands they obeyed this wicked King,
for his sake, that was the King of kings; and it may be, fought against their
own brethren. So did the Jews, that followed Saul against David, and yet we
never read that ever they were blamed for it. And so should we do the like, if
we would do what God commands us: For it is not in the subject's choice,
against whom he will fight; but he must be obedient to his King, if he will be
obedient unto God; for so the Lord says, I have made the earth, the man, and
the beast, Jerem. 27.5, 6.
that are upon the ground by my great power, (therefore certainly, none should
deny his Right to dispose of it) and now I have given all these Lands into the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my servant, (and yet he was both a
Heathen, and Idolater, and a mighty Tyrant) and all nations shall serve him,
and his son, and his sons son; and it shall come to pass, that the nation and
Kingdom which will not serve the same N^buchadnezzar the King of Babylon, and
that will not put their necks under the oak of the King of Babylon, that nation
will I punish, says the Lord, with the sword, and with the famine, and with
the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hands; Therefore hearken not
ye unto your Prophets, nor to your Divines, which speak unto you, saying, Ye
shall not serve the King of Babylon; for they prophecy a lie unto you, which
he repeateth again, and again, they prophecy a lie unto you, that you should
perish. Which very words I may take up against the Rebels of England, Ireland,
and Scotland, God gave these Kingdoms unto King Charles, and they cannot deny
this, nor deny him to be a good man, and a most religious King; and He has
commanded us, to obey him, and they that will not serve him, he will destroy
them by his hand; Therefore believe not your false Teachers, whether they be
the Priests and Jesuits of Ireland, or the Brownists and Anabaptists of
England; for God has not sent them, though they multiply their lies in his
name; because God has so straightly commanded us to obey our King in all civil
causes, and in all things wherein he gives not a special charge to do the
contrary.

And therefore (that which is most worthy to be observed) though God himself,
for the sin of Solomon, declared by his Prophet, that he had decreed, to cut
off ten parts of the Kingdom from Rehoboam; yet, because the people revolted,
not to satisfy Gods justi^e, for the sins of Solomon, but out of their own
discontents, that he would not ease them of their burdens: for this revolt from
a foolish, and an oppressing Prince, they are termed Rebels; 1 Kings 12.19.
and, as the Thief, to prevent his discovery, will commit murder, and scelus
scelere regitur, and one great mischief will shelter it self under a greater;
so their Rebellion corrupted their Religion, and made them fall away from God,
to worship Idols, as they had done from their King, to serve a Traitor, which
soon brought them to confusion: Because this revolt, as it proceeded from them
was most abominable unto God; And therefore, though they were not reduced to
Rehoboam, because that may pretend some cause, as oppression; yet this, after a
plenary disquisition, can admit of none excuse; and therefore, being abominable
above measure, it cannot expect the least favor from God, but they were most
severely punished by God; because they transgressed his will, by thus rebelling
against their King, contrary to his Commandment.

2. The other Caution is, That if the King commands what the Lord forbids,
or the contrary, then I may disobey, but I must not resist; for this is the
will of God, that where my active obedience cannot take place, my passive
obedience must supply it: And though our Kings were as Idolatrous as Manasses,
as Tyrannical as Nero, as wicked as Ahab, and as profane as Julian; yet we may
not resist, we must not Rebel; which would overthrow the very order of nature,
Arnis. de aut^rit. princ c. 3. page 68.
as Arnisaeus proves by many examples, and takes away the glory of martyrdom,
and makes all the Precepts of the Gospel of none effect. And therefore, when
the Christians in Tertullians time, were more in number, and of greater
strength than their enemies; yet being compelled to Idolatry, they rather
suffered any persecution, than admitted of any Rebellion against the most
wicked of their persecutors. And Ju^tinian faith, Q is est tantae authoritatis,
ut nolentem principem possit coarctare? Who has so much power, as to restrain
an unwilling Prince?

And yet it is very strange to consider, what new Divinity has been taught, ex
cathedra pestilentiae, out of the chair of our new Assembly, to raise Rebellion
against our King; and that which is worse than Rebellion, to refuse the grace
of Remission. The Scribes and Pharisees were most wicked hypocrites, and they
sat in Moses chair; but they never durst teach such tenets, as now are
published and practiced in these Kingdoms. And therefore our Savior says,
Math. 23.3.
All that they bid you observe, that observe and do. Indeed, there were some
Heretics among them, that in the days of Theudas and Judas Galilaeus, taught,
That the Jews were not to pray for the life of the Emperor, because he was but
extraneous, an Usurper, and none of their lawful Kings; for which error,
Pilate mingled their blood with their sacrifice; but these never durst avouch,
they should not pray for their own lawful King; much less, that they might
rebel, and take up arms against him, Joseph. Antiq.
though he were never so wicked. For they knew, that the holiest men that ever
were among the Hebrews, (called Essaei, or Esseni, that is, the true Practisers
of the Law of God) maintained, that Sovereign Princes, whatsoever they were,
ought to be inviolable to their subjects as they were in most places, among the
most barbarous Heathens. And therefore no doubt, but these Jews, and these
Gentiles, shall rise in judgment, and condemn our most wicked, and rebellious
generation.

But you will say, What if my King seek to kill me, for so now the Rebels have
ascended to that height of impiety, that they are not ashamed, thus
slanderovsly to tax him, and most falsely to accuse him? Does not nature it
self teach me that common principle, vim vi pellere, and rather kill him, than
suffer my self to be killed?

To resolve this Question, I demand of thee, What if thy father seek to kill
thee, May thou rather kill him, than be killed?

First thou must know, That the father, next under God, is the cause of the
very Being, The sons obligation to his father, is more than ever he can do to
requite it.
and the giver of the life of his son; so is not the son of the father.

2. The father, as I proved upon the 5th Commandment, had under the Law of
Nature, and for many years after Moses, potestatem vitae and necis; the power
of life and death over all his children; and the children, unless they grew
very ungracious, and more than unnatural, never durst resist them; otherwise,
when God commanded Abraham, Genesis 22.2.
to offer up Isaac for a burntoffering, he might have answered; First, that he
had no right to do it. Secondly, that he was old and feeble, and the Lad was
young and lusty, (as you see he was better able to carry the wood upon his
shoulders, than his father) and therefore he might fear his son would be his
death, if he went about to sacrifice him: But Abraham knew that his son was
better taught, and that nature showed him, The child should not, with cursed
Cham, despise his father, no not in his sin, much less to resist him in his
right,

And yet the King, to whom the Paternal-right is transferred, is more than any
private Father; for he is the public Father of us all, under whom we we may
lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2.
as the Apostle speaks; and without whom, we can have neither our Estates
enjoyed, nor our Persons secured from the violence of the strongest; but that
every one shall be exposed to the will of him, that can master him, which was
the case of the Jews, when there was no King in Israel; and will be little
better with us, if God does not preserve our King?

And therefore men, though they may flee with David, to preserve their lives,
yet ought not to offer violence unto their King, though he should prove as
wicked as Saul was to David, without cause to seek to take away their lives;
then certainly, most wicked are those men that rebel, and fight against a good
King; that expendeth his own fortunes, and exposes his own life to preserve
the Estates and Lives of all his loyal subjects; but to proceed.

3. The last branch of that honor which I said was due unto our King, To
assist our King.
is aid and assistance in all his urgent necessities: which aid we all confess
to be due, and yet few of us will believe, or can endure, scarce to hear the
truth, how far this aid is to be extended; How far the aid that we owe unto our
King extends.
I must tell you what the Scripture says, that it comprehends, 1. Our
Estates. For 2. Our Persons. For


1. He that bids us render unto God what is Gods; To the uttermost of our
abilities.
bids us also render unto Caesar what is Caesar's; and S. Paul tells you, that
this tribute is due unto him. Indeed when there is no urgent necessity, it is a
great deal seemlier for the Majesty of a King, as Artax. said, to give, then to
take by pulling from his subjects; and it is a golden Apothegm of King James
unto his Son, where he says, Enrich not your self with exactions from your
Subjects, but think the riches of your Subjects your best treasure. And so it
is generally conceived, that whosoever in the time of peace, overchargeth his
subjects with taxations, either for his own Luxury, or to enrich his
Favorites, is very unwise, because he that rules over men, must be just, 2 Samuel 23.3.
ruling in the fear of God; and Justice tells us, he must take nothing from any
man, but when necessity requires. And then the ordinary gloss; and Mr. Calvin
also says, Neque nostrum est vel principibus praescribere, quantum in res
singulas impendant, vel eos ad calculum vocare; It is neither our part, to
prescribe how much they shall expend, nor to call them to an account for their
expenses: that account, must be given to a higher Judge. But we read, that when
Saul was anointed, to be King over Israel, Samuel told him he should come to
the Plain of Tabor, and there should meet him three men, going up to God to
Bethel, one carrying three kids, another carrying three loaves of bread, and
another carrying a bottle of wine, and they should salute him, and give him two
loaves of bread, which he should receive of their hands; which thing wanted not
a mystery, but was an emblem, as Divines make it, of the right of Kings in
their necessities: The mystery of the gift of the men that met Saul unfolded.
two parts of three, which was a very great proportion; and yet we find that
diverse of the heathens went much further, when after the coronation of their
Kings, most of his subjects, especially the Nobility, and those of any
Fortunes, presented unto him a Purse, with a key hanging thereat; by which
Hierogly phick they showed, that all their treasure was submitted to his
necessities, he might unlock their Store-horse, and put into his Purse, What
the heathens did give unto their Kings.
whatever pleased him; because they conceived it right, that he which protected
all, should have the use of any part of all, when his necessity did require it;
and seeing they were bound to expose their persons for him, they saw no reason,
they should detain their estates from him; because my life should be dearer
unto me, then all my wealth. And if our King had such subjects as these
Heathens, I think he needed not to have wanted to supply his necessities.

But our Kings are not like Augustus, that taxed all the world as much as he
pleased; nor like Charles the fifth, Qui immania tributa populis imperavit, as
Oscrius writes; nor like the Eastern Kings, that impose upon their subjects
what they will: but of their special grace and favor have granted such
privileges, and made such concessions, limitations, and pactions with their
subjects, as cannot be discussed or expressed within my limited time, to set
down how far, and to show how well or ill they were concluded; and therefore
all that I shall say herein is this, that we ought to consider how far God
requires us to assist our King, and take heed that we fail not, to observe his
Commandment; ne rapiat fiscus, quod non capit Christus, lest the Rebel should
take all, because we will not part with what is fit, both to defend our selves,
To the hazard of our lives.
and to assist our King.

2. If we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren, as Saint John says,
much rather ought we to do it for our King, and I could show you many worthy
examples of many Jews and Gentiles, that are made famous throughout all
generations; for what they sustained, in the defense of their Kings. You may
read, that when David was assailed by a mighty Giant, named Ish^benob, which
was of the sons of Rapha, the head of whose spear weighed three hundred
shekels of brass, Abishai the son of Servia, with the danger of his own life,
ran betwixt him and the King; and for this faithfulness to his Master, 2 Samuel
21.17.
God assisted him so, that he killed the Philistine; and it is recorded in our
Annals, to his eternal praise, that Sir Hugh Sincler, at the Siege of
Bridg-north, seeing an arrow that was shot at his Master King Henry the second,
stepped betwixt the shaft and his Sovereign, How freedily subjects ought to
assist their King, and not to (...) till it be too late.
and so receiving the arrow into his own body, was therewith shot to death,
that he might thereby preserve the life of his King.

And as you see how far we are to aid and assist our King to the uttermost of
our abilities, with the hazard of our lives; so we ought to consider the time
when this assistance is to be yielded unto him; for the School-rule is most
sure, Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest.

That aid is not good, when it does no good; but does a great deal of ill,
because we depended on it, and were disappointed of it. And this has been the
loss of many Armies, and the destruction of many men, that have perished in
the expectation of their relief; as the debates and delays of the
Carthaginians, to send aid unto Hannibal, lost him Italy; and thereby lost
themselves: and many the like examples I could produce to you.

Therefore when Metius Suffetius promised aid unto the Romans, and yet deferred
the performance, until he could perceive which was most likely to prevail of
both parties; the Romans more incenst against him, that thus subtly deceived
their expectation then against their enemies, that were in open rebellion, tore
him in pieces betwixt wild horses; and the Poet says to him, that thought it a
hard censure; At tu dictis Albane maneres.

It was but very just, because he was so false; and the Merozites, for the like
faults, were most fearfully cursed by God himself; Judge. 5.23.
And therefore Toll moras: semper nocuit differ paratis.

Let them that mean to aid their King, take off delays; for as God loves a
cheerful doer, so he loves a speedy doer of any good; and therefore he says,
To day if you will hear his voice, hearden not your hearts; and put not off his
service till to morrow. But wise Counselors will tell us, that great bodies do
move slowly, and many matters cannot suddenly be concluded; it is true, yet the
deferring of such duties, as may be a weakening to one part, and a
strengthening to the other; and the delays, that may be purposely protracted,
should be as wisely prevented, as they are craftily intended. I am no
Statesman, neither will I presume to prescribe Rules for Counsel; but as we
daily pray, O God make speed to save us, O Lord make haste to help us, so let
us humbly beseech Almighty God, that he would speedily assist and send aid unto
our King, and set an end to our vexations, and compose all the differences of
these poor distracted Kingdoms; that so we might joyfully serve him, and
praise him without end; Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum, cui Laus, Honor,
and Gloria, in secula seculorum, Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
THE SIXTH TREATISE.
John 10.27. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.


THe blessed Apostle Saint Peter says, that Jesus Christ, while he lived here
on earth, went about, doing good; that is, Acts 10.38.
not good to himself; for so all worldlings, and all ambitious men go about
continually, to do themselves, that which they conceive to be good; but he went
about to do good to all others, as strengthening the feeble, comforting the
broken hearted, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; and as Saint
Matthew says, he gave sight to the blind, he cleansed the leapers, and raised
the dead; Mat. 11.5.
all good deeds indeed:

And yet, the doing of all these good deeds to all men that had need of them,
and were capable of good, could not move all men to speak good of him, All
speak not well of Christ, that did good to all.
nor to give him good words, for all the good works that he did unto them; but
though some said, he has done all things well, and he could neither make the
lame to walk, nor the blind to see, if God were not with him; yet others, and
they were the major part, and the nobler part of the people, the Scribes and
the Pharisees said, he was a grand Impostor, a Seducer of the people, a
Sabbath-breaker, a drunkard, a glutton, and a wine-bibber, a man possessed of
the devil, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Neque enim Jupiter, neque pluens
omnibus placet, neque abstinens. Theog. 25.
and what not? good God!

Quid Domini facient, audent cum talia fures? What shall good men do, when
such wicked men dare say such things of the Son of God?

But you may see, and you ought to consider it, that as Theognis says, (...).

(...); Alius tibi male, alius melius dicet; bonos alius valde vituperat, alius
laudat.
God himself, that made all things exceeding good, and does all things
exceeding well, cannot please the never satisfied will of all men; but when one
would have peace, another would have war, when some desire rain, some others
desire to have fair weather; and so one will speak ill of thee, another well,
and one will exceedingly dispraise the good, another will as much praise them
and commend them. So different are the minds of men.

And therefore how is it possible that either I, Go how we will, or do what we
will, we shall never please all men.
or any man else, either in our Sermons, or in our Prayers, though we preach
nothing but truth, and pray as Christ commands us to pray, should
notwithstanding satisfy all our hearers, but that the Sceptick blames what
the charitable man commends; and though our intentions be never so straight,
yet their expositions will be found often crooked. And this cannot be helped;
neither is he the wisest that otherwise expects it, but will endeavor to
discharge his duty, by good report and evil report.

2. You may observe, that goodness it self is hated, and truth it self
slandered and traduced; for in his mouth was found no guile; but as Saint John
says, he is the way, the truth, and the life; and yet, all that malice can
invent, is thought little enough to be laid on him; he must bear in his bosom
the reproach of a mighty people, and he must endure the contradictions of a
wicked generation.

And therefore what wonder is it, if the best King and Governor in the world,
were he as mild as Moses, as religious as King David, as upright as Samuel, and
as bountiful to Gods servants as Nehemiah, or if as worthy Preachers, as ever
trod pulpit, were they as faithful as Saint Peter, as loving as Saint John, and
as zealous as Saint Paul, should be maligned, traduced and slandered; for, you
may assure your selves, it is no new thing, though a very true thing, for the
wicked to deal thus with the good and godly at all times.

But among all the subtle arguments, doubtful questions and malicious
disputations that the Scribes, Christ's good deeds enraged the wicked.
Pharisees and Heredians had with our Savior Christ, which were very many, and
all only for to entrap him in his speech, that they might bring him to his
death, and not to beget faith in their own hearts, that they might attain-to-
eternal life, this conflict in this chapter seems to be none of the least:
for after he had so miraculously healed the poor man that was born blind, their
malice was so enraged, and their rage so furious against him, that they
excommunicated the poor fellow, and thrust him out of their Synagogue, for
speaking well of him, that had done so much good for him; or, because he would
not be so wicked and so malicious as themselves; and then gathering themselves
together round about Christ, they began to question him about his office, and
very strictly to examine him, whether he was the Christ, the Messiah, or not?
And

Our Savior Christ, Christ answers for the good of the godly.
that knew their thoughts better then themselves, intends not to satisfy
their desire: which was, to receive such an answer whereby they might accuse
him, yet for their instruction, that would believe in him, he sets down an
institution or an infallible induction, whereby both their subtle question was
fully answered, and his own true servants perfectly expressed and distinguished
from them that serve him not, in these words: My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me.

Wherein, The means and ways to save us.
our Savior sets down the means whereby the true Christians are eternally
saved, in being called, justified and sanctified, which are the three main
steps or degrees, whereby we pass from our natural state of corruption unto the
blessed state of grace that brings us to eternal glory.

1. Called, in these words, My sheep hear my voice. 2. Justified, in these
words, I know them. 3. Sanctified, in these words, They follow me.
1. Then, the Christians are called to come to Christ, in that he says, My
sheep hear my voice; for, as Adam, after his transgression, never sought for
God, until God sought for him, and said, Adam, Where art thou? So all the
children of Adam would never come to Christ, if Christ did not call them to
come unto him; but as wisdom cries without, and utters her voice in the
streets: Prove. 1.20.
so does this wisdom of God, Jesus Christ, cry, Come unto me all ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will ease you; and if he did not cry, and utter
forth his voice, his sheep could not hear his voice; but God sends forth his
voice, yea and that a mighty voice; and as the Prophet David says, The Lord
thundered out of heaven, Psalm. 68 33.
and the most high uttered his voice.

And that, not only as he did once unto the Israelites, God utters his voice
two ways.
when he delivered his laws on mount Sinai, but also to all others, whom he
calls, and utters his voice unto them two special ways.

1. To the ears of his people, by the mouths of his Prophets, To our ears.
Apostles and Preachers of his holy Word, that do continually call and cry unto
them to come to hear his voice, and to obey his Precepts.

2. To the hearts of his servants by the inspiration of his blessed Spirit, To
our hearts.
which teaches them to cry abba Father, and persuades them to yield obedience
to all his heavenly motions.

And our Savior says, that his sheep or servants will hear his voice, that
is, both uttered by his servants, and inspired by his Spirit; and they will
neither neglect to hear the preaching of his written Word, nor suffocate, or
choke the inspired Word, that is the internal motions of his holy Spirit; but
they will most readily and willingly hear both these voices, My sheep hear my
voice, howsoever uttered. Three things observable.
For the further and the better understanding of which words, you may observe
these three things: 1. The denomination, Sheep. 2. Their appropriation, my
sheep. 3. Their qualification, hear my voice.


1. By Sheep, here is understood, not those four-footed silly creatures, The
children of God called sheep in a double respect.
that by their wool, and lamb, and milk, and their own flesh, are so
profitable unto us, and by their simplicity are so easy to be kept, and are
the most innocent among all the beasts of the field; but those children of God,
and true Christians, that are called and compared unto sheep in a double
respect.

1. In respect of Christ, that is, their Pastor or Shepherd. 2. In respect of
themselves, that are his flock.
1. Christ is often called in the Scriptures our Shepherd, Grand Shepherd of
the sheep. Christ the good Shepherd in two respects. 1. A lawful entrance into
his Office. Heb. 5.4. 1. By the testimony of his own conscience. 2. By an
outward approbation.
and he is set forth unto us in this 10. c. by a double manifestation: 1. Of a
lawful entrance into his Office. 2. Of an absolute performance of his Duties.


1. The Apostle says, No man takes this honor unto himself, that is, to be
the Shepherd over Gods flock, and a Priest to teach Gods people, but he that is
called of God as was Aaron: And how was Aaron called?

1. By God inwardly, by the testimony of his own conscience, that tells him,
the Spirit of God calls him to such an Office.

2. Because a man is not to believe his own private spirit, that many times
deceives us, therefore God would have Aaron to take his commission and his
ordination from Moses, as you may see, Exodus 28.1. and as the Lord had formerly
said unto Moses, that he should be instead of God unto Aaron, to call him unto
the Priests office: And, as no man takes, or should take this office upon him,
but he, that is as well outwardly approved by such as are lawfully authorized
to approve him, Exodus 4.16.
as inwardly called by the restifying spirit of his own conscience; so also
Christ says the Apostle, glorified not himself, to be made an high Priest, and
to become the great Shepherd of Gods flock, Heb. 5.5. etc. 17.21.
but he that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, and
has sworn, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. And
therefore, if no man, no not Christ himself, takes this holy office upon him,
but he that is lawfully called, by such as have lawful authority to call him: I
wonder how any man dares to intrude himself into the Ministry, without any
mission from Christ, or commission from such as are lawfully authorized by
Christ to admit them.

You know what our Savior says, As my father sent me, so send I you; and they
that were his Apostles never went until he sent them; for there must be an Ite,
go ye, Mat. 28.19. and Mar. 16.15. John 10.1.
before Praedicate, preach ye; and you see what our Savior says here, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, he that enters not by the door into the sheepfold, but
climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber; that is, he that
is not lawfully called, and comes not the right way into the Ministry, to be
the shepherd of Gods flock, the same is none of Gods Ministers, Jer. 23.21. and
14.14.
but is a thief and a robber, stealing to himself, what of right belongs to
another. And yet I fear, we have now too many of whom the Lord may say, as he
does by the Prophet Jeremy, I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran; I
have not spoken unto them, yet they prophesied; for we are not only to
consider, whether they be called and approved to be the Ministers of Christ,
but we must likewise consider, by whom they are called and approved; for as
idem est non esse, and non apparere, so, it is all one, to be not called, and
not approved, as to be called and approved, by such as have no right nor
authority to call and approve them; as when a company of thieves and robbers
gives power and authority to a man to be Justice of the Peace, or a Judge of
Assize, we say his power and authority is null, and of no validity; so they
that give orders and approve of Priests, and have no right, no power nor
authority to give orders, and to allow them, do just nothing in the just way,
and their orders is worth nothing.

But you will say, this may be true of the Lay-preachers; but those that are
ordained by the Presbyterians, and approved by an assembly of Presbyters,
cannot be denied to be lawfully called, and to enter in by the door into the
sheepfold.

I answer, that I will not, at this time, discuss who gave them this power and
authority to ordain Priests: but I say, that I dare not, I cannot approve and
justify their authority: let them answer for it that presume to do it. I have
showed you their error in my discovery of the great Antichrist. So you see how
this grand Shepherd did lawfully enter into his office, and how all his
under-Shepherds should imitate him in their lawful entrance, and not intrude
themselves, nor be unlawfully admitted into the Ministry.

2. A perfect performance of all the duties of a good Shepherd. Philo Jud. in
l. de opificio mundi.
The other point here spoken of this great Shepherd, is a perfect and most
absolute performance of all the duties of a good Shepherd. Where first of all,
you must observe, that Theocritus, Virgil and others, writing of this office of
Shepherds, do make three kinds of Pastors or Shepherds; and so does Philo
Judaeus, where he says, (...), the Shepherd, Goatesman and Herdsman drive the
flocks of sheep, goats and bullocks; and it is observed, (...) dici, de pastore
omnium animalium, (...) cum relatione tantum ad oves; that the Greeks do call
him only that keeps sheep, (...), a shepherd; and our Savior says not,
(...), I am the good goatsman, or the good herdsman, John 10.14.
but he says, (...), I am the good Shepherd, that takes care for his sheep,
but not for goats; because the Lord cares for the righteous, but, as the
Prophet says, he scatters abroad all the ungodly.

And seeing that he is a Shepherd, you know what the Poet says, -- Pastorem
Tytere pingues
Pascere oportet oves; Vagil. Eglog. 6.

The Shepherd ought to feed his sheep; for as the old proverb goes, (...),
Spartam nactus es, hanc orna; every one should look to his own office, as, the
learned Divine to preach the Word of God, the Cobbler to mend his shoes, the
Countreyman to plough his ground, -- and curabit prelia Conon; and the King, or
whosoever is the chief Magistrate, to provide for war and to conclude peace;
which is the only way to keep all things in the right way; because that
mittere falcem in alienam messem; for the Coachman with his whip to lash the
pulpit, the Tailor with his shears to divide the Word of God, the shepherd with
his hook to rule the people, and the unruly people to reign as Kings, is that,
which as the Poet says, -- Turbabit fadera mundi, Lucan. phars. l. 1.
and is the readiest way to pull all things asunder, and to tear in pieces the
whole course of nature, and to subvert all the order of Gods creatures, and
indeed to reduce the total frame of the creation to a speedy dissolution;
whereas, that man is worthy of all praise, as Aelian says, which meddleth with
nothing, (...), that pertains nothing unto him, but looks only and
carefully to his own duty; and he is worthy to be reproved, (as our Savior
checked Saint Peter for his curiosity, to know what John must do) that is a
stranger in his own affairs, and busieth himself only with what only belongs
unto others.

And therefore, not to do my self, what I blame in others, or to extend my
discourse beyond my line, to treat of the art of war with Phormio before
Hannibal, or to tell you the office of a King or a Judge, when my text tells me
I am to treat of a Shepherd, but to keep my self contrary to the common
practice, ad idem, to my own proper task; I shall desire you to remember, that
the duty of a good Shepherd consists chiefly in these two points.

1. Negatively, what he should not do to his sheep. 2. Affirmatively, what he
should do for them.
1. The heathen man could tell us, that boni pastoris est pecus tondere, non
deglubere; it is the part of a good Shepherd to fleece his sheep, and not to
flea them, that is, The duty of a good Shepherd twofold. 1. Negative what he
should not do to his sheep. 1. Not flea the sheep.
to clip and shear the wool, and not to cut and tear the skin with the wool;
and therefore Christ bids S. Peter feed my sheep, and not feed thy self upon my
sheep; which is the property of too too many Shepherds both spiritual and
temporal, to seek rather the wealth of their people unto themselves, and not to
provide for the health of their souls; but this covetousness is a vice so
palpable, which hypocrisy is not, that the people may soon discern it in their
Pastor; and being truly discerned, they may fear the same to be rather an
hireling, then the true Shepherd, but let them take heed how they judge. John
10.


Then the good Shepherd is not to be harsh and rough, but gentle and meek unto
his sheep; for the sheep are gentle creatures, and therefore they must be
gently used, Not prove too harsh unto them.
and gently led, and not forced; for so the Psalmist says, Duxisti populum
sicut oves, non traxisti, God led his people like sheep, and drove them not,
like horses; And therefore when Esan would have Jacob to drive his flock so, as
to keep him company in his hunting pace; Jacob, that was a skilful
sheep-master, answers him, not so Sir, for it is a tender cattle, that is
under my hands, and must be softly driven, Genesis 33.
so as they may endure; or if one should over-drive them but one day, they
would all die, or be laid up for many days after.

Indeed Rehoboam left ten parts of his flock behind him, only for his rough
driving of them, and his harsh carriage toward them; for when in a barbarous
manner he chased his sheep before him, and told them what yokes he would make
for them (a far unmeet occupation for a Prince to be a yoak-maker) they all
shrunk from him, and ran away presently, and so clean falsified his Prophecy;
for whereas he told them seriously, that his little finger should be as big as
his Fathers body, it fell out clean contrary: for his whole body proved not so
big as his Fathers little finger.

But the good Shepherd, whether you mean Prince or Priest, will come down
amongst his sheep, as the Prophet David shows, not like ha^l-stones on the
house top, but like the dew into a fleece of wool, that is, gently and mildly,
without any noise or violence at all; for otherwise the wrangling Shepherd, the
contentious Priest, that still falls out with one or other of his parishioners,
and turns them, only to satisfy his own humor, as unworthy, from his
communion, can never do much good unto his people, but tires them, rather then
feeds them.

2. For the affirmative or positive duties of a good Shepherd, Affirmative what
he should do to his sheep.
they are especially these four.

1. To provide for his sheep sweet and fresh pasture.

2. To foresee and to take care how they should feed in that pasture; that is,
when and how much they should eat thereof; for if the sheep be not warily
looked unto, in a fresh pasture, instead of being fatted, they may very easily
be spoiled, when the eating of too much sweet grass stays not in them, but
scoureth away all their fatness and soundness from them.

3. To protect and defend them from the fury of their Foes, Wolves, Dogs,
Foxes, and the like ravenous Beasts, that do continually seek to disturb and
destroy them.

4. To watch over them, lest by their wandering they should miscarry and be
lost, or otherwise perish out of the way.

And in all these respects, besides many others, our Savior Christ has
approved himself to be (...), that good Shepherd, which excelled all the best
Shepherds of the world: For,

1. How Christ performed the negative part of a good Shepherd.
Touching the negative duties of a Shepherd, Christ came not to gather wealth
with Craesus, nor to enlarge his dominions with Alexander, but to save our
souls; and so Saint Paul says, I seek not yours, but you; and so every
faithful Minister of Christ should not so much hunt after the wealth of their
flocks, as the health of their souls; though this denies not, but as the Sheep
should yield her fleece unto her Shepherd, so should the people pay all dues
and duties unto their Minister; for, as S. 1 Cor. 9.7.
Paul says, Who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock?

And as he came not to enrich himself by his people, so he was no ways harsh
and severe unto his people; Number. 12.3.
but, as Moses was the meekest man upon earth, and carried the children of
Israel in his bosom, as a nursing Father bears a sucking Child, to use Moses
his own words; Number. 11.12.
so was Christ meek and lowly in heart, and never denied any that sought unto
him, nor failed any man that trusted in him. And so he wills all his
Ministers to be gentle and courteous unto the people; for, as the very heathen
says, -- Peragit tranquilla potestas
Quod violenta nequit. --
We may sooner win men by persuasion then by compulsion, rather by fair means
and a sweet language, then by foul means and rough terms: as it appears by
that parable which Damascen sets down, of the contestation betwixt the Sun
and the Wind, which of them was most powerful to make the traveller cast off
his cloak, who the faster the wind blew, the faster he held his cloak about
him; but the Sun, with the influence of his first sweet, and then piercing
beams made him quickly to cast off both his cloak and his coat.

And therefore such a Shepherd of Christ his flock, as the Poet speaks of, --
Non pater est Aeacus, that is not the gentle Child of this meek Father, but Te
saxum te genuere ferae, such as the churlish and rough hewn Nabal was to David,
is fitter to drive wild Horses then to lead the harmless sheep; and they do
rather chase men, like Nimrod, from the Lord, then win them with S. Paul by all
fair means to our Savior Christ, as you may see, how he seeks to lead the
Romans unto Christ, saying, I beseech you brethren, Romans 12.1.
by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies a living sacrifice holy
and acceptable unto God.

Which makes me wonder at those rough collectors of Churches out of the Church
of Christ, by receiving some and rejecting others into their flock, as if the
day of judgment were now come, Mat. 11.28.
to separate the sheep from the goats, and to cast off the tares from the
wheat, when as our chief Shepherd, and this good Shepherd says, Come unto me,
all ye that are weary and ^eavy laden, and I will ease you.

2. How Christ performed the affirmat^ve part of a good Shepherd. 1. Christ
provideth food for his flock.
For the affirmative or positive duties of a good Shepherd, what he should do
for his sheep, never any came near the goodness of this good Shepherd. For,

1. He provideth for his flock, not only the outward food of their bodies,
which he does for all other living creatures, when as the Prophet says, He
opens his hands, and fills all things living with plenteousness; and, as
the same Prophet says, He feeds the young ravens that call upon him, and the
best of us has not a crum of bread but what he has from him; but he has
provided also the spiritual food of their souls, which is the Word of God, and
the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper; for, as our Savior alleged against
Satan, Mat. 4.4.
Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God; and the blessed Sacraments are Verba visibilia Evangelii, the
visible and palpable words of the Gospel, and are as the celestial manna, the
heavenly food that perishes not, but feeds us to eternal life, The error
of the Messalian Heretics.
if we strive to receive the same worthily, as we ought to do; though now we
have too too many that are poisoned with the conceit of the Messalian
Heretics, that said Baptism and the Lords Supper did neither profit us nor
hurt us, but that they which were inspired by Gods Spirit, were guided by the
revelation of that Spirit, how to behave themselves in all their ways, which
is the readiest way to lead them to the infernal spirits; because we are not to
be led by the inspiration of any spirit, but by those holy directions which the
Spirit of God has left us in the holy Scriptures: What is meant to be inspired
with Gods spirit.
and when we pray to be inspired with Gods Spirit, we mean no otherwise, then
that the Spirit of God would guide us to lead our lives, and to do all things,
as we are commanded by the same spirit, to do in the word of God, that is left
unto us by the Prophets and Apostles of Jesus Christ, to be the only Rule of
all our actions.

2. As he provideth thus both our temporal and our spiritual food, Christ
orders how the food of his should be disposed.
so he orders and disposes this food unto his sheep, not according to their
sensual appetite, but for the natural good of their bodies, and the spiritual
health of their souls, that it may be unto them the savor of life unto life,
and not the savor of death unto death. As

1. For their natural food, Their natural food.
he would have us with the son of Jakeh to desire neither poverty nor riches,
neither too much, nor too little, but to be fed with food convenient, lest if
we be too full, we forget the Lord, and grow too proud, as the great rich men
commonly be; or if we be too poor, we be driven to steal and to lie, Prove.
30.8, 9.
and to take the name of God in vain; And, What should be convenient for every
man.
because most men are loath to understand what is the mean betwixt too much and
too little, and what measure is that that is convenient, S. Paul tells us, That
having food and raiment, we should therewith be contented; for the greatest
Monarch in the world can have no more; and our Savior, that best knew what is
convenient for every man, bids us prey to God, that he would give us this day
our daily bread; that is so much as will serve us for our present necessity,
Luke 12.19.
and not with that fool in the Gospel, to lay up much goods for many years,
when he knew not, that his soul, in that night should be taken from him, and
then he could not tell, who should enjoy those things, or how those things
should be spent, that he had provided: And

2. For our spiritual food, Their spiritual food.
this good Shepherd has commanded us that are his under-Shepherds, to give
unto his sheep their own portion in due season.

1. Their own portion, and that both in quality and quantity: Their own
portion. 1. In quality.


1. In Quality, what is most proper for every one; as all meats serve not for
every stomach, and every potion serves not for all diseases, so it is with our
spiritual food, and the divine physic of our souls, and therefore we are
advised to give milk unto the babes, and stronger meat to them that are
stronger men in Christ, that is, plain and easy doctrines, to the plain and
more ignorant people, and deeper and more polite discourses to the judicious,
and those of deeper knowledge; because, as S. Paul says, we are debtors both
to the Greeks and to the Barba^ians, to the wise and to the unwise, and
therefore, as Christ bids his Apostles, so must we sometimes, launch forth
into the deep, both of Divinity and Humanity, and as well of Arts as of
Languages.

And so we are to give praises to the good, reproves to the bad, but
flatteries unto none, when we ought no more to flatter the sweet and clement,
then to fear the cruel tyrant: and in like manner, we are commanded to apply
comfors and consolations to the dejected spirits, to pronounce pardon to the
penitent sinners, and to thunder out the terrors of Gods judgments to none but
such as are impenitent and obstinate transgressors.

2. In Quantity, we are to give our sheep neither too much of this spiritual
food, In quantity.
nor yet too little, for where prophecy fails the people perish, and the
worst famine is the famine, not of corn, wine and oil, but of the famine of
Gods Word; and therofere the Apostle says, Woe is me, if I preach not the
Gospel, and woe is them that hinder us to preach it, as they have done these
many years. And yet, as we are not to give our sheep too little of this
spiritual pasture, lest they should want, so they should not have too much,
lest they should loath it; for a man may eat too much of the Honeycomb, says
Solomon, Prove. 25.16. Number. 11.20.
and the children of Israel had so much Manna, that they loathed it, and Quails
so plentifully, that the flesh came out at their nostrils; and so men may have
the Word of God so fully, that they will despise it, or at least neglect it,
because, as Solomon says, Prove. 27.7.
the full soul loatheth, or treads under foot the honeycomb; but to the
hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet, so is the Word of God precious, when
it is not so plentiful, and despised when we are full of it.

And truly I do believe, Knowledge how more plentiful now then ever it was.
the Gospel of Christ and the rest of the holy Scriptures were never since
Christ his time so fully, and so generally and so truly published as of late
they were in the reign of our late King CHARLES; for you know it is not long
since the Word of God was had in our native language, but it was locked up in
the Greek and Latin Tongues, which none but a few scholars understood; and
since it is vulgarly published, you may consider how many Bibles are now
printed to furnish every Prentice, maid and boy, in comparison of the small
number that the best men had in former times; and for Sermons, how rare were
they in our fathers times, and how generally you may hear them now at all times
in most places? and the Angel foretells the Prophet Daniel, it should be thus
before the end of the world; for, says he, Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased, as now it is, I think ten times more then ever it
was: Dan. 12.4. And therefore the Prophet says, The earth shall be filled with
the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea, Hab. 2.14.

And yet, notwithstanding all the multitude of our Bibles, all the volumes of
divine Treatises, all the frequent Sermons that are made, and all the knowledge
that is professed, from the learned scribe to the City-tradesman, and the Country
plough-man, our Savior tells us, that when he comes, Iniquity shall be
increased, the love of many shall wax cold, and he shall scarce find faith
upon the earth.

And if any man demand with Nichodemus, How can these things be?

I answer, That the more good wheat we sow in the field of Gods Church, the
more tares will Satan sow amongst it, and the more we strive to enlarge the
true faith, the more errors and heresies will his instruments spread amongst
the people; and for knowledge, he knows enough, and too much himself, and is
very well pleased that all his servants should be knowing men, The Devil would
have all to be knowing men.
and be as skilful in the Scriptures as he is himself; for, as one crafty knave
can do ten times more mischief then ten silly fools, so one learned heretic
will broach more errors, and defend and maintain them far better then many
meaner scholars can do; and it is a true axiom, that Non nisi ex magnis
ingeniis magni errores, the great errors never sprung, and the strange
heresies could never have been maintained, but by men of some good parts, and
of great knowledge.

And therefore I may justly say with S. Augustine, that Melior est fidelis
ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia, it were far better for men to be humbly
ignorant, then proudly filled, and rashly erring with knowledge; for, as the
Apostle says, Knowledge puffs up, 1 Cor. 8.1. Esaias 47.10.
and many times produces many errors and much evil, even as the Lord says of
Babylon, Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have perverted thee, and caused thee to
turn away from the right way.

And as the rash, proud and unsanctified knowledge of men does breed many
errors and much evil, so it brings no good at all; for, as S. Paul says,
that not the hearers of the law, Romans 2.13.
but the doers of the law shall be justified, so not the knowers of the
Scriptures, could they repeat it all at their fingers end, but they that
understand it right, apply it as they ought, believe in Christ, and lead their
lives according to the Scriptures, shall receive the reward promised in
Scripture: otherwise, as he that knows his masters will and does it not; so
he that knows the Word of God, and is most skilful in the holy Scriptures,
and yet neither applies them right, nor believes, nor lives according to the
Word of God, is worthy to be beaten with many stripes.

And therefore Christ enjoyneth us to give unto his sheep their own due portion
of knowledge and spiritual food, that may edify them and not destroy them; and
that is such a proportion as every one is capable of, and is requisite for him
to know. And

2. As we are to give to every one his own due portion of this spiritual food,
In due season.
both in quality and quantity, so we are to give it them in due season,
because, as Solomon says, there is a time for all things, as a time to speak,
and a time to be silent, a time to feast, and a time to fast; a time to preach,
and a time to pray, which I fear is now cut shortest of all times, if not
persecuted, to hide it self in corners and private Chapels, when as many of
our Churches are scarce acquainted with the Lords prayer, the prayer that our
Savior commanded us to use, Horrendum dictu.

And as Christ our grand Shepherd has commanded us to give to every one his
own portion in due season, so he has warned and instructed his sheep, not to
take what they list, but to be satisfied with what is given them, and to expect
it in the due time, and not to exact it whenever they please, because God
cannot endure that every man should be his own carver and stretch forth his
hand with Adam to any forbidden fruit, God would not have men to be their own
carvers.
when as every one should be contented with what is given him, and should pray
to God as Christ has taught us, saying, Give us this day our daily bread; and
therefore when Christ blessed the five Loaves and two Fishes, he did not as
many of our new Divines, teach the people now to take what they list of the
blessed bread in the Eucharist, but as S. John says, he distributed them to
the Disciples, John 6.11.
and the Disciples to them that were set down.

But alas, here is our misery, and the iniquity of these times, The misery and
the iniquity of these days.
that our dispensers shall not dispose this spiritual food, and God himself
shall not distribute his own gifts; but, as the Poet says, -- Vivitur ex
rapto, what God has most graciously bestowed upon one man, another will most
wickedly snatch it from him: and men must and will have the Word of God
expounded, extorted and multiplied, as Christ multiplied his loaves, when,
where, how and by whom they list, which is the cause of our calamities, and
like, if not prevented, to bring destruction unto the sheep of Christ. And
therefore,

3. Christ the good Shepherd does not only feed his sheep, and bid S. Peter,
and in him all us three times to feed his sheep, that is, to feed them three
manner of ways.

1. Pascere verbo. 2. Pascere cibo. 3. Pascere exemplo.

1. With the Word of God. 2. With Almsdeeds. 3. With good examples; but he
does also expose himself to all dangers, even to death it self, to save and to
protect his sheep from the fury of those that any ways labor to destroy them,
even as he says, I lay down my life for my sheep, therefore he must needs be
the good Shepherd, and none can deny him to be a good Shepherd, that lays
down his life for his sheep.

And he requires of us likewise, that are his under-shepherds, that we should
undergo all dangers to save and to protect our sheep; and as S. Bernard says,
Custodia civitatis ut sit sufficiens, trifaria est, the guard and safe custody
of Gods City, and sheepfold of Christ, if it be sufficient, must be threefold.

1. A Vi tyrannorum. 2. A fraud haereticorum. 3. a Temptationibus daemonum.
Three most excellent properties of a good Shepherd.
And truly the sheep of Christ had never more need to be protected and defended
from this three-headed Gerion, then now they have: For,

1. In the Primitive Church, though they had Tyrants to oppress them, and
Persecutors to destroy them, yet then they were all at unity among themselves,
and the seamless coat of Christ was still unrent; and therefore Sanguis
martyrum semen ecclesiae, the blood of the Martyrs did fatten the field of Gods
Church, and made it to bring forth fruits more abundantly.

But now the coat of Christ is torn in pieces, far worse then Jeroboams garment
that was cut in ten parts, and the Church of God is filled with Sects and
Heresies, so that the poor sheep of Christ know neither where the fold is, nor
who is the true Shepherd.

2. In the time of the Arians, Novatians, Eutichians, Nestorians and others,
the like Heresiarches, though they infested the Church with damnable doctrines,
and as that traitorous villain, Turkish Histo.
corrupted by Amurath the sixth King of the Turks, poisoned the well of
Sfetigrade, that watered the whole City with the carcass of a dead dog; so did
they seek to poison the pure fountain of the holy Scriptures, with the stinking
carrion of their rotten glosses; yet the Christian Emperors, and the other
pious Kings and Princes stretched forth their hands, to assist the care and
wisdom of the reverend Prelates, to suppress the Heretics, and to root out
all the bitter weeds of false doctrine from Gods Church.

But now, Psalm. 86.14.
as the Prophet David says, O God, Princes have persecuted me without cause,
and the assemblies of violent men, naughty men, says the vulgar, that have not
set thee before their eyes, seek after my soul, and after the soul of thine
anointed. So I fear the Bishops may now say, That Princes do hate them without
a cause, and for seeking to root out the damnable Doctrines of the Sectaries,
the assemblies of terrible men, as the Original has it, that set not God
before their eyes, do seek after our souls.

And that we might be environed with enemies on all sides, Hell is broken
loose, as Edwards, one of their own Presbyterians says, and Satan is set at
liberty, to pour forth, out of the bottomless pit, those locusts that you read
of, Rev. 9.3. whose shapes were like horses prepared unto battle, because their
whole heart is for war, to imbrue their hands in blood, and to destroy all the
true Prelates; and yet their hair were as the hair of women, that is very
specious, and lovely to behold, when they pretend nothing but a perfect
Gospel-discipline, and a pure Heavenly doctrine, beating down the
Antichristian Pope, and the worshipping of Saints, Images, Pictures and all
Impieties; but their teeth were as the teeth of Lions, that is, devouring all
that ever we have, and all that shall come within their reach, as all the
patrimony of the Church and all the fleeces of Christ his Flock, and their
tails are like Scorpions, that have their stings in their tails, to make the
catastrophe and conclusion of their doings very grievous and most lamentable,
as I fear it will be found at last, unless God will be so merciful unto us as
to help us.

And if you would know, whom these locusts might signify, I assure my self
they be now the rabble rout of Priests, Jesuits and Friars in the Church of
Rome, and the multitude of Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Independents and other
sectaries here amongst us, that like Ephraim and Manasses, do conspire together
on both sides, to shoot at, and to shoot through the true Protestant Bishops,
and to destroy all their Protestant flocks, by making them either superstitious
Papists, or wild wandering Sectaries, as bad if not worse then the other. I
must tell you my mind without fear. And therefore,

3. The Sheep of Christ and his Under-shepherds being thus environed, with
Wolves, Foxes and the like ravenous Beasts, their temptations are greater, and
the assaults of Satan are more violent then ever they were; which is the cause
that so many men do start aside like a broken bow, and Satan's book is filled
with the names of apostata's, that either for the desire and love of
preferment, to get a living, or a good Sallary from the Usurpers, or else for
fear of losing their preferment, and to be deprived of their means, which are
the two engines that the Tempter uses against the Shepherds, Ver. 12, and 13.
and do, as our Savior speaks of the hireling, that is, to leave their sheep
to the mercy of the Wolves; yea, and to assist the Wolves and the Foxes, the
Heretics and Schismatics, 4th. Duty is to watch that our shepherd go not
astray.
to lead away and drive the poor Sheep into the wilderness and thickest of all
errors, to destroy them. And therefore,

4. As Christ came down from Heaven to discharge the fourth duty of a good
Shepherd, that is, to watch over his sheep, that they should not wander, or if
they do stray, to seek them that are lost, as he testifies himself, that he
came To seek the lost sheep of the house of Israel; so he commands us, his
under-shepherds, to do the like, and to use all diligence to reduce and regain
the wandering sheep to Christ, when they are perverted by the instruments of
the Antichrist: and truly, it is a shame for us, as Rusticus Diaconus says, to
see how sedulous they are to seduce the poor people, and to lead the sheep of
Christ out of the right way, and with the Scribes and Pharisees to gain
Proselites unto themselves, Nos autem pro veritate frigidiores in venire, and
to find us cold in the defense of truth, and to reduce the erroneous unto the
right way: which notwithstanding, is too too commonly seen in the world,
because, as our Savior says, the children of this world are wiser in their
generation then the children of light; and we see Judas takes more pains to
betray Christ, then his Disciples did to attend their Savior; for he runs from
the garden to the high Priest, How diligent the wicked are, and the godly
negligent.
and from the high Priest to the garden, and then from the garden in a short
space to the gallows; and his Disciples were so careless, that they slumbered
and slept, and so do we; and while we sleep, the envious enemy, by these his
instruments, sows the tares of errors and heresies in the field of Gods
Church.

But though we neglect our duties, yet you see that Christ in all the foresaid
respects, Christ the only good Shepherd.
and in all other respects whatsoever is (...), the good Shepherd, and indeed
the only Shepherd that is simply and absolutely good. For,

Though Abel was a good Shepherd, and Jacob was another good Shepherd, Genesis
31.40.
so carefully watching over his flock, that in the day the drought consumed
him, and the frost by night, and his sleep departed from his eyes; and Moses
was such another, Psalm. 77.20.
of whom the Prophet says, that God led his people like sheep by the hands of
Meses and Aaron; and so David was an excellent Shepherd, that ventured his life
to save his sheep; and to pull it out of the Lions teeth: and when God took him
away from the sheep-folds, that he might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his
inheritance, the Spirit of God tells us, that he fed them with a faithful and
true heart, Psalm. 78.73. Esaias 44.28.
and ruled them prudently with all his power. And of Cyrus the Lord said He is
my Shepherd; and Homer calls Agamemnon (...), the Shepherd of the people; and
so not only the Apostles and Bishops, but also Constantine, Theodosius, King
James and King Charles, and all other religious Kings and pious Princes, as
Nehemiah, the good Lieutenant of Jury under Artaxerxes King of Persia, to whom,
if it were not for suspicion of flattery, which is one of the basest of all
vices, and the worst kind of Scotization (you may see what Minshaw means by
that word) I might truly parallel his Excellency our Lord Lieutenant: The now
Duke of Ormond.
and many more have been very good Shepherds of Gods sheep.

Yet they were all, and put them all together, very very far short of this
Shepherd in my Text, which is, (...), that good Shepherd (...), transcendently;
and which in all the foresaid respects, and in all other respects whatsoever,
excels all the most excellent Shepherds in the world. And so much shall
serve to be spoken at this time, of the good properties of this good Shepherd.

2. As the children of God are termed Sheep, in respect of Christ, Gods people
are termed Sheep in respect of themselves. Geminianus de exemplis, l. 5. c. 46.
1. In respect of their innocence. 2 Samuel 24.17.
which is their chief Shepherd, so they are likewise styled Sheep in respect of
the Analogy and resemblances betwixt them and Sheep, which as Geminianus
says, are in these six special points.

1. Innocence of life; for as nature gave the sheep neither horns to hurt, nor
claws to scratch, nor teeth to bite, so the children of God do nothing to the
hurt of any other; they neither hate their neighbor in their hearts, nor
strike him with their hands, nor traduce him with their tongues, nor think any
evil or wish any hurt to him in their thoughts; and therefore when David saw
the Angel that smote the people in Jerusalem, he said, Lo, I have sinned, but
these sheep, what have they done? as if he should have said, these poor men,
that are like sheep, so harmless and so innocent, what hurt could they do,
either in themselves, or to any others? Et haec vera innocentia est quae nec
sibi, nec aliis nocet, and that is the true innocence, says S. Aug. which
hurts neither himself nor his neighbors.

2. In respect of their patience.
They are resembled unto Sheep for their patience, in suffering all kinds of
injuries and indignities; for as the Prophet shows, and Gods people finds
it, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, Psalm. 44.22.
and are counted as sheep appointed to be slain. Where you may see

1. Where observe 1. The Cause.
The cause of their sufferings is expressed, not for theft, murder, adultery,
or the like wicked acts, but Propter te, for Gods cause; for obeying his will,
and being loyal to our Superiors, and not treacherous unto our lawful
Governors; and so for being faithful in Gods service, by publishing the truth,
and not carried away with every new form of service, and every wind of false
doctrine; this is cause enough to suffer; and this is propter te, for thy sake,
O God, which is our only comfort.

2. The Sufferings.
Here is the sufferings of Gods sheep and servants specified; we are mortified,
or killed: And that is,

1. By our selves, in our repentance and contrition for our sins, every day,
or, all the day long, that is, throughout our whole life, according as the
Apostle says, we die daily, that is, to sin and for our sin: And then

2. We are killed by others, when, with the rest of the Martyrs, we are, as we
have been, not long since, throughout all this Kingdom, robbed of our good
names, filled with reproach, plundered of our estates, banished from our
dwellings, clapped up in prisons, and then led as sheep unto the slaughter. In
all which, and in all other sufferings, I know no better remedy then what our
Savior prescribes to us, in our patience to possess our souls, which may be
lost for want of patience, but will be supported and eased, if we will be like
sheep, patient and silent in our sufferings, Quia levius fit patientia,
Horatius.
quicquid corrigere est nefas, because the more we struggle, when we are in the
briars, the more we shall be scratched and entangled, and the less able we
shall be to bear our indignities; and the less we murmr, the less will be our
sufferings, and the more favors we shall find at the hands of God: and
therefore the Poet could say, -- (...), We ought to suffer patiently whatsoever
God lays upon us: and so the Saints of God do suffer whatsoever is laid upon
them, as you may see in the said 44, Psalm, from the 10. v. to the 22.

3. In respect of their obedience. C. 10. v. 4. Damase. l. 3. c. 4
They are resembled to Sheep in respect of their obedience to do the commands
of God; for as the Sheep do follow the Shepherds whistle, and do know his
voice, so do the servants of God obey the voice of Christ, listening to his
words with their ears; Unde veteres dicebant obaudio pro obedio, embracing it
in their souls, Quia obedientia est voluntatis propriae subjectio preceptis
Dei, which they are most ready to peform, and to say with him in Plautus,
Plaut. trin.
Adsum, impera quidvis, neque tibi ero in mora, neque latebrose me abs tuo
conspectu occultabo.

For, Aug. in Genesis l. 9. and habetur 33. q. 5. c. est ordo.
as S. Aug. truly says, Est ordo naturalis in hominibus, ut serviat foeminae
viris, and filii parentibus; quia in illis haec est justitia, ut majori serviat
minor; it is the order of nature among men, that the women should serve the
men, children their parents, servants their masters, and subjects their Prince,
because it is the rule of justice among them, that the lesser and inferior
should serve the greater and superior; Idom. de operibus Monach.
and as the same Father says, Quid iniquius, quam velle sibi obtemperari a
minoribus and nolle obtemperare majoribus: What can be more unjust and more
unreasonable, then to require obedience of our inferiors, and not to yield it
to our superiors? how then can we expect our children and our servants to hear
our voice and to obey us, if we obey not God, that is our Master and our
Father, and obey not our King that God has placed over us?

And therefore the sheep of Christ, How acceptable obedienae is to God.
like tractable sheep, are always ready to obey his commands, and to do his
will, as well in the greatest as in the least things, and this their obedience
is more acceptable and more pleasing to God, then any sacrifice, because, Greg.
in 1. reg. 15. lib. 35.
as S. Gregory says, Per victimas aliena caro, per obedientiam vere propria
voluntas mactatur; by sacrifice they killed other beasts, but by our obedience
we slay our own proper wills, and submit our selves to do the will of Christ.

4. They are resembled unto Sheep, In respect of plenty of fruits
in respect of their secundity and plenty of all good fruits; for as sheep are
the most profitable of all cattle, and do, as the Prophet says, bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in our streets, and do abound in milk, wool and
fleeces of diverse colors: so the Saints and servants of God are most fruitful
in begetting children unto God, and regenerating them to Christ, and they are
most plentiful of milk, even the sincere milk of Gods Word, as Saint Peter
calls it, 1 Pet. 2.2.
and they do abound with the variety of all virtuous acts, and the examples of
all good deeds; when as Job says, Velleribus ovium mearum calefactus est
pauper, Job 38.
the poor is warmed with the fleeces of my sheep.

And as drink is a great cause of the fecundity and fittening of sheep,
Aristot. de genesis animal.
as Aristotle says: for which purpose some give them salt to eat, that they
might thirst the more and drink the better; so the drinking of the Water of
life, which is the Word of God, does make the children of God to abound in all
good works, even as the Apostle shows, that the Colossians were fruitful in
every good work, Col. 1.10.
when they increased in the knowledge of God.

5. They are resembled unto Sheep, in respect of their plain dealing, In
respect of their plain dealing and simplicity.
and the simplicity of their carriage in all affairs; for as the Sheep is the
silliest and simplest of all beasts, and knows neither how to help her self in
distress, nor to return to the right way, when she wandereth; and therefore we
say, that We have erred and strayed like a lost sheep, that being once gone
from her fellows, can never come home again, unless she be sought for by the
care and diligence of her Shepherd; even so the servants of God are the
simplest of all men in all worldly affairs; so simple, that the world laughs at
the simplicity of their carriage, either in their suits at law, or trades of
life, or any other worldly business; and our Savior tells us, that the
children of this world are far wiser in their generation then the children of
light.

But here you must observe, that there is a twofold simplicity. That there is
a twofold simplicity. 1. Simplicity. Mat. 10.16. Job 1.1. chapter 8.20. Wisd. 1.1.
Prove. 20.7.


1. The one contrary to deceit, and this is good, commanded to be embraced by
Christ himself, Estote sinaplices sicut columbae, and commended in all those
that use it; for so the Lord says Job was, Vir simplex and rectus, a simple
and an upright man: and Bildad says, Deus non projiciet simplicem, God will
not cast away the simple; and the wise man bids us, Seek the Lord in simplicity
of heart: And Solomon says, that the just man which walks in his integrity,
in his simplicity, says the Text, shall leave his childen blessed.

2. The other simplicity is contrary to discretion, Simplicity.
and this is reproved and to be avoided; and therefore our Savior bids us not
only to be simple as Doves, but also to be as wise, as discreet, and as subtle
as the Serpent, that as our simplicity and uprightness hinders us to wrong
and deceive others, so our discretion and wisdom may preserve us from being
wronged and deceived by any other: Hiero. sup. Hos.
Quia non multum distat a vitio, aut decipere, aut decipi posse; nam sicut
prudentia absque simplicitate malitia est, ita simplicitas absque ratione
stultitia est; for as wisdom and understanding without simplicity and
uprightness, is malice and wickedness; so uprightness and simplicity without
wisdom and discretion is folly and weakness, says S. Hierom.

And therefore we should follow our Saviors counsel, to join the wisdom of
the Serpent to the simplicity of the Dove. But Satan is so spightful and so
prevalent, that he makes the wicked worldlings to be only careful to get
subtilty, and to cast away all uprightness and simplicity; and the children of
God being only careful to retain their uprightness and simplicity, The godly
men are careless to prevent the snares and dangers of the world.
are most commonly careless and negligent of that prudence and discretion which
is most requisite for them, while they live amongst the wicked^ and in that
respect they are, for their simplicity herein resembled unto sheep, and well
they may be so resembled; for, though our enemies are so subtle and so crafty
to attain unto their ends, that neither Achitophel nor Machiavel could go
beyond them: yet we see how dull the servants of Christ are, and the servants
of our Kingwere, either to preserve themselves or to prevent the stratagems of
their adversaries, or to devise any ways to prevail against their enemies;
otherwise our late good Shepherd had not been so smitten, and his sheep had not
been so scattered, as they are at this present.

6. 6 In respect of the profit and good that is had from them
And lastly, they are resembled unto Sheep, in respect of the utility and great
benefit that is made of them, and so received from them; for as there is no
part nor parcel of the sheep, but it is good for something; as their flesh to
feedus, their wool to cloth us, their dung to fatten our ground to enrich us,
their intrails to make musical strings to delight us, and their horns and
hoofs, as some say, to make perfumes for many uses; so all the thoughts, words
and works of Gods children are good for something, either the glory of God, or
the edifying of their neighbors, or the discharging of their own duties; and
so Omnia co-operantur in bonum, all that they do is some ways good, or else
will turn to good, as their very sins, when they are confessed and repented of,
do make for Gods glory, in pardoning them, and do make them the more humble and
the more careful to prevent the like fins; whereas the Prophet tells us, that
with the ungodly, it is clean contrary; when, not only the words of their
mouth are unrighteous and full of deceit, Psalm. 37.3. Genesis 6.5.
and the thoughts of their hearts are wicked, and only evil continually, but
also their very prayers, and the best of all their actions shall be turned into
sin. The wicked, to whom they are like.


And therefore the wicked that fear not God, and love not men, are no ways
like unto sheep, but in respect of their subtilty, to circumvent and to deceive
their poor neighbors, they are like Foxes; for malice and anger, they are like
Dogs; for their implacable and bloody minds, they are as cruel as the Tigers;
for their greedy and covetous affections, they are as ravenous as Wolves; for
their high minds and haughty hearts, they are as proud as Peacocks, and for
their hypocrisy and dissimulation, they are as deceitful as the Sirens. And so
forth, -- Forma non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen. --
Though all of them are not like to each one of these, yet every one of them is
like to some one of these, and none of them like unto sheep.

But my time is too short, and my skill is too scant to show unto you the
subtilty, cruelty and other evil qualities of these beasts, and they are
without the limits of my Text; and I pray God to keep me and every poor simple
sheep without the limits of their reach; and into their counsel let not my soul
come: we have felt too much of their weight already: yet by this that I have
spoken, you may perceive who belongs unto my Text, and who are the sheep of
Christ; not those Foxes that beguile their brethren, nor those Wolves that
devour their neighbors, nor yet those that go under the show of Sheep, and
destroy their Shepherds, as you see who have now done it; for you perceive, our
Savior tells you, That his sheep will hear the voice of their shepherd, and
will follow him.

What then shall I say of those cruel beasts, with whom S. Paul fought at
Ephesus, and whose brood have ever since fought against, and robbed and killed
their Shepherds, so that their sheep, which are the faithful Christians, were
miserably scattered and shattered, and much troubled for the calamities that
befell unto their Shepherds, that have been often times so sorely smitten, that
some of them knew not where to find holes to hide their heads, And I speak this
by sad experience.
nor bread to put into their mouths.

Truly I will say nothing of them; but, if any be such persecutors of their
Shepherds, I say that, as yet, they are not the sheep of Christ, what they may
be hereafter I cannot tell; and for the true sheep of Christ, and his
under-shepherds, the Prelates and Preachers of Gods Word, and the rest of them,
I can give you none other counsel, then what S. Phil. 3.2. Mat. 7.15. The
authors counsel to his brethren, the Bishops and Preachers.
Paul gives to his Philippians, beware of dogs, and what our Savior says to
his Disciples, Take heed of them that come unto you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening wolves: and if you be persecuted in one city, then fly
into another; and when the enemies have waylaid all cities, then fly to
another Kingdom, and know that the same sun shines, and the same God reigns
in all the Kingdoms of the world

But let us, that are Gods Shepherds, especially Bishops, take heed that we be
not found like the Bishop of Spalato, wavering with every wind, or like
Ecebolius, that forsook his faith to preserve his living, and lest the service
of God to serve the ruling heretics, or like his imitator of Cambridge, Dr.
Perne, that in King Henry the Eighth's time was a Catholic, and in Edward the
Sixth's time a good Protestant, but in Queen Mary's a rigid Papist, and in
Queen Elizabeth's time, if I be not mistaken, a kind of another Protestant;
changing still just as the Camelion, and as the children of Ephraim, that being
harnessed and carrying bows, and so able to do God service, yet turned
themselves back in the day of battle: for this our good and chief Shepherd does
profess, that whosoever deals so, and denies him before men, that is,
sticks not unto him, to serve him and to defend his Service; him will he deny
before his father which is in heaven. And that is a greater loss then the loss
of a Living, and a worser doom then all the persecution that can be imposed
upon us.

But so much shall serve for the denomination of Gods servants, that they are
styled Sheep, both in respect of Christ, that i^ their Shepherd, and in respect
of their resemblances unto sheep. 2. The next point that is here to be
observed, is their appropriation, Their Appropriation.
expressed in the word My sheep; for though they be sheep, and but sheep, and
like sheep, yet they are my sheep, and I do own them for my sheep; which is the
only comfort of all Christians. For otherwise it were but a small joy, and a
sad case for us, to be Sheep for the Dogs to tear us, and the Wolves to eat us,
and every one to take our Fleeces from us, unless we had a good Shepherd that
is both willing to help us, and able to defend us from all evil: but in these
words, My sheep, both our Protection and our Consolation is fully included, and
if you observe it well, you may herein find intimated these two special things:
1. The honor and dignity of all good Christians. Two things observable in the
words, My sheep. 1. The honor and dignity of good Christistians.
2. The security and safety of all good Christians.


1. The worldly men stand much upon their Nobility, and indeed, Eprincipibus
nasci preclarum est, it is an excellent grace to be born of Nobles, to have
Abraham for our Father, and Sarah to be our Mother; and therefore not only the
Romans made great account of them that were sprung of the Julian Family, and
the like Noble Ancestors, but also the Grecians did the like, Pausan. in
Baeoicis.
as Pausanias writes of Epaminondas, the most illustrious Captain of the
Thebans; and the Jews in like manner boasted much of their Ancestors, Theatr.
Zuing. in vita Joseph.
as Josephus is very careful in describing the Nobility of his Ancestors, that
of his Fathers side he was sprung from the Priests, and his Mother from the
Asmonaean Princes; and Jehu gives this honor unto Jezabel, that she was a
Kings daughter. Reg. 9.34.


But if we do not imitate our Noble Ancestors in Nobleness, that is in Piety
and Virtue; the very Heathens will tell us our springing from them is worth
nothing, but rather a shame then a credit unto us, because as Theognis says,
(...), Virtue is the great Glory, which never perishes; and therefore Juvenal
says, as I have showed to you before, in my first Treatise: Malo pater tibi
sit Thyrsites, Juven. Sat. 8.
dum modo tu sis
Aeacidae similis vulcaniaque arma capessas,
Quam te Thyrsitae similem producat Achilles.
I commend the son of a Clown, that is virtuous, and carries himself nobly,
more then the son of a Prince, that is vicious and behave himself, like a
Clown: And Codrus Urceolus says, Sis licet ingenuis clarisque parentibus
ortus, Urceolus in Epigrammatibus.

Sint tibi divitiae, sit larga and munda supellex,
Denique quicquid eris, nisi sit prudentia tecum,
Magna quidem dico bestia semper eris.
Though thou be born of never so noble Parents, and have never so much
Wealth and Lands, and what thou will, and have no Wisdom nor understanding to
be virtuous, thou art but a very beast; for so the Prophet says, Man being in
honor and without understanding, is campared to the beasts that perish: and
the Poet says, Ovid de Ponto. Nam genus and proavos and quae non ferimus ipsi,
vix ea nostra voco. Hieron. ad Celan.
-- Non Census nec clarum nomen avorum,
Sed probitas magnos ingeniumque facit.


And therefore S. Hierom tells Celantia, that Sola apud Deum libertas est non
servire peccatis, and summa apud deum nobilitas est clarum esse virtutibus; he
is the only Freeman, that serves not sin, and follows not his own lust; and
he is the true Nobleman that is truly virtuous and godly: And Palingenus
says, Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus: hac nobilis Hector -- Alcidesque
fuit. -- And the Prophet says, He had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
God, that is, to be a Porter, and to have the meanest office that is in the
Service of God, then to have the greatest honor in the world, in the Courts
and palaces of the ungodly; and the meanest man that serves God, is more
honorable then the greatest Potentate that serves his own lust; for as
Abraham is said to be Pater sanctorum, the Father of the faithful, though he
was Filius peccatorum, the offspring of sinners, and the son of Terah, that
was an Idolater, because his Fathers Idolatry was not able to obscure his
Glory; so all the Indignities and Contempts that this world can cast upon the
servants of God, can no ways blemish their worth, or diminish their reputation
in the sight of God. To serve God truly, is to be truly noble.


And therefore I had rather be a sheeep of Christ, that is a simple Christian,
that deceive^h no man, and hurreth none, but suffers much, than to be a Fox
of this world to beguile the simple, or a Lion to crush my neighbors all to
pieces; for so I be with John Baptist, Magnus coram Domino, great in the sight
of the Lord, that is, of good esteem with God, as he is said to be, I shall
never greatly care how meanly I shall be accounted of in this world; but as
Constantine rejoiced more in that he was Filius Ecclesiae, a Son of the Church
and a Member of Christ, then in being Caput imperii, the Emperor of the whole
world; so I will be more glad, and take it for a greater Honor to be one of
Christ's simple sheep, of what condition soever my Earthly Father be, then to be
the Son of the Noblest Father in the world, and to be as the Jews were, and all
other our wicked, ungodly, and unrighteous men, though termed Saints, are the
children of their Father the Devil.

2. The security and safety of all good Christians.
As the servants of God are truly noble in being Christ his Sheep, so being his
sheep, they are, and may be, secure, and free from all fear, either 1. Of
Injuries, or 2. Of Wants: For,


1. From wrongs
the Prophet David says, The Lord is on my side, therefore I will not fear
what man can do unto me, for though the Idol sheperd, whereof Zechary speaks,
and I told you before of his ill properties, Zech. 11.
and the Hiveling shepherd, that our Savior speaks of, Qui lanas plus quam
oves diligunt, which love the Wages better then the Work, and the Fleeces
better then the Flock, will fly away, that is, from his Duty, and do any thing
that is enjoined him, when the Wolf comes, that is, when the Devil, or the
Tyrant, or the Heretic commands any other Service to be observed, or any
other Faith to be professed; yet Christ, that is the good Shepherd, as he
neither left his sheep nor forsook them, but gave his life for them, to deliver
them from eternal death; What the false shepherds and covetous of timorous
Preachers do.
so he will strengthen his Under-shepherds, and their sheep, that are his sheep
likewise, by his Grace, against all fear, either of want of Necessaries, or
loss of Life; so that none of these shall make them fly away from the
performance of their Duties, because they know that this their good Shepherd is
both able and willing to protect them from all evil.

And therefore Terra fremat, regna alta crepent ruat ortus and orcus,
Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet.
let Tyrants threaten us, and let the world rage against us as much as they
will, Tyrants cannot prevail
and let them do as much as they can, take away our Churches, rob us of our
Estates, banish us from our dwellings, cast us into prison, and deprive us of
our lives, yet if we still continue Christ his sheep, and retain the innocence
and simplicity of sheep, and obey the voice of this our good Shepherd, we need
not fear the face of any man, nor the rage, strength and malice of any Wolf,
but we may comfort our selves sufficiently with what the Angel says unto the
Church of Smyrna; Revel. 2.10.
Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, but be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee the Crown of life; and so turn the evils that thine
enemies shall do thee, to thine eternal good.

And the striving of the Heretics to corrupt the Faith, Heretics cannot
prevail
and to suppress Gods service, and the struggling of the Wolves to devour the
Sheep, and to destroy Gods servants, is, but as Christ says to Saul, when he
breathed slaughters against the Church, to kick against the pricks; or as the
Poet says, Coelum ipsum petere stulstitia, most foolishly and madly to fight
against Heaven it solf, which is a harder task then the twelve Labors of
Hercules, or to take the City of Troy, that endured ten years siege, because
this our City is built upon a Rock, and the gate of hell shall never be able to
prevail against it; not only, because that being upon a Rock, it can never be
undermined, but especially, because as S. Cyprian says, Cyprianus.
Non plus valet ad dejiciendum terrena paena, quam ad erigendum divina tutela:
And this good Shepherd, which is the Lamb, that stands upon Mount Sion to
defend it, is more powerful to save it, then the Roaring Lion, which is the
Prince of darkness, to destroy it.

2. The same Prophet David says, The Lord is my Shepherd, From wants. Psalm.
23.2.
therefore I shall want nothing; he shall feed me in a green pasture, and lead
mo forth besides the waters of comfort: And in the Propher Ezekiel this good
Shepherd says, Ezekiel. 34.14. The best food for Gods sheep what it is.
I will feed my sheep in a good pasture, and upon the high Mountains of Israel
shall their Fold be, there shall they lie in a good Fold, and in a fat Pasture
shall they feed upon the Mountains of Israel: where you must observe, that this
Fold is the Church of Christ, and the fat Pastures are the Lilies, Violets, and
the sweetest of all pleasant flowers, especially the three leaved grass, that
as Aristotle says, is most delight some unto the sheep; for this is the food
of the Shepherd, even as he professes in the Canticles, Cantic. 2.
that he feeds among the Lilies; and that is, as Psellus does interpret it,
where he sees the graces of Gods holy Spirit, and the virtuous examples of the
Saints; these are as meat and drink unto him, and so they are unto his sheep:
For as S. Ambrose says, the Pastures of Gods sheep are the blessed Sacraments,
the holy Scriptures, heavenly Sermons, pious books, and holy meditations of
heavenly things, and especially the three leaved grass, which is the
understanding of that great mystery of godliness, that our God, which is but
one God in Essence, is distinguished into three Persons, the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.

And the waters of comfort, The waters of comfort, what they are.
are those plentiful streams of milk and honey of Divine Consolation, wherewith
the Spirit of God does, as it were, inebriate the souls of his servants; for
the Church of Christ is the Land of Promise, which flows with milk and honey,
it is the Wilderness where the Lord raineth Manna, the bread of heaven, to
fatisfie the fouls of his children; it is the Spouse of Christ, whose loves are
better then Wine; and it is the House of God, Cantic. 2.
whereof the Psalmist speaks, that the sheep of Christ shall be satisfied
with the plenteousness of his house, and he shall give them drink of his
pleasure, as out of a River that is always running, Psalm. 36.8.
and yet never dried up.

And Christ being our Shepherd, his sheep shall not only have the spiritual
food of their souls, and be satisfied with these heavenly juncates, but they
shall have also whatsoever is necessary for the sustentation of their temporal
life: For as S. Paul says, Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the
promise of the life that now is, 1 Timothy 4.8.
and of that which is to come: And our Savior says, that if we first seek the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and so to become the sheep of this good
Shepherd; Matthew. 6.
then (...), all the other things that you seek, as food and raiment, shall be
given unto you, for your heavenly Father knows, that you have need of these
things; therefore he that feeds the young Ravens that call upon him, will
much rather feed you that are the sheep of Christ, if you rely upon him: And
they shall not only have sufficient for themselves, but also to help and to
relieve many others; as the poor, and their children, and their childrens
children; for the blessing of the Lord, says Solomon, makes rich, and a good
man leaves an inheritance to his childrens children; Prove. 10.22. Prove. 13 22.
Psalm. 112. v. 2, and 3. Job 22.23.
for riches and plenteousness are in his house, and his Seed is blessed: And
Eliphas the Temanite says, If thou return to the Almighty, and put away
iniquity far from thy Tabernacles, then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the
gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks: Yea, the Almighty shall be thy
Defense, and thou shall have plenty of silver, even as the Lord blessed
Abraham, that he became very rich in cattle, Genesis 13.2. etc. 12.16.
in silver and in gold, and had sheep and oxen, and he-asses, and menservants,
and maidservants, and she-asses, and Camels.

Or were it so that God did not thus bless us with outward wealth, but suffer
the world to frown upon us, and to bring us to some want and poverty, as he did
to Job, Lazarus, and others, either for the trial of their faith, patience, and
constancy in his service, or for some other causes best known unto himself; yet
if we be the sheep of Christ, what need we care or fear any such want, so long
as we want not the Wedding Garment, and the spiritual food of our souls, Quia
major est suavitas mentis quam ventris; because the garment of righteousness is
of more worth, then any Imperial Robe, and the satisfying of our Souls, is a
great deal better then the filling of our bodies, whose food, be the same never
so dainty, is, compared with the other, nothing but ackorns and husks, and
other like vanities, that are as soon done and gone, as they are begun; whereas
a good conscience is a continual feast, and the food of our souls, John 6.50.
and 54.
which our good Shepherd gives us, never perishes, but feeds us to
everlasting life, as our Savior shows.

O then beloved Brethren: What a blessed and a happy thing it is, to be the
sheep of Christ? to be thus innobled with such a Master, thus protected from
all evil, and thus satisfied with all good; though therefore the Proverb tells
us, and it is very true, if thou make thy self a sheep, the Wolf will eat
thee; yet it is far more excellent, and to be chosen rather, to be a sheep of
Christ, then a wolf of the world, and to be a Lamb of God, rather then a Lion
of the devil, when at the last we shall find it far better, to be devoured,
then to devour, and to be spoiled, then to spoil our Neighbors. The duties
and properties of Christ his sheep. Two special points. John 10. v. 5.
But then

3. If you would be the sheep of Christ, you must be qualified with these two
special properties.

1. To hear the Voice of Christ. 2. To refuse the hearing of a strangers voice.
For
So our Savior says, My sheep hear my voice, but a stranger will they not
follow, but will fly from him, because they know not the voice of strangers: So
you have

1. What the sheep of Christ must do, to hear the voice of Christ.

2. What they must not do, that is, by no means to hearken and listen to any
Sirens voice, that entice them with fair promises, or to be afraid of any
thundering voice of Tyrants and Persecutors, that terrify them with foul
threatenings, to move them to change their Faith, and to leave the right service
of God, to follow after the new directions, and the idolatrous superstitions,
that are sounded in their ears by the voices of the false Prophets, What they
must do.
of the Idol Shepherd.

1. In the affirmative part, that tells us, what we that are Christ's sheep are
to do: You may observe these two things.

1. The act, to hear.
The act, to hear. For my sheep will hear my voice. 2. The object, my voice.
For my sheep will hear my voice.
1. S. Paul says, that faith comes by hearing; for how can we believe in him
of whom we have not heard? Romans 10.14.
and therefore Samuel says, that to hearken was better then the fat of rams;
and this fat of rams, was in the old time, an holy Oblation instituted by God
himself, and therefore a most acceptable offering unto God; and yet the Prophet
tells us, 1 Samuel 15.22.
that to hearken to his voice, was far more acceptable in the sight of God, and
it is far more profitable unto man, for such Oblations, when they were offered
by wicked hypocrites, Esaias 55.3.
were abominations unto God: But the Lord says, Incline your ear, and come
unto me; hear, and your soul shall live.

And therefore, seeing that to hear the voice of Christ, is so beneficial to
the sheep of Christ, it is no marvel that our Savior does so often cry unto
us, Luke 8.8.
He that has ears to hear, let him hear; because this hearing of his voice, is
not only a special means to beget faith and obedience in us, but it is also the
first staff in Jacobs Ladder, and the first step that we make toward the
Kingdom of heaven: For S. Paul tells us, that whom God has predestined,
them he has called, Romans 8.30.
and whom he has called, those also he has justified, and whom he justified,
them he also glorified: So that there is no glorification without we be
justified, and no justification without we be called, and in vain are we
called, if we do not hearken to the Voice that calls us; and therefore, ad
summum nisi a principio pervenire non potes; thou shall never be glorified in
heaven, except thou do hear the Voice of Christ on earth; and therefore S.
James advises us, to be swift to hear, and slow to speak; for which cause, Ia.
1.19. Why God has given us two ears, and but one tongue.
that we may do so, God has given us two ears, and but one tongue, that we
might hear much more then we speak; and lest we should speak too much, he has
hedged in out tongues with the strong walls of our teeth, to the end that we
should rather bite it, then suffer it to speak too much, but our ears he has
left wide open, to the end we might hear very much, and our hearing many
things, cannot so much prejudice us as our speaking may.

And yet our Savior knowing how we fail in the performance of our best
actions, That there be four sorts of hearers of Christ his voice. 1. The
Heretic and Schismatic. Elephantiasis, what kind of disease.
bids us take heed how we hear: And we have great reason to take heed how we
hear, for our Savior Christ, in the Parable of the Sower, shows, that there
be four sorts of men that do hear his Voice, and but one of them do reap any
good thereby; the other three much hurt, and no good. As

1. The Heretics and Schismatics that are infected with Elephantiasis, which
as the Physicians say, is a very venomous disease, full of poison, because it
proceeds from corrupt blood, that invadeth all the inward and outward parts
of the body, and makes it so foul and filthy, that the breath of this Leper is
very infectious, and it cleaves so fast to his bones, and is so fixed in his
heart, infecting all his powers and spirits, that his understanding cannot
comprehend things aright, especially those things that appertain to the Spirit
of God, to be converted thereby: But though this man will hear as well as the
best, and press to hear rather then the best, and say that he can never hear
too much; yet as all were not Israelites which were of the house and seed of
Israel, and as all are not Christians that take upon them the Name of Christ,
so all are not the sheep of Christ, that with Christ his sheep, and like Christ
his sheep, do hear the voice of Christ; for these Heretics and Schismatics,
in a singularity of wit, will hold some false and erroneous points, and they
are so obstinate and perverse in their own opinions, that although they have
the truth preached unto them, yet, says Christ, the devil comes and takes
away the same out of their heart, Luke 8.12.
and hinders them to believe it: And though we make the point never so plain
and so clear unto them, yet as S. Hierome says of the Luciferians, Hierom.
adversus Lucifer.
Solent oculis clausis denegare, qui non credunt factum esse quod nolunt: They
will shut their eyes against the truth, and cannot endure to believe that which
they would not have to be believed; but as S. Aug. says of the Donatists,
Vident se non habere quid respondeant, putant tamen se habere quid faciant,
quid loquantur non inveniunt, tacere tamen non permittuntur, quia malunt
perversis vocibus veritati reluctari, quam confessis erroribus paci restitui:
Though they see they have not what to answer, yet they know what to do; though
they cannot find what they should say, yet they are not suffered to be silent,
because they had rather most peevishly and perversely to resist the truth, then
by confessing their error, to submit in peace; and so, as the same Father
speaks, Cum eos obmutescere compellat veritas; silere tamen non permittit
iniquitas: When the truth would have them to be mute, their iniquity will not
permit them to hold their peace.

And are not our Sectaries, our new Divines, and our Anabaptists, Our Sectaries
just like the old Donatists.
that have unsainted the blessed souls that are in heaven, and have trodden the
holy Festivals of the Church under foot, and deny to the innocent Babes to be
incorporated into Christ, and have turned the true faith and right service of
God topsie turvy, such as these Donatists were; judge you that do see, what
they do, and how they do hear the voice of Christ; for I am sure we have too
too many that do hear his voice, and yet as Job says, Nolunt intelligere ut
been agerent, they will not understand the truth, that they might do well.

2. The Hypocrites.
The next sort of bad hearers are the hypocrites, which for a while will seem
to be Saints, and in the end will prove Apostata? and an hypocrite is a Greek
word, that was used to signify a Stage Player, who for a time wears the
habit, and carries the style and title of a King, An Hypocrite, what it
signifies.
or acts the part of some valorous Knight, when as indeed he is but a Peasant
and a Coward, of no resolution; and being applied to matters of Religion, it
signifies such a one, whose mouth, ears, and face, and all other his outward
deportment, do make shows of great piety and Religion, when as really he is
nothing of what he seems to be; but as the Watermen do look one way, and row
another way, so does the hypocrite pretend one thing, and aim at another thing;
as those Spies that were sent by the chief Priests and Scribes to watch our
Savior Christ, did feign themselves just men, but it was to this end, says
the Evangelist, that they might take hold of his words, Luke 20.20.
that so they might deliver him to the power of the Governor. So here is a
fair pretense to be just and honest men, and yet a most wicked purpose to
entrap and betray our Savior Christ: And have we no such Spies in these days,
that come to hear us, that they might take hold of our words, and pervert our
words too, that they might accuse us? Res ipsaloquitur, and I have found them.

And therefore seeing such hearers of Gods Words have but the shows and shadows
of Religion, and no substances, they are fitly compared to those falling stars,
which the Philosophers do call assub; for as these in the night time do seem to
be truestars in the Firmament, and yet they are nothing else but certain fat
exhalations of the earth, which being lifted up through the upper Region of the
air, and kindled through the heat and force of the upper Element, which is the
fire, do suddenly fall again into nothing: So these hypocritical hearers of
Gods Words, that are Catones foris, and Nerones intus, as upright as Cato, and
as zealous as S. Paul without, and as deceitful as Tyberius, and as cruel as
Nero within, do for a while seem to be good Christians in the Church of God;
but because the Words that they hear, take no root in their hearts that are
canales non conchi, like Sluices and Channels to convey it through them, and not
pools or vessels to retain it still within them, when the fire of affliction
and persecution, and the fear of losing their honors and preferment comes,
they fall away, says our Savior, even as the falling stars, and they are
ready to turn with every wind, as you may note in your books the many multitude
of Professors, both Clergy and Laity, that have done so since 1641. I pray God
it be not laid to their charge.

3. The worldling.
The last sort of bad hearers, are those worldly men that would gladly come to
the Kingdom of heaven, but they cannot be persuaded to relinquish and forsake
the things of this world; but they are so far addicted, and so much in love
with the pleasures and vanities of this present life, that as Christ says, the
cares and riches of this world do so choke them, Luke 8.14. 4. The good
Christian.
that they bring no fruit unto perfection.

But the sheep of Christ, with an honest heart, and a simple desire to
understand the will of God, and know the truth, that they may believe the one,
and obey the other, do hear the voice of Christ.

And therefore, as when Moses called the people of God to hear the words and
Commandments of God, and told them how the Lord willed them to sanctify
themselves the day before, to make clean their apparel, and to keep themselves
from their wives, Exodus 19.10. and 4. and 15. v. How men should prepare
themselves to hear Gods Word.
that they might with the more purity and sincerity hear his words: So the
sheep of Christ, considering that this outward sanctification and preparation
of this people to hear Gods Word, was but the type and figure of that inward
purity and due preparation that they should make, when they come to hear the
voice of Christ, do earnestly pray to God, that they may come to hear with a
good intent, and not for fashion sake, or with a prejudicate conceit of the
Preacher, or an obstinate mind to perfist in their own erroneous Opinion,
whatsoever they hear to the contrary, or especially to catch at some things
from the Preacher to accuse him, but to be truly edified in the Faith of
Christ, and rightly instructed for the true service of God.

These be the true sheep, that do rightly hear the voice of the true Shepherd;
and all other hearers that do call for preaching, and run after preaching, and
seek for singular Preachers of their own Faction, are but wicked or formal
hearers of the voice of Christ, and such as the Prophet Esaias speaks of, which
follow after the Word, and gather precept upon precept, and word upon word, and
line upon line, here a little, Esaias 28. and 10.13.
and there a little, and are never the better, but fall backward, and grow
worse and worse, because these hearers do resemble the Inhabitants that are
about the fall of the river Nilus, which is very great, and the fall thereof so
exceeding high, The customary hearers like the Inhabitants about the fall of
Nilus. Macrobius.
and the noise of the fall so violent, and so loud, that at the first it
astonisheth the hearers so much, and makes them in a manner senseless, and to
hear nothing else, by reason of the violence of the noise; yet at length, says
Macrobius, when they are accustomed with the noise thereof, and that it becomes
habitual to them, it seems as nothing to move them to astonishment, even so is
the Word of God to these hearers: At first it seems to quicken and make some
impression in them, but the same being so often sounded, and the voice thereof
so familiar to them, and so often heard of them, it moves their hearts no whit
at all, but it passes so smoothly through them, that it makes no operation
within them, which makes the Apostle tell us, 2 Timothy 3.7.
that they are ever learning, and so ever hearing, and yet never able to come
to the knowledge of the truth.

2. Having heard the act which my sheep are to do, that is, The object, my
voice.
to hear as they ought to hear, attentively, reverently and religiously, to be
edified and bettered thereby; we are now to consider the object of this act,
what they are to hear, and that is, not the Turks Alcoran, nor the Popes
Traditions, nor the Jewish fables, but my voice, says Christ.

And this voice of Christ does administer much matter unto us, Christ utters
his voice three manner of ways. 1. Way.
for Christ speaks unto his sheep three manner of ways.

1. By the inward inspiration of his spirit, which suggesteth good motions into
the hearts and heads of his sheep.

2. By his holy Word, that is written unto us by his Prophets and Apostles, Way.
to declare his will, that is his Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, his decrees,
promises, and threatenings, that we might obey his precepts, believe his
promises, and fear his threatenings.

3. By the lively voice of his under Shepherds, Way.
those Preachers that he continually sends to instruct his sheep, and to
inform them of the truth and true meaning of his will, that is set down in his
written Word.

1. And because there are many spirits, we are not to believe every spirit, 1
John 4.1.
but we ought to be very careful, to try the spirits, whether those motions and
inspirations of the spirit that we have, be agreeable to the written Word of
God, which if they be not, they are the suggestions of the lying spirit, and
not the inspiration of Gods Spirit.

2. And because the written Word is but the dead letter, a dumb Judge, and full
of mysteries and obscurities, Christ sends his servants to explain that written
Word, as Counselors do the written Law unto his sheep; or, if it were not so,
there was no need of Teachers, but every one that had a Bible, and could read
ir, could understand the voice of Christ: But Christ knew how necessary it was
for his sheep to have Instructors, and explainers of his will; and therefore he
sends his under-Shepherds continually to sound forth his voice unto them, and
he tells us plainly, Luke 10.16.
He that hears them, hears him.

But here, by the voice of Christ, which the preachers are to explain unto the
sheep, the question is, whether they ought to allege or cite any other voice,
or the voice of any other man, then what is set down by the divine Penmen of
the holy Scriptures, in the Canonical books of the Old and New Testament, which
are the only writings that are of divine inspiration, and infallibly true,
without any commixion of any error: For some will believe nothing, and would
have nothing said or alleged, but what is set down directis terminis in the
holy Scriptures, that are the only undoubted voice of Christ; therefore they do
blame them much, and tax them sore, that cite any other Author, or produce any
other proof of any truth, then what is found in the holy Bible.

To these men I answer, that as I love their Zeal to Gods Word, so I pity their
Ignorance of Gods Will; for they should know, that as every lie is the voice of
the Devil, who is a lier from the beginning, and the Father of all lies, as our
Savior says, so every one that is of the truth hears my voice, says
Christ: and as he is Pater luminum, the Father of Lights, so he is Pater
veritatum, the Father of Truths, and every truth qua truth, John 8.44. John
18.37. 1 Samuel 10.12.
is the Voice of God, and comes from God, as when Saul prophesied, it became a
Proverb in Israel, Is Saul also among the Prophets? and when Caiphas the high
Priest, that condemned Christ to death, prophesied, that it was expedient for
the Jews, That one man should die for the people, that the whole nation perish
not; John 11.10.
his words were the Truth of God, and they are registered in the holy
Scriptures; nay more, when Satan said, I know who thou art, even the holy one
of God: And again, Thou art Christ the Son of God: And when Peter said, Thou
art Christ the son of the living God. Luke 4.34. and 4^.
Utriusque confessionis non neganda sed agnoscenda est veritas, the truth of
either of their confession cannot be denied, but must be acknowledged, and
ought to be believed for truth, not because either of them has said it, but
because what either of them has said, is true; otherwise, if we refuse to
believe the truth, because the Devil speaks it, his malice is so great, that,
to hinder our Faith, he would perchance very often say the truth, that we might
not believe i^, which is his aim and desire always, when he does speak truth;
and therefore, Quamvis hic laudatur, iste tamen vituperatur, though S. Peter
was commended, yet Satan was reproved for his confession, because he had no
command nor commission to speak that truth, and he spoke it to none other end,
but that it might not be believed, because he hoped that none would believe the
Devil: Galat. 1.8.
but S. Paul tells us, That if an angel from heaven should preach to us any
other gospel then what was truth, he should be accursed, to teach us, that
neither the worthiness nor, the unworthiness of the persons speaking, but the
lawful commission and authority of the speaker, the truth of what is spoken, is
most chiefly to be regarded by the hearers; and therefore Christ says, The
Scribes and Pharisees, that were wicked men, and his enemies, do sit in Moses
chair; that is, they are lawfully called to teach the people, and to expound
the law of God; All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, Mat. 23.2. and 3.
that observe and do; but do not ye after their works, because they say and do
not.

And therefore, though the holy Scriptures primarily, infallibly and perfectly,
without error, be the voice of Christ, and the true Word of God, yet this
denies no, but that other Writings, either of holy Faith, witty Poets, and
learned Philosophets, or whosoever they be that write the Truth, either
Historically or Physically, or Morally, may secondarily be styled the voice of
Christ, so far forth as they are the words of truth: otherwise S. Paul would
never have cited three Testimonies of the Heathens, to justify the truth of
what he delivered, which was like the fact of David to cut off Goliah's head
with his own sword, or as the Israelites robbed the Egyptians of their Gold and
of their Jewels, when we take what is good out of prophine Authors, as S. Aug.
shows at large: De doct. Chr. l. 2. c. 40. and produces many excellent
points out of their Writings. De civ. dei l. 8. c. 6, 7, 8.

And if it were not lawful and useful to quote other Authors, as the Voice of
Christ unto the people, it had been but a vain thing, either for the Fathers of
old, or for any other learned Divine now to write any thing at all, if their
writings bare no credit, or was of no use, either with the Readers or the
Hearers of their explications; or shall we think that all the learned Authors,
that have written since the Apostles ti^e, were such fools, as to take such
pains as they have done to no purpose, which must needs be to no purpose, if no
use can be made of them.

You will perchance say, yes, they may be read by the Preacher, but not quoted
and cited to the hearers; but as Virgil says, -- Hot ego versiculos feei,
tulit alter honores. So I say, this is to rob the Bees of their Honey, and to
eat that our selves which we our selves never gathered; and so, to take the
Honor which is due to other men unto our selves, which is a kind of Thest, and
an Injury done unto our deceased brethren, and not so beneficial to the
hearers, who ought rather to respect them more then us.

But to prove both the lawfulness and the necessity of using the help of as
many Authors as we can conveniently read, you know that the holy Scriptures are
like a deep well, from whence we cannot draw out the water, without the help of
some things to reach it, as the Samaritan woman said to Christ; John 4.11. 2
Pet. 3.16. The difficulty of the Scripture is more fully showed in my book of
the Great Antichrist.
it is full of Figures and Mysteries, so difficult, that in S. Paul's Epistles
S. Peter says, there are (...), some things hard to be understood; and in
other places much more, and perhaps more difficult, when as the Scriptures do
comprehend a Literal or Historical sense, and a Spiritual or a Mystical sense;
and the Literal sense is either simple, which consists in the propriety of
the words, or figurative, whereby the words are transferred from their natuaral
signification to another signification, as when Christ says, I have other
sheep that are not of this fold; the meaning is, that besides the people of the
Jews, he had other people that were to be brought to the Church of God; Et
hujus sensus tot sunt genera quot sunt genera figurarum, says Bellarm. l. 3.
c. 3. very truly.

And the spiritual sense is distinguished to be threefold allegorical,
tropological and anagogical; and the not understanding in what sense the
Scripture is to be interpreted, has caused many great scholars to err most
foully, as Origin does so allegorize the terrestial Paradise, that he takes
away the truth of the History, when for the trees he understands the Angels,
for the rivers the heavenly virtues, and the coats of skin their humane bodies:
and others have as foully erred in taking that literally which ought to be
figuratively understood, as Papias, and those that follow him, Just. Martyr,
Iren. Tertul. Lactant. and some others do expound the new Jerusalem, and the
thousand years that the Saints are said they should reign with Christ,
altogether literally, which are figuratively to be understood, as both S.
Hierom and S. Ang. testify.

And therefore S. Aug. demands, how he, that cannot understand Terence
without a comment, dares presume to understand the Scripture without a Teacher,
when as Quicquid est in scripturis illis, altum and divinum est, all and every
thing that is in these holy Scriptures, is very deep and divine: And S. Paul
says, that the letter kills, that is, the words of the Scriptures literally
interpreted, when they ought to be figuratively understood, do bring men into
many errors; and indeed, as S. Augustine says, Hinc omnes haereses, dum
scripturae bonae intelliguntur non been, from hence all Heresies and Errors do
arise, when the good Scriptures are misconstrued, and not rightly understood.

For it is not enough for us to have the Bible in our hands, and the words of
it in our mouths, unless we have also the sense and meaning of it in our heads;
Acts 8.21.
therefore our Savior Christ knowing, that, as the Eunuch who had perfectly
read the prophecy of Isaiah, yet understood it not without a guide; and as the
Jews, Mal. 2.7.
that had the Laws of God written upon their doors and the posts of their
houses; yet were they to seek the meaning thereof from the mouth of the
Priests; so, our having the words of the Scripture at our fingers end, would
avail us nothing, unless we understood it, and understand it we could not,
unless with the Jews and the Eunuch we were instructed in the true sense and
meaning thereof, he sends his Ambassadors, the Bishops and Ministers, as I said
before, to instruct his people to understand the sense and meaning of the holy
Ghost, and the voice of Christ in such and such words and places of the holy
Scripture as are difficult and obscure, and says, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you hears me.

And of all those that Christ sends to explain his Will, and to interpret his
Voice, and to give the true sense of his words unto the people, who, I pray
you, do ye think can best do it, the preachers that are now living, or those
that are dead? Surely the wise men were wont to say, Who are the best
Counselors. Dead Preachers rather to be believed, then the living Preachers,
so says Christ, they have Moses and the Prophets that were all dead.
that the best Counselors are the dead; that is, the counsels and instructions
that the dead men have left in their books, because they are no time-servers
that fear the Tyrant, or flatter for reward: And truly I am of the same mind
for our Preachers and instructors in the Word of God, when I see many men for
the love of preferment, and many others for fear of loosing their livings,
doing that service to God, and teaching those documents unto men, which
otherwise, I know, they would not do.

And therefore if you believe me, or any other living man, that Christ sends
to instruct you, why should you not rather, or at least as soon believe S. Aug.
S. Chrysostom. or any other of the holy Fathers that are dead, when we are
assured they were sent from God to declare his will unto his people, and who we
know were most learned, zealous, and most faithful Ministers of Christ: And so
you see what the sheep of Christ must do, to hear his voice from those
messengers that Christ sends, and has sent to inform them of it.

2. The negative part, what they must not do.
What the must not do, is here likewise set down by Christ; and that is, they
must not hear the voice of a stranger, which Christ has not sent to declare
his will, and to explain his meanings, for a strangers voice, says Christ, my
sheep will not hear, but will fly from him, for that they know not the voice of
strangers.

Where you must observe, Who is meant by a stranger.
that by stranger is not meant, a stranger that comes unto the people, but a
stranger unto Christ, and to the truth of Christ, and true service of God; and
because he speaks here first in the singular number, of a stranger, whose
voice Christ's sheep will not hear, but will fly from him; and then in the
plural number of strangers, whose voice his sheep know not; for though Tremel.
translates it out of the Syriack, Non norunt vocem alieni, yet the Greek Copy
has it, (...), which Beza translates, Non norunt vocem alienorum; they know
not the voice of strangers, as our English translation has it very right.

Therefore I conceive that by the stranger, Whom does Christ mean by the
stranger, and who by the strangers.
he means that foolish Idol Shepherd, whereof the Prophet Zachary speaks,
that should come in the time of Christ, to be the type of the great
Antichrist, that should be manifested in our time; and by the other strangers
he means, those many Anticks that S. John speaks of, the Heretics and false
Prophets, that from time to time, and now more then at any other time, Ier.
14.14. etc. 23.21.
do intrude themselves into the Sacred Function of the Ministry, and as the
Prophet Jeremy says, do run, when Christ has not sent them, and do speak what
he has not commanded them, but do preach the lying inventions of their own
heads, to seduce the sheep of Christ to follow the Antichrist, and to
relinquish the true received worship of the living God.

But the true and right sheep of Christ will hear none of these, nor follow
after any of them, for they know, that as they which are not lawfully called,
or allowed to be the lawful Ministers of Gods Word, should not preach, and
cannot do it without great offense to God, that may justly say to them, as he
does to the Jews by his Prophet, Quis avobis requisivit hac? Who has required
these things at your hands? So they cannot hear them without the like offense
to God, yea, though they should preach the truth, and nothing but the truth
unto them; for as Christ reproved Satan, and bad him hold his peace, when he
spoke the very truth, that he was the Son of God, because he had no Commission
to be the Ambassador of Christ, to publish that truth unto his people, so shall
they be sharply censured by God, though they preach the very truth, when they
are not lawfully called, and have no Commission from God to do the same; 2
Chro. 26.21.
and I think the fearful Judgment of God upon King Uzzia, for invading the
Priests office, and upon Uzza, for doing that which appertained to the Levites
to do, 1 Chronicles. 13.10. and upon King Saul for offering Sacrifice to the Lord,
should be a sufficient warning for them to take heed how they thrust themselves
into the Ministry; for King Uzzia, presuming to burn Incense unto the Lord,
which appertained to the Priests, the sons of Aaron to do, the Lord suddenly
smote him with Leprosy, and so he continued a Leper to his dying day: And
Uzza, putting forth his hand to hold up the Ark, when the Oxen shook it, which
belonged only unto the Levites to carry it, the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Uzza, that he smote him dead in the very place; and Saul lost his
Kingdom for his intrusion into the Priests Office; and how date these men to
intrude themselves into this Sacred Office, to be the Ambassadors of Christ, to
declare his will, and to expound his meaning, without Commission? And if they
should dare to preach, how dare the sheep of Christ hear their voice, when as
Christ tells us plainly, his sheep will not hear the voice of strangers; and
the Lord commands them by his Prophet, not to hearken to those whom he has not
sent? And Solomon says, Ier. 27.14. etc. 29.8.
Cease my son to hear the instruction that causes to err from the words of
knowledge, Prove. 19.27. Surely none would do it, but that we love to show our
selves to be the children of Adam, and to stretch forth our hands to the
forbidden fruit, and as the Poet says, Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque
negata.

We long to do what we are forbidden, and will the rather do it, because it is
forbidden; like the man, that for some just impediment, never went out of his
house, but being for some offense enjoined to keep his house, he was so moved
for the debarring of his liberty, that to cross the command of his Superiors,
and to become liable to his censure, he would needs presently walk abroad, and
so with Shimei, 1 Reg. 2.46. Our wilfulness to do what we are forbidden.
bring himself to death: And so it is with us, we will not hear when we are
commanded to hear, and we long to hear those that we are forbidden to hear, as
if God envied our good when he forbad us, when as he forbids nothing but for
our good, as when we forbid a man to drink poison, that it might not kill him.

2. Having heard how the sheep of Christ are called, Secunda pars, I know them.
it follows that I should show how they are justified, in these words, (...),
and I know them, that is, I do acknowledge them for my sheep, and do own them
for my people, for my servants, and for my children; for there be very many
that go under the shape and show of Gods sheep, and are indeed the Foxes,
Wolves, and Lions of Satan, of whom Christ never says, I know them, but
rather, Depart from me, I know you not, you workers of iniquity.

Yet these subtle Foxes, and these Wolves in sheeps clothing, The wicked and
the hypocrite not acknowledged by God to be his sheep. Genesis 34.23. The
Sichemites how served for their deceitful hypocrisy. V. 26.
that profess themselves to be the only Saints, and are indeed the destroyers
of Gods servants, may easily blind the eyes of men, but they cannot beguile the
all-seeing God; for as the Sichemites whereof Moses testifies, that they came
with dissembling hearts to deceive Jacob and his children, were contented to be
circumcised, and take upon them the habit of Gods children, in hope that all
theirs should be their own, if they were circumcised, as themselves confess;
yet the Lord that knew the^ to be hypocrites, does not acknowledge them for his
children; and therefore their dissembling of Religion brought on their
destruction, and their Circumcision, which they thought would be the means to
enrich them, became the means to destroy them, for while they were weak and
sore, by reason of their Circumcision, the sons of Jacob fell upon them, and
slew all that were male, which was a just judgment of God for the dissembling
of their Religion: And as the Gibeonites with false hearts, and a dissembling
show of a religious desire of communion with Gods children, came to the
children of Israel, and through their lies and dissimulation made a league with
them, and so freed themselves from the Sword of Joshua, and deceived the
Israelites, Josh. 9.15.
yet they could not deceive the Lord, who knew their hypocrisy, and knew them
not for any of his people, and therefore made them slaves and drudges to draw
water, carry wood, V. 27. The Gibeonites how served for their dissimulation.
and do all manner of servile work for the sons of Israel: So amongst us in all
places, and at all times, we have such Sichemites and Gibeonites, as deceive
the world, and do blind the eyes of men, by making them to believe they are the
only Saints of God, and do all for the honor of God, but the Lord knows them
not for any such Saints, and Christ does not acknowledge them for any of his
sheep; but though they shall say to Christ, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast out devils, and in thy Name done
wonderful works, that is, preached, and fasted, and prayed, and fought for thy
service, and the like evidences of our faithfulness unto thee; yet Christ, that
knows very well they did all these things for their own ends, Mat. 7.22, 23.
will profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye that work iniquity.

And S. Luke is more ample in setting out the discourse and Dialogue betwixt
Christ and these men at the last day, saying, When once the Master of the house
is risen up, How S. Luke describes the hypocrites.
and has shut the door, and they standing without shall knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; and he shall answer and say unto them. I know
you not, whence you are; then shall they begin to say, we have eaten and drunk
in thy presence, that is, when they received the blessed Sacrament of his Body
and Blood at his own Table, and thou have taught in our streets, and we were
daily hearers of those Sermons that were preached, though but in Chambers, or
in Barns, or in the streets; but he shall say, I tell you, as being angry for
their presumption and hypocrisy, I know you not, whence you are, depart from
me all ye workers of iniquity; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
when they shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, and
the rest of Gods faithful servants, whom they persecuted, in the Kingdom of
God, Luke 13.25, 26, 27, 28.
and themselves thrust out of doors.

But can they persuade themselves, that our Savior Christ will not know them,
when as they seem to be so zealous of his worship, How hardly it is to persuade
hypocrites, to acknowledge themselves to be hypocrites.
and profess themselves so earnestly and so strictly to observe his will, and
to do nothing without a warrant from his written Word.

Surely no, they cannot be persuaded hereunto; but it is easier to convert the
drunkards, adulterers, and harlots, then to persuade these hypocritical Saints,
that they are sinners, save in that general notion, that we are all sinners;
for as decipimur specie recti, we are deceived in them, and the world is
blinded, through that show of piety and profession of Religion which they make,
so they deceive themselves hereby.

Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and umbra. For it is most certain, that
vice deceives the owner, under the show and shadow of virtue, when as our
Savior says to his Apostles, they shall persecute you, and imprison you,
Lament. 4.5. Was there ever any time wherein this was more truly fulfilled,
then now in our days?
and scourge you, silence you, and rob you of your means and maintenance; and
as the Prophet Jeremy says, cause those that did feed delicately, to lie
desolate in the streets, and those that were brought up in Scarlet, to embrace
dunghills; and yet they that do these things shall not be Infidels and Pagans,
but such as shall think themselves very good Christians, and to do God herein
very good service, to persecute his servan s.

And what a cruel deceit is this, to beguile their own hearts, and to deceive
their own souls, to think they have God Almighty by the hand, when the devil
holds them fast by the toes, and to persuade themselves they are the sheep of
Christ, when Christ professes he knows them not to be his sheep, but knows
them to be the Wolves of Satan.

But can any thing be unknown to God, or be hid from him which knows the
secrets of our hearts, and understands our thoughts long before? he knows
what is in the deep Sea, and how far the world extends; he knows the number
of the stars, and calls them all by their names; and he knows the height of
heaven, the depth of the Sea, and the length of all the Spheres; and does he
not know these men?

Indeed we know them not, they are such Camelions that can change themselves
into all colors, saving white; that is, put on all manner of shows and shapes,
but that which is virtuous and honest, but God knows them very well, intus
and in cute, both within and without; for so the Lord professes, I know their
works and their thoughts, Esaias 66.18. And therefore you must understand there
is a twofold knowledge in God.

1. The one general, or universal. 2. The other special, or particular.
The first is over all the things in the world, as they are his creatures, The
twofold knowledge of God.
and the works of his hands; and so he knows all men, good and bad, and all
creatures both in heaven and in earth.

The other is only over his Church, that is, his children, whom he has chosen
and loves, and which therefore do love, honor, and obey him, in doing his
will, and keeping his Commandments: And thus he knows not the wicked
hypocrites, How God knows both the godly and the wicked.
oppressors, extortioners, and the like sinful generation, and brood of Vipers,
as John Baptist calls them, to be his children, but knows that they are none
of his children, but rather the children of their Father the Devil; for as a
Father knows his Son, and as he is his Son provideth for him an inheritance,
and knows his servant, but knows him not for his Son, and therefore
provideth no inheritance for him, but appoints him to do some drudgery, and
keeps him for his service: So Christ knows his sheep, and as they are his
sheep, he provideth for them eternal life, and he knows the Goats, the
Wolves, and the Foxes, and knows them not to be his sheep; and therefore
provideth no inheritance for them, but will severely punish them, because they
neither follow him, nor hear his voice, but as the Lord says, Refused his
counsel, and despised his reproof, Prove. 1.30. And this should be an exceeding
grief and terror unto the wicked, when God shall say unto them, as a Father
does to his disobedient Son, I will not know him; that is, I will not
acknowledge him for my son; so God will not own nor acknowledge these men for
his children, though he knows them, and knows their works well enough.

And on the other side, this is an exceeding comfort and joy unto the godly,
when as a friend shall say of his friend, I will know him wheresoever I see
him, before friend and foe, and I will acknowledge him my friend, and my self
his friend, in what state or condition soever he be, rich or poor, bond or
free, Nahum. 1.7.
so God knows them that trust in him, says the Prophet, and he shall say of
them, I know them, and I will acknowledge them to be mine, my sheep, and my
servants, wheresoever they are; and in what state or condition soever they be:
And therefore they follow me, and study to be holy, as I am holy; which is
their sanctification, and the third part of these words.

3. Christ told his Apostles at the first, that if any man would be his
Disciple, Tertia part, they follow me. Luke 9.23. The following of Christ
twofold. 1. In suffering Esaias 53.3.
and so his sheep to hear his voice, and to learn of him, he must take up his
cross and follow him.

And this following of him, as you see by these words, must be twofold.

1. In patiendo, in suffering, as he suffered. 2. In agendo, in doing, as he
did. For
1. Our Shepherd Christ was vir dolorum, a man of sorrows, as the Prophet calls
him, that had experience of infirmities; and his whole life, from his Cradle to
his Cross, was but a life of suffering, the scornful reproofs of the wealthy,
and the despitefulness of the proud, who did all that either tongues or hands
could do against him; and yet, as a Lamb before his shearer is dumb, so he
opened not his mouth, V. 7.
but forgave them all their indignities, and prayed for them that crucified
him, which was an example of suffering without example, and beyond all examples.

And our Savior tells us, the Disciple must not be above his Master, he must
not look to walk on flowers, when his Master walks through the briars; but
where the Master goes before, the servant should follow after.

And yet we may justly say with S. Bernard, Quam pauci, O Domius Jesu, post te
ire volunt, cum tamen ad te pervenire, nemo sit quinesit, hoc scitutibus
cunctis, qua delectationes in dextratnausque ad finem? How few, O Lord Jesu,
there are, which will come after thee, when as to come unto thee, there is no
man but is willing, because where thou art, and in thy right hand, there is
fullness of joy, and abundance of pleasures for evermore.

Et propterea, says that Father, Vol^^t omnes te frai, at non ita and
intitari, conregnare cupiunt, sed non compati: And therefore all men would
enjoy thee, but not so as to follow thee; they would Reign with thee, but they
will not suffer with thee; they can be concented with the Apostle, to build
Tabernacles, and to abide with him on mount Tabor, where he was transfigured in
Glory; but they can all forsake him on mount Calvarie, when he was overwhelmed
with sorrow, and confusion went over his face.

This is the common course of the world, to follow him close in prosperity, and
to seem zealous of his honor and of his service, Cum benefecerit illis, when
as the Prophet David says, Their corn, and wine, and oil increases, and they
prosper in their successes; but if they should be ejected, suppressed and
persecuted for serving him, then will they start aside like a broken bow, and
like the children of Ephraint, that, being harnessed, and carrying bows, and
so being enabled by their learning wealth and friends, to do God good service,
do turn their backs to him in the day of battle, when there is most need of
their help, and they could most chiefly follow him.

But the true sheep of Christ, and the faithful servants of God will follow
him, Per mare, per saxa, per ignes, and will say, Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ, or withdraw us from the service of our God, and following
after our Shepherd? or shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No sure, in all these things they are
more then Conquerours, through him that loved them, so that neither Death, nor
life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, Romans
8.35. and v. 38.39.
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be
able to separate them from the love of God, and from following their Master
Jesus Christ our Lord.

And they that cannot truly say thus, or they that love Father, or Mother, or
Son, or Daughter, or any other thing in this world, even their own life, more
then Christ, they are not worthy of Christ, Mat. 10.37.
as Christ himself does testify.

And therefore, seeing that to suffer with Christ, and for Christ his Service,
is an especial gift and grace of God, Phil 1.29. 1 Pet. 3.14. Mat. 5.11.
as the Apostle shows, and that they are happy and blessed that suffer
persecution for righteousness sake, and when men shall revile them, and say all
manner of evil against them, falsely for Christ his sake, I say with the Poet,
-- Componite mentes, Lucan Phars.

Ad magnae virtutis opus, magnosque labores.
And as our Savior says, when you suffer all that can be suffered, and all
that your enemies can impose upon you, Mat. 11. v. 12.
rejoice and be glad, yea, and be exceeding glad, because your reward shall be
great in heaven; and let not your sufferings trouble you. -- Nec enim fortuna
querenda Ovid Met. l. ul^. sab. 44.

Sola tua est, similes aliorum respice casus,
Mitius istaferes.
For this is not your case alone, but if you look what happened to other men,
you shall find, that as our Savior says, So persecuted they the Prophets,
that were before you, and so are many of your brethren persecuted as well as
you, and perhaps more then you, which should teach you, Mitius ista far, to
follow Christ in his sufferings, the more patiently and contentedly, without
any manner of muttering.

2. In Doings.
As we are to follow our Shepherd Christ in his Sufferings, so we are to follow
him in his Doings, that is, to imitate him in our actions, and to make him the
Exemplar and the Pattern of all our doings; for though we should live by Rules,
and not by Examples, yet the Example of Christ is beyond all Rules; Et validior
est vox operis, quam oris, Bern, in Cant. Ser. 59. and moral operations are
more forcible then all the logical demonstrations in the world.

But you must understand, that the Acts and Doings of Christ are of two sorts:
1. Unimitable. 2. Imitable. And,


The first he did as God, to approve his Office, and to confirm our Faith, that
we might believe him to be the Son of God, and the Messiah that should come to
be the Savior of the world; for so he says himself, The works that I do, do
testify, and bear witness of me. And herein we are not required to follow
him; and we are not able to imitate him, neither should we attempt to do it;
for when he says, Learn of me, he means not, says Saint Augustine, that
thou should learn of him, Aut mundos fabricare, aut mortuos suscitare, aut
per maria ambulare, Aug. de bonis. C^njugal. c. 37. Non in quantum sil. dei sed
in quant. filius hominis, Id. de sanctitat. Virginit. c. 27.
aut coecos illuminare -- but learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart.
Therefore,

The second sort of the Acts and Doings of Christ are such as he did as man,
and are imitable, to be imitated by us, that are men, and would be counted the
Sheep and Servants of Christ: and herein we should follow him.

And therein also we are to follow him.

1. In respect of the Manner. 2. In respect of the Matter. For,
1. What virtuous or pious act soever we desire to do, Sincerely. 2. Totally.
3. Diligently. 4. Constantly. 5. Humbly. Diabolus dux nobis fuit ad superbiam.
Aug. ho. 12. Phil. 2.7.
and to imitate Christ therein, we must strive to do it to the uttermost of our
power, Modo and forma, in the same manner as Christ did it; and that is, 1. In
sincerity, without hypocrisy. 2. For Gods glory, and not for our own
commodity. 3. In a discreet knowledge, and not in a blind zeal.


Without the observation of which rules, the Acts that we do may be good in
themselves, and yet quite spoiled from yielding any great good to us, by our
ill manner of doing them. As,

1. To fast and pray, and to pay Tithes of Mynt and Annyse, Boni videri volunt
sed non esse. Bern. in cant. Ser. 66. 1 Chr. 28.9. Prove. 21.1. Psalm. 51. Ad
novercae tumul^m flere. Hieron. in Esa. l. 6. How horrible it is to do
villainies under the pretense of Piety. Erasm. in simil.
were very good deeds, commended and commanded to be done by God himself; yet
because the Scribes and Pharisees did them in hypocrisy, to be seen of men,
and to make the world believe they were Saints, and the only religious men,
our Savior denounces many a bitter woe against them, and tells us, that they
have their reward, and that is, as Saint Hierom says, Gloriam mercenariam and
supplicia peccatorum. So they that proclaim days of Humiliation, and practice
nothing but Oppression, that pray to God, to bless them, and prey upon the
poor that curse them, do but as the Greek Adage says, (...), to weep for the
death of our Stepmother, and double their sin in the sight of God, Quia levius
est in alium aperte peccare, quam simulare sanctitatem, because the professed
thief, that robs by the high-way-side, is not so bad as the holy Saint, that
under the show of Religion takes away mine Estate, says Saint Hierome; for as
Wine mingled with Water does sooner provoke vomit, then either Water alone, or
pure Wine, Ita intolerabilior est nequitia pietatatis simulatione condita, quam
simplex and aperta malitia, so any wickedness that is covered with the Cloak of
Religion, is a great deal more intolerable, then if the same were plainly
committed without any pretense of Piety, says Erasmus, So horrible a sin it is
to cloth Sin in the garment of Holiness, as to put the Coat of Christ upon
Judas his back.

2. As it was an acceptable service unto God, Many do Gods work for their own
end, as to subdue the rebels to get their lands for themselves. The continual
course of all worldlings in the service of God.
and a very good work to root out the house of Ahab for his Idolatry and
profaning Gods Service; yet because Jehis did it rather to get the Kingdom
unto himself, and destroyed all the Kings children, the better to secure
himself in his Kingdom, then to satisfy Gods justice for Ahabs Impiety, the
Lord says, that he will require the blood of Ahab on the house of Jehu: even
so, they that destroy any Offenders, root out the Transgressors of Gods Laws,
and punish the Corrupters of Gods Worship, be they whom you will, the Work may
be good and just; yet if the doers thereof do it, not so much to execute Gods
Will, as to satisfy their own Malice, to suppress whom they hate, or according
to their ambition, to make themselves great, and to get their Estates and
Possessions to themselves and their Posterity, God will never accept of this
work for any service done to him, but will most severely punish it at the last.

And I think, that the making of themselves great, as Jehu did, by the service
that men pretend to do to God, does sufficiently cause many others to doubt,
whether they have done those things only for Gods glory, or for a conjuncture
likewise of their own profit; and I conceive, you may be sure, the jealous God
will not regard that service which is done to him with a sinister aspect and
respect to our own profit, because he will not give his glory unto another, he
will not yield any part of his service to any of them that do the service; but,
though he will certainly reward every man that does him service; yet, as our
Savior explaineth the words of Moses, it is written, The shall worship the
Lord thy God, (...), and him only shall thou serve, and not thy self with him
in the service that thou do to him, so he will neither accept nor reward that
service which thou do to thy self as well as to God, or rather to thy self
then to God.

And therefore I would advise all those, that in doing service unto God, by
pulling down the Transgressors of his Laws, have raised themselves to such
great Polsessions, I would the Rebels would consider this.
to look well to their intention, progression and execution of their work, lest
that for the service they believe they do to God, they receive the reward of
the Scribes and Pharisees, or of Jehn, that pulled down King Ahab, to make
himself King of Israel.

3. Many do good in a blind zeal Number. 11.28. 2 Samuel 16.9.
The love of Joshna to Moses, when Eldad and Medad prophesied was good, and so
was the love of Abishai to David, when Shimei cursed him, and of James and John
to Christ, when they would have called for fire out of heaven to destroy the
Samaritans for not receiving Christ; but the love of them was in a blind Zeal,
without knowledge, and therefore instead of being commended, they were much
reproved for their indiscretion; even as Saint Paul persecuted the Saints, when
his blind zeal persuaded him, that he destroyed Gods enemies.

And as Ajax in his frenzy, is reported to have slain his own children, by
taking them for Ulisses and Agamemnon; so many men in their blind Zeal destroy
the true Ambassadors of Christ, and the Pastors of Gods people, by taking them
for Popish Prelates; Origin in ep. ad Romans Zelus ad mortem. Amb. in Ps. 119.
and therein think, they do God good service, as the Jews thought when they
crucified Christ; for, as Origin says, Putant se zelum Dei habere, sed quia
non secundum scientiam zelati sunt, sacriligi extiterunt in filium Dei; they
persuaded themselves that they had the love and zeal of the honor of God; but
because their zeal was not according to knowledge, they became sacrilegious
against the Son of God; and their fiery zeal to Gods Worship became as Saint
Ambrose says, A bloody Zeal unto Death; and like unto a Ship under fail,
without a Pilate, that will dash it self against the Rocks all to pieces; so it
is, when we rob and spoil, and persecute the true Servants of Christ, for
being, as we suppose, the limbs of the Antichrist.

But such and so great is the malice and subtilty of Satan toward mankind,
that he cares not which ways he brings man to destruction, so he may bring him
any way, either in being too zealous without knowledge, and so persecute the
good for bad, or too careless with all our knowledge, and so bless the bad for
the good, either by hating the superstitious Papist, The continual practice of
the Devil.
beyond all reason, or loving the malicious Sectary, contrary to all reason;
either by falling into the fire on the right hand, or into the water on the
left hand, either by making the whole Service of God to consist only of
preaching and hearing Sermons, and neglect the Prayers and all other Christian
duties, or using the Prayers only with the Service of the Church, and omit the
preaching of Gods Word; for this has been always the Devils practice, To
separate those whom God would have joined together, and to join those together
whom God would have kept asunder.

And therefore we should be very careful to join Knowledge and Discretion with
our Zeal, and desire to do God service, if we desire to follow Christ.

2. The matter wherein we are to follow Christ.
For the Matter, Points, or ways, wherein the Sheep of Christ are to follow
him, they are very many, but the chiefest of them are reducible into these
three principal Heads.

1. The works of Piety. Joh. 2.17. 2. The works of Equity. 3. The works of
Charity. Jam. 2.16. Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
In all which we are to do our best endeavor to imitate and to follow Christ,
Actu and ciffectu. Bern. in Cant. S. 50.
and therein we shall do the things that are most acceptable unto God, and most
profitable for our selves. For the first, none doubts of it, but that these
things are most acceptable in the sight of God: And for the second, we may be
sure of it, that it is better for us to build Churches, to maintain Preachers,
and to erect Hospitals, then to raise our Families; and we shall receive more
comfort to do Justice, and to protect the Innocent, and to relieve the Poor,
then by gaining Naboths Vineyard, or he^ping Dives his Treasures unto our
selves.

The time will not give me leave to prosecute these particulars any further;
but I pray God give us grace to prosecute the performance and doing of them
throughout all our lives, to the glory of God, the discharging of our Duties,
and the eternal comfort of our own souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all Glory and Honor,
for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.

THE SEVENTH TREATISE.
1 John 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us.


THis text, you see, is a text of love, a Theme that fills Sea and Land,
Heaven and Earth, and as the Poets feign, Hell it self; Claudian de raptu
Proserpinae.
when as the King thereof -- Tumidas exarsit in iras, did swell with rage,
because he might not enjoy his love in hell, as Jupiter did in heaven.

And yet the scarcity and want of true love, causes such plenty of great evils
in every place; for we love not God, we love not our neighbors, we love not
our own selves, for if we loved God, we would keep his Commandments; if we
loved our neighbors, we would neither wrong them, nor oppress them; and if we
loved our selves, then we would love God, if not for his own sake, which is the
right love, yet for our own good, and our neighbors, for Gods sake: But for
Gods Commandments, I may truly say it with Nehemiah, Nehem. 9.34.
Neither have our Kings, our Princes, our Priests, nor our Fathers kept his
Laws, nor hearkened unto his Commandments; but as Ezra says, Ezra 9.7.
We have all been in a great trespass unto this day, and for our iniquities
have we, our King, our Priests, our Bishops, our Judges, and all of us been
delivered to the sword, to the spoil, to confusion of face, and to all these
miseries, as it is this day.

And for wronging one another, if we consider all the oppressions that are done
under the Sun, nay, that were done in these Kingdoms, and the tears of such as
were oppressed, and had no Comforter, when the oppressors had such power, that
none durst speak against them; then, as Solomon says, we may most justly
praise the dead, which are already dead, more then the living which are yet
alive, Eccles. 4.1, 2, 3
and him better then both which has not yet been, to see the great evils that
are done amongst us. And for our own selves, we do just as the wise man says,
seek our own death in the error of our life, and Sampson-like, pull down the
house upon our own heads; as you may remember, that when we had plenty of peace
and prosperity, then as the children of Israel murmured against Moses, that
delivered them out of the Egyptian bondage, and loathed Manna that came down
from heaven, so were we discontented at every trifle, and so weary of peace,
and such murmurers against our happiness. When the Articles of peace were
published, we were so discontented and murmured so much thereat, that the ear
of jealousy, which hears all things, heard the same, and was pleased to
satisfy our discontents, and to send us our own desires, such plenty of wars,
and fullness of all miseries, plagues, famines, and oppressions, as our Fathers
never knew the like, and are like to continue amongst us, until God sees us
more in love with his goodness toward us, and our repentings move him to
repent him of the evils that he intends against us, that have so justly
deserved them from him.

Therefore to engender and beget love where it is not, to increase it where it
is but little, and to rectify it where it is amiss, either toward God, or our
neighbors, or our selves, I will by Gods help, and your patience, with as much
brevity as I can, How the created Trinity fell, and may be reunited to the
uncreated Trinity.
express the plenty of these few words, (...).

Mellifluous S. Bern. (whose laborious work is like a pleasant garden that is
replenished with all sorts of the most odoriferous flowers) says, that in the
Unity of Gods Essence, there is a Trinity of persons, the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost; and in the unity of the souls substance, there is a trinity of
faculties, the reason, the will, and the memory, which being created in
holiness, fell away from the uncreated goodness of God: And in the unity of
Christian Religion, there is a trinity of invaluable grace, Faith, Hope, and
Love, whereby the relapsed trinity of man's soul is reunited unto the blessed
favor of the Eternal Trinity of Gods Essence.

And these three graces I find most excellently delivered and explained by
three of the chiefest Apostles (the three worthiest Pillars of Gods Church) S.
The three chiefest graces expressed by the three chiefest Apostles. 1. Faith
expressed by S. Peter.
Peter, S. Paul, and S. John; for as Faith is radix omnium virtutum, the root
of all virtues, as S. Ambrose says; and prima quae subjugat animam Deo; and
(as S. Hierome says) the first grace that bends and brings our souls to God,
and the foundation of all other graces, from whence, as from the root of a
tree, those fair and fruitful branches of hope and love do spring: So S. Peter
was the first of all the Apostles, and his confession, (...); Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God, was the Rock, whereupon the whole frame of Christian
Religion was established, as both S. Ambr. and S. Aug. testify: And as hope
is, quasi columna, quae totum spirituale aedificium sustentat, Hope explained
by S. Paul.
as Laurentius Justinianus says, like the Pillar that bears and upholdeth
faith and love, or the Anchor that preserves the little ship of Gods Church in
all storms, as the Apostle calls it, and is indeed the only Nurse that
feeds, inlargeth, and maintains the very life of these graces: So the
blessed Apostle S. Paul was the greatest Inlarger and Cherisher of the Doctrine
of Christ, that we can read of, for he caused the same, by his own
indefatigable pains, to be planted and watered, preached and published in
abundance of places, as you may see in the Table of his Peregrination,
collected out of his own writings, and the Acts of the blessed Apostles; and as
love is (...), the perfection and complement of all virtues; indeficiens
thesaurus gratiarum, an unexhaustible treasure of graces, and unguentum suave,
quo pestes animi sanantur, and oculi cordis illuminantur; and that sweet
precious ointment which heals all the sores of our souls, enlighteneth the
eyes of our understanding, and sweetneth all those fruits that proceed from
Faith and Hope, Love amplified by S. John. John 3.
as S. Basil says: So that heavenly Evangelist, and best beloved Apostle S.
John, is the best and chiefest expressor of Gods love to man, and the most
careful exacter and requirer of man's love to God again; for what else does he
chiefly aim at in all his Gospel, but to show how God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten, and his dearly beloved Son, coequal and coessential
unto himself: (...); for this Son was the Word, and that Word was God (says S.
Basil) that whosoever believed in him, John 3.
should not perish, but should have everlasting life: And what else does he in
all his Epistles, in every Chapter, and almost in every verse; but as the
Prophet David (in the 119. Psalm) does continually touch upon the strings of
Gods Law, so does he as sweetly play upon the strings of Gods Love, his love to
us, and that love which we owe, and are so many ways bound to render unto him:
And to his dying day, when he could not go, he would be carried to the Church
in a Chair, and when he was able to say no more, his whole Sermon was ut
diligatis invicem, that they would love one another.

And no marvel, for he was indeed the Disciple which our Savior loved above
the rest, and before all the rest of the Apostles; he was the chiefest child of
Love, as S. Aug. calls S. Paul the best Child of Grace: And therefore, as S.
Paul gave himself principally to magnify the free grace of God, so does S.
John wholly dedicate himself to amplify the great love of God; and as he does
the same in all his works, so he does it especially in this my Text, which I
may well call the Epitome of all his writings, and it contains these two
things, which contain the sum of all Divinity. 1. Gods love to Man. The sum of
all Divinity twofold.
2. Man's love to God.
For what

Is the end of the Law, and the substance of the Gospel, but to show how God
loved us, and to teach us, why and how we should love God again, and manifest
this our love to God, by loving one another? For to love God with all our
hearts, is the great command of the Law, and to love one another as Christ has
loved us, is the new Command of the Gospel: In these two hang all the Law and
the Prophets; and in these are comprehended all our duties, and all this is
contained in these few words: (...). Quia causae precedit effectum.
Wherein the Apostle does principally aim at the main ground, and chiefest
cause, why we do, and should love our God. This is the sum of the whole,
expressed in the word (...); and therefore must be first treated of.

Indeed, if we do contemplate of those infinitely amiable excellencies, and
transcendent beauties, that are so accumulated and resplendent in the Essence
of God, which is that light in whom is no darkness at all, We shall find that,
as Nazian. says of Christ, he is (...), wholly desiderable, and wholly
delectable, so fully invested with such attractive excellencies, as are easily
able to confound the senses, and to ravish the desires of all that truly
consider them; Worthy men worthily loved.
for when we hear Abraham so highly commended for his Faith, David for his
Valor, Solomon for his Wisdom, Hercules, Achilles, Alexander, Hannibal,
Caesar, and the like, such glorious Heroes, celebrated and admired for their
eminencies above other men, we cannot choose but deem them worthy of love, when
so many wise men as have written of them, thought them worthy of admiration,
and reputed them the Worthies of the world. So when we consider the glory of
nature, and the beauty of bodies (which is nothing else but an apt proportion,
and a just correspondence of the parts and colors of these visible creatures)
they do so entice our senses, captivate our affections, and ravish our minds,
that our hearts are more present, in their desires, with such bodies that they
like and love, then with our own, wherein they sojourn and live.

But what are all the Mights and Monarchs of the World, compared unto God, No
excellency any ways comparable to the excellencies of God.
but as Lambs among Lions, or as the leaves that are driven away with the wind,
blown down from their Regal Thrones, consumed to ashes, and reduced to nothing,
their power weakness, their prudence folly, and their excellency base, in
respect of that boundless Omnipotency, infinite Wisdom, and incomprehensible
transcendent excellencies of God: For if he is not barren that imparteth
fecundity unto others, nor he poor that can make many rich, then surely he must
needs be most beautiful, that can adorn the poor Lilies of the field with a far
more glorious mantle, then any of those choicest robes that covered the body of
the wisest Solomon: For though fields and gardens, and Palaces, and the bodies
of men and women (and so the Heavens and the Angels, and the whole frame of
this Universe (which the Grecians called (...)) because it is so admirably
beautified and composed in number, weight, and measure) are all innamelled with
abundance of beauty, yet all these beauties proceeds from him, and reside in
him, and are comprised in him, in a far more eminent degree of excellency, How
eminently all perfections are in God.
then they are in the best of these creatures themselves, because that in these
creatures they are all limited in Essence, and hedged within the narrow bounds
of natural perfections: But in God, all the Attributes of his bounty,
simplicity, verity, charity, justice, mercy, benignity, and all other amiable
colors, and most glorious beauties of his perfections, which the Angels
rejoice to behold, the blessed Saints contemplate, and we poor wandering
Pilgrims do all aspire to see, are all illimited, infinite and boundless.

And befides all this, if we consider him truly, he is whatsoever is desirable,
or can be desired by any one; as Omnipotency to him that affects power,
Omnisciency to him that desires knowledge, and the Ancient of days to him
that desighteth in antiquity: And as S. Ambrose says, Siesuris, ipse est
panis; if thou art hungry, he is the Bread of Life; Whatsoever we desire, we
may have the same in God.
if thou art thirsty, he is the Fountain of Living Water; if thou art naked, he
is the Garment of Righteousness; if thou art sick, he is a heavenly Physician;
if thou art in prison, he is with thee, as he was with Joseph; if thou art in
danger, he is a present help in trouble; if thou be dead, he can restore
thee to life, for he is life, which is of all things so infinitely desired, and
he is light, which is so much admired; he is truth, which is so much commended;
he is the God of Peace, which is the Mother of all plenty; he is the God of
Unity, which is the honor of all Brethren; he is the God of Constancy, which
is the Crown of all Friendship; and he is the God of Wisdom, which is the
glory of every man: And to be brief, all things that are good are in him, and
derived from him, who is goodness it self.

And therefore, causa diligendi Deum Deuteronomy est; this only consideration that he
is God, and such a God, is a sufficient cause of loving God, as S. Bern. says,
because these are excellencies enough to attract love from the stoniest hearts,
quae genuere ferae, which the most salvage men have produced, if they did but
truly consider them.

And yet this is not that which the Apostle sets down here, to be the ground
and cause of our loving God; but seeing our weakness could not ascend so high,
as to conceive the excellent brightness of this everlasting glory; therefore
his goodness was pleased to descend so low, as to express that which is nearer
unto us, and does more feelingly concern our selves; Whom men do naturally love
best.
that is, the love of God toward us, and the great good that we receive from
that love; for the Apostle knew, that all men were naturally inclined to love
their benefactors, and to love them best which do profit them most: And albeit,
very often this kind of love is but base and vicious, yet being guided with
reason, Job 1.
and ruled by charity, it may prove good and virtuous; therefore, as the devil
maliciously suggested of holy Job, that he served not God for naught, so the
Apostle wisely does here intimate, that we love not God without cause,
especially if we consider that great and real love of God, which has and does
continually so infinitely profit us, for we love him, because he loved us
first. Touching which words, though our love to God is first set down in the
series of these words, yet seeing by the order of nature, causa precedit
effectum, the cause does ever precede the effect, I will by Gods help speak:

1. Of that great love which God has showed unto us.

2. Of that love, which in requital thereof, we owe unto God. And the first
shall be the subject of my whole discourse at this time, wherein you may
observe as many parts, In Gods love to us four things observable.
as there be words.

1. The Lover, he He loved us first. 2. The affection, loved He loved us first.
3. The Lover. Diverse pretend to love us.
The beloved, us He loved us first. 4. The time, first. He loved us first.
1. Who is this He that loves us? for there be very many that pretend to love
us, and yet in very deed do love us not at all, especially: 1. The Devil. How
the Devil professes to love us.
2. The World. 3. Our own selves.


1. In the third of Hosea, v. 1. Diabolus Dicitur amicus; says a Father: Satan
is said to be the lover of the seduced soul, even as the lascivious loves the
Harlot; for the Devil comes unto us as he came unto Adam, and says, You shall
be as gods, and I will make you happy, and you shall be victorious, when he
means to plunge us into all miseries, and to hurl us headlong into hell: And to
that end, we can intend nothing, nor resolve upon any good action, What manner
of love the Devil bears to us.
wherein this dissembling Lover is not always ready to entrap us, as Progne
did to Tereus, proponendo quod delectabile, and supponendo quod exitiale; by
giving us, like the Whore of Babylon, a drink of deadly poison in a golden Cup,
to teach us Heresies out of the holy Scriptures, to set up a mere Anarchy under
the glorious title of a Gospel-Government, and to raise a most odious
rebellion, under the name of King and Parliament, and under the pretense of
Faith and Religion: But O good God, is it possible, that tantum potuit Religio
suadere malorum? No, no, God will tell us, this is nothing else but Satan's
plot, who desires our ruin; and he desires, not only thus to fill us up with
evil, but also to infect all our good; for if we pray, he casts wandering
thoughts into our minds, and when our hearts should think most of God, he will
guide our eyes, to withdraw them to some other object, as S. Hierom confesses
of himself, that while his tongue was talking with God in his private Closet,
his mind was wandering among the Wantons in the Galleries of Rome: If we hear
Sermons, he will poison our Opinions, and prejudicate our minds with some ill
conceit of the Preacher; if we do well, he will infect our best deeds with
Pharisaical pride, and tum superbia destruit, quicquid justitia aedificat,
pride destroys whatsoever righteousness builds; if we do ill, he will
persuade us to persevere therein: And so in all things else, though he
professes love, yet is it but (...), like the gift of an enemy, as was Ajax
Sword that he received from Hector, wherewith he killed himself; a most deadly
love, worse then any open hate.

2. Passing over all dissembling flatterers, and all flattering friends, How
the world professes to love us.
and perditissimos homines, and those villainous men, as Cicere terms them,
which can give a stab to the smile of an innocent, and perfidiously deceive
them, qui laesi non essent, nisi credidissent, which had been safe if they had
not trusted them: The whole world is the Devils Ape, and imitates him to a
hair, like the Courtly Mountebank, that is composed of nothing else but
Complements, and can promise golden Mountains, but perform dirty Dales, and
deal with us as Laban did with Jacob, Genesis 29.24.
when he had served seven years for beautiful Rachel, to thrust into his bed
and to his bosom bleer-ey'd Leah: It is like Dalila, able to betray the
strongest Sampson, and like Circe, powerful enough to bewitch the Wisest
Solomon.

And if I had time to relate unto you the Tragedies of Mar. Attilius Regulus,
Cheops King of Egypt, that erected the Pyramides, Croesus King of Lydia, Darius
King of Persia, Manius Acilius the Roman Consul, Belisarius the brave General
of Justinian, who in his old age begged, Date obolum Belisario, Job 30.4.
quem virtus exaltavit, fortuna depressit, and malitia excaecavit: O give one
halfpenny to him, whom virtue raised, fortune spoiled, and malice made him a
poor blind beggar: And those thirty Emperors, or thereabouts, that died not
sicca Morte, but were killed, from Julius Caesar to Charlemaigne, and
especially that notable example of Hebraim Bassa, chief Councellor, and of
greatest power with Solomon the Great Turk, whom Paulus Jovius terms the
greatest Minion of the worlds inconstancy, because he was so entirely beloved
of Solomon, that he entreated his Master not to make so much of him, lest being
elevated with Haman too high, he might have like him, too great a fall, and the
Emperor swore he would never take away his life while he lived; yet
afterward, for some distaste of his insolent carriage, Solomon being informed
by a Talisman, or Turkish Priest, that a man asleep cannot be counted among the
living, sent an Eunuch into his Chamber, who with a sharp Razor cut his throat,
as he was quietly sleeping in his bed. And likewise Pope Baltazar Cossa, who
called himself John the XXIV. that being thrown out of his Popedom, by the
Council of Constance, 1417. made these verses of himself.

Qui modo summus eram, gandens and nomine Prasul,
Tristis and Abjectus, nunc mea Fata gemo;
Excelsus solio nuper versabar in alto,
Cunctaque Gens pedibus oscula prona dabant;
Nunc ego paenarum fundo devolvor in imo,
Vultum deformem quemque videre piget:
Omnibus eterris Aurum mihi sponte ferebant,
Sed nec Gaza juvat, nec quis amicus adest;
Sic varians Fortuna vices adversa secundis,
Subdit, and ambiguo nomine ludit atrox.
And a thousand like examples that might be produced of some men, that as Job
says, cut up mallows by the bushes, and Juniper roots for their meat, children
of fools, yea, children of base men, that were viler then the earth, whose
Fathers we would have disdained to have eaten with the dogs of our flocks, are
now keepers of Castles, and Commanders of whole Countries: Camer. l. 4. c.
7.246.
And others, that from the highest honor, were suddenly thrown down to the
lowest misery, and compelled to change their scarlet robes for rugs, it would
plainly appear unto us, that the lovers of this world, which rely upon the
Worlds love, Camerarius, l. 3. c. 5.162.
are greater fools then Heliodorus the Carthaginian, who caused this Epitaph to
be engraven upon his Tomb, hard by the straight of Gibralter: I Heliodorus,
Reliodorus his Epitaph.
a fool of Carthage, have ordained by my last will to be buried in this place,
in the remotest part of the world, to see if any man more foolish then my self
would come thus far to see me.

And therefore the best way to escape the deceits of the World, is to follow
the counsel of the Epicarmus, How we ought to deal with the world.
that is, semper diffidere, always to distrust it, and never to believe it,
but with Ulysses, to tie our selves unto the main Mast of our ship, i.e. to
sound reason, or rather to true Religion, that teaches us to deal with this
World, as the worldlings deal with God, to stop our ears, like the deaf Adder,
that lays one ear close to the earth, and clappeth her tail in the other, and
so never listneth to the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

3. How we love our selves 2 Timothy 3.2.
The Comique tells us, verum idesse, vulgo quod dici solet, that every man
loves himself better then another: And Euripides says, (...); every one loves
himself better then his friend; and the Apostle says, that in the last times
men should be lovers of themselves: And yet there was not a sounder truth
uttered by the mouth of any Philosopher, then nemo laditur nisi a seipso, no
man is wounded but by himself; because as Aquinas says, inordinatus amor sui
est causa omnis peccati: Sin is the cause of all our miseries, and the
inordinate love of our selves, That our selflove is the cause of all our sins,
and of all our miseries
is the chiefest cause of all sins: And Plato calls this (...), sons omnium
malorum, the root and fountain of all mischief: And experience tells us, that
intus est equus Trojanus, every man's greatest enemy lodges within his own
bosom; otherwise, if we had the true reins of our own passions, and could
bridle our own affections, then outward occasions might well exercise our
virtue, but not much injure our actions, because others cannot draw us into any
great inconveniences, if we do not some way help our selves forward: As the
Adulterers cannot bereave us of the chastity of our bodies, if there be not an
Adulterer lodging within our souls; and the Fornicator cannot take away the
chastity of a Virgin, if her corrupted heart does not some way yield consent;
and therefore the Law says of the ravished woman, that she shall be freed, and
no cause of death shall be in her, because the fact was committed against her
will; No force can prevail against the will.
and actual sins have so much dependency upon the hearts approbation, as that
the same alone can either vitiate or excuse the action, and no outward force
has any power over mine inward mind, unless my self do give it him; as all the
power of the Kingdom cannot force my heart to hate my King, or to love his
enemies, they may tear this poor body all to pieces, but they can never force
the mind to do but what it will.

And yet, such is the deceit of our own flesh, that if the devil should be
absent from us, our own frailties would be his tempting deputies, and when we
have none other foe, we will become the greatest foes unto our selves; as
Apollodorus the Tyrant dreamd, that he was flead by the Scythians, and that his
heart, thrown into a boiling caldron, should say unto him, That it was the
cause of all his miseries, and so every man that is undone, has indeed undone
himself: for Perditio tua exte, thy destruction is from thy self, says the
Prophet; yea the very best men, Hos. 13.9.
by whomsoever wronged, yet wrong themselves, as now it is with our gracious
King: for as Valentine the Emperor, when he cut off his best Commander, and
demanding of his best Counselour what he thought of it, had this answer given
him, That he had cut off his own right arm with his left hand; so when the good
King, seduced and overperswaded, gave way (though against his will) to make an
Everlasting Parliament, he then gave away the Sword out his own hand; So, I
could tell you of a very good man that is brought to very great exigency, by
parting with his own strength, and giving his sword out of his own hand.
and when he excluded the Bishops out of the House of Peers, he parted with so
much of his own strength, and brought himself thereby to be weaker then he was
before: and so it will be with every one of us, and it may be in a higher
misprision then with our King, if we look not well unto our selves, and take
heed, lest in seeking to preserve our bodies we destroy our own souls, or to
save our estates we make shipwreck of our faith, or especially to uphold an
earthly Rule or Kingdom, we expose to ruin the spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
which is the Church of God, as you know how the Parliament do it at this day.

And therefore the Spaniards prayer is very good, Dios mi, guarda mi, de mi, O
my God, defend me from my self, that I do not destroy my self: and Saint
Augustine upon the words of the Psalmist, Deliver me from the wicked man;
demanding, who was that wicked man: Answ. it was a seipso: and so the wisest
Philosophers have given us many Precepts, to beware of our selves: And he that
can do so, -- Latius regnat, avidum domando
Spiritum, Horatius.
quam si lybiam remotis
Gadibus jungat, and uterque paenus,
Serviat uni. --
does more, and rules better then he, that reigns from the Southern Lybia to
the Northern Pole: so hard it is for man, under all the cope of Heaven, to find
any one that truly loves him.

But God is Verax and veritas, true and the truth it self; and as Hugo says,
Veritas est sine fallacia, and faelicitas sine miseria, he is Truth without
Deceit, that neither can deceive not be deceived; and as this our Apostle
says, God is love, and the Fountain of all true love; and he is sweet, he is
wise, and he is strong; 1 John 4.8. How God loves us, and how sweet and
gracious his love is.
therefore S. Bern. says, that he loves sweetly, wisely and strongly,
Dulciter, quia carnem induit; sapienter, quia culpam cavit; and fortiter quia
mortem sustinuit; sweetly, because he was made man to have a fellow-feeling of
our miseries; wisely, because he did avoid sin, that he might be able to help
us; and strongly, because his love was as strong as death, when rather then he
would lessen his love unto us, he would lose his life for us.

And therefore of all that pretend to love us, God alone is the only pure and
truly perfect lover.

2. For the affection, it is love; for God loved us; and love, The affection.
Love comprehends three things.
as it is in the creatures, is a passion better perceived by the lover, then it
can be expressed by any other, and it comprehends three things:

1. A liking to the thing beloved.

2. A desire to enjoy it. And

3. A contentment in it, as when the Father says, (...). This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased; because, (...), derived of (...), or as others
think of (...), signifies to be fully and perfectly satisfied in the thing
loved, as Phavorinus testifies.

And so though the affection of love is not the same in God as it is in us,
because he is a Spirit most simple, without passion, and we are oftentimes
transported and swallowed up of this affection; yet in the love of God we find
these three things most perfectly contained: Things contained in the love of
God.


1. An Eternal benevolence, or purpose to do good unto his creatures. 2. An
Actual beneficence and performance of that good unto them. 3. A Delightful
complacency, or contented delight in the things beloved; as the Lord loves him
that follows after righteousness, that is, he takes delight and pleasure in
all righteous livers; and as he hates the ungodly, so he loves the righteous,
and takes delight in them, and in their just and righteous dealing.


But because love is an inward affection that can hardly be discerned without
some outward demonstration of the same; and that as S. Gregory says, Probatio
dilectionis exhibitio est operis, the trial of our love is seen by our actions,
which testify our love far better then our words, How God imanifesteth his
love many ways.
when we see too too many that profess to love us, when they labor to destroy
us, as the rebels pray for the King, when they fight against him; so finely can
the Devil deceive us: therefore God manifested his love by many manifold
arguments. As

1. they were all exceeding good.

2. Quia fundavit Deus mundum supranihilum, ut mundus fundaret se supra Deum;
because God laid the foundations of the world upon nothing, that the world
might wholly rely upon God, who is the basis that bears up all things with
his mighty word; and more particularly, in preserving not only the righteous,
but even the wicked also from many evils, both of Sin and Punishment; for did
not God withhold and restrain the very reprobates, even from many sins, they
would fall into most fearful abominations: and did not he sustain them with
his hand, they would pull down many mischiefs, and kindle many plagues upon
their own heads.

3. sending them rain and fruitful seasons, Acts 14.17.
making the Sun to shine both upon the good and upon the bad, and filling our
hearts with food and gladness, by giving us Health, Wealth and Prosperity.

4. only Son to redeem us when we were captives, and to save us when we were
utterly lost. Seneca says, we esteem our selves too highly, if we suppose our
selves worthy that the revolution of Winter and Summer should be done for us:
But alas, good Philosopher, if thou think it strange, that the world should
hold his course for our sake, what would thou think, if thou knew as much
as we, that God, for our sake, should send his only Son to suffer the most
ignominious death of the cross to deliver us from everlasting death? The
inexpressable greatness of Gods love in sending his Son to redeem us.
for this love is so full of all bottomless Mysteries and so transcendently
infinite, that all the other multitudes of his blessings heaped upon us in our
creation and preservation, are not worth the talking of, or so much as to be
once named in comparison of this blessing; but as the light of the Sun
obscureth all the light of the Stars, so the consideration of this benefit
swalloweth up all the memory of all other benefits whatsoever.

And therefore this is ever and anon showed and urged as the chiefest argument
of Gods love, and as the most royal Present whereby the King of Heaven did so
exemplarily commend his love toward the sons of men; 1 Johon 4.9.
for as the Apostle says in this (...), was manifested the love of God toward
us, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world, Why this benefit
exceeds all other benefits.
that we might live through him.

And the reason why this benefit transcendeth and excels all other benefits,
seems to be twofold:

1. before our creation we had done nothing that had displeased God, or opposed
his purpose to produce us; but before our redemption we had every way offended
his Majesty, rejected his grace, and refused his favors toward us; nay, we
had not only slighted his love, but we had also in all hostile manner done, as
we see others do now unto us, rendered to him evil for good, and for all his
grace and loving favors, we offered Wars and all despightful Indignities unto
him.

Dixit and facta sunt, he spoke the world and they were made, commanded, and
they stood fast, but in working our redemption, Multa dixit, magna fecit, and
dira tulit, he spoke many excellent Sermons, he did many admirable Works, and
he suffered many intolerable Things; and yet Solus homo non compatitur pro quo
solo Deus patitur, of all Gods creatures, The exceeding greatness of the
Mystery of our Redemption, by the Incarnation and Passion of Christ. Col 1.26.
1 Pet. 1.10, 12.
man alone regards not all this, for whom alone God did all this.

And therefore this work alone was that astonishing project, wherewith the
invisible God, blessed for ever, intended, in the fullest measure to glorify
all his Attributes, even at once; and to make himself far more admirably known
by this, then he was either by the Creation or the preservation of all the
things of this world.

And this was that unsearchable Mystery that was hidden from the Ages and the
Generations before, in which God would make known the riches of his glory, and
which the holy men of God for many ages together longed to see, and the Angels
themselves desired (...), most heedfully to pry into it.

So you see that God, by innumerable ways, and specially by this superlative
argument of his love to mankind, does sufficiently testify that he loves.

3. For the extent and object of Gods love, the Apostle says, that he loves
us; The Parties loved, us. Love what it is. The extent of is. The extent of
Gods Love. 1. Himself. 2. All that he made.
and S. Austin defines love to be a motion of the heart delighting it self in
any thing: And the better we conceive the thing to be, the more is our heart
inflamed to love it; and therefore God being the chiefest good, he must needs,
in the first place, love himself best, as the Father loves the Son, the Son in
like manner loves the Father, and both of them equally love the holy Spirit,
and the Spirit them.

And besides himself, God loves all things that he made, because all that he
made were good; Sin he made not, therefore he loves it not, but hates the same
with a perfect hatred.

But, though God loves every thing which he has made, That of all Creatures
God loved Mankind best.
yet he loves not all things equally alike; for we find that he showed more
evident testimonies of far greater love to mankind, then he did to any other
creature whatsoever: for though he loves his Angels with a very great and
singular love, when he makes them his Ministers, and these Ministers flames of
fire, that do continually burn with the love of his Sacred Majesty; yet we do
not read that he styles himself (...), a lover of Angels, as he terms
himself, (...), a lover of men, as Zanchy well observes out of Tit. 3.4.

And this (...), his love to man more then to any other creature, appears
more manifestly by the manifold effects of his love: As

1. In creating man alone after his own Image.

2. In giving to him alone dominion over the rest of his creatures, over all
the works of his hands.

3. In predestinating his only begotten Son to take upon him our flesh,
thereby to exalt the humane nature alone above all other creatures whatsoever;
for though the Angels were of a pure, simple and unspotted being, and we of a
terrene corrupted substance: yet, as the Apostle well observes, (...), Heb.
2.16.
he took not upon him the Angels, but he took the seed of Abraham.

And therefore the Prophet David considering these many many testimonies of the
divine love to man, cries out with admiration, O God, what is man that thou
art so mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou so regardest him? thou
made him a little lower then the Angels, but it was to crown him with glory
and worship, Psalm. 8 5. Gods love to men not equally alike to all men. Prove. 8.
Exodus 20. Psalm. 11.6.
And therefore (...) here has an emphasis that God loved us men, or mankind,
(...) more and above all other his creatures whatsoever.

And here you must observe also, that amongst men, as the glory of all Stars,
or the beauty of all Flowers, is not the same, when as every Star is not a
Phoebus, and every Flower is not a Lilly, so the love of God does not appear
alike to all men; for I love them that love me, and I will show mercy on them
that love me and keep my commandments, says the Lord; but the ungodly and him
that delights in wickedness does his soul abhor. And thus not only the Elect
are beloved better then the Reprobates, and the Saints better then Sinners; but
among the very chosen Saints, God loves some better then others; for every
like loves his like; and therefore God embraces them with a greater love whom
he vouchsafes to make, and finds them willing and most yielding to be the
more like unto himself, and so he loves those that are the better, more then
those that are less good: as the more we excel in Virtue and Goodness, the
more dearly does God love us, so he loved Abraham among the Patriarchs, Moses
among the Prophets, David among the Kings, and this beloved Disciple among the
Apostles, more (as it seems) then any other: and so the blessed Virgin, whom
all generations shall call blessed, was highly beloved, and loved more then any
of all the daughters of men. And of this gradation of Gods love S. Aug. says,
Omnia diligit Deus quae fecit, God loves all that he made, and among them he
loves rather the reasonable creatures, and of these he loves them more which
are the members of his Son, and most of all his only begotten Son.

And this greater love of God to some men more then to others (besides those
internal graces of Faith, Hope, Love, Patience, and the like, which he gives
to the Elect, Mark 4.11.
and not to the Reprobates, Quia vobis datum est, because it is given to you to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven, but to others not, because they
will not accept of them when they are offered) God manifests the same to all
men by two outward infallible demonstrations: 1. The donation of his graces. 2.
The preservation of their persons. For,


1. There is no man but might consider how God has bestowed more excellent
gifts and graces on himself, God gives his Gifts and Graces severally and
differently.
then he has done to many others, as either Health, or Wealth, or Honor, or
some other gift that the meanest man has, which many others have not: or if
not, yet seeing God out of his greater love to some men more then to others,
bestows on some five Talents, when he bestows on others but two, or but
one, and makes some men Princes and others Peasants, or indueth some men with
Learning and Knowledge, when he leaves others ignorant and foolish; and so
makes some men rich, when as many others are very poor: Why should our eyes be
evil because he is good: For, Cum huic fit misericordia, tibi non fit injuria.
when as herein he does but show mercy unto one, and injury unto none. Why
should we not rather consider that he may love whom he will, and show mercy on
whom he will have mercy, and so do what he will with his own, especially seeing
we know not, why he does, what he does.

2. God does guide some men with his counsel, that they run not with the
wicked, Ps. 37.24. Romans 1.
into the same excess of riot as they do, for seeing by nature we are all
equally indifferent, and equally inclined to all sins, Repleti omni injustitia,
says the Apostle, How comes it to pass that some men abstain from odious
Rebellions, and other impious abominations and abominable impieties, that many
wicked men do perpetrate? Is it from out selves, and from the goodness of our
Natures, or the sweetness of our dispositions? No, no, it is from God that
gives his grace and holy Spirit unto some, that are willing and ready to
receive it when God offers it unto them, rather then to others, that refuse
to answer when he calls, and to accept his gifts and graces when he offers
the same unto them; so God preserved Noah from partaking with the wickedness of
the old world, Lot from following after the abominations of the Sodomites,
Joseph from consenting to the lewd inticements of his Mistress, and the like:
and so he does preserve them that he loves from imitating the wicked in their
odious sins, because these men love God again, and are ready and willing to be
preserved by God; for, did not the blessed God work this happy change in our
souls, and the Father of Lights illuminate our minds with a more distinct
knowledge of his grace, we might have groped and flumbled in a thicker mist of
stupidity then now befools our unnurtured brethren, and whatsoever is either
odious or ridiculons in them might have been far more prodigious in us.

And so S. Aug. does most excellently confess it, saying, tentator defuit,
Satan was away, and time and place was wanting to do the deed, but this was thy
doing, to preserve me, the Tempter came in time and place convenient, Aug.
Soliloqu. L. 16.
but then thou withheldest me from consenting: So when I had a will, I wanted
ability, and when I had ability, I wanted opportunity, and all this was from
thy blessed Spirit that preserved me: And this preservation of us from evil,
Prove. 1.
is offered by the goodness of God unto the wicked, but that they refuse it, as
the wise man shows, and the Scripture testifies in many places.

And as God preserves those that he loves from the sins, so he delivers
them, also from the punishments of sin; for though misfortune shall slay the
ungodly, yet as the Prophet says, God preserves the righteous: And though the
plagues of God shall range and rage so far against the wicked, that thousands
of them shall fall besides the godly, and ten thousands on his right hand, yet
it shall not come nigh him, because God gives his Angels charge over those
that he loves, and they do preserve them in all their ways, that they dash
not their foot against a stone.

And here in (...), the persons on whom God showed so many testimonies of his
abundant love, to some more then to others, I may, and must put our selves
before many thousands of others, that perhaps deserved the same far better then
we do: For whereas all other places, that had the truth of the Protestant
Religion amongst them, have now their Candlesticks removed, and the true
public service of God metamorphosed, and corrupted with lies, heresies, and
blasphemies, we alone, of all our Kings Dominion, have the true light, and the
public service of God shining in the right Candlestick, and with Authority
maintained: And I humbly beseech Almighty God, that our sins, unthankfulness,
and unworthiness, do not ere long deprive us of it: And whereas this day five
years past, all the Protestants in this Kingdom, and we especially of this
City, were destined to be sacrificed, and slaughtered, and sent as an Hol^^^st,
or whole burnt-offering, from the holy Father, to the infernal God, as many
thousands of our Brethren were then and since, yet by the love of God toward
us, we are still preserved alive, that we might serve him, and love him again.

And what more shall I say, but cry out with the Psalmist, O how plentiful is
thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee* Psalm 31.21.
and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even before
the Sons of men! for thou have showed us Mavelous great kindness, I cannot
say in a strong City, but I say, in a weak City, and delivering us from strong
Enemies, whose Subtilty and Cruelty, Treachery and Perfidiousness, would
require the head of the best experienced converted Jesuit, to express it: I
had rather preach of Gods Love, than treat of their Malic^, and to talk of his
Goodness, rather than their wickedness, and that great goodness, The Lord
Marquess of Ormond.
which he has so lately showed in delivering our most Excellent Governor so
often from that malicious wickedness of the Sons of Belial, so perfidiously
intended against him, is not the least Testimony of Gods Love to us all;
especially if we consider, that what was intended this day 5 years, had now
questionless been executed, if God had not broken the Snare of the Fowler, and
by delivering him, redeemed us all from the Sword of Malice, and from the Jaws
of death; and therefore this ought to be rightly weighed, and duly remembered in
our Thanksgiving, among the many great undeserved and unexpected Preservations,
that our good God has wrought for us. And because his Excellency trusts not
in Lying Vanities, but puts his Trust in the Lord, and in the Mercy of the
Most High, therefore he shall not miscarry.

But indeed this Love of God to us, has been so great, and his Blessings in
our Deliverances have been so many, that if I should go about to enumerate
them, I might as well tell the Stars; for as the Prophet says, they are more
in number than I am able to express; and therefore I will now conclude with
our hearty thanks and Praise unto our good God for all his Love and Favors and
Deliverances, that he has showed unto us through Jesus Christ our Lord, who is
blessed for evermore,

Labilis memoria hominis, How easily and how soon men forget good things.
the memory of man is very frail and slippery, especially in the retention of
all good things, for though, as the Poet says, Scribit in marmore laesus, we
write injuries in marble, and never forget nor forgive the least ill turn that
is done against us; yet we write all benefits and all good instructions in the
sands, where the waves of forgetfulness do soon wash all away; as the children
of Israel regarded not the wonders that God wrought in Egypt, neither kept
they his great goodness in remembrance, Psalm. 106.7, 13, 21.
but soon forgot his works, yea, and forgot God their Savior, which had done
so great things in Egypt, wondrous works in the Land of Ham, and fearful
things by the Red Sea; therefore, lest you should forget the first part of this
text, before you heard the second, I thougt it high time to proceed to those
points, which the time prevented me to enlarge, not the last time I was in this
place, but the last time I treated of this verse; and I hope you do remember
that I told you, this text was a text of love, and of a twofold love.

1. The love of God to man. And 2. The love of man to God. And
In the first I noted these four things, 1. The lover, God. 2. The affection,
Love. He loved us first. 3. The beloved, Us. 4. The time, First.


And I have done with the first three; and therefore, not to stand upon any
further repetition, I am now to proceed to show you the fourth point, that is,
the time when he loved us, The time when God loved us first.
(...); he loved us first, i.e. before we would, or could love him; for love is
one of the affections, and the affections are seated in the heart, and the
heart is placed in the midst of the body, and the body could not contain the
heart, nor the heart cast forth the affections, nor the affections produce
love, before our loves, Jer. 31.3. God loved us from everlasting before our
Creation.
and affections, and hearts, and bodies, had their being.

But God loved us, before we were created, and before we could have the least
thought of our very being, for I have loved thee with an everlasting love;
therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee, says the Lord; and this love
was everlasting, as well a part ante, from the time past, as a part post, for
the time to come; and this love will appear the greater, if we consider how
freely, and how undeservedly he has loved us, for the object of love is good,
either that which is really so indeed, or seeming so to be: And S. Aug.
reasons most truly, that antequam creati eramus nihil boni merebamur; before
we were made, we could do no good, we could merit no reward, we could deserve
no love.

And yet, before we had received any being, the love of God toward us had
received a beginning; and when our souls were unbreathed, our bodies unframed,
and all this glorious structure laid in the dust, before ever we beheld the
light, or the light was brought out of darkness, or the darkness was upon the
face of the deep, our bodies and our souls were affected by God, and we had a
deep interest in the love of God, when as then the earth was created for our
habitation, the creatures were produced for our service, and the heavens were
appointed for our comfort: So God loved us before our Generation, before we
were, before we had our being, and after our transgression, God loved us after
our transgression. John 8.
when as God had made us his sons, like himself, and we had made our selves
like our Father the devil, there was cause enough of hate, but none of love,
for then we found a way to run away from God, we invented garments to hide our
shame, and to cover our nakedness from the eyes of men, but to make us most
loathsome in the eyes of God, and we became (...), haters of God, that labored
with the old Giants, (...), to fight and war with God, to unthrone him, and to
ungod him, when we desired to make our selves like Gods, nay the only Gods, and
he should be no God at all, unless we might have our wills, and not his will to
be done in heaven, as we do in earth.

Yet then, when we were thus filled with malice, swelled with enmity, and
opposite to all amity, to all verity, to all goodness, when we lay polluted in
our own blood, as the Prop. Ezekiel. says, Ez. 6.6. and were enemies unto God,
and were, as the Ap. speaks, dead in trespasses and sins, having hearts, but
no hearts to love him, having souls, Ephesians. 2.1.
but no souls to long for him, and having bodies, but no bodies to serve him,
but such as were breathing out slaughters against him, as Saul was breathing
the like against the Church; Acts 9.1.
and when we were no more willing to yield him any, the least jot of true love,
or holy affection, then dead bodies are able to perform the most honorable
action; God then pitied our miseries, and had compassion of our unworthiness,
and as S. Aug. says, etiam non dilectus dilexit, out of his abundant goodness,
without any other motive, he loved us, when we thus hated, wronged, and abused
him, continually provoking him to anger with our continual abominations; and
yet he does not say with the Poet, Odero si potero, si non invitus amabo; I
love them against my will, but indignos amavi, I have freely loved them that
are so worthy of my hate, and so unworthy of my love.

And therefore here is love, and the love of loves, and the wonder of all
wonders, to prosecute them with love, that persecuted him with hate, and so
mercifully to give his only Son to save their lives, that so causlesly and
maliciously put his Son, whom he so dearly loved, to a most direful and a most
shameful death: And therefore, as David directs his 45. Psalm, which is
Epithalamium Christi and sponsae, or Canticum amicanum, a Song of Loves to the
chief Musician upon Shoshannim, or to him that excels in Music: So must I
leave this great love of God to be amplified by him that is vates amorum, the
Disciple of Love, not he that termed himself so, but he that was so indeed, the
Disciple which our Savior loved.

And so I will descend unto the second part of this text, which is, Pars 2.
(...), nos diligimus eum; as Catharinus, Calv. Beza, Tremel. and abundance
more do read it; or diligamus eum, as the Vulg. Lat. Aquinas, Justinianus,
Corn. a Lapide, and all those that follow the vulgar translation, do expound
it, which in effect is all one, the Holy Ghost purposely using that word, which
in the original, is both the Indicative and the Subjunctive Mood, to reach us,
that what the holy men of God do, all men should do the same, that is, to love
him, which is the second part of my Text, far different from the former, that
being high and excellent, this low, and but indifferent, that very great, and
more then can be expressed, this very very little, and less then should be
imagined; and therefore I can speak but a little of it, and for that little. I
beseech you to consider these two points.

The 1. From the consideration of Gods love, that he loved us. 2. From the
consideration of the time, that he loved us first.


The first point teaches us to love God again, Quia amor amoris magnes, What
the first Point teaches us, i.e. to love God aagain. De Lege Talionis. Res
dare pro rebus, pro verbis verba solemus. Pro bufis bufas, pro trufis reddere
trufas. Buffets with blows and mocks with mowes, Dalton p. 180. Mat. 7.12. 1.
In retaliation of evil for evil. Exodus 21.22.
and durus est qui amorem non rependit, and Lextalionis: The Law of like, does
require no less, then that we should love him that loves us, for even reason
shows, that Lex non justior ullaest, there cannot be a juster Law in the
world, then the Law of Retaliation; and so our Savior testifies, With the
same measure ye meat, it shall be measured to you again, and Nature it self
teaches us the same Lesson.

Quod tibi fieri velis, aliis hoc fieri videto,
Quod tibi fieri nolis, aliis hoc fieri caveto.
And the Eternal Verity says, Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you,
do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. And this Law
holds good not only in general, but also in the particular retribution, 1. Of
evil for evil. 2. Of good for good.
As,

1. Moses that was Faithful in all Gods House, says, If men strive, and any
mischief follow, then thou shall give Life for Life, Eye for Eye, etc. which is
to be understood not of private revenge, but to be executed by him that is
justly deputed to execute vengeance upon the evil doers: And so we find it
executed, both by God and men; for the Old world that filled the Earth with a
Deluge of all wickedness, God brought a Deluge of Water, to wash the same clean
away, and the Sodomites that burned with the fire of unlawful Lusts, were
consumed with Fire and Brimstone for the same; and the Egyptians that drowned
all the Male Children of the Israelites, were themselves drowned in the Red
Sea; and the Children of Israel when they took Adonibezek, cut off his Thumbes
and his Great Toes, and he said, Judges 1.6, 7.
Threescore and ten Kings having their Thumbes and their Great Toes out off,
g^thered their meat under my Table, and now as I have done, so God has
required me. So when Perillus made his Brazen Bull to torment others, Phalaris
thought it just, that himself, which made it, should first taste of his own
Invention. And when Egypt wanted the wonted Inundation of Nilus, and Thracius
told Busiris that the Wrath of the gods would be appeased by the Sacrificing of
a Strangers Blood, and the King understanding, by his own Confession, that he
was an Alien, Illi Busiris, fies Jovis Hostia primus
Inquit, and Aegypto tu dabis hospes aquam.
He thought it the justest act to offer him first unto the gods. So we read
that those Lords which first called the Moors into Spain, to suppress their
King Rodericke whom they hated, were themselves and their Families destroyed by
the means of those Moors; and the Britains that rejected their Just and Lawful
King, Aurel. Ambrosius, Speed, l. 7. c. 12.
and sent for the Saxons Hengist and Horsus, to aid Vortigerne and his
Associates, that were Intruders. were driven by the Saxons into the Rocky
Mountains, where they remain exiled from their own Right, to this very day: and
because the God of Long Patience is a God of Great Justice, that will render to
every man according to his deeds, and holds it very just, that those rebellious
people, which call any other Nation to suppress their own Lawful King, should
at one time or other, either by that very Nation, or some other, be subdued and
destroyed themselves; therefore Subjects ought to think of Gods Justice, before
they cast off the Yoke of their Allegiance.

And 2. As the Poet says, Lex non justior ulla est,
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua.
There cannot be a juster Law, In retaliation of good for good.
then for him that diggeth a Pit, to fall into it himself, or that he that
loves War, should perish in the War, and he that sheddeth man's Blood, should
have his Blood shed by man; so in the retaliation of good for good, the same
Law holds most just, and more especially, 1. In Giving. 2. In Suffering. 3.
In Loving. For,
For,

1. In giving.
Is it not just, that we should give to him that has given all to us? And what
have we that we have not received from God? Why then should we think much
either to give the Tenth to God, or our Alms unto the Poor? when the Lord
himself professes, he that gives unto the poor, lends unto the Lord: and
whatsoever you do to these, you do to Him.

2. In suffering.
Is it not as just, that we should be ready to suffer for him that has
suffered so much for us? The Apostle says, that Christ exinanivit seipsum,
though he thought it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.
yet he emptied himself of all his Royal Dignities, and suffered all the
Indignities that could be laid upon him for our sake; and shall we grudge to
suffer the Loss of a little Worldly Trash? or the bearing of some Light
Affliction for him, and for the Defense of his Truth and True Service, that
has suffered all Sufferings for us? No, no, when we suffer any thing for the
Faith of Christ, or our Loyalty to our King, let us but consider, what Christ
has suffered for us, and what our good King has suffered for the Defense of
our Faith, because he will not yield to deface the Church of Christ, and to
destroy the True Service of God, and this will support us in all our
Sufferings, we suffer a little for him that suffered much for us.

3. Because all men have not wealth to give, In loving.
and all men have not the patience to suffer, yet all men have hearts to love
God, and they can have no excuse if they love him not; because he has so
dearly loved them; for if you consider all the Motives and procurements of
Love, which are very many, as Beauty, Benignity, Bounty, Wisdom, Valor, and
the like; yet there is none of these, nor all these, nor any other thing in the
world, so powerful to beget Love, as Love it self; neither is there any thing
so available to increase or to continue Love, as Love it self: Therefore the
Poets feign, that when Venus the Goddess of Love, brought forth her first
begotten Son, she called him (...), Love; and when she saw, he thrived not, but
was still lean, meager, and bloodless, How Venus consulted with Themis about
her son Eros.
she consulted with Themis the Goddess of Justice, which was Mother to Minerva
the Goddess of Wisdom, to know the reason of the sad condition of her Son, and
she told her, that she must bring forth another Son, which she did, and called
him (...), i.e. Love for Love, and then both her Children prospered, and became
exceeding beautiful and lovely: So among men, when we prosecute any one with
Love, it is impossible that Love should be lasting, if at no time, in no
measure, it should be requited with Love again; for as the Coals Conjoined,
will preserve the heat, but when they are scattered, will be soon extinguished;
so debet amor laesus irasci, love when it is deserted and forsaken or left
alone, will be soon lost. And therefore if we desire the Love of God to
continue toward us, we must resolve to show our Love to God again; for I will
love them that love me, and show mercy unto Thousands of them that love me,
says the Lord: Prove. 8.17.
And so the Apostle says, we love him because he loved us first, that is,
seeing he has loved us, therefore we are bound to love him; where you may
observe, 1. The Persons, We. We love him. 2. The Act, Love. We love him. Parts.
3. The Object, Him. We love him.


1. The persons here said to love God are not the Angels, The persons that love
God, We.
though they do exceedingly love him, when as the Script. says, He makes his
angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire, where you may see three most
admirable and transcendent excellencies of the Angels: as

1. Purity of substance, because they are Spirits.

2. Readiness of obedience, because they are his Angels and his Ministers,
Three excellent properties of the Angels.
and such as for their swift execution of Gods commands, are compared to the
wings of the wind.

3. Ferventness of charity, or burning love, not only of one toward another,
but especially toward God, because they are flames of fire: but the persons
here meant are men, we love him, i.e. we that are the sons of Adam do love him;
and seeing man's love to God is but Radius divini amoris erga homines, in deum
reflexus, a beam of Gods love toward man, reflected from man to God again, as
Zanchius says, and seeing that where so powerful a cause does exist, the
subsequent effect must needs follow.

Therefore, seeing God loves all men, it must needs be, that all men, How all
men do love God. Acts 17.
in some measure do love God again, that is, as God is their Creator,
Preserver, and Cause, in whom they live, and move, and have their being, and
from whom they have, and do receive all the good that they have: so the Jews,
Turks and Heathens, Worldlings, Rebels and Traitors, and all the wicked men in
the world, do love God.

But seeing this love is too general and too base for all Christians, scarce
worthy of the name of love, it will not serve the turn to make us happy, but
will deceive and destroy those lovers, that have none other love to God but
this poor confused general love. Therefore,

2. To proceed unto the stricter discussion of the act, or the affection of
love, The act, love. The Original cause of love twofold. 1. General.
We love him, you must note the same to be according to the original cause and
ground thereof: And that is twofold.

1. General, as the many manifold benefits that we continually receive from
God, as he is the faithful Creator, a wise Preserver, and a bountiful Bestower
of abundance of all good gifts upon his Creatures; So the Reprobates love God.
2. Special.
and in this respect, the very Reprobates (as I told you) cannot choose but love
the Lord, that is their Creator and Preserver.

2. Special, as the serious apprehension of our own infinite wants and
miseries, and of those Miracles of Love and Mercies, which God has performed
to cure our souls from those Miseries, Thus the Saints only love God.
by sending his only Son, to save us from all our sins.

And thus the true Saints that do hate their sins, and lay hold on Christ, do
only love the Lord, and the wicked that delight in sin, and perceive not the
sweetness of their Savior, cannot be said to love God; for as the whole have
no need of the Physician, and give no thanks for his Physic; so they that feel
not the sense of their own miseries, and perceive not their Obligation to their
Deliverer, can have no love to God their Savior.

Therefore seeing as the Poet says, Quod latet, ignotum est, ignoti nulla
cupido. And as S. Bern. says, non potes aut amare quem non noveris, aut habere
quem non amaveris; we cannot love whom we know not, nor enjoy whom we love not;
it behooves us to search into our spirits, to look into our own states, to
consider the multitude of our own sins, and to bethink our selves, in what need
we stand of a Deliverer, to see if this will not bring us in love with God our
Savior:

And then I beseech you, Two special Points to be considered.
let us consider, 1. What manner of Love we ought to have 2. How great a love
it ought to be
toward him.

And 1. I presume, the^e is no man in this Assembly, but he would think himself
much injured, What manner of Lovewe ought to have.
if it were but imagined, that he did not love God his Savior; and i^ is not
my desire to dishearten any, when I wish from my heart, that every the least
spark of your love to God, might prove a Glorious Flame. Yet I fear there be
very many men that come into the world, they know not why, and live therein
they care not how, and go out of it again, they cannot tell where, but do live
in it without a God, and then die without any hope. And others there be, that
dream of happiness, and their hopes being but dreams, they do therein but
deceive themselves, like those that dream they are at a pleasant Banquet, yet
when they awake, their soul is hungry: For as the Jews, in our Saviors time,
did indeed persecute him, because they were so blinded, that they could not
apprehend him to be the Son of God; but for God himself, they made full
account, that they alone, and none but they did love him, and for Moses, whose
very Name was the Glory of their Nation, they professed to love him beyond
measure, so that whosoever spoke any blasphemous words against Moses, was
thought worthy to be stoned to death: Acts 6.11. John 5.42. V. 45.
And yet our Savior tells them, I know you, that you have not the love of God
in you, and that Moses in whom they trusted, should accuse them before God: So
many Christians at the last day shall profess, that they have prophesied in
Christ's Name, and cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works in his Name,
and rebelled against their own King, and killed their own Brethren, and
starved their own Shepherds, and hazarded their own Lives for his sake; and yet
he shall protest unto them, I never knew you, i. e. to love me, or to do these
things for my sake, but for your own ends, and to satisfy your own desires;
and therefore depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity.

And the reason is, Two sorts of the Lovers of Christ. 1. Formal. 2. Real.
that there are two sorts of the lovers of Christ, and two kinds of professors
of Christianity: 1. General. 2. Special. That formal, this real; that in show,
this in deed; that engendered by Education, by Country, by Custom, by
conformity to the Laws and Fashions of them with whom they live, and by a
common sense of Gods outward favors for Christ his sake unto them; and this
infused by an inward operation of Gods Spirit in the heart, in all sincerity
and truth, and is continually preserved and increased by a lively sense of Gods
special favor unto them through Jesus Christ. And you know that S. Paul tells
us, he is not a Jew which is one, (...), in that which appears outwardly in
the flesh; i.e. which is but only born and bred a Jew, of the seed of Abraham,
of the visible Synagogue, and partaker of all the external Covenants of grace;
but he only is the right Jew, which is one (...), inwardly in the secrets of
the heart; so he is not a Christian that is but only born a Christian, and does
but outwardly profess Christianity, to come to the Church to hear Sermons, to
receive the Sacraments, Who is the true Christian.
and to accustom himself to all the outward formalities of Christianity; but
he is the true Christian, that is so made by his second birth, and by that
internal grace, which is indeed invisible unto others, but most sensible unto
himself, and who, as the Evangelist says, John 1.13.
is born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man,
but of God.

And therefore, seeing God is not mocked, and that he requires truth in the
inward parts, and the exactest kind of love that can be imagined, let us not
mock our selves by any presumptuous conceits of our love to God, and so deceive
our own hearts, and betray our own souls; which is the usual practice of too
too many men; for if we love God, as we ought, then our love must be, as the
Apostle speaks, (...), in purity, in simplicity, or, as the word signifies,
in incorruption; i.e. such as neither the most honorable, nor the most
profitable, nor the most delectable things in this world can ever be able to
lessen, or diminish the least jot of our love to God; when, with the Apostle,
we disesteem our preferments, and our honors, and whatsoever else the world
could confer upon us, and account them all but as dung in comparison of our
love to God, and the discharging of that duty which we owe unto him; for so
Abraham forsook his Country, neglected his honor, and was ready to facrifice
his only Son in obedience to the commands of God, and so will all they do, that
do truly love the Lord as they out to love him.

2. For the extent and quantity of our love to God, S. Augustine says, Aug. de
moribus Ecclesiae.
that Modus diligendi Deum est, ut diligatur quantum potest diligi, and quanto
plus diligitur, tanto est dilectio melior. And St. Bernard says, that Modus
diligendi Deum est sine modo; The measure of our love to God should be beyond
measure, so much, that we should prefer his Love, his Honor, and his Service,
before our Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Husband, or Children, or Pleasure, or
Profit, or any other thing in this World; yea, before our own life, which we
should be ready and willing to lay down for the love of him, and the defense of
his truth and service, Qui amori nostri placide ac benign pro nobis mori
dignatus est; which for the purchasing of our Salvation, did most cheerfully
and readily vouchsafe to suffer a most shameful death for us; for so much only
we do love God, as we love him more than we love any thing else, though the
same should be never so lovely.

And in very deed, our love to his honor, and our care of his service, and the
maintaining of his truth, can never be near so much performed as we ought to do.

Therefore, let others laugh at our too-much love to God, and our too hot zeal
to promote his truth, and to maintain his service; yet I shall never condemn
the nature of those men, that with the zeal Phinees, and the boldness of St.
Peter, are sometimes violent and vehement in these proceedings; but I shall
blame them that know not when, and wherein it is fitting to be so; for in this
our love to God, if it be directed to the right end, though we should fail in
the manner, We cannot love God too much, nor near so much as we ought to^ love
him.
yet we can never fail in the measure of loving God; because, as when the
subject of our hatred is sin, it cannot be too deep: So when the Object of our
love is God, it cannot be too high; and they that with the Laodiceans are but
warm, when God requires them to be hot, can never be freed from sin; when
their moderation is become a transgression, and their Sobriety is belied into a
Virtue; which had it been done by Elias, John Baptist, and the rest of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the Fathers of the Primitive Church, we had been
deprived of much truth, and they had failed of the Crown of Martyrdom.

Yet I deny not, but a man may eat too much honey, and in Solomon's sense, Men
may be too precise.
a man may be righteous overmuch, and make himself over-wise; that is, if I
might expound it, make those things to be sins, to be superstitious, to be
Idolatrous, to be Popish, which are not so, (as the English Rebels throughout
all Ingland now do) and to make that for Gods service, and teach those things
for truths, which are not so: As the Romish Priests throughout all this Kingdom
do; but to love God too much, to be too careful to obey Gods Precepts, or too
vehement to publish what we know to be a truth, most necessary to be known, it
is the Sophistry of Satan to say, this is too much.

And yet I say not that every Christian does, or can love God in so great a
measure as is required of him, or as many others have and do love him; for as
there are degrees of faith, That there are diverse degrees, as of Faith, so of
Love.
so there are degrees of love; and every degree of spiritual love proceeds from
a proportionable act of saving faith. And therefore, as our faith, so our love
is subject to all variations and changes, ebbings and flowings, according to
the strength of our persuasions, or the violence of our desertions. And, as
some men are endued with a greater measure of faith than others be, (when as
some have no more than a grain of mustard seed, and that mixed with much
anxiety, and others are strong in faith, like Abraham, that doubted nothing of
Gods Promise, notwithstanding all the impediments that might cross it;) so some
men have but an ordinary love to God, and others are endued with a more eminent
and heroical love.

And such was the love of the Primitive Christians when the rage of the Pagans
was so great against them, Eus. l. 4. c. 15. and l. 5. c. 1.
that to be a Christian was a sufficient accusation to draw them to their
execution, as it appears by those two memorable examples of Attalus and
Polycarpus; for as they made Attalus to walk about the Amphitheater of the
Lions, there was a little Tablet born before him, wherein those four words were
only written, Eus. l. 4. c. 15. and l. 5. c. 1.
(...), This is Attalus the Christian; and when Polycarpus was led to his
Execution, the Governor commanded the Crier to make Proclamation, that
Polycarpus had confessed himself to be a Christian.

And yet such was their Constancy, and so great was their love to Christ, that
they did not only say with Ignatius, Ure, tunde, divelle, Burn me, kill me,
tear me to pieces, yet thou shall never draw me from my Savior Christ, but
they did also suffer the most exquisite torments that could be invented with
such incredible patience, that the sight thereof was so far from terrifying the
beholding Christians, that it rather enflamed them to undergo the like
tortures; The great love of the Primitive Christians unto God.
for as they were leading Ptolomaeus, an honorable person, to a most
dishonorable death, only because he had confessed himself to be a Christian;
Lucius, another Christian, seeing this injustice of Urbicius the Governor,
goes unto him, and demands, What reason is it that thou should put
Ptolomaeus to death for confessing himself to be a Christian, seeing he has
not committed Adultery nor Murder; and thou can not prove him a Thief or a
Ravisher, or guilty of any crime or iniquity, therefore thy Sentence does no
credit unto the Emperor Antoninus the meek, nor to his Son, nor to the Senate
of Rome. To whom Urbicius answered nothing, but only asked Lucius, if he was a
Christian? Who replied Yes, that I am; and was therefore presently led to his
execution; For which injustice he joyfully thanked Urbicius, that by this means
he should be delivered out of the hands of such cruel Masters, and should go to
God his most loving Father.

And albeit, in the time of the Apostles and the Primitive Fathers, the
Persecutions raised against the Christians were thus cruel, Isidor. de summo
bono, l. 1. c. 28.
and so tyrannical, that many good minds cannot read or remember the same
without weeping; Yet Isidorus tells us, That in the time of Antichrist, and
toward the end of the world, the Synagogue of Satan, and the wordly Senate
shall more furiously rage against the Church of Christ and the City of God,
than ever he did in the Primitive times; for Satan was to be bound for a
thousand years; Rev. 20.2.
whereby his malice was chained, and his power abridged, that the Church might
have some refreshment, and therefore if the devil (says he) when he was fast
bound handled the Martyrs so cruelly, then surely he will do much more when he
shall be unchained, which shall be, and now is in the time of Antichrist.
Thumus Hist. l. 6. Cham de crudel. Antich. l. 16. c. 15. Mr. Fox.


And truly I think that whosoever reads Thuanus and Chamier, and the book of
the Martyrs of our Church, and consider the Massacres of those Christians, that
within this last Century of years have suffered in France, Germany, Spain,
Italy, and other places round about, and that only for Religion, and not for
worldly Dominion, which is the suffering of the Christians under the Turk, that
permits any profession so they yield themselves to his subjection.) He must
ingenuously confess this truth of Isidorus; that the greatest of all
Persecutions is that which is prosecuted by the Ministry of Antichrist that now
reigns in the world.

But if you would desire to know who is this Antichrist that now reigns and
thus rages in the world?

I answer, Who is the Great Antichrist diverse opinions.
That although many good Arguments are produced to prove the Great Turk to be
that Great Antichrist, and Constantinople to be that Babylon which is the
Throne of that bloody beast; and as many good Arguments are alleged by Powel,
Whitaker, Downham, Thompson, and others of our Protestant Writers to prove that
series paparum from Boniface in Phocas time, to this present Pope, is that
(...), spoken of by St. Paul, 2 These. 3. and that Rome is his proper seat, and
so called Babylm by St. Peter. Yet diverse others, of no small Learning, do
avouch, That as Ecclesia credentium, corpus cum capite, the whole Catholic
Church of Christ, head and members, is said to be, and is so termed, unus
Christus, one Christ, as in Joh. 3.13. And Christ says unto Saul, Why
persecutest thou me, when he persecuted his Church; So Ecclesia malignantium,
the Congregation of the wicked, or especially Senatus consultus, the great
Sanedrim of the people, the supreme Counsel, A pack of wicked men is termed the
Antichrist.
and the highest Court of any Nation, which is the representative mystical body
of that dispersed and nefarious Synagogue, is oftentimes, for their unanimous
consent in all wickedness, spoken of, quasi unus homo, as if they were but one
man; because they all have but one head, one will, and one end, to destroy the
truth, and the true Church of Christ. And this supreme stool of wickedness,
that establishes mischief by a Law, 2 These. 3.8.
does now appear to many men to be (...), That man of sin, and the child of
perdition, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the brightness of his coming; because they say,

First, There is neither Note, Argument, Saying, nor Testimony of holy
Scripture that does, competere antichristo, and is suitable unto Antichrist, but
it is most properly found to agree with that Cumulus Senatorum, the
representative Council of all wickedness. As,

1. They have seated themselves in a mystical Babylon, the Amsterdam of all
confusion, where you may easily find almost all Heresies maintained that have
been invented, and any Religion used but the true Religion, that dares not be
professed.

2. They do sit in the Temple of God as God, that is, they do possess the
truest Church of God that we know to be on earth, and as God they establish
Worship and Religion, and ordain Laws for the Government of that Church, and
root out that Worship and Government which God himself has ordained.

3. They exalt themselves above all that is called God, i.e. Above Kings, This
point of the Great Antichrist is fully and at large handled in my Book of The
Great Antichrist revealed.
of whom the Scripture most properly says, Dixi Dii estis; I said you are
Gods, because they are in Gods stead, and do exercise Gods Power here on Earth;
and yet this grand Council of the Great Synagogue would not only be worshipped
themselves as Kings, but will suppress Kings, deny any service to be done to
them, and suffer none to do them Worship, which is properly to exalt themselves
above Kings when they keep Kings so low.

4. When, by their false assembled Prophets, they deny the Notions, whereby we
understand the Father and the Son to be the true God, (as they plainly do by
the cashiering of the words, Essence, Person, Trinity, and the like words,
which the Church of God, penes quam norma loquendi, has ever used to bring her
Children thereby to some sure knowledge of that great mystery of godliness, and
to enable them to confute those wicked Heretics that denied the same) they do
manifest themselves to be that Antichrist, who, as St. John says, denies the
Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22.
which neither Turk nor Pope as yet ever did.

5. The unfolding of that great mystery of the Beast, Aug de Civitat. Dei. l.
20. c. 9. and 14.
which Beast St. Augustine understands of the Society of wicked Christians,
and the City of Satan, that is signified by that Beast; and the mystery which
the Holy Ghost sets down to be observed as the most proper Note of the
Beast, is, that it contains 666. touching which, if you omit one thousand,
which is a full and perfect number, and which is not an unusual thing in the
Scripture to do, to make the other the more mystery, and consider that in 646.
this great Sanedrim or superlative Council demanded the Militia or sovereign
rule over the King, for twenty years, which being added to 646 do make up the
just number of 666. This they say is a strong Argument to prove the grand
Council to be that Great Beast.

6. And lastly, The unspeakable unparalelled persecution of this Antichrist,
above all the persecutions that preceded it, either of Pope, Turk, or heathen
Tyrants, do plainly prove them, to the judgment of some men, to be the greatest
Antichrist that as yet is revealed unto the world; though some think that a
greater may yet come before Christ does come to judgment; which I do not
believe.

But though I say, as St. Augustine does in the like case, Alii atque alii
aliud atque aliud opinati sunt; Diverse men have diverse opinions about the time,
place, and person of Antichrist which neither my Text nor my time will give me
leave, either to discuss, or to disprove any of the same now.

Yet thus much I dare boldly say, that letting pass the persecutions of the
Preachers, not to be paralelled in any History, if you consider first the
number of them, all the Reverend Bishops, all the Deans, all Prebends, and all
the best Divines in the whole Kingdom And 2. the misery that is imposed upon
them, worse than death, Quia dulce mori miseris? To be spoiled of all their
means, banished from all their friends, wife, children, and Parents, and
exposed to all wants and contempts, so that neither Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian,
nor Julian, brought such a storm upon the Church of Christ, as is now brought
upon the body of the whole Clergy within these five years; and omitting the
many thousands of good Christians, No Historian can show me any king that has
suffered more indignities at any ^nchristian hand, than King Charles has
suffered from the Long Parliament.
that for their Religion and good conscience have lost their lives, livings,
and liberties. I say, letting all these things pass, I dare appeal to any
impartial Reader, that neither Eusebius, nor Socrates, nor Thuanus, nor
Chammier, nor any other Hystorian, Ecclesiastical or Profane, that have
written of Persecutions, or of the cruelty of Antichrist can show me any King
(since the King of the Jews) that by his own Subjects, and for no vice of his
own that malice it self can tax him, but only in reality (whatsoever is
otherwise pretended) for the defense of Christ his faith, and the true service
of God, the protection of all faithful Preachers, and the upholding of the
Fundamental Laws of his Kingdom, has or could suffer more unkingly indignities
by any Antichrist, than our gracious King has done by his own ungraciaus
Subjects of these three Kingdoms.

But stay, and let us consider, that, although these Persecutions be exceeding
great, yet our sins and transgressions are far greater, and God in all this is
most just; and as Ezra says, Ezra 9 13.
Punishes us less than our iniquities deserve; for certainly we must confess,
what the world sees, that we have sinned with our Fathers, we have done amiss
and dealt wickedly; and therefore as Eusebius confesses the iniquities of the
Primitive Christians to have pulled upon them those Heathen Persecutions, so
must we acknowledge this Antichristian Tyranny, to have most justly fallen upon
us.

And not only so, but seeing we have so justly deserved it, let us submit our
selves under the mighty hand of God, repent and be sorry for whatsoever we have
done amiss, and pray to God for grace and strength, to suffer what shall be
laid upon us, either for the punishment of our sins, or the trial of our Faith
to God, and our Loyalty to our King, not only the loss of all worldly things,
but even of our life it self, because that in so suffering unto death, we shall
be sure to have the Crown of life; which the Lord grant unto us for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom be all glory and honor for ever and ever, Amen.

I have spent two hours in treating of this one verse already; and because here
is magnum in parvo, abundance of treasure in this little mine, I must crave
leave to spend one hour more, and with that I hope I shall finish all that I
have to say on these words.

You may remember I told you the words contain, 1. Gods love to Man. 2. Man's
love to God.


The first I handled in my first Sermon. And, In the second, I showed you three
parts; that is to say, 1. The Persons, We, 2. The Act, Love, 3. The Object, him,
We love him. The Object of our love, God.

The two first in my last Sermon. And now because I love neither Tautologies,
nor to stand long upon repetitions, I will proceed unto the object of our love,
where the Apostle says, We love him, that is, God. And I would to God that we
did all love him, quia actus distinguitur per objectum; because it is not our
love that does hurt us, but the object of our love makes or marreth all; for
as St. Augustine says, Duas civitates duo faciunt amores; our love to God
builds up Jerusalem, Aug. super Psalm. 64.
the Church and City of God, and our love to the world, and these worldly
things, builds up Babylon, the Synagogue of Satan.

And therefore this is the error of the sons of men, The error of men.
not that we are subject unto Passions, and endued with the affections of Fear,
Hate, Love, and the like; but that we misguide our Passions, and misorder our
affections, by misplacing them where they ought not to be settled; for we may
fear, so it be him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire; we may
hate, so it be the thing that is evil, and we may love, so it be what we
ought, and as we ought to love.

But this is that which God cannot endure, that we should fear men more than
God, or fear temporal losses, goods, or lands, more than the loss of our souls,
and the wounding of a good conscience; or that we should hate our brethren, and
not their sins, which we cherish in our selves, though we detest them in all
others; or that we should love the world and not God, or any thing in the world
more than God, or so much, that it should any ways lessen our love to God.

And therefore here I may stop my course, and stay a while, to reprove those
many millions of men that are, as the Philosophers said, The Citizens of the
world, and do freely bestow their loves, not on God, but either upon the vain
pleasures, The love of vain things choaketh our love to God.
or the vile profits of this wicked world. And it is a strange thing to see,
how one affects Honor, another Beauty, a third Authority, and most of us
some one kind of vanity or other, that either drowneth or drives away, and so
lesseneth much our love to God: And above all things, the love of Riches
choaketh this divine love in all worldly men.

For, as Apolonius Tyanaeus says, That he has seen a stone, called Pantaura,
which is the Queen of all other stones, and has in it all the virtues that are
to be found in all the other precious stones; So, to this stone do some men
compare riches; Kiches what they are like.
because they suppose riches to contain in them the force and virtue of all
other things, and are able to bring mighty things to pass; as the fiercest
beasts are made tame by them, the fairest Ladies are won by them, as Jupiter
prevailed with Danae, What great things wealth and riches have done.
when as the Poets feign, he came unto her in a golden shower; The greatest
Kings are subdued by them, when as no weapons can overcome the shields of Gold;
and Rome it self might have been bought, if Jugurth had had wealth enough to
purchase it, as he said when he passed out of Rome. And you see the Fishes of
the Sea, that are overwhelmed with water, and drowned in the Deep, cannot
escape the force of Riches; and the Fowls of the air, though of the swiftest
Wings, yet can they not fly from their Empire; yea, what Altitudes have not
Riches abated? What difficulties have they not vanquished? What
improbabilities, I will not say impossibilities, have they not facilitated? And
what things have they desired, that they have not obtained?

Therefore St. Augustine, showing the folly of the Pagans about their selected
gods, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 7. c. 3.
wondreth, that if wise men were their Selectors, why Venus was preferred
before the Lady Virtue; or if Venus deserves her enhansement, because more do
affect her, than those that love virtue, then why was not Lady Money more
famous than Minerva, seeing that in all sorts of men there are more that love
coin better than knowledge, and all Trades aim at Money, and say with the
Poet, Quaerenda pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos,
Haec Janus summus ab imo perdocet
Haec recinunt juvenes dictata senesque;
Which made Euripides to present one in an humor, that neglected all things and
all reproaches; for wealth; because (said he) men seld om or never ask, how
good or how honest is such a one, but how rich is he? and each man is that,
which he possesses, and is so esteemed, according as he is worth and no more;

And therefore most men (I mean worldly men) love their gold as their God, and
this God has their love; And yet riches in their own nature, have neither
honor, nor knowledge, nor power, nor valor, nor any other good nor evil in
themselves more than that, whereunto they that do possess them do direct them,
but they are like the water, Riches like the waters of Feneo.
of the lake Feneo, whereof the Arcadians do report, that whosoever drinks of
it in the night, he falls sick, but whosoever takes it in the day time, he
becomes well; so riches, used for the works of darkness, to oppress the
poor, to subdue our Prince, to uphold pride, to maintain Idolatry, rebellion,
and the like, are very poison unto our Souls; but if we employ them for the
deeds of light, How riches do evil, and how they may do good.
to uphold the right, to relieve the poor, to defend the innocent, they are as
antidotes against all evil; for neither is the rich man condemned, nor the poor
man saved, because the one is rich, and the other poor, but as both may be
saved, so beth may be condemned, because the rich man abuses his wealth, and
the poor man his poverty.

And, as most men hunt after riches, so I might show you how others affect
authority, and others are drunk with the desire of honors, but the time would
be too short for me to go about to cut off the head of this monstrous Hydra of
misordered love; and most men do profess to know, that as S. John says, 1 John 2.15. Whosoever loves the World, the love of the Father is not in him;
and that this world is full of snares and thorns, and vanities and vexation of
spirit; and that the lovers of this world are none other than the Servants of
the Devil; and they do likewise confess, that God has done and does all those
great things for them, which we have set down, and therefore that they are no
worldlings, but do love God with all their hearts, and do think themselves much
wronged, if they should be otherwise suspected.

Yet because, 2 These. 3.2.
as the Apostle says, all men have not faith, so all men have not love, What
we must do if we love God.
especially such love as they ought to have; therefore lest we should deceive
our selves herein, and so destroy our Souls, we must know, that God is truth;
and therefore he that loves God, loves truth, and whosoever loves lies and
falsehoods, loves not God; and God is Justice; therefore he that loves God,
loves that which is right and just, and he that loves to do wrong loves not
God; and so God is Wisdom, and God is Mercy, and therefore he that loves God,
loves Wisdom and shows mercy; and they that are foolish, as all the wicked
are, and do show cruelty unto their brethren, as do the blood thirsty men that
do now seize and kill and slay the innocent that never offended them, cannot be
said to love God.

But for the fuller manifestation of our love to God,

1. Two things to be done.
I will set down some of the most infallible signs of this true love of God,
the best of them that are collected;

2. Lest, upon the discussion of these truths, we find our selves destitute of
this love I will briefly and as the time will give me leave, show the
impediments and set down the furtherances of our love to God. The infallible
signs of our true love of God. The Image of of Love how anciently painted: And
why.
And

1. I find amongst the Ancient Hieroglyphics, that the Image of Love was
painted in the shape of a beautiful woman, clothed in a green vesture, wherein
was written these two words, prope and procul, far and nigh, in the breast were
engraven life and death, in the borders of her garment were set Winter and
Summer, and in her side a wound, so wide, and so largely opened, that all her
inward parts were transparent.

And those Sages that pourtrayed Love thus, did it for these reasons;

1. In the shape of a woman, to show the vehemency of this affection, The
explanation of the hierogliphick. 2 Samuel 1.26.
because women, by reason of their weakness to bridle their passions, as they
are more violent in their hate, so are they more fervent in their love, and
more vehement in all their desires than men; therefore David, expressing the
great love of Jonathan toward him, says, that his love passed the love of
women.

2. Of a beautiful woman, to show that Love is an alluring subject, and is
sweet and delectable, even to them that are troubled with Love.

3. In a green vesture, to show that true love ought always to be fresh and
fair, and never withered, nor waxen old, because it never fails, 1 Cor. 13.8.
as the Apostle testifies.

4. In the words, far and nigh, that were set in the forehead of that Image,
was signified that, contrary to the common practice of the world to follow that
old Proverb, Qui procul ab oculis procul est a limine cordis, Out of sight out
of mind, true love remains firm, as well in the absence as in the presence of
them that we love; when as neither length of time nor distance of place can any
ways alter the constancy or lessen the affection of a true Lover.

5. In life and death that were engraven on the breast, was showed, that, Cant.
8.6.
as Solomon says, love is as strong as death, Ecl. 49.1.
and cannot be extinguished even by death it self; but we will love the very
names and memories of them, whom we loved, as the Son of Syrach says of Josias.

6. By the Winter and Summer, that were set in the borders of her garment was
signified, that true love is permanent and durable as well in adversity as in
prosperity; for though as the Poet says of worldly lovers, Donec eris felix --
While prosperity lasts, and thy table is well furnished, thou shall want no
friends nor miss of any guests; but if adversity comes, thy friends will
fail, and thy guests will be gone; so the Prophet tells us, there be many men,
that will love God, and praise him too, cum lucrum accidit illis, when they
receive any benefit from him, and when (as David says) their corn and wine and
oil increases; Psalm. 4.8. Job 1.11.
but if any great loss, or sud calamity should happen unto them, then what the
Devil said falsely of holy Job, may be truly said of these worldly men, they
will curse God to his face, and therefore God may justly say to them, as S.
Augustine says of the like, you have showed me love indeed, and in some
things, kept my commandments, but it was for your own profits sake, non quia me
pure diligebatis, Aug. despeculo humanae miseriae.
sed quia a me lucrari volebatis; not because you did Sincerely love me, but
because you desired to be enriched and exalted by me, like those Jews that
followed Christ, not because they saw his miracles, and were edified by his
heavenly doctrine, but because they did eat of the loaves and were filled, i.
e. for his temporal blessings, John 6.26.
and not for the love of his spiritual graces; or like S. Peter, that would
build tabernacles unto Christ upon Mount Tabor, where he was transfigured in
glory, but did forsake him on Mount Calvary, when he was oppressed with
calamities and overladed with injuries, just like too many of the servants of
our now gracious King, that could serve and extol him in White Hall, while he
sat on his throne of Majesty, and yet now serve and magnify his oppressors
and opponents, when he is compassed with afflictions, which is to love in
Summer, and not in the cold of Winter; yet I say, the true lovers of God will
as truly love him in the Winter of adversity and persecution, Job 2.10.
as in the Summer of prosperity and exaltation; and will say with holy Job,
shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? or
shall we rejoice at our advancement, and shall we not be contented at our
abasement?

7. And lastly by the wound, that she had opened in her side, is showed, that
true love reveals the very secrets of the heart to his beloved; so will they
that love God, confess all their sins with Daniel, and lay open all their
wants with David, unto God; and they need not be ashamed to confess them, when
as before their confession, they are all patent to his eyes, as the Apostle
shows; But because all these are signs of any true love to any object,
therefore I will show you some more proper signs of our love to God; and

The 1. Acts 7.48.
is to love Gods house; for though as S. Steven says, God dwells not in
houses made wiah hands, but as the Poet says, Enter praesenter, The chiefest
Signs of our Love to God. 1. To love Gods House.
Deus est ubique potenter, That is, in the Prophets phrase, he fills all
places: yet as he chooses a Seventh day for his service, when as all days are
his, and challenges a tenth part of our goods for his servants, when as all we
have is at his disposing; so he requires a Church, and a material house to be
served in, when as all the houses, and all the places in the World, Psalm. 27.4.
Psalm. 84.2.
cannot comprehend his Majesty; therefore the Prophet David says, one thing
have I required of God, which I will desire, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life; and again, my Soul longs, yea, even
faints for the Courts of the Lord, Hag. 1.4.
and the Prophet does extremely tax them that dwell themselves in seiled
houses, and suffer the house of God to be wast, fit for nothing, but, as I see
it now in many places, to lodge beasts and birds; and they may be as much and
more blamed, that, neglecting his consecrated house, do think their polluted
barns to be good enough to serve our God.

Secondly, To love Gods Word. Psalm. 119.79 and 47. and 72. What we understand
by Gods word.
To love Gods Word, is another sign of our love to God; therefore the Prophet
David says, O how do I love thy Law, my delight is in thy Commandments; and
again, thy testimonies are better unto me, than thousands of gold and silver.

But here you must observe, that, because every one pretends to love Gods
Word, as they do profess to love God, by Gods Word we understand not the bare
Written letter, but the truth of the holy Scripture, for, as the Heretics in
Tertull. time, credebant Scripturis, ut crederent adversus Scripturas; believed
not the Scripture, but what themselves pleased out of the Scriptures; so now
and oftentimes always, the Word of God is perverted and mis-interpreted,
(especially by two sorts of men, as S. Peter notes,

1. 2 Pet. 3.16. Two sorts of men pervert Gods word.
Those that are unlearned, and have not knowledge enough to undestand the truth
of these high Mysteries.

2. Those that are unstable and unconstant, and therefore change the sense of
Scriptures as they see the times and occasions change) As for example.

1. Mat. 20.26, 27
The words of Christ, whosoever will be great among you let him be your
Minister, and whosoever will be chief among you let him be your Servant; the
Presbyterians allegde them to prove a parity of orders and an equality amongst
all the Ministers of Gods Church, and yet the very same words are produced by
all the Fathers and all the most learned Divines, to show the diversity of our
callings, and the superiority of some of them above the others; which is indeed
the very truth; because otherwise, he would never have said, whosoever will be
chief, but he would have told them plainly and briefly, they were all equal,
and none was chief, or none was greater than the rest; but, in saying,
whosoever will be chief, let him be your Servant; he shows the duty and
humility that should be in him which was to have the priority, and does
sufficiently confirm the superiority of some above the rest.

2. Mat. 26.26.
The words of the consecration of the Eucharist, take eat this is my body; are
interpretd by Bellarm. and all the Church of Rome, that quote the Authors of
all ages, to prove the Transubstantiation of that holy bread into the very body
of Christ; and yet the very same words are expounded by the Lutherans to prove
their consubstantiation, and by the Fathers rightly understood, as they are
amply quoted by Pet. Martyr, and by the most learned of our Church, do prove,
not the oral, or corporal eating, but the spiritual and sacramental eating of
the body of Christ, by Faith; which is indeed there, really, but ineffably
eaten, and should be so believed to be without any further searching into these
Divine Mysteries, lest with the men of Bethshemesh, we be justly smitten for
peeping too narrowly into the Ark of the Lord.

3. The very same Scriptures to the number of forty places, were alleged by the
Arians to prove their Damnable Heresy, that Christ was (...), of the like
nature with his Father, as were produced by the Orthodox to prove him to be
(...), of the same essence with God.

4. That Scripture which commands us, Matthew. 22.21.
to render unto Caesar what is Caesar's and to God what is Gods, is truly
alleged by most Divines to exact our full obedience to those our just
Sovereigns that do lawfully sit on their royal thrones; and this is so pressed
by the true Expositors, that it may be observed, God requires this duty to be
performed, before his own dues should be rendered.

And yet when the right Kings are thrust out by any Usurpers, (as the Roman
Emperors were oftentime expussed, and since many lawful Kings have been
unlawfully dethroned) the very same Scripture is still alleged by some other
false Interpreters, to require obedience to those powerful intruders that seem
to have the lawful authority.

So when the Lawful Governors of Gods People are undecently reviled, the
answer of St. Paul, to them that said unto him, revilest thou Gods High Priest?
When he replied, I wist not, brethren that he was the High Priest, for it is
written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the people, is justly urged
by most of the best Interpreters, to condemn the upbraiders of just authority;
And yet the same example is produced by some other spurious divines, to require
the like obedience to intruding and usurping Governors, when they have got the
power, and have attained unto the authority, though by very unlawful ways.

And in all these, and many more places of like nature, I may say with S. Aug.
in the like case, alit atque alii, aliud atque aliud opinati sunt, But the
truth is, that the mistaking of the true sense of the Scripture, or the
misapplying of those holy examples, is nothing else, but to make the same Word
of God (as Card. Hosius calls it) a nose of wax, that may be wrought to serve
every turn; because the same univocal truth cannot be rightly produced, to
prove contraries, John 6.52.
or a direct contrariety of things. And therefore I say that, as hoc, est
corpus meum, do no ways confirm the carnivorant, or inhumane eating of the
true natural flesh of Christ that was born of the Virgin, and crucified for us
under Pontius Pilate (which the very Jews loathed to hear of, otherwise then
sacramentally, mystically, and spiritually, Dr. Hanmer in his chron. after
Eusebius. his History makes this plain.
though really, by Faith, as I showed unto you before; and the rhapsody of the
misalleaged Scripture by the Arians, do no ways prove the wicked Heresy of
the (...); so the words of Christ to render tribute unto Caesar, do no ways
require, the yielding of our obedience to any usurped power, or intruding
Sovereigns.

Because now, as you may see out of Josephus, Appian, and other Histories both
of the Greeks and Romans, and out of the Books of the Machabees, the Jews ever
since Pompey's time were become Tributaries, and were tied by many other
Obligations, for their defense against Antiochus and other enemies, unto the
Romans, to become Tributaries unto them; and the Scepter was now quite departed
from Judah, when Herod that was an Idumaean, had quite extirpated all the Royal
Line, and they had not then any other more Lawful visible Sovereign, then
Caesar, John 19.15.
as themselves confess, We have no King but Caesar, whose Image was upon their
Coin, which thing is one of the chiefest things inter jura regalia; and
therefore they did acknowledge Judas Galilaeus for a Rebel, and to have his
Blood most justly mingled with his Sacrifice by Pilate, because he denied
Tribute to be given, and Prayers to be made, for the life of the Emperor.

And the example of S. Paul is more clear, that as he gave no Reverence, so he
deemed no obedience to be due to the usurped power of Ananias, when he said God
shall smite thee, thou whited Wall, that is, thou Hypocrite, for sit thou
to judge me after the Law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law?
And if you say, that he recalled himself, and recanted his Error, by
acknowledging his Fault (as some Expositors, that is, Erasmus and Cyprian, qui
videntur hanc Interpretationem approbare, would have it so) when he says, I
wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest; I answer, Aug. Epist. 5. ad
Marcel. quits him from all fault; and says, Irridenter Circumstantes admonet.
Hieron. ad Nepot. excuses him also, and alleges Crassus in Cicer. de Orat.
l. 3. for the like Answ. A Lapide and Lorinus in Loc. do clear him likewise.
Baron. to 1. Anno 58. etc. 150, distinguit inter Summum Sacerdotem and
Principem Sacerdotum; and thereby makes good the Apostles Answer, because in
that Confusion he could not well discern the one from the other. And Beza in
his Larg. annotat. in Loc. quits the Apostle from all fault because this Anan.
was an Usurper, as Josephus testifies. And therefore we say, that this Answer
of S. Paul acknowledges no Fault, but rather confirms my Saying, that he
deemed no Obedience to be due to his usurped and unjust Authority; because you
must not think S. Paul to be so ignorant, as not to know him to be the reputed
High Priest, else he had not said, Sit thou to judge me after the Law? and
he had been 9 or 10 Days in Jerusalem, before he was brought to the Counsel;
and think you, that in all that time, he understood not who was High Priest,
the greatest Governor in Town? but S. Paul did not know, that is, did not
acknowledge; which (...), usually signifies, or he did not take him to be the
True and Lawful High Priest; for if he had taken him to be such an one, he
would never have reviled him; because the Law forbids us to speak evil of
the Ruler of the People; but because he knew him to be an Intruder and Usurper,
as Josephus testifies, and such an one as had no just Power nor authority over
him, therefore he says, God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: and yet being
reproved for this Reproof, he makes use of the wisdom of the Serpent, to which
our Savior advises us, and as he escaped the violence of his Enemies, when he
perceived the one half of them to be Pharisees, and other Sadduces, by making
such a Speech as divided them, so here he evadeth the like Fury, by this fair
Answer, I wist not Brethren that he was the High Priest.

Therefore though his Reply might be some excuse for his Maleloquy, which
Michael would not use against Satan, yet this Example gives no countenance to
the yielding of Obedience to Usurped Authority, unless you will conclude S.
Paul to be either very ignorant, or a very great Dissembler, which is very
injurious to think of so holy an Apostle.

But the Case of Athaliah puts this out of all doubt, because the had the Power
and the Government, and the Authority settled upon her, about the space of seven
years, yet because she had no Right, 2 Reg. 11.4.
but did usurp the Crown, the good High Priest Jehojada was so far from obeying
her, that as soon as ever he found ability, and a fit opportunity, he devised
the way to depose her, and to set the Crown upon the right Heirs Head, whose
example we ought all to follow, when opportunity serves.

Or were I not so; that we must renounce usurped power, how shall we protect
and maintain the just and lawful authority? 2 Samuel 15, 16.
surely the people that followed Abso lon, when he had the power to trample
Justice under foot, to possess the royal City, and to drive the lawful King to
fly from place to place; and the followers of those perfideous Rebels of
Killkenney, that so barbarously massacred the poor Protestants, and so foully,
so falsely deluded both the good King and all the Kings friends, and have now,
as themselves pretend, the great power in this Kingdom, may well be justified
not to have offended, if this doctrine may be defended, that usurped authority
is not to be resisted, but to be obeyed, when its power is most prevalent.

But the Apostle tells us plainly, Romans 14.2.
that whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and with what faith, I pray you, can I
obey that power and submit my self to that authority, which my conscience tells
me to be against truth and without Justice.

But Tertull. ad Scapulam makes this most clear; where he shows how tender
the Christians were to preserve the right to the lawful Emperors, and
therefore though Albinus was most powerful in the West, and Pisen Niger in the
East, yet the Christians would be nec Albiniani, nec Cassiani, nec Nigriani.

Yet this much I must tell you, that where the right heir is not apparent, as
it was not amongst many of the Primitive Emperors, who were often lifted up to
that royal dignity by none other right than the Sword of the tumultuous
Soldiers, and unconstant cohorts, and were therefore obeyed by the good
Christians, because they knew not of any other that had any better right unto
the Empire, the same as yet being unsettled to continue in any hereditary line.;
or when the just Title to the Crown is not cleared, as perhaps it was not to
all the Subjects in the time of Hen. 4. Edw. 4. and Rich. 3. and the like
doubtful claims, then it is not for every private mechanic or ignorant
Rustic to determine the right to the Crown, and decide the equity or the
iniquity of such powers; but as the Apostle says, and as it was most learnedly
handled by a most Reverend and a most learned Prelate of our Church, not long
since in this place, they ought to study to be quiet, to follow their own
Trades, 1 These. 4 11.
and to do their own business, and not to polupragmatize in matters so
transcendent and so metaphysical to their Mechanic and Rustic capacities.

And in this qualified sense you must understand and not mistake the meaning of
the same most Reverend Prelate in this place upon our last Kings day, that when
it is doubtful to whom the right of the Sovereign Power should belong, or who
has right unto the Sovereignty, then all ignorant and private men are excused
though they resist not the Government that has the present power over them,
but do obey the same, especially by their passive obedience, and likewise by
their active obedience in all honest and lawful demands.

All which, with all that I said before, I say to clear the integrity of the
said Reverend Prelates intention, from any sinister apprehension of
misunderstanding hearers.

But where the right is indubitable, and the sovereignty not to be questioned
whose it is, as it is with our most gracious King, whom all the Irish Rebels of
Kilkenny, and all the other Rebels of these three Kingdoms, deny not to be
their lawful Sovereign: I say, that what Power soever exalts it self above
him, or against him, (which the Parliament of England does not, when it
challenges only a kind of co-ordination with him) we are not to yield any
obedience unto the same, especially if the same command, or require any thing
contrary to his commands; because, as the Son of Syrach says, We are to stand
with the right, and in the truth, and as our Savior says, To continue
faithful therein unto death, if we desire to enjoy the Crown of life.

And therefore, though the dumb devil may hold my tongue, Rev. 2.10.
so that I shall be able to say nothing of what truth should be delivered, yet
all the power of hell shall never open my mouth, and cause me to say that
untruth which my conscience tells me cannot be justified; because this love
to the truth of Scripture is a singular Testimony of our love to God.

3. The next sign of the love of God is to love the honor of God, without
which we cannot be said to love God. To love Gods honor.


4. The next sign is to love Gods Image, that is Man.

5. To observe Gods Precepts.

6. To hate Sin.

7. A longing desire to be with God; to have an Union and Communion with him;
for it is an impregnable property of a person loving, to desire to be united to
the person loved; and therefore Pyramus loving Thisbe, cries out to the wall,
that hindered them to meet together, Invide, dicebat, paries quid amantibus
obstas? Many other signs of Gods love I should show unto you, and the
impediments that hinders us to love God; such as are,

1. The ignorance of the incomprehensible sweetness, and unspeakable goodness
of God.

2. The too much love of our selves, and of our carnal desires.

3. The bewitching allurements of the pleasures, profits, and other vanities of
this present world, and the like, that do hinder, blind, and suffocate our love
to God.

And then last of all, I should show unto you the helps and furtherances to
beget and to nourish the love of God in us, such as are,

1. The continual meditation of Gods goodness toward us, and his excellencies
in himself.

2. The daily reading and hearing of Gods Word, and the reading of other godly
Books, that do incite and invite us to love the Lord above all the things of
this World.

3. Continual Prayers to God for Grace, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit
to incline our hearts to love him.

4. Often discourse and conference with good and holy men about the goodness of
God and heavenly things, and the like.

All which I should more fully and amply enlarge unto you, but that the time
binds me to defer the same to a fitter opportunity, and in the interim to pray
to God for grace to abandon the love of this World, and to love God, and to
increase in our love to him more and more, through Jesus Christ our Lord; To
whom be Glory, and Honor, and Thanks now and for evermore. Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
THE DECLARATION OF THE Just Judgments of GOD.
THE Man, that was according to God's own heart, the best Subject, that ever we
read of, and the greatest Ring that ever Israel saw, David, the Son of Jesse
says, that the LORD is righteous in all his ways, Psalm. 145.17.
and holy in all his works: and the Prophet Daniel testifies as much; and so
do all the Saints and Servants of God; yea, and the very wicked Reprobates do
confess the same: for Adoni-bezek, the Tyrant, that had Seventy Kings, having
their Thumbs, and great Toes cut off, to gather their meat under his Table,
does acknowledge, that God did most justly deal with him, as he had dealt with
others; and so we find, that the Law of God is most just, and requires
Justice to be done at all times, in all places, and to all persons; as an eye
for an eye, tooth for tooth, and he that sheddeth man's blood, by man should
his blood be shed: yet such is the corruption of man's Nature, that we do often
judge amiss of the just Judgments of God; and therefore Christ advises us not
to judge, that is, amiss; or, if we judge, not to do it according to the
Superficies, and outward appearance of things, but to judge righteous
Judgments, and especially of all the Judgments of God, that he shows either
in this world, or in the world to come. And because God of late has poured out
much of his wrath, and indignation, and showed many Judgments upon these
Kingdoms, I will endeavor, Romans 2.3.
by the help, and assistance of the same God, to make, as the Apostle says, a
Declaration of the just Judgments of God, to stop the mouths of all
discontented Murmurers, and to show the just deserts of us all, that either
have been, or still are most justly punished; and I shall further show, how
that in the midst of God's anger against these Nations, he was pleased to
continue his mercies, and loving kindnesses to his dear, and faithful Servant,
and our late most gracious King, of ever blessed Memory, Charles the First.

And first, as the Poet says, A Jove principium Musae; so I shall begin with
him, that was Jehovah's Vicegerent, the Anointed of the Lord, and our most
gracions King.

CHAP. I.
FIrst then for King Charles, I knew him before he was crowned King, a most
virtuous, Vera quidem res est. patrem sequitur sua proles; Et sequitur leviter
filia matris iter.
and Religious Prince, religiously following the pious steps of his good and
godly Father, and well-beloved, and well spoken of by all his Fathers Court;
and pietas spectata per ignes, and his Travels through France, and Return from
Spain, have sufficiently testified his sincerity, and constancy in the true
Religion: so that I may truly say of him; Firma valent per^se, nullumque
Machaona quaerunt And after he was crowned King, all in white, in token of that
purity, and innocence, which he desired always to retain, according to the
counsel of Solomon, that says, Let thy Garments be always white: I living in
His Court, in no mean place, had a very great desire to note, and observe the
lives, actions, and contrivements, both of the King, and of most other men,
that were of any note in the King's house; and throughout all the space of
seventeen, or eighteen years, that I was resident in His Court, whereof I
waited in my turn six or seven years, upon His Majesty, my Witness is in
Heaven, that I could observe none, nor find out any man, either of the Lords,
Knights, or other Gentlemen of his House, that was of so mild a Disposition, so
courteous in his Conversation, and so pious in all the actions, and
circumstances of Religion as King Charles was: a man, that I never heard to
take the Name of God in vain at any time; nor ever saw him passionately angry
with any man: neither do I believe, that the mouth of the Father of Lies could
justly tax him of any open crime, or inexcusable defect, either of Charity,
Equity, or Piety, before the Birth of the Long Parliament, or after throughout
all his life; for he knew that, Qui sceptra duro saevus imperio reget, Timet
timentes, metus in autorem cedit: Seneca in Oedipo, Act. 3.
and I am sure, I am able to arise in the last day to testify against many of
his enemies, and accusers, that I have often heard them justifying him in those
things, for which afterward they accused him, and condemned him; yea, they
were his Counselors to have them done, and then his Prosecutours, and
Persecutours of him unto the death for doing them.

Much more could I speak, and speak it most truly, in the just praise and
commendation of this good and godly King; and when all that I could speak were
set down, I must confess mine offense, that plenty it self, and the abundance
of his virtues, -- Talem vix reperit unum Millibus (...) multis bominum
consultus Apollo. Ausonius.
and merits, has made me poor in mine expressions thereof.

Prob dolor, infoelix sors nostra amittere talem,
Ter foelix talem, quae tenet or aviorum.
And is it not therefore strange, that the just and good God should suffer the
wicked Sons of men so strictly to prosecute, and so unexemplarily to handle,
and to deal with so just, so good, and so Religious a Prince, as the Long
Parliament has done with King Charles, and so to confute that Poet, which
says, Nullum caruit exemplo nefas: when as no History of any Times, of any
Kingdom, can parallel the proceedings against King Charles.

I answer no, not at all; but in the death of this good and godly King may be
seen, the great merey of God, and I dare not say the Revelation of the just
Judgment of God; but the gentle chastisement of a most loving Father, to a most
dear and dutiful Son, that all men, that see the same, might praise God for the
one, and fear him for the other; for, as the death of the Son of God, Jesus
Christ, was most unjustly done by the wicked Jews, that condemned him for
Blasphemy against God, and Treason against Caesar, whereof he was most
innocent, and guilty of neither; yet was it most justly suffered to be done by
the determinate Counsel of God, as Saint Peter shows, because that out of his
great love, and mercy to save sinful man, he became his Surety, to pay his
Debts, and to satisfy God's Wrath, by suffering that death for our sins, that,
as the Prophet says, We by his stripes might be healed; therefore did God most
justly execute upon him, what he had most mercifully undertaken for us all: so,
though King Charles was a very good man, and a most religious Prince, and as
his friends knew, most innocent, and free from all those crimes, that were laid
to his charge by the long Parliament; yet could be not be justified from all
offenses against his God; but, as Moses that was faithful in all Gods House,
yet failed he a little at the waters of Meriba; and as David that was a man
according to Gods own heart; yet offended he also in numbering the people; and
as Ezechias and Josias that were two of the three best Princes of all the Kings
of Israel and Judah; yet both of them transgressed: the one in showing his
Treasures to the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, and the other in his
confederacy with a wicked King; and God justly punished every one of them;
Moses, that he should not so much as enter into the Land of Canaan; David, with
the loss of threescore and ten thousand of his people; Ezechias to have all
that he showed transported into Babylon, and Josias even with death in the
Valley of Megiado: so King Charles, though a very good man, and a most just and
pious Prince, and a faithful Servant of Jesus Christ, and a strenuous defender
of the true Faith; yet, because that, when God for his trial tempted him, as he
tempted Abraham, Job, and many others, temptatione probationis, non
deceptionis, to see how far he would stand unmovable in the right way, he
either through fear and frailty, or rather as I conceive, by the deceitful
persuasions of some, whom he supposed to be his faithful Counselors, but were
indeed seducing friends, yielded, and perhaps with some reluctance against his
own mind, consented to the desires of some evil men, to do those things that
offended God; therefore as he did, though deceived, what he should not do,
(like the man of God in 1 King.) so his good God that did most truly love him,
did notwithstanding most justly suffer his Counselors to become his enemies to
war against him, and to punish him, for what himself and his friends knew, and
most others conceived, and do believe he never did; for it is just with God to
punish our sins and offenses, when and where, and how, and by whom he pleases,
as I shall declare unto you by this plain Story, which may illustrate this
point unto you.

A certain poor man had a Pick-axe wherewith he got his living; and there was a
certain rich man, his Neighbor, that coveted the same, and finding it, on a
time, left where the poor man wrought, stole it from him, so that the poor
Labourer was fain to provide another, and after many years, and the memory of
the Pick-axe quite forgotten, the rich man driving some of his Cattle to the
Market, a lusty fellow, that had stolen a couple of Oxen, drove them among the
rich man's Beasts, and after a while, fearing to be apprehended, by the search
and cry, that he perceived to come after him, he prayed the rich man to drive
his Oxen a little way, while he went a Furlong or two, to deliver a Letter to
such a Gentleman, and the rich man, suspecting no evil, did so; but not long
after, the searchers for the Oxen found them with the rich man, driven toward
the Fair amongst his own Beasts, and apprehending him, prosecuted him so
eagerly, and the rather, because he was a rich man, that he was condemned to
die for stealing of those Oxen; and being upon the Ladder, complaining of this
injustice, and professing his innocence herein, he spieth a Kite flying up and
down over his head, and crying, as he conceived, for the Pick-axe, for the
Pick-axe; whereupon, his Conscience accusing him, he cried out, that God was
just, and his judgment right; for though he was innocent from the Oxen; yet he
long agone, had stolen a poor man's Pick-axe, for which God now brought him to
this end; so no doubt, many a Thief and murderer, may escape for the robbery
and murders committed by them; and yet may suffer for that which they never
knew, which is most just with God, though unjustly done by men.

And so God might justly, though most mercifully too, suffer the enemies of
this good King to condemn him for what he never did, because he might offend
God in some other things, for which he was never blamed by his enemies, nor
accused by the Parliament.

And let no man wonder, nor blame me for saying, that the King, though never so
good a King, and so pious a man, should notwithstanding fail, and offend God in
some things, when the Apostle tells us plainly, that in many things we offend
all. For as there is no condition of life, be it never so happy, but it has
his cross, to show unto us, that perfect felicity is to be expected elsewhere:
so there is no Prince, nor any man living, be he never so wise, but he
sometimes erreth, and be he never so virtuous, but he will sometimes offend,
else should he prove himself to be more then man, because, as Plutarch says,
(...), It is more then is in the power of man to offend nothing in great
matters, such as are the Affairs of Kings, and Princes.

But what were those things, wherein this good King has failed, and offended
God, and for which he might justly suffer his enemies to war, and to prevail
against him? can any man tell what they be?

I answer, that the wisest of the Kings friends conceive them to be not those
things, for which his enemies warred against him, and condemned him most
unjustly; but might be those things, wherein, contrary to his own free desires,
he yielded to the desires of his enemies: and those you may find in the Bishop
of Ossory his Discovery of Mysteries, to be those three principal mistakes, and
not denied to be so by the King himself, when Secretary Falkland would for
those things, have suppressed that Book; but the good King told him, they were
true, and so suffered the Book to be published.

1. The threefold errors of the King.
To yield his assent to put the Earl of Strafford to death. 2. To pass the Act,
that excluded the Bishops from the House of Peers, and the other Clergy from
Civil Affairs. 3. To make the Parliament perpetual, and so by himself,
indissoluble, till they consented to dissolve it.
These things pleased the Parliament, but might displease God, and might
without doubt most justly move God to be offended with his Majesty, and to
suffer his enemies most unjustly, and causelessly to rage against him; for that
First, Touching the Earl of Strafford, the King, we all know, loved his person,
and admired his worth, and took indefatigable pains at his Trial, to be fully
certified, and informed of those things, whereof the Earl was accused, and as
the Poet says, Regia, And this the King confessed at his death, saying, God
for bid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say, that God's
Judgments are just upon me, when many times he does inflict Justice by an
unjust Sentence: this is ordinary: I will only say, that an unjust Sentence,
that I suffered to take effect, is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon my
self
creed mihi, res est succurrere lapsis, inquirere verum.
This was a most royal part in him, and which Moses commanded to be observed,
before any Idolater should be condemned; but after he had so religiously, and
diligently searched into the depth of their malice, that accused the Earl, and
found out the truth of his cause, and his Conscience informing him, that he was
no ways worthy of death, for the King then to be persuaded, for what pretense
of good soever, and by whomsoever, were it an Angel out of Heaven, to consent
unto his death, is to become guilty of a great fault, and to say, that he was
persuaded thereunto by the Bishops, (whose fault: was therefore greater then
his Majesty's) can no more excuse him, then for the man of God to say, that he
was seduced by the old Prophet.

And therefore this might be a just cause with God, to suffer him, that, to
satisfy sinful men, would offend his good God, by giving way to them, to take
away the life of an innocent man, to have his own life taken from him, even by
those men, to whom he had yielded to take away the life of another man; which
is, (...), a conformity of our punishment to our offense; and is nothing else
but lex talionis, an eye for an eye, a tooth for tooth, and death for death,
which was the first Law, that God published after the Deluge, saying, Whosoever
sheddeth man's blood, that is, either per se, as Cain did Abel, or per alium,
as David did Vriah's, and Ahab Naboth, by Act, or, it may be, by consent, by
man shall his blood be shed.

Secondly, touching the Bishops, my self knows, that he loved them all, and
honored their Calling very much, being fully satisfied of the truth of their
Divine, and Apostolical Institution, as appears by that learned, and
exquisite defense, that himself most graciously made against the Presbyterians,
of the Episcopal Order; and he was indeed a right Constantine to all the
Bishops, rather hiding their infirmities, if he spyed any fault in them, with
the Lap of his Garment, then any ways multiplying, or publishing the same unto
the People. And this was a most Christian course in him; for I may justly say,
Victima sacra Deo res est succurrere Cleris:

And as our Savior says of them, He that receives you, receives me:

And the Bishops, of all other his Subjects, were his most loyal Servants, and
most faithful Orators, never thwarting their King, nor crossing any of his
just Designs, but ever cleaving unto his Cause, and voting on his side, so far
as truth, and right, and a good Conscience, would give them leave: contrary to
which, his Majesty never desired any thing. And therefore, when the King saw
the malice of most wicked men, qui oderunt eos gratis, and did bear an
intestine hatred against these true Servants of God, and did strive manibus,
pedibusque, with all their might, against all justice, to thrust them out of
their undoubted Right (by the favor, we confess, of our most pious Princes)
for him, as we conceive, against his own mind, and to his own prejudice, to
please, and satisfy the implacable hatred of his, and their enemies, to pass
an Act to exclude the Bishops out of his Great Council, the Parliament, when
above thirty Acts of Parliament had confirmed their right Interest therein,
since the confirmation of Magna Charta, was an error, as I conceive, not
salvable, and a fault, that cannot be justly excused by his best Friends; and
therefore God might justly suffer all his Counsels to fail, and his
Counselors to become perfidi familiares, his familiar Traitors, such as the
Poet speaks of, Saepe sub agnina latet hirtus pelle Lycaon,
Subque Catone pio perfidus ille Nero.
And though I do not, nor dare not, say it was so, yet I may say, that for
this, God might so give way to his Enemies, to prevail against him, and to
thrust him out of his Kingdom, when he gave way to thrust his Ambassadors out
of his house; which is but (...), and even as Solomon divided God's Service,
betwixt God, and the Idols of Zidon, Moab, and Ammon, 1 Reg. 11. etc. 12.
so God divided his Kingdom betwixt his Son Rehoboam, and his Servant Jeroboam;
so might he deal with King Charles, when he yielded to expel the Bishops, that
were his true Friends, and God's Servants, out of his Council, to suffer his
Enemies to exclude him out of his Kingdom: and not unjustly, or without cause
neither, as the same proceeds from God, whose ways are always just; for who
could better declare the right, and truth of things unto the King, then the
Expounders of the Book of Truth? Who could advise, and direct him, to make
better, and juster Laws, then the Teachers of the Law of God? and who fitter to
judge of right, and to require Justice to be enjoined, and practiced by all
People, then they, whose Calling is continually to call upon all men, to live
godly, and soberly, and justly, in this present World? Why then should they be
excluded from the Seat of Justice, either in the making of Laws, or to see
those Laws executed, unless it were, that the Lay-Justices might do what they
would without shame, and what they pleased without control, when as heretofore
the reverend Presence of the Bishops, and grave Divines, and their sage
Counsel, did oftentimes stop the Current of Injustice, and made some ashamed of
some gross dealings, that, in their absence, they were not ashamed to have
effected: and therefore, I suppose I may justly say, that, as it was said of
the Emperor Justinian, when he caused Aetius, his brave General, to be cut
off, he had cut off his right Arm with his left Hand; so did King Charles, when
he p^ssed that Act, that prejudiced himself more then the Bishops.

Thirdly, touching the Parliament, we must understand, that Parliaments were
first insti^uted by the Kings of this Nation, to inform them of the Abuses,
Dangers, and Defects, which the Lords and Peers, and the wiser sort of their
Subjects, which each Country had elected, and the chief Cities had chosen for
that purpose, had observed; and to advise, and consult with their King de
arduis rebus Regni, of these, and all other difficult, and great Affairs of the
Kingdom; as the Writs, that call them together, do declare; and then, to
consider, by what good means the Dangers of the Kingdom might be prevented; by
what Laws' the abuses might be redressed, and which ways the peace of the
People might be preserved, and the happiness of all his Subjects continued, and
enlarged; and if they understood of any sorreign dangers, invasions, or
injuries, to consult how the same might be prevented, and rectified. And when
the King understood, what his Lords and Commons conceived fitting to be done,
He, with the Advice of His Council, ratified what he approved, and rejected
what he disliked, with the usual phrase in that kind.

But in process of time, the Parliament Men (as I heard wise men say) began to
incroach more and more upon the Rights of Majesty, upon the Power, and
Authority of the King, especially of those Kings that either had no Right, or,
at the best, but doubtful Titles unto the Crown, or those that were of less
Abilities, or of an easy, and facile disposition, and would soon be persuaded,
by the importunity of their People, to yield to many things that they desired.
And what Favors, and Privileges they thus obtained from these Kings, they
challenged as their Right and Due from the succeeding Princes; and the more
Favors, and Privileges they obtained, the more still they desired, and at
last in some Parliaments, from Advisers, the Members thereof would fain become
Directours, and instead of being Counselors, they aimed to be Commanders of
their Kings, and to persuade them, that they ought and must enact what Laws,
and do what things, as they concluded should be done: But, seeing as the Poet
says, Flumina magna vides parvis de fontibus orta, small Springs do often make
great Rivers; therefore, to prevent the increase of this growing Mischief, to
allay the Disease, before the Sore grew to be incurable, and to quench the
Flame, before the Fire burnt the House, the wise and prudent Kings retained
always, in their own hands, the power to dissolve the Parliament whenever
they pleased; that, as they called them together, when they thought good, so
they might dismiss them, when they listed, either when all things were
reasonably concluded, or when they conceived the Parliament men to become
unreasonable in their Demands; which was the first Signal Evidence of the
Ambitious Desire of Kingly Majesty in the Lord Protector, when he dissolved
the Long Parliament; which made me to believe, he aimed to be a King.

Therefore when the King perceived, Qui s^mel verecundiae fines transgress us
fuerit, eum oportet gnaviter esse impudentem. Cicero.
not the importunity, but as some of the King's Friends said, the impudency of
this Long Parliament, beyond all the Parliaments that preceded it, and saw them
so insolent, and their proceedings so violent, in all their courses, for him
then to pass away that Supreamest Power, or at least one Branch of the Highest
Power which was in him, and which never any other King passed before; and so to
give that Sword, which God had put into his hands, into the hands of any mad
men, or to the usage of his Enemies, was such a fault, in my apprehension, as
passed all the errors that this good King ever committed; or, as I believe,
any other; for this was none other, then to give the Sword to his enemies, to
enable them to destroy him. So that this good King might well cry out with the
Poet, Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis:

Indeed, Golias's Head was cut off with his own Sword; but David took it from
him perforce, and Golias gave it not, neither could he hold it, when he lay at
David's feet: when as the King was not so, when he passed this Act, but he
might have easily denied to pass this Bill of an indissoluble Parliament; which
had never been an Act, had he not given his consent unto the same, which in a
short time after made his Enemies Kings, and unkinged him; and the Lord
Protector was hereby put in mind of his Grammar Lesson, Foelix, quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum: and therefore he never gave to his Parliaments such
advantage against him.

But you will say, that the Parliament deceived the good King, who was
therefore the sooner deceived, because he was good; for as the Orator says,
Cicero, Epist. l. 10.
Vt quisque est vir optimus, it a difficilime esse alios improbos suspicatur;
and Cicero says most truly, that Credulitas error magis est, quam culpa, and
quidem in optimi eujusque mentem irrepit facillime. So the credulous, and
well-minded King believed the deceitful Protestations of the subtle Parliament,
who pretended only, they desired him to pass this Act, that they might the
sooner be trusted to raise up Moneys, to satisfy their Brethren the Scots,
that were their Brethren indeed, but intended hereby to change the Government,
to root out the King, and to exstirpate the Royal Race, and so to settle
themselves, and their Successors in the Throne of Supremacy for ever, as it is
more amply expressed in the Discovery of Mysteries, and as afterward they
showed their intentions unto all.

I answer, that it is most true; they deceived the good King: so did the
Serpent deceive our Progenitors, and the old Prophet deceived the Man of God;
yet this excused neither of them. And the Lord Coke says, Tantum abest, Cokus
De Jure R^gis Ecclesiastico.
ut ignorantia excuset, aut extennet ejus errorem, qui veritatem invenire
poterat, quam necessario agnoscere debeat, and tantum investigare noluit, ut in
causa sit, cur gravius plectatur, And it cannot be denied, but that the King
should have searched and sifted into their Plots, and not to have been ignorant
of their Wiles, as we are not to be ignorant of the Wiles of Satan, as the
Apostle testifies. And I must confess, that as it was wickedness in them to
deceive the King, so it was want of good Counsel in him to be deceived, and
suffer himself to be circumvented by them: for had he consulted with God, and
by God's Ministers, that were now to be all tumbled down, I believe these Foxes
of Satan should not have ensnared his Majesty; because they could have
sufficiently informed him, how the Old Serpent has Emissaries enough to
deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. And therefore, as he was as
innocent as the Dove, so he should have been as wise as the Serpent, to avoid
the Stings, and to find out the Windings of the Infernal Serpent; and one
man's head, though the wisest among many, is scarce sufficient to pierce into
the Plots and Subtilties of many heads. And if you say, he had his
Counselors; true, and I could name them; and they were great ones too, and
wise men too: but, as I said before, they were not the Ambassadors of Christ,
the Counselors that are sent for God; for their Advice was not suffered at
this time to be desired, their presence was to be excluded, and themselves
shortly to be imprisoned. And therefore, as Lucan says, Hoc placet, o Superi,
cum vobis vertere cuncta
Propositum, nostris erroribus addere crimen.
Therefore, as the King, though unwillingly gave way to these Foxes to
suppress, and to exclude God's Ministers from his Counsels; so God might justly
give way for his Counselors, to betray him to his enemies, by yielding to
their Desires, to have an everlasting Parliament, thereby to end him, and to
remain as Kings themselves without end.

Some other Misprisons, it may be, the good King might commit, of less moment,
and not so easily to be observed, though easily pass, as Plutarch says, in
great affairs.

But howsoever, for all that this good King did, and in all the things, that he
suffered or have happened unto him, you may see that God is just in all his
ways and holy in all his Works, and how the Judgments of the great God, as they
proceed from him, may easily be justified by the weakest of men.

And yet, as in the sufferings, and Death of the King we do see, and must
acknowledge the just Judgment of God, and that he spares not his dearest
Children, if they do offend, but, though Coniah were as the Signet upon his
righthand, when he transgresses, God will cut him off; so, in this very
Judgment of God, The great goodness of God toward King Charles seen.
we may plainly see, Mercy ana Truth met together, Righteousness and Peace
kissing each other; yea we may clearly see the great love, and mercy of God
toward this good and godly King, both in his Death, and in the consequents of
his Death, as specially 1. In his Friends 2. In his Honor 3. In his Posterity
4. In his Felicity:
for

First, In his death.
touching his Death, it is a true saying, Qui non vult in vita praevidere
mortem, non potest in morte videre vitam; and as another says Turpe est eo
statu vivere, in quo non statuas mori: therefore did King Charles live so
Justly, so innocently, so Religiously, and so Christianlike, that he might well
say, nec pudet vivere, nec timeo mori, I am neither ashamed to live, nor afraid
to die: for he lived like a Saint, and died a Martyr, like a good Christian;
yea, so Christianlike, that, although I would not wish it for a World, to be,
where I fear many of his Enemies are, yet, next to my being with Christ, I
would wish nothing of God sooner or rather then to be where I assure my self
King Charles is.

Nec dubito, qui sic vixit, sic mortuus idem est
Qui n sit apud Superos nobilis umbra Deos.
Secondly, 2 In the Consequents of his death. 1. In his Friends. Claud. 2.
Stilicon.
For the Consequents of his death, and

First, For his Friends, as Claudian says, Haec and amicitias lengo post
tempore firmat,
Mansuroque adamante ligat, nec mobile mutat
Ingenium, parvae strepitu nec vincula noxae
Dissolvi patitur, nec fastidire priorem


Allicitur veniente novo. -- Or, as Solomon, says, fortis est ut mors
dilectio, Love is as strong as death. So they verified all this, in testifying
to the World, that although his Enemies took him out of the World, and his
Picture, (which, with all reverent respect to Christ, be it spoken, was in my
judgment, the likest that ever I saw, to that Picture, and Description of our
Savior, that Publius Lentulus sent to the Senate of Rome) out of our houses;
yet they never were, nor ever shall be able to take him, or our loves to him
out of our Hearts, the hearts of all us that truly knew him, quia igneti nulla
cupido; and therefore loved him, and so loved him, that neither Life nor Death,
nor all the malice of his Foes could, or can lessen our love, and honor that
we bare to him, or blot out the goodness of this King, and the Sweetness of his
disposition from our thoughts, and memories: but as the Son of Sirach says of
good Josias, so we say of good King Charles; In Honor, and good name. Ovid in
Ibin: Antut Anaxa^chus pila minuaris in alta.
The remembrance of King Charles is like the composition of perfume that is
made by the art of the Apothecarie, the more you stir it, the Sweeter it
smells; and therefore

Secondly, He is happy in his honor, and good name; that shall continue
Famous and Blessed among all Posterities for evermore: for though
Anaxarchus-like, that for his Detracting tongue was Pestled to death in a
Brazen Mortar, his Enemies say, with malicious Juno, Non sic abibunt odia,
vivaces aget violentus iras animus, saevusque dolor aeterna bella, pace
sublata, geret. Their hatred to him shall never die, yet, as Solomon says,
Memoria justi erit in benedictionibus, the remembrance of this just man, and
good King, shall be blessed for ever. Indeed the malice of his enemies has
been, and still is such, and so great, as that to falsify the Saying of the
Poet, Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit, that tells us, we hate the
living only, and our hatred dies with death: they never cease to stain his
good name, and obscure his honor with apparent lies, and scandalous
aspersions: for their hate to him is immortal, and unexplicable, seeking to
bury his honor with himself; yea, and before himself was buried, even while
he was alive, they dealt with him, as the Jews did with his Master Christ,
saying, that he was a Blasphemer, a Glutton, a Drunkard, a Sabbath-breaker, a
Traitor unto Caesar, and a Seducer of the people, that had a Devil, and did
cast out Devils through Beelzebub the chief of the Devils; and what not? so do
these, like those Jews, say, that King Charles was an Hypocrite, making only
an outward profession of honesty and piety; that he was a Tyrant, and a
Traitor, which both are (...), most inconsistible, when as a Tyrant, as
Claudian describes him, Jnstat terribilis vivis, morientibus baeres, Claudian.
De bello Gildico.

Virginibus raptor, thalamis obscoenus adulter:
Quisquis vel locuples, pulchra vel conjuge notus,
Crimine pulsatur falso, si crimina desunt.
For which I think the Devil could not have the face to tax King Charles with
any of all these things: for we all know, that he was so merciful a Prince, as
seldom, if ever, he took the advantage of the rigor of any Law, but lessened,
and sweetened that same many times, and in many things: neither do I believe,
that Juno her self, had she been his Queen, could have suspected him for any
false Play; so Chaste a Prince was King Charles, beyond the fair carriage of
Alexander toward the Wife, and Daughters of Darius. And that he should be a
Traitor is a thing, that the like was never heard of; because Treason is, as
you know, crimen laesae Majestatis, an offense against the Supreme Majesty,
which was solely, and fully resident in himself; and would he, think you, be a
Traitor to himself? Indeed he was; when too confidently he trusted himself into
the hands of those perfidious Gentlemen, the Scots, that, worse then Judas,
sold him, and delivered him to be crucified by his grand enemies of the
Parliament; and other treason, I am confident, can no ways be fixed on him.
But, quid miror? quid opus est verbis? what need we say any more? When men laid
to Christ his charge the things, that he never knew, and taxed him with what he
never did, nor said; what wonder is it, if they slander the Footsteps of his
Anointed? Yet all they do is to no purpose; for, as Plutarch says, Plutarch.
in Numa.
Omnes bonos justosque viros major post mortem sequitur laus; invidia non
multum post illos temporis supervivente non nunquam etiam ante exitum eorum
moriente; the greatest praise, and honor, will follow good, and just men after
they are dead, envy and malice not living long after them, but sometimes dying
before them: even as Justin says, it did in Semiramis; Cicero pro Cor.
or if not, yet as Cicero says, Cum mors extinxit invidiamres gestae
sempiterna nominis gloria nituntur: when death slays envy, the virtuous Acts
of good men will shine to the eternal praise, and glory of their good name; for
as the Rain, or Dew will not stick upon a Sea-gulls back, so the reproaches,
and imputations of the malicious, cannot prejudice the honor, and good name of
the godly; quia ut malam conscientiam laudantis praeconium non sanat, ita bonam
non vulnerat convitium, because that as no praise, nor flattery can heal a bad
Conscience, nor make a wicked man good, so no slander, nor dispraise, can wound
a good Conscience, or make a good man wicked, nor diminish any of his deserved
honor; but, as Christ Laudatur ab his, ut culpatur ab illis, though he be
blasphemed of the Jews, yet is he truly honored of all Christians, and all
Saints in all Nations, that do him service, and sing with St. Ambrose, Thou art
the King of glory, O Christ, thou art the everlasting Son of the Father, that
sits on the right hand of God in the glory of the Father; so our late good
King Charles, notwithstanding that false, In the Royal Exchange.
and infamous Inscription set up, where his Picture, and Statue stood, and
notwithstanding all that the venomous mouths of malice can vomit out against
him, which shall vanish like the Summer's Snow, or the grass upon the
Housetop, that withers before it be plucked up, shall have his virtues, his
goodness, and his godliness Chronicled, and fama perennis erit, and so long, as
we shall be able to speak, or write, we shall leave it recorded, as in Marble,
to the eternal honor of this good King, and the everlasting shame of his
malicious enemies: both which Nec ira, nec ignis
Nec poterit abolere vetustas.


Thirdly, In his Posterity.
For his Posterity, God said not of him, as he did of Coniah; Write this man
childless: but he gave him a numerous, and a glorious offspring, and as Moses
says of the first Fathers, and replenishers of the World, He begat Sons, and
Daughters; and he needed not to say of them, as Clytemnestra said of her
Children, Ista Clytemnestra digna quevela foret. For when my Nuts are ripe, and
brown, My leaves, and boughs are beaten down.
Certe ego, si nunquam peperissem, tutior essem; Nor with the Nut-tree;
In felix fructus in mea damna fero;


But the world sees he was most happy in them all, in whom he still lives,
and shall live, though his enemies studied their death, manibus pedibusque
laborarunt, and have used all machinations, and all plots, and devices, that
either subtlety, or cruelty could invent, to cut them off; but God preserved
them, and his Providence watched over them, and especially his eldest Son,
after a strange and almost miraculous manner, from the last Fight at Worcester,
where, through the cowardice of some, the oversight of others, and (as they
say) the treachery of some chief Commanders in his own Army, and by the prudent
Carriage of a brave and valiant General, to give the Devil his right, as the
Proverb goes, such as this Age will scarce equal, he had been taken, or
swallowed, had not he, that dwells in the Heavens, most graciously preserved
him, in a manner, as he preserved Daniel from the Lions mouths, and sent his
Angel, as he did to Tobias, to direct him in his Journey, and to carry him safe
through Sea, and Land, which is wonderful in our eyes, and does sufficiently
presage, that God has kept him for some great work, that in his divine wisdom
he intends to effect by him, as now we see the same begun to his great
honor, and our unspeakable comfort.

And as God has thus mercifully preserved his Eldest Son, so he has made his
second, and his third Son, the Duke of York, and the Duke of Gloucester, famous
for their excellent parts, and Heroical Exploits, like their Brother, and
Ascanius-like, followers of their Father's Virtues, passibus aequis. Neither
may I here omit that Virtuous, and Heroic Lady, the Princess of Orange, that,
with her Brothers, and as her Brothers, will perpetuate the blessed memory of
that blessed King for ever, who is herein, not like King Henry the 8th, that
notwithstanding his six Wives, besides all his Concubines, has not a branch of
his Body, that we know of, remaining under the Cope of Heaven: nor like Ahab,
and other Tyrants, and wicked men, whose seed, for their sins, God rooteth out:
but as God has promised, and since performed unto Abraham, that his Seed
should be as the Stars of Heaven for number, that is, innumerable, and has
likewise promised to all the faithful Children of Abraham, that their
Generation should be blessed; so he has done it, and no doubt but he will
perform it to this good King, to muliply his seed, and to bless them for ever,
even as the Prophet Esaias says of all God's people, Their seed shall be known
among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the People, all that see them
shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed, Esaias lxi 9. So shall the seed of
King Charles be.
which the Lord has blessed.

Fourthly, The Prophet says, the age of man is but seventy years, and Pindarus
says (...), umbrae somnium homo, man is but the shadow of a man, a thing of
nothing; Sicque in non hominem vertitur omnis homo: In his eternal selicity.
Man's life is but a shadow, that soon vanishes; and Job says, he has but a
short time to live, and that short time is full of misery, interminabilis
labor, even an endless toil, like the tumbling of a Sysiphus stone, or the
filling of the fatal Tunn by King Danaus daughters; where the water run out, as
fast as they poured it in: or, as the Poet says most truly, Passibus ambiguis
fortuna volubilis errat,
Et manet in nullo certa tenaxque loco.
Sed modo laeta manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos:
Et tantum constans in levitate sua est.
And when the affairs of this world are best, and our happiness at the highest,
then, as the very Heathens have observed, they presently decline, and begin to
turn like the Cart wheel, Res humanae in summo declinant.
Which warns all, on Fortune's wheel that clime,
To bear in mind, that they have but a time.


And such was the time of King Charles, of whom I cannot say with him, that
wrote A short view of the long life, and reign of Henry the third; A dainty
piece of story presented to King James. Es. liii. 8.
but I must say the short life, and reign, and long troubles of Charles the
First; for as the Prophet says of Christ, non dimidiavit dies suos, he has
not lived out half his days, being cut off e terra viventium, from the land of
the living at a few months more then thirty three years old; by his malicious
enemies; so the like enemies have shortened the life of this good King, and cut
him off at the eight and fourtieth year of his age; yet, as Esaias says of
Christ, Generationem ejus quis enarrabit? who shall be able to declare his
Generation? for he shall see his seed and shall prolong his days, and as the
new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me says
the Lord, so shall his seed and his name remain; that is, for ever and ever: so
I doubt not to say of King Charles, that howsoever, and for what cause soever,
the wisdom of God has been pleased to permit his enemies to shorten that life,
which at the best, and to the best is accompanied with abundance of
infelicities, yet, instead of that Crown which was replenished with cares, and
circumvironed with thorns, and which his persecutors have snatched from him,
God has now crowned him with eternal felicity, and has set a crown of pure
gold upon his head, that is, as himself said, the crown of Martyrdom, which is
the crown of the greatest glory, because none can go higher, or do more for
Christ, then to die for Christ, for the defense of the service, and servants of
God, and the laws of this Kingdom, as he testified upon the Scaffold.

And so the Lord has dealt with him, just as he says of his chosen people,
for a small moment have I forsaken thee, that is, while I suffered thine
enemies so furiously to rage against thee, and so maliciously to behead thee;
but with great mercies will I gather thee; In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee, for a moment, when in justice I punished thee for thine errors, those
small things, wherein thou have failed; but with everlasting kindness will I
have mercy on thee, when as now I make thee to be numbered with my Saints, in
glory everlasting.

Therefore, as Balaam wished that he might die the death of the righteous, and
that his last end might be like his, Numb. 23 10.
so from my soul I wish that my soul may rest, as I hope it shall, when it
leaves my body, with this righteous King that does now rest in Abraham's bosom.

CHAP. II.
SEcondly, For of his other subjects that were against him, I shall speak in an
other place
touching the King's subjects, that honored, loved, and served him, and were
of his party, and have been, and still were persecuted, banished, killed, and
afflicted, so long as the Tyrants ruled, they are either, 1. Clergy, or And 2.
Laity. or And


First, as for the Clergy, that are the other second witness of Jesus Christ,
they are either, 1. the Bishops 2. the Priests
And whatsoever has befallen to these, or to either of these, I may truly, and
justly say with Ezra, Ezra ix. 13.
and God has punished us less, then our iniquities deserved.

First, Touching the Bishops, that are the prime part of the spiritual Witness
of Christ, I do cordially love all their persons, and honor their calling,
being all of them very learned, and most reverend men, and therefore not to
discover the nakedness of such worthy Fathers, whose imperfections, and
imbecillities, like neves in a fair face, I had rather, with the good King,
like the most Christian Constantine, cover with the lap of my garment, then
expose them to the view of the Vulgar; but yet, to justify the doings of our
just God, whose Judgments always are according to truth, I must say, as Christ
says to the Angel, that is, the Bishop of the Church of Ephesus, and to the
Angel of the Church of Pergamus, that God had somewhat against them, and I fear
more then he had against those Angels, for which he might most justly remove
their candlesticks, and remove them, Two things considerable in all Clergymen.
as he did, out of their places. For there be two things considerable in the
calling of all God's Ministers, as well those of the highest, as the other of
the lowest order.

1. Their introduction, or coming into their places; 2. The Execution of their
office, after they are entered into it.
For first, Their entrance into that holy calling. So the Articles of our
Church, and of our religion testify.
Whosoever shall not be called by the spirit of God to the great office, as
Aaron was, or shall not enter through the gate, that is Christ, or the
Ordinance of Christ set down by his holy Apostles, is a thief, and a robber;
and not the Vicar of Christ, but of Judas Iscariot, and of Simon the Samaritan;
but whether all our Bishops came rightly in I cannot judge, we cannot search
into the testimony of any man's conscience; yet, for the investigation of the
truth, and the outward election and approbation of them, which Dionysius
calls the Sacrament of Order, I am sure, the King was so careful, that none
should be admitted to that high, and holy office, but such as should be thought
worthy, (both for uprightness of life, and soundness of learning,) of those
places, whereof most of them, The execution of their office.
if not all of them, he knew to be such himself.

2. For the execution of their office, they were to do it 1. by the example of
a good life 2. by the discharging of their Episcopal duties.


First, By a good example of a just, and holy conversation; because, By a good
example.
as the Poet says, Exemplar vitae populis est vita regentis. The common people
look rather after our example, then after our Precept; Christ's slock to be sed
three ways.
therefore the Expositours do apply the thrice repetition of the same thing to
Saint Peter, Feed my Sheep, to a threefold manner of feeding, that is, 1. Pasce
verbo. 2. Pasce cibo. 3. Pasce exemplo.

First, Feed them with the word of God, and with good instruction, With the
word of God.
how they ought to behave themselves, as becomes Saints, and what to believe,
like good Christians. 2 With Almsdeeds.


Secondly, Feed the poorer sort with food, and alms-deeds, so far as thy means,
and ability will give thee leave.

Thirdly, Feed all of them with the good examples, of humility, meekness, With
good examples.
gentleness, patience, piety, contentedness, and contempt of these worldly
vanities.

And here I must confess, that, instead of giving good Example unto the People,
many of the Bishops, that were our Predecessors, gave the worst example that
could be, both to their succeeding Bishops, and to all other people whatsoever,
The evil Example of our Predecessors.
if the example of covetousness, injustice, and neglect of God's Service be
evil examples; for what pious men, and good Christians had formerly bestowed
upon the Church, and Churchmen for the honor of God, and the promoting of the
Christian Faith, they, either through covetousness, for some Fine, or affection
to their Children, Friends, or Servants, have alienated the same from their
Successors in Fee-Farmes, or long Leases, some for a 1000. some for an 100.
years, Whereby we are not able to seed the poor' nor scarce our selves.
and some for other longer time, reserving only some small rent for the
succeeding Bishops, as in my Diocese, theat Lordship was set for 10. l. yearly,
that is well-nigh worth a 200. l. and that was set for 4. l. that is worth a
100. l. and the like.

And therefore seeing the Bishops themselves did so unjustly destroy their
succeeding Bishops; what wonder is it, that the just God should suffer the
haters of the Bishops, and the Enemies of all goodness, to destroy them?

And therefore, not to do my self, what I blame in others, lest God should
justly condem me out of mine own mouth, I have resolved, and do pray to God
continually, to give me the grace to perform it, and do hope, that God will
grant it me; That I will take no Fine for any Lands, or Lordships belonging to
my Bishopric while I live, that I may not wrong any of my succeeding Bishops,
nor lessen the Revenue of the Church of Christ, but to take heed, and beware of
covetousness, which is the cause of much, and many evils, especially in all
Churchmen, as you see it was the root, that sprang to the destruction of Judas,
and to cause Demas to apostatize from the Ministry of Christ.

Secondly, For the discharging of the Episc^pal duties, which is a very great
charge, and onus Angelicis humeris formidandum, as a Father calls it, if,
Revelat. ii. 14.
with the Church of Ephesus, we have not forsaken our first love, and grown
cold in our care to promote the gospel of Christ; yet I fear the Bishops had
amongst them, those that held the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to set a
stumblingblock before the Children of Israel, that is, as the Apostle
expounds it, to love the wages of unrighteousness: and for the love of
worldly honor, wealth, and other sinister respects, to grow cold in the love
of truth, which made a Preacher at Paul's cross to pray, that God would be
pleased to make the Lords Temporal more spiritual, and the Lords Spiritual less
temporal; and it grieves me much to set down, how the Bishops Courts were
generally complained of (how justly, or how unjustly, I cannot tell) as the
greatest Oprressours of the People, and the public grievance of the Kingdom,
their delays unsufferable, their excommunications unreasonable, Corn. Ag^ippa
De vanit^ue Scient^arum, cap. 61.
their Fees intolerable, and often times their injustice no ways to be excused;
which made the Lay people to exclaim against the Bishops, and their Courts, as
much, and in like manner as Cornelius Agrippa, and our Presbyterians do against
the Romish Bishops. And if they say, as they do, the Courts belonged to their
Chancellours, that were learned men, Doctors of the Civil, and Canon Laws, and
of honorable repute among all Nations; and what they did, should not be
imputed to the Bishop's fault:

It may be answered, Qui facit per alium, idem est, quasi faceret per seipsum;
he that offends by his Proctor, shall suffer by himself. And we must confess
the Courts were the Bishops Courts, and the Chancellours were but their
Deputies, and they should have rectified the Abuses of their own Courts, Yet I
must ingenuously confess, that I can accuse none of the Bishops for this fault,
but that this is the complaint of the People, how truly I know not.
unless the Chancellor might say to the Bishop, as it was said to the Pope of
the like Officer, Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.

He had paid him dear for his place, therefore he must take great Fees, and
sell justice, or he shall lose much by the Bargain; for indeed, he cannot sell
cheap, that buyeth dear, and be a saves thereby; nor can he prove, but very
seldom, an upright Judge, that has bought his office, and by corruption
obtained his place: and therefore this selling of the Chancellour's office, and
other places in the Bishops Courts was the root of all the corruption that were
of those Courts; and so the Bishops that did this, even for these faults,
besides the neglect to redress their other abuses, can not, in my judgment, be
any ways excused.

But I will show you yet, To ordain unworthy persons to be Priests, a great
fault.
to the shame of some, greater Abomination, which I have often bemoaned, when I
considered how some of the Bishops, not following Saint Paul's counsel in the
ordination of Priests, and Deacons, to lay hands on no man rashly; but to see
the Persons to be admitted to Holy Orders, should be no Novices, and no ways
unworthy of that high Calling, but every way qualified, both for life, and
doctrine, so, as the word of God does require, have notwithstanding, Vide
Englands Reprover, page 67.
either by the solicitation of friends, or for some other respects, and perhaps
worser corruption, many times made young Novices, illiterate men, and, which is
worse, men of corrupt minds, and bad life, the Priests of the most high Gods to
wait at his Altar, that were not worthy to wait on our Tables; and therefore,
as the Bishops, that did this, did herein falsify their faith to God, and
betrayed his Service to these unworthy men; so the just God has most rightly
suffered these perfidious men to betray their Makers, to spit in their Father's
faces, and to combine with the Enemies of God, to destroy the Bishops of
Christ; and so, as the Poet says in another kind, Ignavum fucos pecus a
praesepibus arcent. Neither was this all the Bishops fault, to ordain these, to
drive away themselves: but, as it was said of old, Rector eris praesto, Men
obtained their livings four manner of ways.
de sanguine Praesulis esto: or, as another says, Quattuor Ecclesias portis
intratur in omnes:
Prima patet magnis, nummatis altera, tertia charis;
Quarta sed paucis solet patere Dei.
So, to put weapons into their hands, to enable them to war with their Bishops:
it was the practice of some of the Bishops (if we may believe the common report
of the Country Mercury) to bestow Livings, Rectories, Prebends, and other
preferments, not on such worthy Scholars, and Academicks, as best deserved
them, but either upon their own Friends, Children, Kinsmen, or Servants, or on
such, as, according to the old riddle, could tell them, who was Melchisedec's
Father, and his Mother too; and could say Saint Peter's Lesson, Aurum, and
argentum non est mihi, the clean contrary way.

And this very practice of those Bishops, that did so, bred ill blood, and many
corrupt humors against the Episcopal function; as especially,

First, A disdain of them amongst those worthy men, that were so carelessly
neglected.

Secondly, A neglect of God's People, and leaving them untaught, and unguided
by those unworthy men, that were thus promoted.

Thirdly, A general distaste of the people against all the Bishops, when they
resented these distempers, that were only caused by very few.

And all these things cried to God for redress, and for judgment against the
Bishops, that were the Authors of these evils; and so, as all the Mariners
were tossed for Jonas his sin, so all the Bishops must suffer for the offense
of few.

And though, as Eusebius says, all the malice of the world, and all the
persecution of Tyrants, and all the Stratagems of that old Serpent could not
darken the glory of Christ his Church, while the Bishops, and the rest of the
Priests, and Preachers of God's word held together, and kept the Unity of
Faith, in the Bond of Peace: yet when the Bishops fell together by the ears,
and dissented in their opinions, the one from the other, the (...) from the
(...), they that held the faith of one Substance (which is the right Catholic
faith) from them, that maintained the faith of the like Substance, which was,
and is the Arrian Heresy; and when the Priests banded against the Bishops, and
the Bishops did therefore seek to suppress those Priests, then the Lord
darkened the glory of the daughter of Sion, and the Church that formerly
triumphed, sat then as a Sparrow, that is alone, mourning upon the Housetop;
even so now in our days, when they that ought, and had promised, and vowed most
solemnly, when they were admitted to Holy Orders, to reverence their Bishops,
and to be advised by them, and obedient to them, began to spurn with their
heels, to spit in their faces, and to bark against them in their Pulpits: our
Savior's words must hold true, that A Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand: and much less the Hierarchy, when the Priests, and Bishops are at such
ods, and so contrary to themselves.

And this division of Reuben, with the aforesaid distempers, was a great
presage of their present fall; yet I believe not all the cause, that moved God
to permit the Devil to stir up Enemies to throw them down, but the true cause
was greater sins, if I judge right, then either of these: for the former might
be the aspersions of Enemies, and but only the allegation of ill-willers
without any sound ground for their Justification; or, if true, but the Acts of
some few of the inferior Bishops; and the Divisions of the Clergy might lessen
our repute, and weaken our Authority, but not utterly to overthrow our
Hierarchy, as all the contentions of the Primitive Church never did.

And therefore the true causes of our ruin must needs be of an higher nature,
and they might be, besides the forenamed, and some others, that we know not of,
these three main faults, that can neither be denied, nor excused.

1. The misguiding of the good King before the Long Parliament. The three great
saults of the Bishops.
2. The neglecting of him in the Parliament. 3. The evil Counsel they gave him
with the Parliament.
First, The King, having a reverend opinion of the Bishops, Fault.
was persuaded to second, and to set forward the Designs of the Bishop of
Canterbury in many things, that brought him the ill opinion, and so diminished
the love of the people; as in the matter of Saint Gregory's by Saint Paul's,
and especially in sending the newly amended Liturgy unto the Scottish Church,
and the Prosecution of that business so eagerly, to the great prejudice of the
King; which was, to speak what I conceive to be truth without flattery, such an
Episcopal offense, as cannot be expiated with words, nor could be defended with
the power of the King, as the Scots alleged, Non omnibus unum est, Quod
placet; hic spinas colligit, ille rosas.
and which I conceive to be the Original, and the Seed of all the King's
troubles, and misfortunes, and the Bishop's overthrow, mittere falcem in
alienam messem, to busy themselves out of their own Diocese, especially among
the Scots, that were bewitched with the love of the Presbytery, and hated all
forms of Liturgies, but such as was without form, or beauty: like Christ at his
Passion, that was then, as the Prophet says, without form, or beauty; for had
they rested quiet, without raising up those Northern blasts, and those Spirits,
that they could not lay down, they might, no doubt, in my Judgment, have
remained quiet to this very day; but they, throwing these stones into the Air,
they fell into their own foreheads, and they verified the old Proverb, Qui
striut insidias aliis, sibi damna dat ipse, he that diggeth a pit for another,
shall fall into it himself; for, by troubling the Scots with the new service,
they pulled an old house upon their own heads, and an unspeakable trouble upon
the King, and this Kingdom, as they soon felt it afterward, and all the people
smarted for it.

Secondly, Great fault of the Bishops.
When they had troubled these unsavory waters, and raised up these foul
Spirits, that they could not bind, and had engaged the good King in this bad
cause, they neither justified the King with their pens, nor assisted him with
their purses, near so much, as so good a Patron, both of them, and of their
Churches had deserved; but, as men stupefied with that storm, that the
Parliament had raised, they were tongue-tied in his Cause, and hand-bound for
any great help, or assistance they afforded him, against his, and their own
enemies. And what a neglect was this of so good a King by wise men? to save
their Wealth, and to lose both their King, and themselves. I would they had
remembered Ausonius his Epigram 55. Effigiem, Ausonius Epigt. 55.
Rex Croese, tuam, ditissime regum,
Vidit apud manes Diogenes Cynicus;
Constitit, utque procul stetit, majore cachinno
Concussus, dixit; Quid tibi divitiae
Nunc prosunt, regum Rex O ditissime, cumsis
Sicut ego solus, me quoque pauperior?
Nam quaecunque habui mecum fero, cum nihil ipse
Ex tantis tecum, Croese, feras opibus.
But they skulked to escape the storm, I could name the men that had, and let
abundance of Wealth, and ready Coin behind them; and yet did nothing to relieve
the King.
and suffered their King to suffer Shipwreck, a fault, not unworthy to be
punished by the Judges; and an unthankfulness, yea, and such unthankfulness, as
exceeded all their former defects, and faults: to do so little for him, that
did so much for them; and was contented to lose his life, as he did, rather
then he would consent, that they should lose their honor, and be degraded of
that Calling, to which Christ had called them; I am sure it is our duty, and we
ow it unto our King, as I have fully showed in my Book, Of the Right of Kings,
to hazard our lives for our King, and to spend all, that we have, in the
defense of our King; and I think this King well deserved, if ever any King
deserved at the Bishops hands, that they should hazard their lives, and expose
all that they had in the just defense of so just a King; and therefore God
dealt most justly with us, to suffer all our Bishops to fall, that would not
help him to stand, which agonized, strived, and sweated to keep them up. And
yet I will show you greater abomination: for

Thirdly, The greatest fault of the Bishops.
When the Parliament thirsted after the blood, and so eagerly sought to take
away the life of that good, and wise Earl of Strafford, and the King, like a
just, and a Christian King, would not, against his Conscience, consent unto his
death, to shed the blood of him, whom he conceived, if not innocent, yet not
worthy of death, nor guilty of the crimes, laid to his charge, they chose some
Bishops to persuade, the King, and to rectific his Conscience, as they
pretended, wherein he erred; and they were the heads of the people, the heads
of the Clergy, and the chiefest amongst the Bishops, two Archbishops, and two
of the prime Bishops, that I can name; and these, all but one, * The Bishop of
London.
which I am sure herein was the honester, the wiser, and the more Christian,
advised the King; -- and, I pray God the Earl's blood be not laid to their
charge: howsoever, after they had been with the King, the King was induced to
subscribe unto his death, though still with some reluctance of his own
Conscience, as himself confessed, which makes me to conceive, it was for none
other cause, then as Pilate delivered Christ to be crucified, for fear of some
evil, if he denied it; or as Herod committed St. Peter unto the Goal, to please
the people, that would needs have it so: so did the Bishops, so did the King,
though unwillingly, commit this great evil, to satisfy the desire of the long
Parliament; but, O Lord, I hope, and am sure, thy mercy is such, that thou have
not laid this to the charge of him, that was deceived by those guides, that,
with Balaam, had their eyes open, Numbers 24.15.
and yet did set a stumbling block before the blind; and therefore are the
more inexcusable, who knowing the judgment of God, that they, which commit
such things, are worthy of death, not only join with the Parliament
themselves, though not in that sentence, yet in approving, by not disproving,
the sentence of his death, but also be the means, at leastwise, ut causa sine
qua non, to draw the King, to deliver him, into the hands of his Executioners.

Who then, but such as with the Sodomites do grope for the wall in the clear
day, can not see the judgment of God to be most just against us, and far less
then we deserve, to suffer the Parliament, to thrust us out of their Society,
when we would be companions with them in this Iniquity? and to put all the
Bishops out of their Honorable calling, when the chiefest of them would have
any Finger with the Parliament, to put such an honorable person out of his
life? a person, The just commendation of the Earl of Strafford for a true
Friend of the Church.
that I dare say it, upon my knowledge, did more favor, and more good to the
Church, and Churchmen then any man, except the King, in these three Kingdoms:
for as men, that sail in a Ship, when a Storm comes, must all both good, and
bad, endure the same loss: so the Bishops, sailing with the same wind, must
all perish, with their heads in the same Boat.

And, as their sufferings, and the judgment of God was most justly inflicted
upon them all in general, as we may conceive, for these master-faults, and the
general corruption that was amongst them, not much inferior, if true, to those
wherewith Corn. Agrippa taxes the Roman Prelates: so I could descend to every
particular man, and show you how the violent death of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the sudden death of the Archbishop of York, and the
Childishness of the Archbishop of Armath; and whatsoever disaster befell to
any other of them, they have for some offense or other more then most justly
deserved the same. But I love not to rake in the dunghill of their shame, and
dishonor, wherein I have no other pleasure, but to amplify the Declaration of
the just Judgments of God, even upon these otherwise most worthy men, and the
faithful witnesses of Jesus Christ, and upon the sight hereof, to teach every
one of them, and every like of them, to say with Job, I do abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes, and to proclaim it with Saint Paul to all the World,
Let God be true, and just, and every man a liar; and every one of them to have
more cause to rejoice, and to praise God, that he has so favorably spared
them, then either to complain, and murmur, or to grieve, that he has too
severely dealt with them; and to warn all men to consider, 1 Pettr 4.17.
that if these things be done in the green trees what shall be done in the
dry? and if judgment thus begins in the house of God, and upon his own
faithful Witnesses, for their delinquences, what shall be end of them, that
obey not the Gospel of Christ?

Secondly, 2 The Insetior Clergy.
For the other Clergy the Priests, that have suffered and felt the rod of Gods
anger within these few years, wherein the Wars raged amongst us, I may
distribute them into these two Ranks, that is either 1. Presbyterians or 2.
Episcopalls or


First, Revel. xiii. 11.
The Presbyterians, are the false Prophets and the Beast that rose out of the
Earth: and they were duces omnium malorum, the Fountain from whence sprang all
the mischief, they hated both the King, and the Bishops; and therefore contrary
to their oaths taken many times, both of their Faith and allegiance to the
King, and of their submission, and canonical obedience, to their Diocessans,
have rebelled against their King, and railed against their Bishops, and became
the incendiaries, and the bellows to blow and to inflame that fiery zeal, of
some of our blind zelots, and the infernal malice of some others, both of the
Parliament, Cities and Countries, to dethrone the King, and to degrade the
Bishops.

And truly, The causes of the differences and distaste betwixt the Bishops, and
presbyterians. 1 On the Bishops part.
though I have deligently searched into the cause of this mischief, yet I could
never fide it to be any other, then.

First, too much austerity, superciliousness, and neglect, if not contempt, of
these men, in some of the Bishops, for which they cannot be excused, when of
all others, they should be courteous and affable, like Pompey, of whom it is
Recorded, that no Petitioner departed from him discontented; because he either
granted his request, or he gave such reasons with that courtesy and affability,
that the Petitioner could not be offended; and as Titus, the Son of Vespatian
was wont to say, non oportet quemquam a Caesaris colloquio tristem discedere,
so should a Bishop especially endeavor, to let none of his coat and calling,
to depart from him in discontent, Sueton. in vita Titi.
if reasons and fair speeches could do the same; Multum quippe placent
admixtis dulcia acerbis, and a soft answer appeaseth wrath, says Solomon; and
a fair speech gains love; and Secondly 1. Secondly on the Presbyterian part.
1. Pride.
Pride 2. Ignorance 3. Envy 4. Ambition 5. Coveteousness 6. Hatred.
in the Presbyters, are the causes of all the discontent betwixt them and the
Bishops.

First, Their Pride and Arrogance was such, that they thought too well of
themselves, Superbos Jequiter ultor a tergo deus.
and preferring themselves before others, they thought themselves worthy to be
set above others; but (...), says Menander, none shall escape the punishment
of Pride; because as Cicero says, Nullum est officium tam sanctum tamque
solenne, quod non superbia and abitio comminuere, ac violare solet; and as St.
Augustine says, Destruit superbia quicquid justitia aedificat, Pride
destroys whatsoever Virtue or Righteousness builds; and the Poet says as
much; Inquinat egregios adjuncta superbia mores: our Pride soileth, and
spoileth the best and fairest things; and so the Pride of these men destroyed
whatsoever their good parts deserved; and deserve much they could not: For,

Secondly, 2 Ignorance.
Ignorance is many times the Mother of Pride, when as none is so bold as blind
Bayard; for though sometimes, multum facit ad ingenium superbia, Pride spurreth
on some to get Learning, and their Learning makes them the prouder: yet true
knowledge, and especially the Divine Learning, teaches Humility, and not
Pride, for when they have attained to all Arts, and do know as much as
Berengarius, that was said to know as much as was knowable; or as Solomon, that
wrote of all Natures, from the Isop that grows upon the Wall, to the Cedar of
Lebanon: Yet may they cry out with the Poet, O quantum mortalia pectora cecae
noctis habet: Ovid, M^t. l. 6,
Alas! alas! how much Blindness lodges in all mortal men? and they may most
truly say with Job, that they are but of yesterday, and know nothing: But their
ignorance of the truth of the Holy Scriptures, the Writings of the ancient
Fathers, and the Ecclesiastical Stories of all Times, made them to neglect
their Duties, and to spurn against both their King, and their Bishops; for, had
they been well versed in these things, and had understood them well, I should
have thought it not possible for the Devil to have filled them with so much
poison, as they have showed, both against their King, and against their
Bishops; and that, just like the Coy-Duck, Officiosa aliis, exitiosa suis, to
destroy their Brethren, to pleasure their Enemies, and the Enemies of God's
Church. For,

Thirdly, Seeing the Bishops, whom they deemed no more, then their Equals, to
be preferred before them; and conceiving themselves thereby to be neglected,
they both hated the King for his choice, and envied the Bishops for their
places; and because they were not capable to work any other revenge, their
Tongues were their own, and they let fly their Arrows, even bitter words, both
against our obedience to the King, though cunningly, and obliquely; and most
directly against the Calling of the Bishops, making that nothing, wherein
themselves had nothing to do. But, till their envy had gotten power to work
their ends, it only wrought the greatest mischief unto themselves: for, as it
is said of Mount Aetna, Nil a liud nisi se valet ardens Aetna cremare, that it
burns nothing but it self, Sic se non alios invidus ipse cremat; so the envious
man comburitur intus and extra, does burn, and pine away himself through envy;
and this envy destroyed the whole Nation of the Jews: because, as Saint
Ambrose says, Maluerunt invidere, quam credere, they rather chose to envy
Christ for his honor, that he had for his Miracles, and good Deeds, then
believe in him for their own Salvation; and the Bishops thought with Pindarus,
(...), Melior est invidentia commiseratione, that a Case hateful was better
then woeful, and that it was better for them to be envied by these, then to be
pitied by all. But,

Fourthly, The next thing, that made them to start aside, like a broken Bow,
Ambition:
was not so much their envy against the Bishops, as their ambition to obtain
their places; and their ambition, which, as the Scholeman says, is one of the
Daughters of Pride, failing to lay hold of what it went about, or that
preferment, which they sought, made them to fly out against the Bishops; and,
as Arius, missing the Bishopric of Alexandria, became the Father of the Arian
Heresy, and Aerius, as Epiphanius writes, being denied the Bishopric, that
he required, did first broach that Heresy, that there was no difference
betwixt a Presbyter and a Bishop: so the Presbyterians haughty spirit breaks
forth to discontent, to murmr, to traduce, to malign, and to abundance of
other evils, not easily to be discovered; for, as Cicero says, Facillime ad
res injust as impellitur, quisquis est altissimo animo, and gloriae cupido; He
is most easily induced, to do very unjust things, that is of an high mind, and
ambitious of glory, and great places; Nam dulce venenum
Est mundi lethalis honos:
because this deadly desire of honor is like sweet poison, that enticeth us to
suck it up. And

Fifthly, As covetousness, and the love of this present World, Covetousness.
made Demas to forsake St. Paul, so the like worldly love, and the love of the
things of this World, has made these false Brethren, to forsake their leaders;
for this is that root of bitterness, Javenal. Satyr. 14.
which choaketh every pleasant flower, and destroys every virtue; for, as
Juvenal says, quae reverentia legum? Quis metus, aut pudor est unquam
properantis avari? what respect of Laws, what fear of punishment, or what shame
of the World is at any time in a covetous man, that makes have to be rich? Nam
saevior ignibus Aetnae
Fervens amor ardet habendi.
Yet we may, and ought to covet that, which is good; for he, that coveteth the
Office of a Bishop, to feed the Flock of Christ, to preach the Gospel, and to
promote the Glory of God, desires a good work, says the Apostle; but he, that
desires a Bishopric, to Lord it over God's Inheritance, and to enrich himself,
and his Posterity, to purchase Lands, and to leave Lordships for his Children,
this is an evil sickness, that produces death. And this covetousness is said
to be the Epidemical Disease of the Presbyterians, that are generally seen to
be more covetous, then any other kind of men, as it is expressed in particular
by the Author of the last Will and Testament of Sir John Presbyter.

Sixthly, Covetousness.
Their covetous desire and ambition, to get Wealth, and Preferment, and their
unworthiness to obtain it, causing them to miss of it, have bred in them, not
only envy against the Bishops, but also discontent, and hatred against the
King, for preferring the other, and neglecting them; though the King did to
them herein, Homer says Iliad. p.
but as God uses to do in the like case.

(...), Annuit hoc illi Divum pater, abnuit illud, that is, to give them, what
he thought fit for them, and to deny them, what he conceived them unworthy of.
Yet, because that was not satisfactory to their expectation, when they beheld,
as Ovid says, Fertilior seges alienis semper in agris, better Corn, and a more
plentiful Harvest in the Bishops Fields, then in their own, they taught their
Proselytes to invent new Oaths, and Covenants, to call new Synods, and they
made Seditious, and Schismatical Sermons, and defended Perjuries, Forgeries,
Treacheries, Equivocations, Rebellions, and the like; and they altered the
whole frame of the Government of the Church, and of the Service of our God. And
so, as Solomon ascended to the Throne of Majesty, per sex gradus, by six steps,
so these men descended to the depth of their Iniquity, by these six ugly sins.

And though, as Reusner says, Formicae grata est formica, cicada cicadae,
Et doctus doctis gaudet Apollo choris;
one Ant, Disscidia inter aequales, ^ut fratres, p^ssima.
and one Grasshopper loves another; and as Pliny says, Serpens Serpentem non
laedit, one Serpent will not bite, nor hurt another; and as our Savior says,
If Satan cast out Satan, his kingdom cannot stand: yet these men, worse then
Serpents, and foolisher then Flies, do that, which Satan will not do, destroy
them of their own Profession, their Fellow Servants, and those worrhy men, that
made them the Ministers of Christ.

Proud envy so their virtues does deface,
And makes these foes to them, they should embrace.
And therefore, as their Pride, Covetousness, and Ambition, either through
ignorance, or else, which is worse, against their Consciences, if they were not
ignorant, have made them to envy the Bishops, and to hate the King, and
thereupon omnem movere lapidem, to use all their best wit, and to employ their
whole strength, like the brood of Vipers, to gnaw out the bowels of their
Mother Church, and like cursed Cham, to discover, and to deride their Fathers
supposed nakedness, and to spur on the Parliament, never to give over to
prosecute their design, to degrade the Bishops, to put down the Hierarchy, Root
and Branch: so the just God, whose Judgments are true, and righteous
altogether, Psalm. 19.5.
to recompense this their wickedness to their bosom, suffered the Devil, to
stir up as spiteful, and as malicious a generation of Vipers, as themselves, a
brood of Independents, that sprang from among themselves, and that became as
outrageous against them, as they had been injurious against the Bishops; and
these were not afraid to jear Jack Presbyter, as they termed him, to his face,
to set out his last Will, and Testament, and to proclaim it to the World, that
these Presbyterians were far more insolent, more intolerable, more inconsistent
with Monarchy, and their Government every way, more unjustifiable, and further
from the Apostolical Rule, then the Government of the Prelates; and if the
Presbytery should be established, whereas before we had but twenty six Bishops
in all England, So many Popes in England, as there be Parishes.
we should then have not a Bishop, but a Pope in every Parish throughout this
Kingdom; and a Pope more arrogant and presumptuous, and more tyrannical, and
injurious to the people of God, then ever any Bishop, or Pope attempted to be:
for whereas neither Pope, nor Bishop excommunicated any Christian, but either
for contempt of his Court, or upon sufficient proof upon the Oath of good
Witnesses, to make good the Allegation alleged against him, every Presbyter,
upon his own dislike, and his own supposal, that such an one is unworthy, and a
scandalous liver, will presently excommunicate the same person, and cut him off
from the Body of Christ: heu scelus nefandum! an offense beyond expression.

And so by these, and the like bold attempts, And another says, Hic jacet in
cineres, quem deflent hae mulieres, Presbyter Andreas, qui vitiavit eas: Cujus
luxuriae meretrix non sufficit omnis, Cujus ^varitiae totus non sufficit orbis.
and constant Allegations of the Independents, the dissembling and Hypocritical
Assembly of Presbyterians were disliked, diverse of them imprisonned, some of
them executed, others fled, and all of them discarded, and discharged from
their new devised Presbyterial Tyranny: and one that best knew them, makes this
Epitaph of them.

Presbyter hic jacet, jam dedecus urbis, and orbis,
Qui nostrae aetatis magna ruina fuit;
Hic est, si nescis, qui nobis certe paravit
Excidium, pestem, funera, bella famem,
Contemptor sacrum, blasphemus, publicus hostis,
Perfidus, ingratus, raptor iniquus, atrox;
Ex ista tandem migravit urbe Tyrannus,
Quo pejor pestis nullus in orb fuit.
And, as there were, under the Law, four great Prophets, Esaias, Jeremiah,
Ezechiel, and Daniel; and in the time of the Gospel, four Evangelists, St.
Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John; and in the Primitive Church, four
famous Greek Fathers, St. Athanasius, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzene, and
St. Chrysostom; and the like four in the Latin Church, St. Hierome, St.
Ambrose, St. Augustine, and St. Gregory; and in the Popish Church, four great
Schole-Doctors, Aquinas, Scotus, Antoninus, and Bonaventur: So these
Independents have nominated four Arch-Presbyters, Marshall, Case, Calamy, and
Edwards, to be the four Bearers of the Presbyterial Assembly to his Grave, and
appointed Sibbalds to teach their Funeral-Sermon upon that Text in Psalm. 89.44.
The days of my youth have thou shortened, and covered me with dishonor: and
Burges, and Sedgewick, were to be the close Mourners: then Gouge to throw it,
like an Ass, into the pit, with these few words, Ashes to ashes, dust to dust,
And rise thou, when others must.


And thus their own Proselytes have jeared the Presbytery out of his life. The
whole Trial of Mr. Love, page 68.
And, that, which is more worthy your observation, Mr. Christopher Love, who
confesses, that he was the first Scholar, that he knew of, or ever heard of,
in Oxford, that did publicly refuse, in the Congregation-House, to subscribe
unto those Impositions, or Canons, imposed by the Archbishop, touching the
Prelates, and Common Prayer, for which, he was expelled the Congregation-House,
never to sit amongst his Brethren; so he was the first of the Presbyters, that
suffered death for the defense of the Covenant, and the Presbyterian Cause.

And this was, as I conceive, some part of the inchoative Judgment of God upon
them, in this life; what more shall be imposed on them, either here, or
hereafter, it is not for me to imagine, but leave it to him, that is the Judge
of all the World.

But hereby we may all see, How justly God has dealt, and deals with the
Presbyterians.
how just is God in all this, to throw them down, that sought to raise
themselves by throwing their Fathers down. And who then, considering these just
Judgments of Almighty God, and his unsearchable ways, to pull down the pride
of men, and to cross the ambition of aspiring spirits, should not rather fear
to deal unjustly, and be contented with his own unblameable station, then seek
to raise himself, by unwarrantable courses, and especially such, as are by the
downfall of others? When, as Pliny writes of the Hart-wolf, Quamvis in fame
mandens, si respexerit aliud, oblivionem cibi subrepere aiunt, digressumque
quaerere illud, etc. that, be he never so hungry, and eating; yet, if he sees
another prey, Venator sequitur fugientiae, capta relinquit. Semper and inventis
ulteriora petit. Ovid. Amor. lib. 2.
he forsakes his meat, and follows after the same, and thereby does
oftentimes, like Aesops Dog, lose the morsel in his mouth, by snatching at the
shadow in the water: so the ambitious covetous wretches, making no account of
what they have, but greedily, and unjustly hunting after more, do, by the just
judgment of God, amittere certa, dum incerta petunt, as Plautus says, lose
what they justly had, by their unjust seeking of what they should not look
after.

Secondly, The Episcopal Clergy.
For those Clergymen, that were not the Members of the false Prophet, but were
Royalists, and the approvers of the Episcopal Function, and yet have not
escaped the fiery trial, but have been driven through fire, and water, and
have suffered many heavy things, to be plundered of their Goods, deprived of
their Livings, and often times detained in Bonds, or driven to fly from their
house, and home; I say, that, besides other causes, best known to God, into
whose secrets we dare not dive, we know good reasons, that they were not thus
handled without good cause, nor any ways unjustly dealt withal by the just
God: as specially, if there were nothing else, but because they were not 1.
Either right Royalists, or 2. Right Episcopals;
but, as the Poet says of the Maremaid, Desinit in piscem mulier formosa
superne, or, like those half-Christians, that begin in the spirit, but end in
the flesh; or those Apostles, that would build Tabernacles, to remain with
Christ on Mount Tabor, where he was transfigured in glory, but will flinch
away, and forsake him, on Mount Calvary, when his face was filled with
ignominy: so they like the Jews in Elias his time, halted betwixt God, and
Baal; were staggering betwixt the King, and the Parliament; and tottered
betwixt the Bishops, and the Presbyters: as doubtful what would be the event,
and issue of this debate. For

1. Diverse indeed loved the King, and approved his Cause, as most just, and
right, and their Consciences told them how far they were obliged, even by God's
word, to honor and obey him in all his just Commands, and to assist him
against his unjust enemies; but they like Ephraim, that was as a Cake baked on
the one side, or like the Church of Laodicea, that, of (...) and (...), were
termed a righteous people, and yet were neither hot nor could, but lukewarm in
their Profession; so were these men, as they pretended, for the King, but did
nothing against the Parliament, nor any thing to any purpose, for the King; for
had they all, with their tongues, and with their pens, hi scriptis illi verbis,
published, and thundered it out, like Trumpets, unto their several
Congregations, and to all the World, how unjustly, and how unchristian-like it
is for any Subjects to rebel, and to war against their King, and how far they,
and all other true Subjects, and good Christians, are bound in Conscience, and
obliged by God's Word, to defend him, whom they know without question, is their
undoubted King; and had they themselves (to give good examples unto their
people) opened their purses, and extended their bounty to the uttermost of
their power, and sent their Servants and their Children to assist his Majesty,
I doubt not, but am sure of it, that they had herein pleased God, and in all
probability defended the King, and freed themselves from that yoke of Tyranny,
and all those burdens and afflictions, that since the Parliament prevailed,
were imposed upon them, and they were necessitated to undergo them: but they
were such, as Pliny speaks of, (...) mouthless men, that could not, or would
not speak a word in the King's cause, and they were (...) men without hands,
able to do nothing, or at least willing to do nothing for him, that underwent
all his trouble for the Church, and Churchmen.

And therefore, when they neglected their duty, to do what in their Consciences
they were persuaded they should do, it was most just that they should suffer
what they would not suffer, because the sins of omission are as punishable, as
the sins of commission, and he that is not with me, says our Savior, is
against me, and he that gathers not, scatters abroad, and so (the Angel
cursed Meroz, and cursed bitterly the inhabitants thereof, because they came
not forth to help Israel against Jahin King of Canaan;) and so they are justly
punished, that, being in their hearts for the King, they did not with their
tongues, hands and purses, do the uttermrst of their endeavors to aid, and
assist the King; for as the Poet says, Foederis haec species, id habet
concordia signum,
Vt quos jungit amor, jungat and ipsa manus.
Our hands should ever go with our hearts: and I am confident, had all we, that
in our hearts were for the King, given to his Majesty in time, the fifth part
of that which the Parliament has since plundered, and wrested from us, we
might by the assistance of God, have preserved both our King, and our selves,
from all the miseries, and losses that the Parliament has since brought upon
us; and what fools were we, to save our wealth, and shut our purses to enrich
our enemies, and to empower them to destroy our selves! O let ns never do so
again.

Secondly, For those that approved of Episcopacy, and had subscribed to the
Articles, and allowed the Liturgy of our Church, and were in their Consciences
persuaded of the purity, and excellency thereof, the same being composed by
those godly Martyrs, that weeded all superstition, and superfluities from it,
and then sealed the rest, that was inoffensive, and pious with their blood; and
the same also, being justified by all the convocations of all the Bishops, and
Clergy ever since and accordingly confirmed by acts of Parliament throughout
the reign of four most pious Princes; for the space of well near one hundred
years; for them, I say, through hope to save, and to retain their livings, and
so for the love of the World, to comply with the Parliament, and to embrace
their directory, so indirectly to serve God, every Presbiter after his own
fancy, and to omit the whole set form of God's Worship, enjoined to be observed
in all Churches, save only the reading of a Psalm, and two Chapters (which
notwithstanding they did not according to the Rubric) and to profane all
Holy Days, even those, that are set apart for the Commemoration of the blessed
Birth, Circumcision, and Ascension of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
and all other days, that the former Saints and the whole Church of Christ had
appointed for the children of God, to meet, to give thanks to God, for the
great blessings, that all we had received from him; I demand of any man, even
themselves being Judges, if it be not very just, that they should be plundered,
and pressed, and even lose their livings, which have so unjustly, and so
perfidiously done those things in hope to retain their livings; for (...), Non
te latuerit, O supreme Jupiter, horum malorum quisquis author extitit. The
Heathen man can tell us God will not be mocked, neither can we blind the
all-seeing eyes of God, nor hide our selves out of his sight, when we do commit
such evils; and Christ tells us plainly, he that saves his life shall lose it:
and he that loses his life for his sake shall find it. And were the Martyrs
so ready to lose their lives for his sake, and shall we be so unwilling to
forgo a little worldly pelf, and some small living for his sake, that tells us
plainly, whatsoever we give, or lose for his sake, we shall be required an
hundredfold, and shall receive eternal life.

Let them therefore that will, if not out of faction, or ignorance, but for the
love of their livings, reject our inoffensive, and divine Liturgy, that is so
conducing to peace, and good order, so little obnoxious to any just exception,
and so exceeding profitable for the instruction of the people: for mine own
part, I know it to be the true service, of the true God, and the best way that
I know to serve God; and therefore, by God's help, I will never omit it, nor be
guided by their directory for all the livings, that they could, or can heap
upon me; and, I pray God, it be not laid to their charge, that to comply with
the factious opposers of it, or to retain their livings have done it, to betray
the service of God, and to lay aside those heavenly prayers, that were made by
holy Saints, and approved by all the best Doctors of the Church, and appointed
by authority, to be used to help the devotion of God's people, and in the stead
thereof to authorize, or at least by their example to encourage every Ignoramus
to prate nonsense, and sometimes to belch out blasphemies in his prayers to
God, and in the face of the Church, without shame; God forgive them.

Secondly, For the lay-subjects of the King, that have had their part, in the
miseries of these latter days, The lay-subjects.
I speak only of those, that in their Consciences approved of their King's
cause: for his enemies, their portion, perhaps, is yet unpaid I may divide them
into two ranks, just as were the followers of Gideon.

1. Judges vii. 7.
Some were faint hearted, and they were the greatest part and that by much.

2. Others were very faithful, and courageous, but they were by far, the
smalest number, not above 300. of 32000. so were the following subjects of King
Charles.

First, The faint-hearted Royalist.
the fainthearted subjects, that loved the King, and wished that he might
prosper, and prevail against his Adversaries, but feared the powerful, numerous
multitude of the Parliament abettors, that were very many, and were just like
the Inhabitants of Meroz, that hated the Cananites, but did nothing for the
Israelites: so did these nothing, or so little as nothing, for the King, and
for their fellow subjects, that were with him.

And yet the Schools tell us, and so do the Heathens also, that Qui potest
liberare alium, and non liberat, occidit; he that can deliver another, that is,
from anundeserved death, as in his Conscience he believes is innocent, and
delivers him not, kills him, and is thereby guilty of his blood; and the
Canonists do say, Scotus in sent. did. 15. decret. secunda part c. usa 23. q.
3. Et Seneca passim^ qui succurrere perituro potest, cum non succurr^t occidit.

And Cicero says, N^l habet fortuna majus quam ut possit. nec n^turametius
qua^ ut velit servare Pro. xxiv. 11, 12.


qui non repellit injuriam a Socio, cum potest, tam est in vitio, quam qui
facit; he that hinders not an injury, or a wrong that is done his fellow,
when it lies in his power to do it, is as much in fault, as he that does the
injury: and Solomon says, If thou faint in the day of Adversity, thy strength
is small, and if thou forbear to deliver them, that are drawn unto death, and
those that are ready to be slain, and say, behold, we knew it not; does not
he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that keeps thy Soul, does not
he know it? and shall not he render to every man according to his works; and
the Prophet David bids us to defend the Fatherless, and the Widows, and to
see, that such as be oppressed, have right, which was the practice of Job, as
himself confesses; and of Moses also, when he killed the Egyptian, to deliver
the oppressed Israelite out of his hands: and the Poet that knew no more, then
what the dim Light of Nature showed him; says, Turpe erit in miseris veteri
tibi rebus amico
Auxilium nulla part tulisse tuum: Ovid. lib. 2. De Ponto.

It is a foul shame for any man to leave an old friend in distress, and not to
further him with his aid, and assistance.

And if men are thus obliged to assist their Neighbors, and their Friends, A
shameful thing to neglect our Friends in Adversity.
when they are wronged, how much more are they bound to aid, and to defend
their King, when they see him wronged, and sought to be murdered, or dethroned?
for these men had sworn Allegiance, and fidelity to their King at diverse times,
and many of them, if not most of them, had their places and offices, at least
their Protection formerly from him; and, passing over those that were furthest
from my knowledge, and, to speak of them, quorum pars magna fui, mine own
Country men and Kinsmen, with some great, ( I know not how good) men, had like
Aeneas and Vcalegon, invited the wily Greeks to enter Troy, and to come into
our Coasts; the chiefest Gentry were all moved, and persuaded to swear, and to
take an Oath, so well deviced and penned, as the best, and most learned Divines
in all those parts could do it; to be true and faithful unto their King, and to
the uttermost of their power, with the hazard of their lives, and the expense
of their goods, and fortunes, to oppose all those Adversaries, The inconstancy
of many men.
that then opposed him, and the chiefest of them by name.

And yet behold the Constancy, and the Faithfulness of these good Subjects, how
good Christians I know not, before one drop of their blood was spilt, or any
part of their goods spent, they submitted themselves to the Parliament, and
left the Kings friends to sink or swim, and the King himself to do as he could;
and I believe they were neither the first, nor the last that did the like in
many parts of this Kingdom; neither do I conceive these men to be the worst of
the King's Subjects, because, that indeed, there was something now, that might
induce faint-hearted men, and semi-Subjects to yield unto the Parliament
(though not to break their Oath, which is indispensable, and should be
inviolably kept in any Case) for that the King was worsted, and the Parliament
had very much prevailed against him; though this also is no such great
Inducement, either with wise men, or faithful Subjects, to make them, so
suddenly to lay down their Bucklers; because, as the Poet says, Victores,
victique cadunt, victique resurgunt. The doubtful events of war.
And as another says, Communis Mars est, and interfectorem interficit. Sam.
xi. 25.
That is, in King David's Phrase, The Sword devoureth one as well as another,
as well the Conqueror as the conquered; and therefore Menevensis says of King
Alfred, Si modo victor erat ad crastina bella pavebat,
Si modo victus erat ad crastina bella parabat.
He feared his Enemies when he overcame them, and he prepared against them,
when they overcame him; and, as Demosthenes answered, when he was charged for
running away from his Enemies, Vir fugiens, denuo pugnabit, he that runs away
to day, may cause his enemies to fly away to morrow: and so we find it
verefied many times, as the Histories of the greatest Warriors testify unto
us.

But, if fear of the Prevalency of the Parliament was now so powerful with
them, as to bind their hands, and to shut their Purses from the King, what was
the reason they were so slow, and did so little aid him, either with men or
money, when, in all probability, the King had the better, or at lest stood at
even terms with his enemies, and then might with a little help, and a small
weight added, turn the Scales, and so subdue his Adversaries, and prevent all
the miseries, and disasters that have happened ever since? Surely, here can be
made none other answer, nor any excuse alleged, but the same reason that the
Merozites had to shut their mouths, stop their feet, and hold their hands, till
they did see who should prevail, and under whose wings they thought to shelter
themselves, when all the brunt was past, The true cause of the neutrality of
most men in this Kingdom.
without danger; or, at least to come off upon very reasonable terms. And this
was the cause of the neutrality of the most men, especially the greatest men of
this Kingdom.

And is it not therefore most just, that this pannick fear, and punick faith
should suffer the punishment that such perfidiousness deserved? that he which
refuses the sweet, How justly these men were punished by suffering all that
fell upon them.
just, and easy Yoke of Christ, should undergo the bitter, hard, and cruel
Yoke of Satan? or that they, which undutifully neglected, and refused to do a
little help, which their Conscience told them, they should do for their King,
that exposed himself to the hazard of his life, and loss of his Kingdom, for to
maintain the Service of God, and to defend their Laws, and Liberties; should
bear the full Measure, and Weight of that punishment, which they deserved? Yes
certainly, me judice, these, of all others merited to be scourged with
Scorpions and not lashed with twigs, and I pray God, their deserts do not light
upon their heads, when as, neither plundering, nor composition, nor taxes can
Parallel that greatness of their offense, that destroyed both the King and his
party by their deserting of them.

Therefore, whatsoever miseries, taxes or service, or any, other Trouble, of
the like nature has fallen on any person of this classes, The greatness of
their offense.
let him say, and he shall say but the truth, that God has, not only most
justly dealt with him, that had so unjustly neglected his King, but has been
more merciful unto him, then either his offense deserved, or with any reason
could be expected.

Secondly, 2 The faith.
For those Subjects of the King, that were like Gedeons faithful Soldiers,
and spent their Wealth, and Strength to the uttermost of their power, to assist
his Majesty, and did, according to their Consciences, and as they conceived
the Word of God, Expounded by the true Prophets and servants of Christ,
directed them, and yet felt the rod of God, and the miseries of those times in
full measure and far heavier then most others, as though they had been the
worst of men, and the greatest of all Sinners, such as diverse of the Jews
conceited those eihtteen Galilaeans, upon whom the Tower of Siloah fell, and
those whose Blood ^ilate mingled with their Sacrifice, were; I say that if God
should be extreme to mark, what they had don amiss, or should with the Eye of
justice look upon the best of all his Saints, were he as faithful as Moses,
that was faithful in all Gods house, as religious as David, that was a man
according to Gods own heart, as constant as Saint Peter, that was contented to
be Crucified for the Faith of Christ, and as industrious as Saint Paul, that
labored more then any of all the Apostles, yet were he not able to answer God
one of a thousand, but he must lay his Hand upon his Mouth, and opening the
same, he must say with Holy Job, If I wash my self in Snow water, and make my
hands never so clean; Job. ix. 30.
yet shall thou plunge me in the ditch, and mine own Clothes shall abhor me,
Dan. ix. 7.
and with the Prophet Daniel, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto the, When we
do never so well God may justly punish us, though not for that our well-doing,
but for some other evil-doings, that we had done at some other time before, or
for some defect in our well-doing. Why God punishes the loyal Subject, and his
own most faithful servants.
but unto us shame and confusion of Faces. And therefore how faithful, and how
constant soever these seemed to be, both in the service of God, and discharging
their duties unto the King, yet must they confess, they failed in many things
of that degree of perfection, which God requires at their hands in both
respects, they neither serveing God as they ought, nor being such Subjects unto
their King, as the strictness of God's Law requires. And therefore I say,
First, that in all our sufferings, whatsoever calamities we have endured, and
what pressure soever lies upon us, we must all confess, that, either for our
delinquences, and miscariages in these times, or some other offenses, committed
by us, at some other times, we are most justly, and far less then we deserve,
afflicted, and punished by God, whose judgments on us, as upon all others, are
always most righteous, and just.

Secondly, I say, that there is crudelitas parcens, and misericordia puniens, a
sparing, which is cruelty, and a punishment; that is a great mercy; and such
are the troubles, pressures and punishments of God's Children, mercies rather
then judgments; because they proceed not from God's Wrath, but as the
chastisements of a Father to his Children, so do these come from the love of
God toward his servants, for their good, whom he afflicts here for a moment,
that they should be bettered, and not be condemned with the Wicked hereafter
for ever.

Thirdly, I say, that the Miseries, Crosses, and Calamities, Abraham, not
temptatione deceptionis, to deceive him, as Satan tempts us, but temptatione
probationis, to try him, whether he would obey the Commandment of God, or not,
when he commanded him, to offer his Son, his only Son Isaac for a Sacrifice,
unto God: and so he tried the Israelites, at the waters of Strife; and, as
Moses says, in their Forty years wandering through the Wilderness, to see,
whether they would love the Lord their God, and cleave unto him, and continue
faithful in his service; and so he does plainly tell the Church of Smyrna,
that the Devil should cast some of them into Prison, that they might be tried,
and they should have Tribulation ten days: and that is, either ten years, as
Junius expounds it, or else, several times, as others think; yet all to this
end, that they might be tried, whether they would continue faithful unto
death, or not; and such were the afflictions of Job, and of many other of the
Saints of God: they were justly deserved by their Sins, and God in mercy sent
them for their trial. What the former Doctrine teaching the us.


And therefore whatsoever, and how great soever a measure of Miseries, Crosses,
and Troubles, we have or shall suffer; yet let us not faint, nor be afraid of
them: and let not the Children of God be like the Children of Ephraim, that
being Harnessed and carrying Bows, and so well prepared for the fight, yet
turned themselves back in the day of Battle, when there was most need of
their assistance; but as we have loved our King, and have suffered all the
calamities and burdens, that are laid upon us, for our faithfulness to him,
and the preservance of a good conscience, so let us continue unto the end, and
never comply with any of the King's Enemies, in the abatement of the least jot
of our love, and good opinion of the deceased King, or with the Factious
Non-conformists, in the dis-service of God, and the new invented Religion of
our upstart Schismatics; let neither weight of trouble, nor length of time
change our minds: because perseverance in Faith, and Virtue is that, which
crowns all the other Virtues; and if at any time, even at the last, we
forsake our first love, and change our Faith we lose all the reward of all the
former good, that we have done, and do, by our revolt, testify, that we were
not good, for the love of goodness, nor adhered to the truth, for righteousness
sake; but for some other by-respects, for our own ends, that never brings any
to a good end: and therefore the primitive Christians could never, by any
means, be drawn, to alter the least point of their Faith, Prudent De Vincentio.
and the right service of God; but, as Prudentius says, Tormenta, carcer,
ungulae,
Stridensque flammis lamina,
Atque ipsa, paenarum ultima,
Mors, Christianis ludus est.


All the Torments, and Terrors of the World could never move them, to change
their minds.

But some man may say, King is dead, Victrix causa Dits placuit.
and the Parliament has prevailed against him, and all his Friends; and
therefore what should I do now, but comply with the stronger side, and use that
religion, which they profess, and that form of worship, which they prescribe,
and so redeem the time, that I have lost, and repair some losses, that I have
sustained.

I answer, Jews might make to terrify the Christians, and to withold them
from the faith of Christ, because they had killed him, and he was dead, and
therefore to what purpose should they adhere to a dead Savior, and hazard
their lives, and their fortunes, to maintain the honor of a dead man, that
could not preserve his own life, because a Living Dog is better then a dead
Lion, says unto his Servant John, I am he, that lives, and was dead, and
behold, (or, mark it well,) I am alive for evermore, Amen; and therefore let
not my death deterr any man from following me, or believing in me: so I say,
that faith, and truth are still alive, and though oftentimes suppressed, and
afflicted, yet not killed; and therefore the Poet says, Despair not yet,
though truth be hidden often;
Because at last she shall be set aloft.
And as another says, Terra fremat, regna alta crepent, ruet ortus and orcus;
Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet.
And for King Charles, I say, though he is dead, yet he is still alive many
ways; and that his blood, like Abel's blood, being dead, yet speaks, and
speaks aloud, not only to God, These things were written, and preached, by the
Author in the time of Oliver.
but also to every one of them, that loved him, that they should not so soon
forget their faith, and love to him, that lost his life for their defense, and
the defense of the true Catholic Faith; and though he be dead, he is still
alive, alive with Christ in Heaven for evermore, and alive with us on earth, in
the good, that he did bring to us, in the love, that he showed toward us, and
in the good, that he left amongst us; and shall we leave him, and leave our
love to him, and our remembrance of him, and forsake our faith, and prove
perfidious both to God, and to the honor, and to the memory of our deceased
King; and cleave to them, to say and do, as they say and do, that have bereft
us of him, and would have destroyed us with him? No, no; let us abhor them, and
their evil doings, detest their false Faith, and hate their Wickedness with a
perfect hatred. And though we have suffered much, and may suffer much more, at
the hands of these Tyrants, that are our new Masters, yet let us submit our
selves unto them, but as Daniel, and the rest of God's people did unto the
Chaldeans full sore against their wills; James v 11. Job lxii. 12.
and let us yield none otherwise to this present Government, then the Children
of Israel did unto Pharaoh, that is, till they saw all Opportunity to be
delivered from it. And, as the Apostle says, You have heard of the patience of
Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, how the Lord blessed the latter end of
Job more then his beginning: so may the Lord do with us; for as the Lord says
unto Cain, Sin lies at the door, and is ready like a Sergeant to attach every
cruel, blood-thirsty, and wicked Sinner, and so the Lord knows best both how
and when, to deliver his Servants out of all their troubles, and his will be
done: let us still wait on him; and stay his time, and we shall not miscarry.
Amen.

CHAP. III.
THirdly touching the Irish Rebels, that are now either killed, banished, or
enslaved; I say the world may see in them, as in the clearest Cristal glass,
the just Judgment of God, and should learn by their example, Obadiah verse. 15.
Jer. l. 15.
to fear to offend his great Majesty; for, as the Prophet Obadiah says
concerning the Edomites, who came of Esau, Jacob's brother, and so were
brethren unto the Israelites, As thou have done, it shall be done unto thee;
the reward shall return upon thine own head: and as Jeremiah says the like of
Babylon, Take Vengeance upon her, and, as she has done, do unto her: so we
find the Lord deals with the Irish, measuring unto them the same measure,
that they measured unto their brethren the English, and those brethren, whom
they pretended to be dearer unto them, the Britains. And how, I pray you, have
they dealt with these their dear brethren? surely, the heynousness of their
cruel, and most wicked doings, can hardly be expressed, though by a far better
Orator then I am, that never had any other style, but plain; yet, so near as I
can, according to my plain manner, I will set it forth in these four respects;
that is, The Suddenness, and unexpectedness of the Irish Rebellion.
1. The Suddenness of it, for 2. The Subtlety of it, for 3. The Cruelty of it,
for 4. The Generality of it, for


First, When a dark Cloud appears, and when the Winds do blow, and the Waves
of the Sea do roar, before a mighty tempest of Lightning, and Thunder, and a
storm of Hailstones does fall upon us; men, foreseeing thereby, what is like
to ensue, may either wisely prevent the danger, or resolvedly prepare
themselves with Patience to sustain all their ensuing miseries, which will not
be so terrible unto them, when they are expected, before they fall upon them;
quia tela praevisa minus nocent, because foreseen evils do least hurt us: and,
as Horace says, Levius fit patientia, quicquid corrigere est nefas; because
Patience lightens the maladies, that we cannot mend: Genesis xix. 24.
but when the Sun does shine upon the ground, and the Lord suddenly raineth
Fire, and Brimstone from the Lord out of Heaven, as he did upon Sodom, and
Gomorrah, there is no evasion of such a sudden Destruction; and yet, the Irish
Insurrection was not much unlike the Sicilian Vespers, or the French Massacre,
that came like a Thief in the night, and rushed upon the poor Protestants, like
an armed man, against whom there is no resistance: and as Joab shed the blood
of War in Peace, Reg. ii. 18.
so did the Irish Rebels shed the blood of their harmless Neighbors, that
behaved themselves most peaceably amongst them; and as the Israelites by the
command of God borrowed Jewels of Silver, and Jewels of Gold of the Egyptians
to depart from them, so did the Irish, contrary to the commandment of God,
borrow Gold, and Silver, and all the Arms, and Weapons, not of those that
oppressed them, as the Egyptians did the Israclites, but of many that had
often times relieved, and protected them; and this they did not, with Israel to
go out of Egypt, but, as Mithridates slew all the Romans that were in Pontus,
so did they intend most suddenly to destroy all the English, and Britains that
were in Ireland, and that, while they seemed to be most friendly with them.

And this very Circumstance, the Suddenness of their iniquity is so far from
the Possibility to be excused, or extenuated, that it must needs be
acknowledged to be a most horrible Impiety.

Secondly, The subtle Carriage of their Rebellion.
The palpable Forgery, and inexcusable Perjury of the first Rebels, and
Murderers of our men, shows their Subtlety, and the height of their Iniquity;
for they most falsely pretended, that whatsoever they did to unarm the
Protestants, and to expel the English, they did it for the King, and by the
King's special Command, and Commission under his Great Seal; and therefore they
termed themselves the King's Soldiers, and the Queen's Army, that were thus
authorized by his Majesty, to rob, expel, and destroy all the English and
British Protestants out of Ireland; and hereby they seduced many thousands of
the simpler Irish, that otherwise meant no evil unto their Neigbours, to join
with them in their Rebellion, and they stopped the mouths, and weakened the
hands of those loyal Protestants, that, otherwise, would have labored more
strongly to have resisted their un-Christian Violence; and so, in thus carrying
on their design, they most impudently slandered God's Anointed, and with faces
no less shameless then the Devils, How impudently the first Irish Rebels belyed
our most gracious King.
they belyed the good King, that was further from those thoughts, then the
worst of them were from all goodness; yet they did hereby give color to the
ill-affected, and the Enemies to the King in Parliament, to lay those things
often in the King's dish, and to tax him openly with these forged lies of those
false Rebels; as you may obviously find it (as I believe) in their
Remonstrances, and Declarations.

And, as that is most abominable with God, when a Thief, Murderer, or
Adulterer, Psalm. l. 21.
thinks wickedly, that God is such an one as himself, or regards not those
things; so was this gross traducing of his Majesty, a most horrible impiety, to
persuade the world, that so just, and so gracious a King, was so unjust, so
cruel, and so bloody as these butcherly Rebels were.

But Menander can tell them, (...) they should not think, that a lying Perjurer
can hide himself from the All-seeing God; and the very Heathens knew, that God
would be just, though for a while his Justice were oftentimes deferred; for
upon the Trojans Lies, and perfidious Perjuries, Agamemnon could say, as Homer
testifies, (...),
Homer. Iliad. 4.
(...) --
Though the God of Heaven avengeth not the same presently, yet surely he will
punish it at last, (...), -- For I am sure of this, To pay for all these lies,
and ^e^juries.
and do know it very well, (...); There will be a day, when stately Troy shall
be overthrown. Nam licet haud sontes praesenti puniat ira,
Sera tamen punit Deus, and graviora malorum
Supplicia, --
For though God comes, to punish lies and perjuries, and such like horrid
crimes, slowly, and as it were, on leaden feet; yet when he comes, he lays
on soundly, and smites them home, as it were with Iron hands; and as the Poet
Claudian says, In prolem dilatarunt perjuria patris, Claud. in curetium. O
that all Parents would always remember this, even this saying of Claudian.

Et quas fallaceis collegit lingua parentis
Has eadem nati lingua refudit opes.
The punishment of the Fathers perjuries, will reach unto his Children, even as
Moses told us long ago, from the mouth of God himself, that God is jealous of
his honor, and will visit the sins of the Fathers, especially such horrid
sins, as perjuries, and high slanders, upon the Children, unto the third, and
fourth Generation, and as the Wives, and Children of these Irish Rebels, can
now testify, the truth of these things, and I shall more fully declare the
same anon unto you.

Thirdly, The bloody, barbarous, and inhumane murders of the wild Northern,
Their bloody and inhumane dealings.
Irish, and the rest of the uncivillized Rebels, do add a great deal of more
weight unto their impiety; for though the murders, and slaughters don here in
England, be most bloody, and cruel, yea, most unnatural, and unchristian, when,
as the Poet says, Nec hospes, ab hospite tutus. but the Brother fought against
his Brother, and sometimes killed one another, as we read they did in the Wars
of Sertorius, and the Fathers often fought against their Children, and the
Children against their Parents, just as our Savior says, it should be in the
time of the great Antichrist; yet if we compare them with the Savage Butchering
of the Women with Child, young Infants, aged Matrons, old Fathers, and all
others, of what age, Sex or Condition soever they were, that were done,
especially by the Northern Irish, and the other Rebels, that are expressed in
the Remonstrance, published by a learned and Reverend man, Dr. Jones, the now
Bishop of Cloghar, and the other Commissioners, authorized for the Examination
of those outrages, then we shall find, that as the Poet says, Saevior est
tristi busiride, Saevior illo
Qui falsum lento torruit igne bovem,
Quique bovem siculo fertur donasse tyranno
Et dictis arts conciliasse suas:
the barbarous inhumanity of these Rebels to have exceeded all the cruelties,
of Phalaris, Busiris, Dyonisius, and the rest of the Savage Tyrants of the
Heathens, or the bloody persecutors of the Primitive Christians, and the
English cruelties, to be very merciful, and their bloody slaughters to be but
gentle punishments, in respect of these Tragic Acts, that (...), in the
lemnian hands, they laid upon the poor Protestants, so far, that they, which
felt them not, can hardly believe such infernal destruction should be invented,
and executed by any humane Creature here on Earth; for as the Poet says, Vix
ulla fides tam saevi criminis unum
Tot poenas cepisse caput; quis prodere tanta
Funera, quis caedes possit deflere nefandas?
Quid tale immanes unquam gessisse feruntur?
It was so great, and so horrible an impiety, that scarce faith can be given to
it, scarce tears can be found sufficient to bewail it, and scarce torments
enough devised, to punish it, being so inhumane, that if I were an Infidel or
Pagan, I would refuse all the happiness, that their Priests could persuade me
to accept of, for embracing of their faith, rather then I would be of their
Religion, that would incite their people to the unjust effusion of so much
innocent blood, and the savage butchering of so many guiltless persons; when as
such cruelties would be a sufficient Argument unto me, to prove, that they
could not be the Priests of any good God, but rather the Children of Apollyon,
and the firstborn of that destroyer, which labors with all his might, to
bring all men unto perdition; for that we may justly say, that, as the Sun
darkneth all the light of the Stars, so the Irish cruelty, if the Relation of
their inhumanity be true, blotteth out all the strangeness of most other former
cruelties; especially if we add,

Fourthly, The generality of their intended wickedness. Psalm. 137.7.
the generality of their intended resolution, which was, as the Children of
Edom cried in the day of Jerusalem, saying, Down with it, d^wn with it, even
to the ground, that the name of Israel might be no more in remembrance: so they
thought to root out all the English and British blood out of Ireland; but the
Prophet Jeremiah, and Obediah, demand the same question of the Edomites,
saying, Obadiah. v. 5.
If thieves come to thee, if Robbers by night, would they not have scollen till
they had enough? that is, no more, then what they thought enough; or as
Jeremiah says, Jerem. 49.9.
They will destroy till they have enough, as if he said, they will only
destroy so much, but no more; and if Grape-gatherers come to thee, would they
not leave some gleaning-Grapes? And yet these Rebels, worse then Thieves, or
then robbers by night, were not satisfied with enough, nor could they tell,
when they had enough; but they would cut off head and tail, root and branch,
and leave not any gleanings, nor any remnant, for their Children to destroy
afterward.

And so you see the wickedness of the Irish; and yet, not all, for after they
had done all this, and after that, with the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, and of
Antioch, when they threw down the Statues of their Emperous, they had provoked
their King by their our-rages, and they considered, that they had done
foolishly, by imagining such a device, as they were not able to bring to pass,
and found their King more merciful, then the Thessalonians found Theodosius, or
the Antiochians found Julian, when, upon their submission, and reducement to
their former obedience, he would have been contented with some reasonable
satisfaction, to be made to himself, and his abused Subjects, far less then
their iniquity deserved, and the yielding up of the prime Rebels, and the
bloody murderers to answer the Laws for their offenses, and it may be, the
decimating of them, to suffer death for their doings; and to that end, had
appointed a most honorable, wise, and sweet natured Nobleman, that might more
rightly be termed deliciae generis humani, then the Son of Vespasian, to be a
Commissioner, on the King, and the Protestants behalf, to treat with some, that
were chosen to do the like, on the Irish side, how things might be well
pacified, and a firm peace settled on all sides, betwixt the Protestants and the
Papists, the English and the Natives; and these Commissioners, after much time
spent, and a great deal of pains taken, had brought things, as they conceived,
to a reasonable good pass, and a far fairer conclusion on the Irish side, then
either their wickedness deserved, or any reason could give them any hope to
expect; and the Noble Marquess of Ormond, had resolved to travel in his own
person (as he did to Kilkenny and Clonmel) to cause the concluded Articles of
peace, to be proclaimed, in the chiefest Cities of that Kingdom; these wretched
men, bewitched with the poison of Rebellion, in the pride of their heart, which
as the Prophet says of the Edomites, has deceived them, instead of a thankful
acceptance of so merciful a favor, and abundance of graces concluded for them,
did most desperately reject their own happiness; and as not forgetting their
usual Treacheries, they laid snares, and plotted how they might take the noble
Marquess, and render evil, what or how much I know not, to him, that had, with
much cost, and more pains, procured so much good for them.

To show unto us, that, as the Inhabitants of the Isle of Malta, unjustly said
of Saint Paul, so we might justly say of them, though the merciful King
desired not their Blood, to their ruin; yet vengeance would not suffer them to
escape; Act. 28.4.
but, as the Lord said of Edom, behind, they whose judgment was not to drink of
the Cup, have assuredly drunken; and art thou he, that shall altogether go
unpunished? thou shall not go unpunished; but thou shall surely drink of it,
for I have sworn by my self, says the Lord, that Bozra shall become a
desolation, a reproach, a waste, Jerem. xlix. 1^. Jerem. xlix. v. 37.
and a curse, and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes; and as the
Lord said of Elam, I will cause it to be dismayed before their enemies, and
before them that seek their-life, and I will bring evil upon them, even my
fierce anger, says the Lord, and I will send the Sword after them, till I have
consumed them; so the very like judgment does now fall upon the Irish, for the
Sword is sent after them, And yet the last v. of this C. may be a great comfort
unto the Irish, for it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will
bring again the captivity of Elam, says the Lord, and so the Irish repenting
and reduced to their obedience may be received again into a sociable communion
and become a great and a good nation.
and they are dismaide before their Enemies, and they are become a Desolation,
a reproach, a waste, and a curse, and their cities, as they were theirs,
perpetual wastes; and that, even in the judgment of man, most justly too;
because as I showed to you before, they have rebelled against the Lord, and
against a good King, and were so cruel against their brethren, and have
committed such horrible wickedness against innocent persons; and yet, as
blinded in their own malice, they have refused their own happiness; for now the
Lord God, that ministers true judgment unto the people, makes inquisition, by
his Magistrates, for all the Blood, that they have spilt; and if the Blood of
Abell, that was but one man, cried so loud to God from off the Earth, for
vengeance against Caine, that was likewise but one single murderer; then how
much more loud, do the Bloods of so many hundreds of men, so many women, and so
many infants, as so many thousands of these Irish Rebels, have most cruelly
spilt, cry to God, for Vengeance against those wicked murderers.

And therefore, whatsoever has befallen them, or shall happen unto them; God
must needs be justified in all the judgments of these rebels; and themselves
cannot deny, but that he, which sits in the Throne that judges right, has
done them right, in all that is done unto them. And I fear that before God
makes an end of their punishment, as the Prophet says, I will houle for Moab
and I will cry out for all Moab, mine heart shall mourn for the men of
Kir-heres, O vine of Sibmah, Jerem xlviii. 31.
I will weep for thee with the weeping of Jazer; so we may weep and lament for
the desolation of Ireland, and the sad condition of the poor Irish people, when
they shall find and feel, the mighty distance and difference, betwixt a
merciful King that they had, and merciless enemies and a cruel Tyrant, whose
little fingers, shall be found heavier then the King's loins, and who, For
these things we^e written in the time of the Usurper.
in stead of those twigs wherewith the King would have most gently whipped
them, will most severely Scourge them with Scorpions.

Fourthly, touching the Scots, I shall, as brief as I can speak.

1. Of Charles Stuart, whom they Crowned to be their King, and is both their
and our lawful King. 2. Of those perfideous, and distressed Subjects, that
have Crowned him.
First, their Crowned King Charles Stuart, as the Son of a good Father, and no
less Virtuous a mother, is in the judgment of all, that now know him, a very
wise, discreet, and Prudent Prince; and, they say, as Valiant and Courageous,
as any Gentleman whatsoever; I need not say much of his worth, it is so well
known to all that know him, and his Enemies cannot deny it, neither does the
Relation of his worth any ways lessen theirs, that have any worth in them; but
were he as wise as Solomon, the mysteries of States, and the requisites to
govern many people, will require many heads, and those likewise not of the
meanest sort, but of the wisest, and greatest capacities to assist him; for, as
Xenophon says, Pauca aliqua unus videat, unus audiat, one man can neither see
much, nor hear much, and therefore Tacitus none of the meanest Statesmen
says, Xenophon. Cyr. lib. 8.
Non est unius men's tantae molis capax; but great affairs, such as fall out
within the Spheres of Kings and Princes, do require many Heads to advise, and
many hands to effect, and manage them; How requisite it is for all Kings and
Princes to have wise Counselors to advise them and to be consuited with.
when as one arm is altogether unsufficient to bear up so unsupportable a
Burden, as is the Government of many people, and one brain is not capable of
such a charge, as to be alone sufficient to advise how to discharge so great a
business; but as Velleius says, Magna negotia magnis adjutoribus egent, great
businesses do require great assistants; and therefore, a Princes, or King's
affairs being great, especially to regain such a loss, as this Prince received,
he must not follow his own opinion, though grounded upon very probable
suppositions, but he must yield to his faithful Counselors, when they produce
more forcible reasons: because, he that needs no Counsel, especially in great
matters, must be more then a man, and he that refuses all Counsel, is not much
better then a Beast. And it was most wisely said of Mar. Antoninus, the
Philosopher, Aequius est ut ego tot taliumque amicorum Consilia sequar, quam
tot talesque amici mei unius voluntatem. Tit. Live. lib. 44.
It was fitter, that he should follow the Counsel of such, and so many Friends,
then that such, and so many men should follow the mind and will of himself
alone; for he like a wise man judged that man which does all things out of his
own head, superbum magis quam sapientem esse; rather a proud man then a wise
man, as Titus Livius says.

Charles Stuart our now most gracious King, therefore, I make no question had
his Counselors then; and, as we find it by the Transactions of business in
Jersy, and Breda, he was in his greatest affairs guided by them; the more fault
theirs, if they misguided him, though the more damage his; neither yet can he
be excused from all fault, if he was misguided by them; the great God that
governs all things, and crowns events according to their deserts, has made it
manifest to the world, Laertius in Solon.
that his Counselors have not fully followed the old rule in Laertius, (...);
Consule non quae suavissima, sed quae optima, Counsel not those things, that
seem most sweet, and pleasant, but those things which are best, and most
honest; for these Ductores Principis, Counselors of this young Prince,
consulting with flesh and blood, and considering what was likest to advance his
design, and not considering what was most agreeable to God's Will, have in the
Judgment of some, not so well advised their good Master; and had he not been,
as it seems, another Jedidia, beloved of God, by following their Counsel in
the Course, that he took, he might have been taken in a snare to his utter
ruin. That is in Worcester Fight.


But, what was the Counsel that they gave him? it appears by the trial of
Master Love, and by the event of those treatises, betwixt the Scots
Commissioners, and the Presbyterian Agents out of England, Captain Titus,
Drake, and the rest, and the Prince; that they persuaded him to comply with the
Scots; for that by this means, he should peaceably gain the Crown of Scotland,
and with the Strength of Scotland, joined with the Presbyterian Party of
England, which were very considerable, he might easily gain the Kingdom of
England, and then Ireland must needs yield. An unquestionable uncontrollable
way in the judgment of man; but it seemed not so with God, as the event did
make it clear; and therefore, as when the Counselors of Rheoboam differed in
their advice, the one sort, saying, Si loquaris verba lenia -- speak to this
people fair, and they will be thy Servants; and the other sort bidding him to
tell them, that His Father whipped them with rods, but he would scourge them
with Scorpions; Rhe^boam should have had the Discretion to know, which was the
best to follow; for herein consists the greatest wisdom of any Prince, in the
Election of his Counsel; because it is most likely, that among many wise men,
both the best, and the worst Counsel will be propounded.

And it is a point of great wisdom to be able to follow the best, to choose the
good, and to refuse the evil; and the wisest man in the world may easily fail
herein; especially in great matters, whose future, and contingent events are so
doubtful.

And therefore it is no wonder, nor any fault-unexcuseable, for the best
traveller to mistake his way in the dark, or in a wilderness among the thickets:

But could any wise man, that remembered the former passages betwixt the Scots,
and the late pious King, think, or any good Christian believe, that God (whose
ways are always right, as the Prophet speaks, and the just shall walk in
them; but the transgressors shall fall therein) would prosper the counsel that
leads to any erroneous course? no, no; this cannot be. And therefore, as I
conceive; the Counselors of this good Prince failed, though, not in their love
and faithfulness to their Master, but in their advice in directing him the best
way; and he, not knowing which way was best, Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare
Charibdim: By seeking to escape the Lions (it may be the Irish Catholics) he
fell among Bears, if I may so call the Scottish Presbytery, whose feet, Rev.
xiii. 2.
the holy Scripture tells us, are as the feet of a Bear.

But his Counselors may answer, as a very learned Scotchman, discoursing
hereof answered me; that their purpose was right, and their intention exceeding
good, aiming at the same end, as is now, blessed be God for it, come to pass.

But I say, the just God will not approve of our intentions to do good, if we
go about to effect that good by an evil way: for, as the Schools tell us, si
bonum feceris mala intention, non imputabitur tibi pro bono, if thou do
good, with an ill intent, it shall not be imputed to thee for good; so in like
manner, si malum feceris bona intention, non imputabitur tibi pro bono, if
thou do evil, though thou meanest never so well, and thine intention be
never so good; yet shall it not be imputed to thee for good; because the God
that is most perfect in all his ways, and in every thing, does require that the
good which we do, should be perfectly good, ex omni part, on all sides, and in
every respect: for as the Prophet speaks, He requires truth in the inward
parts, and will have heart, and hand, mind, and tongue to go together; and
therefore we may not do evil, that good may come thereof, or to enable us to do
good, Job xiii. 7.
neither may we speak wickedly for God, nor talk deceitfully for him, as Job
speaks: much less may we do the same, for the greatest preferment in the
World.

And therefore if this good Prince had been well informed, and thoroughly given
to understand all the former passages, and proceedings of those Scots, that so
undutifully, so unkindly, and so treacherously dealt with his good Father, and
for what ends they did it, I believe he would have never wandered those ways
that he traveled unto them; but he having thus mistaken his way, he missed of
his end, and the Presbyterians, that had made a Covenant with death, as the
Prophet speaks of the Jews, and an agreement with Hell it self, did not stand
any ways to further his design: but, when the overflowing Scourge did pass
through, then were they trodden down by it; and he had been likewise trodden down
himself, or taken, which had been worst, had not the eye of Heaven, which saw
the innocence of his heart, not wittingly offending in any way, watched over
him, and as he did, when he led Jacob to Padan-Aram, that he might escape his
Brother's wrath, so it guided him, most miraculously, in man's judgment, to the
haven where he would be, that so, he might escape the treachery of some
professed friends, and be delivered from the malice of his cruel enemies: for I
fear we may say, with Obadiah, All the men of thy confedracy have brought thee
even to the border, Obadiah v. 7.
the men that were at peace with thee, have deceived thee, and they that eat
thy bread, have laid a wound under thee; that is, his own counselors, by
persuading him to take the Presbyterian way: I am confident, and sure, that God
never approves of their courses, nor for a man to accept of his own right, by
an indirect way: and therefore I find not, that he blessed any of the Scots
designs, but as Nahum says of Niniveh, Nahum 3.13.
so we may say of them, thy people in the midest of thee are Women, the gates
of thy land shall be set wide open unto thine enemies, and the fire shall
devour thy bars; and I think, they have found it true themselves, through
their Kingdom when the Lion, and his Bears, the Tyrant, and his Whelps came
amongst them.

And therefore, this deliverance of the Prince, being of the like nature as
those wonderful deliverances, that God wrought for other good Princes, which
are set down by Camerar: libro secundo capite decimo: being such a special act
of God's favor, and so wonderful in our eyes, and as I believe with these
former praecedentia, fore-passed things, will be a warning to him, and to all
others, to amend future things, and to detest, and abandon this Presbyterian
way, which I am confident the Lord hates, and do assure my self, will never
bless it, nor them that cordially follow it, if they do rightly understand it:
howsoever he may in his secret Counsel, suffer them, as he does many other
Sinners, and great offenders, for a time to tyrannise over his children, and
to prosper in this World, which is, but as the Prophet says, a slippery
station; when as Claudian speaking of Ruffinus, and his confederates, says, --
tolluntur in altum
Vt lapsu graviori ruant,
God lifts them up, to throw them down, which makes their overthrow the
greater, by how much their exaltation is the higher; for, Qui jacet in terra,
non habet unde cadat, He that walks upon the ground, can have no great fall,
but as Horace says, Saepius ventis agitatur ingens
pinus, and celsae graviori casu
decidunt turres, feriuntque summos
ful^ ura montes.
And so I believe their fall will be ere long, which now ride on other men's
palfreys, and jet it up and down in pride, in their Brethren's garments;
because, as Job says, Job. 20.5, and 27.
The triumphing of the Wicked is but short, and the joy of the Hypocrite is but
for a moment, when as the heavens shall reveile his iniquity, and the earth
shall rise up against him.

Secondly, for the rest of the Scottish nation Mr. Hall a Counselor for the
Commonwealth of England, The trial of Mr. Love, page 76. How the Scots have
been always avers and great enemies to the English-Nation.
in the trial of Mr. Love, says, that Master Love held Intelligence with the
Scottish-Nation, which truly, says he, I do conceive hardly an English man,
that had the blood of an English man running in his Veins, would join in
confederacy with that Nation, of all the Nations in the World, against the
Commonwealth: a Nation, that has been known, to have been a constant enemy to
this nation in all ages through the memory of all Histories; whereby * If this
be true.
you may guess, how worthy they are to have an union with this Nation, and how
wisely we do, to submit our selves, by an indissoluble Covenant to their
Scottish-discipline; and therefore touching the now distressed, and subdued
subjects of Scotland, especially those that Covenanted with the Parliament of
England, to overthrow the established Government of our Church, and to set up
the beggarly Presbytery, I may most truly say, lex non justior ulla;
Quam Artifices tales art perire sua
Never Nation was more justly dealt withal, then they be by what Crumwell
brought upon them: for though according to the Apostles warrant, saying, (...),
the Cretians are always liars, I might justly say, there are national sins, as
well as personal; and you know that punica fides, Titus 1.12,
grew to be a Proverb among the Romans, to note out a perfidions person! so I
might truly tell you, that from Fergusius the renowned King of the Scots, that
first entered Ireland, and afterward was drowned at Carreg-fergus, now
corruptly called Knocfargus, in that Kingdom, their own Chronicles do testify,
how this Nation have been always, such as Saint Stephen says, the Jews were, a
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, and ears; that have allways resisted
the Holy Ghost, even as their Fathers did, so did they; so were the Scots, a
stiff-necked, stubborn, and rebellious people, that have always resisted their
own lawful Princes, by deposing some, and killing others, whom they disliked,
and whom I could easily name (if it were not for fear to be too tedious, unto
you) out of their own Chronicles: And though they had many brave Commanders,
and gallant Soldiers amongst them, and some great Scholars, as furious Knox,
Antimonarchical Buchanan, That the Scots, have been ever a most rebellious
Nation.
in his Junius Brutus, and De Jure regni apud Scotos; and the like not a few,
yet as a little colloquintida spoileth all the whole pot of pottage; so their
treachery, and Rebellion against their Kings, obscureth all the good parts that
can be in them; It is a rare commendation, that Quintus Curtius gives unto the
Persians for their love, and faithfullness unto Darius their King, in his
dejected Fortunes, when they would rather lose their own lives, then betray
their King; and Damianus a Goes tells us that many Infidels among the Indians,
were not inferiors to the best nations in their Obedience, and Loyalty to
their Kings; and yet the Scots, of all other Nations, are as (they say) clean
contrary; for, to go no further then our times, it is not unknown to both
Kingdoms, how many signal favors were conferred upon men of all sorts, both
the nobles, Gentles, and Plebeyans of Scotland, by King James, that made
himself poor, How liberal, and bountiful King James has been unto the Scots.
to make them rich, and many times, emptied his own Exchequer to fill their
purses, and how King Charles, never imposed any heavy burden upon them, but
was no small benefactour to them, preferring them in his own house to places of
the greatest honor, and best profit, and those that came with their staff like
Jacob, over the Tweed, and in their blew Bonnets into England, they were in a
short space, enriched, Knighted, and ennobled in the King's Court.

But least that this Commemoration of benefits should be taken for an
exprobration, as the Comic speaks, I will not name those great persons, that
have been made great by this good King, and that I could have set down, for
unthankful retributours of such great favors; yet in general, I would that all
men knew, how they have all rewarded their deserving Prince; for that blessed
man in his (...) says, The Scots are a Nation, The King in his (...). How
lovingly King Charles used the Scots.
upon whom I have not only ties of nature, sovereignty, and bounty with my
Father of blessed memory, but also special; and late obligations of Favors,
having gratified the active spirits among them so far, that I seemed to many,
to prefer the desires of that party, before mine own interest, and honor: And
Cicero tells us, that, ingratitudine nihil mali non inest, there is no evil
that is not residing in an unthankful Wretch, and Ausonius says, that ingrato
homine terra pejus nil procreat, The earth never brought forth a viler thing,
or worser wood then an unthankful man: and could there be found besides the
Jews, a more unthankful people on earth, then the Scots have been to this,
their own lawful, loving King, and bountiful Benefactour? How unthankful the
Scots are.
Witness that monster of men, whom the King made Lieutenant of the Tower, the
chiefest Fort of all England, and he made himself the King's mortal enemy; and
besides him, witness a thousand more, whom the King raised from the dunghill, to
make them companions of Princes, and they to requite him, combined with the
Parliament, fought against their King, to subdue him, and to bring him to
nothing: hoc magnum est, hoc mirum; and may not this be wondered at? that the
earth should bring forth such creatures, as are unworthy to live upon the
earth? for, have they not like mortal Enemies, in a most hostile manner,
invaded the King's Territories, and warred against him with as perfect fury, as
ever Hannibal did against the Romans? and we all know, or should know, that no
causes are warrantable for the undertaking of a war, if justice be not the
ground thereof; Lipsius polit. lib. 5.
Justum autem non est, quod tria haec non habet justa; autorem, causam, and
finem; and just it cannot be, says Justus Lipsius, if it has not these three
just things: A just Author, a just Cause, and a just End. And Titus Livius
says, Tit. Livius. lib. 9.
Justum bellum, quibus necessarium, and pia arma, quibus nulla, nisi in armis,
relinquitur spes; that war is just, to whom it is necessary, and they do
rightly fall to take Arms, And no War in no time for no cause can be just, that
is made by Subjects against their King.
which have no help nor hope but in their Arms. In eum autem, qui just agere,
and satisfacere paratus est, nefas est bellum sumere; says Thucidides, but it
is an heinous offense to make war against him, that if you be wronged, is ready
to do you right, and to make you satisfaction: and wherein I pray you could the
Scots show themselves justly grieved, and King Charles did not most willingly,
and beyond expectation give them, and offer them, full satisfaction?

And what cause then could they pretend for this Invasion? surely none at all
but only covetousness, and a desire to be enriched, either with Spoils and
Plunderings, or with very fair Compositions, as they were by the means of their
Confederates in England, with the Sum, as was said, of three hundred thousand
pounds, a fair Sum for such a foul Fact: and therefore, these doings must needs
be odious, both to God, and to all good men.

And yet I will show you greater Abomination of these abominable rebellious
Creatures, for they had, as the Parliament of England had done likewise, taken
their Oaths of Allegiance, and Fidelity to his Majesty: and how have they kept
their Faith, and observed their Oaths? did they not, being Scholars, remember
what the Poet says, Non bove mactato caelestia Numina gaudent, Ovid Epist. 18.

Sed quae prestanda est, and sine test, fides: [id est]
That God delights more in observing Faith, and performing Promises, then in
sacrificing whole Oxen to him. Nam fidem qui perdidit, nihil ultra potest; for
he that has lost his faith, How heinous a thing it is to break our faith, and
to fal^ifie our Oaths.
has lost all that he has worth any thing, and is unworthy to live among men:
And would these men violate their solemn Oaths, think you? surely men will
hardly believe it, if they did not see it; for a perfidious Violation of an
Oath, and Covenant, is as damnable as Athiesm, if not worse, because this
wittingly and willingly abuses and scorneth that Deity, which it necessarily,
though unwillingly acknowledges; and therefore the Heathen man could advise
us; (...), by no means to forswear our selves, for fear of punishment from God,
and shame among men; because, as I said before out of Menander, (...), though
we may deceive men, as Perjurers do many times, yet we must not think that our
Perjuries, and Falsities can be hid from God, whose peircing eyes do behold
every secret thought, and will not suffer the Perjurers and Deceivers to go
unpunished, as it may appear by this one example, The Story of Perfidiousness
of Hat^o Bishop of Mentz.
which I have picked out of many, that might be produced to the same purpose,
of Hatto, Bishop of Meutz; for Abbas Vrsbergensis writes, that Adelbert, Count
Palatine of Franconia, being charged to have slain the Emperors Son, and upon
that suspicion, being straightly besieged by the Emperor; but the Castle of
Adelbert being very strong, both by nature, and by art, the Siege did no whit
promise, either the taking of it, or the yielding up thereof; therefore Hatto
being a near Kinsman to Adelbert, and desireous to curry favor with the
Emperor, employed himself, by cheating means, to draw his Cosen into the
Emperor's hands, persuading Adelbert to go with him unto the Emperor, and
that he might boldly go without any fear of danger, he made a solemn Oath unto
him, that, as he came safe out of his Castle, so, if they could not well agree,
by a good Treaty, he would bring him safe again unto his Castle; whereupon
Adelbert consented to go with him, and went a pretty way from his Castle; but
Hatto, looking upon the Sun, said, the Morning was well spent, and there was a
long way to the Emperors Camp, and therefore he thought it was their best
Course, to return to the Castle and to break their Fast, and then they might go
the better, and with more ease; and Adelbert suspecting no ill, in so fair a
Motion, yielded to return to break their Fast, and he courteously entertained
his Cosen, and after Breakfast, they rid both to the Emperors Camp; where
presently the Emperor adjudged Adelbert to die; whereupon he calls for Hatto,
and accused him of Treason, and Perjury, except he performed his Promise to
bring him back safe again into his Castle; whereto the Bishop answered, that he
was acquitted of his Oath, in that he carried him to his Castle, when they
returned to break their Fast; and upon this perfideous trick the credulous Earl
lost his life, and the Emperor seized upon all his Seigniories; but for this
wicked part Hatto could never blot out his reproach, but was ever afterward
called by the Germans, Hatto the Traitor; and as you may find it in the
Chronological Collections, taken out of Petreius his Library, God suffered this
Hatto to be carried away by Devils, and to be thrown headlong into a burning
pit in Mount Gibel, and a voice was heard in the Air, at his throwing in,
crying out, Debito supplicio scelus luere Budaeus.
Sic peccando lues, sicque luendo rues. Thus art thou worthily punished for thy
wicked deeds, so the Psalmist demands, Shall they escape for their wickedness?

So heinous a sin is a perfideous perjury, and so just is God in the Severity
of his punishment for the same; and the reason is, Why God does so severely
punish Perjury.
because every perjured person makes a mock of God more then most of other
Sinners do: either denies his wisdom, as not thinking him to know all things;
or else argues him of injustice, as not regarding the innocent, and conniving
with the faults, and malice of the most false and wicked men, which the Lord
will never endure.

And yet with these sweet Scots, these over zealous Saints, Tam facile and
pronum est superos contemnere testes; It is but a small matter to break their
faith, they make so small account to forswear themselves, when they deem
Oaths, but as Lysander, How the Scott account of Oaths.
and Dionysius said of them, and Alexander the sixth used them; that they were
as Toys and Rattles, whereby we deceive fools, and delude Children: for as soon
as the Parliament had contrived their wicked Covenant, and sent to the Scots
for their conjunction, and association in this impiety, which they knew was the
only Bait to take them; they presently swear, contrary to all former Oaths,
and subscribe unto the same; and accordingly to disannul their Allegiance to
the King, and to evacuate their Oaths of Fidelity to him; they join in Arms
with the Parliament against him, to compel him, because they could not
persuade him to take that Covenant, and thereby to forswear himself, and to
become as wicked as themselves.

And therefore, Vt Carbone pollicenti quidpiam, and addente jus jurandum, What
kind of fellow Carb^ was.
populus Romanus vicissim juravit, se illi non credere; as when Carbo promised
any thing, and added his Oath, swearing that he would perform it; the people of
Rome in like manner, would presently swear they did not believe him; even so
when these men, that do thus slight their Oaths, do swear any thing, I might
swear, that I will not believe them; and as the Prophet Jeremy says of the
Jews, Shall not the Lord visit them for these things, Jer. v. 9. and 29.
and shall not his Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?

And yet this is not all the Wickedness, and impiety of these men, but they do
still proceed from bad to worse, from worse to worst of all; for as one says
most truly, to betray a Kinsman, Friend, or Confederate is contrary to all
law, odious to all men, injurious to the party betrayed, and a most abominable
impiety in the sight of God; and Petrarch says, Proditore turpius nihil unquam
sol vidit, cujus obscoenitas tanta est, ut and qui artificio ejus egent,
execrentur artificem, and caeterorum scelerum famam quaerunt hujus infamiam
reformident; the Sun never beheld any thing filthier then a false Traitor,
whose Villainy, and Treachery is so great, and so hateful, that they which need,
and love his help, and treacherous art, do notwithstanding abhor, and detest
the Traitor, and they which hunt after the same of other vices, do exceedingly
shun, and fear the infamy of this vice; Cicero pro Ros.
and the reason is rendered by Cicero, Quia nemo fere credit nisi ei quem
fidelem putat; because no man willingly trusts any man, but whom he thinks,
and believes to be an honest, and a faithful man; and therefore, says he,
Perditissimi hominis est, fallere eum, qui laesus non esset, nisi credidisset;
it is the part, and practice of the worst, and vilest Wretch in the World, to
deceive, and betray that man, who had never been hurt, nor betrayed, if he had
not trusted and believed the Traitor, to be an honest man.

And yet when the good King, by intimation from some friends, understood he
might be safe with these, his own native Subjects: who, as the King says, have
often professed, they fought not against him, but for him, as you may see in the
22. page of his (...); In his Letter, the 3. of April 1646.
and as his Majesty writes, to the honorable Lord Marquess of Ormond, saying,
that having received very good security, that he, and all that should adhere to
him, should be safe, in their persons, honors, and consciences, I would all
perfidious traitors would read the seventh Chapter of the 1. Book of Camerar
hist. Medit. that shows the just reward that perfidious Traitors deserve, and
have received for betraying their King, Country, or frien ^.
in the Scottish Army, that would really, and effectually join with them, and
employ their arms, and forces to assist them, for the procuring of a happy
peace, he resolved on that course, that is, to go unto them, and thereupon,
with a very great hazard of his own person, he adventured to pass throughout
all difficulties, and through the very Pikes of his Adversaries, and to commit
himself into the hands of these men; they very fairly, but most falsely, made a
good Merchandise of his Majesty, and sold him to the Parliament, at a far
deerer rate, then the Traitor Judas sold the Savior of the World, and the King
of Kings, unto the Jews: and no such wonder neither, because Judas was but an
Ass to Lesley, who had been a Pedlar, or Merchant, as they term Pedlars in the
Country, before he became Commander of an Army, and therefore he knew how to
sell his ware better then the other; though his sin, in one respect was far
worse; for Judas repented of his treachery, and he brought the thirty pieces of
silver, all that he had received, every penny, and he threw them down,
contemptu quodam, with a kind of disdain, and contempt, and confessing his
fault, said, I have sinned in betraying the Innocent Blood: But we do not find
that either Lesley, or any other of these Scottish-Merchants, either repented
them of their falsehood, and Treachery, or confessed their fault, or brought any
part, or penny of the price, they received for their King, back again.

But we find here is in them, morbus complicatus, a multiplicity of all kind
of wickedness; The manifold sins of the Scots
First, Impiety, Secondly, Injustice, Thirdly, Coveteousness, Fourthly,
Perfidiousness, Fifthly, Perjury, Sixthly, Treachery, and what not? And shall I
not visit for these things, says the Lord? and shall not my soul be avenged
on such a Nation as this?

Yes certainly, How justly God has requited the treacherous Scots.
God will visit them, and in some measure he has held his visitation amongst
them already, and he has sent his Deputies to redress, and correct their
abuses, and them also for their abuses; Yet you must know, there were, and I do
know very many of them, very excellent, worthy, and brave men, most faithful,
and loyal to their King, and most religious, and zealous in the service of God,
among the Scots, both here, and in Scotland. And therefore whatsoever I say
here of the Scots, I mean it of those, that warred against their King,
Covenanted with the Parliament, and sold him to the Parliament, and upon these
perfidious Scots he has most justly brought his judgments, to make the
Parliament, that invited them to these impieties, to become the instruments of
their punishments, and a rod to scourge them, that formerly were a banquet, to
feast them; so that now we may rightly say with Job, A dreadful sound is in
their ears; and in their prosperity the destroyer came upon them; and though
Wickedness was sweet in their mouths, when the Parliament filled their Coffers,
though they hid it under their tongues, that is, by their Hypocrisy, fair
glossing speeches, and pretense of piety; yet, now the meat in their bellies is
turned into the gall of aspes within them, and the riches, which they swallowed
down, and which they had, for betraying their King, they vomit them up again;
God does cast them out of their bellies, Job xx.
yea now, they suck the poison of Aspes, and the Viper's tongue does slay them;
they fly from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel does strike them through;
and when they are about to fill their bellies, God shall cast the fury of his
wrath upon them, and shall rain it upon them while they are eating. And how
long these their miseries shall continue, he only knows, that knows the
greatness of their Impieties. O consider this, all ye that forget God, and
become not such transgressors, as they were, lest he tears you in pieces
whilst there is none to help you, and remember what Adonibezek said,
Threescore, and ten Kings having their thumbs, Judge. i. 7.
and their great Toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table, and now, as
I have done, so God has requited me, that is, when the Children of Israel took
him, and cut off his thumbs, and his great Toes, just as he had done to others.

And therefore, as Martial says of the Lion, which is the Arms of Scotland,
Laeserat ingrato Leo perfidus ore Magistrum,
Ausus tam notas contaminare manus;
Sed dignas tanto persolvit crimine poenas,
Et qui non tulerat verbera, tela tulit.
Which Mr. Thomas May thus excellently translates; A treacherous Lion hurt his
keeper late,
Daring those well-known hands to violate,
But for his foul offense he paid full dear,
Instead of stripes, he felt a killing Spear.


So may I say of the Treacherous Scots, And as he suddenly turned their mirth
into heaviness, so he can as suddenly turn our heaviness into joy.
that they soon smarted for their Treachery. And when I consider how they are
now punnished, and plagued by their dear Brethren of our Parliament, that, not
long ago, made Speeches in their commendation, and gratulory Orations, for the
blessed union betwixt these two Nations, and were the first that ran into the
same transgression, and yet are now the chiefest instruments, that the Lord
uses, for the execution of his Fury upon this perfidious and perjured people,
I cannot choose, but cry out to God, and say O Lord God, thou art wonderful in
all thy works, and most wonderful in all thy judgments, to whom Vengeance
belongs, and thy Vengeance always is most just, how unsearchable are thy
ways, and thy Paths past finding out, how suddenly can thou turn the Wheel,
and overwhelm the courses of things, and bring to naught the devices of men,
and abase all those that walk in Pride? why then should not the sinner, that is
but a Worm, and no man, a Vanity, and altogether lighter then Vanity it self,
tremble, for fear of thee, and be afraid of thy judgments, that are so often
and so openly showed in the sight of the World? O my God, I most humbly pray
thee, give me thy grace, that I may continually fear thee, and be ever afraid
to offend thee. Amen.

CHAP. IV.
FIfthly, Who are meant by the long Parliament.
Touching the Long Parliament, I mean hereby not only the Members, that are
elected, and chosen by the Cities, and Counties of this Kingdom of England,
together with the Barons, and Lords of the Upper House, to sit in consultation,
for to determine, and settle matters for the well Government of the People of
this Land, and to do all other Acts, that appertain to War, and Peace, but also
all other men, that have complied with them, and been partakers in their
proceedings, and assisted them any ways, either with Men, Money, or Ammunition,
The Judgments of God upon the long Parliament, two fold.
as their Associates, Confederates, and Approvers of their Actions, Opinions,
and Conclusions, wheresoever dispersed through out this whole Kingdom, or in
any other part of the World.

And by the Judgments of God upon these, or any of these men, I under stand
some imposed Punnishment, as a Signal Demonstration of his heavy Wrath, and
Displeasure conceived against them, for some great, and extraordinary offenses,
and transgressions of his will: and these Judgments to be powered forth upon
them are either 1. Inchoated, or 2. Suspended


First, The inchoated judgments of God, that are already executed, and
manifested to the World, are to be considered 2. ways 1. On the whole number,
and Mass of them in general, and specially the prime, and principal part of
them, that sat, and consulted in Parliament at Westminster. 2. On many
particular Members, and the most active persons of that Parliament, and their
adherents.


First, For the Parliament in gross, if I should go about to express, and set
down what they have done to deserve God's Wrath, and to pull down the Judgments
of God upon their own heads, it would be a work more difficult, and a task far
heavier, then the twelve labors of Hercules; for if this Parliament be, as it
is conceived by many, and I have, as I do most confidently believe,
unanswerably proved it to be, the great Antichrist; and the Antichrist is the
Beast, that ascended out of the bottomless-Pit: then certainly the Wickedness,
and impieties of this Beast are so bottomless, that we cannot dive into the
depth thereof.

And truly, their Plots, and Devices, their Actions, and Proceedings, during
the time, were so Unnatural, so Unjust, so Ungodly, and so Unparalled in any
History; and withal so subtilley, and so inexplicably contrived, that I must
needs confess my learning wants words to express them, and my understanding is
not sufficient to comprehend, how many, and how vile they were, how odious unto
God, and how injurious unto men; and therefore I only desire my reader, to
take that satisfaction from me herein, which I have set down concerning their
doings in the foregoing Treatises, that I set forth, of the Discovery of
Mysteries, and the Revelation of the great Antichrist.

And for which doings, the Lord God has, if not sufficiently, yet apparently
showed his just Wrath, and Indignation against them, many ways.

First, In the discovery of their secret, Hypocritical, and hidden underground
Mysteries of their Iniquity, which could not otherwise be sifted out, and
manifested, but by the omniscient Spirit of the all-seeing-God.

Secondly, In raising so many godly men, though to many with the hazard, and to
some with the loss of their lives and fortunes, to oppose them, and with a
courage, raised by the divine Spirit, to withstand their wicked ways, and to
uphold the true service of the living God.

Thirdly, In the reducing of their chiefest Plots and Devices to nothing,
though, out of his patience and long-sufferings he suffered them for a while to
prosper, and to walk on still, and to proceed in their wickedness: for they
intended, like those Giants that built the Tower of Babel to erect such a frame
of Government, in these Kingdoms, that they only and their Posterity and
Successors should sit at the Stern, to turn and guide the same, as the thirty
Tyrants did for a while in Athens, so long as the Sun and Moon endures; and to
that end they destroyed their King, they suppressed the Bishops, they excluded
the Lords, and then framed such an Engagement, as might infringebly oblige and
tie all the inhabitants of these dominions, to adore them, for their good
Masters and Governors for ever.

But, lo, he, that dwells in Heaven laughed them to scorn, Psalm. ii. 4.
and the Lord had them in derision; for, as the Spirit of the Lord came upon
Othniel and upon Barak and Gedeon to destroy the Aramites, Canaanites and
Midianites; and as the Lord stired up Sampson, and David to destroy the
Philistines: so the same Spirit stirred up one even the Lord General Cromwell a
Philistine, from among these Philistines and a grand Rebel out of these
Rebel's, that did first so wisely disannul their brazen Engine, the Engagement,
and then, seeing his opportunity, and finding how acceptable it would be to
God, and beneficial to all good men, he did with an Heroical courage, dissolve
that knot, and scatter those Parliament Men, as the Lord scattered the Jews,
that were the murderers of his Son and their own King, over all the parts of
this Kingdom: And thus by the just Judgment of God, the whole Mass of that long
Parliament, that thought to remain as Kings for ever, became like the chaff,
which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth. And therefore.

Secondly, The just Judgment of God upon the dismembered members of the long
Pa^liament.
I must now proceed to show you the just Judgments of God upon the dismembered
parts of this great body, as I find them driven by the wind of God's wrath,
here, and there throughout all the parts of these Dominions. But I must
confess, that for the particular persons of that Parliament and their
adherrents, that have in a great measure already felt the heavy hand of God's
wrath for their Transgressions, in that confederacy, it is a work beyond man's
reach, either to set them down, or to show their punishments; and therefore I
will confine my self, and as the Lord showed unto Moses the land of Canaan from
the top of Mount Nebo afar of, which sight must needs be therefore, but very
partial and imperfect, so will I give you a taste, and a glimmering light of
some judgments of God, and the justness thereof upon some particular men, and
the more noted Members of that Parliament; and I will begin with him, that was
the beginning of our trouble, the first disturber of our peace, and the General
of the late unhappy War, the Earl of Essex.

First, It was said, as I remember, of Dionysius, King of Sicily, Of the Earl
of Essex.
that he was a Tyrant, begot of Tyrants, then which a worser Character could
not be given, and a baser description could not be made of him; says Plutarch.
But I will not say of this noble Lord, who in deed had a great deal of Honor
in him, and carried himself for ought that ever I heard, like a man of Honor,
and pius inimicus, a noble Adversary unto the King, that he was a Traitor,
begot a of Traitor; yet I must say that his Father was a favorite of Queen
Elizabeth, and was arraigned and beheaded for Treason aainst the Queen, whether
justly for his deserts, or unjustly by the malice of his enemies, I will not
determine, and though, her Royal Majesty did Royally, and most Graciously
restore this man, both to his Fathers Lands, and Honors, and King James
confirmed the same, and King Charles more then that, made him one of his Privy
Council, and Lord Chamberlain of his Household, which was, for Honor, one of
the best Offices, as I take it in the Court, and for profit, a place worth,
viis, and modis, near about 2000. pounds per annum, as I heard: and conferred
many other favors upon him, and for all this, this Lord, as is conceived, out
of no other cause, then ambition of popular praise, (which greedy desire of
popularity has undone many a noble mind) or, as others think, out of a secret
grudg, which he bare to this good King, and to King James his lineage, for
giving way to his Lady, and Wife to be divorced from him, only propter
frigiditatem naturae, which all Divines, and Canonists do not consent to be a
sufficient cause of divorce, presently, and willingly accepted the motion of
the House of Commons, Plinius l^b. 8. cap. 23.
and commission of the Parliament to become the General of all their Forces
against the King: wherein, as Pliny writes of the Aspick, saying, Conjunga
fere vagantur, nec nisi cum compare vita est, itaque alterutra, intercepta
incredibilis alteri ultionis cura, persequitur interfectorem, unumque eum in
quantolibet populi agmine notitia quadam infestat, perrupit omnes
difficultates, ut perdat eum, qui comparem perdiderat; that he pursues him,
which has hurt, or killed his Mate, and knows him among a multitude of men,
and therefore hunteth him still, and lays for him, breaking throughout all
difficulties to come at him: so, it may be, this Lord was such as Seneca speaks
of, qui tantum ut noceat, cupit esse potens: that accepted of his office, that
he might be revenged for his disgrace; when, notwithstanding, King Charles was
not the Author of his dishonor, nor did any ways further that divorce, and
therefore should not have been maligned for another fault.

Or if it was not for this cause, as I heard some confidently say it was, yet
for what cause soever, this, or any other, and with what mind soever, this
Lord accepted that office, as being loath to stain his Honor, and Ambitious to
retain the Fame of an honorable Soldier, I never heard the King, nor any other
of the Nobility, accusing him, for any base, ignoble, and perfidious act, that
he did against his Majesty, other then a fair enemy, and a pious Adversary
uses to do; this I must need say of him, that I never heard any man speak
otherwise of him.

But how did the just God like of these his doings, how fairly soever carried,
you may conceive by the success, so far as man can judge of things; for he was
worsted at Edg-Hill, the first Field that he fought, where he was fain to hide
his head in the day of Battle, and the next day to retire, not without some
Dishonor, to Warwick-Castle; and afterward in Cornwall, he was forced to
abandon, and leave his whole army, and glad to take the Sea, to carry him back
to the rebellious City: for which, and for such other the like disasters, that
the Parliament conceived, they that so solemny swore a little before, that they
would live, and die with him, do now Vote a dispensation of that Oath, and
discard this unfortunate, though not unhonourable head, and choose another in
his room; and his Lordship, not without some disgrace, is disrobed of his
Excellency; and, least this potion might, in time, through discontent, work
some bitter effect, against them, that gave it him, as the like has done to
many other rejected, and degraded Officers, that are most sensible of
disgraces, their jealousy produced a double passion, of Fear, and Hate, and
these cause the Patient to think, that all remedies are too weak for the
Danger; and do force them to apply more violent Phyfick, then either the
quallity of the Disease, or the Constitution of the diseased can sustain; and
therefore it is generally reported, and of most of the King's Friends,
believed, they gave him a Spanish-fig, The Earl of Essex suspected to have been
poisoned.
some Aconites that wrought too strongly upon his Body, that it soon brought
his head into the Grave; And thus was he rewarded for his good service unto the
Parliament, and the ill offices he did against his King, God in justice
suffering the People, Sir John Hotham and his Son.
that magnified him, to destroy him, which is the Common fruit of Popularity,

Secondly, The next persons that I shall instance are Sir John Hotham, and his
Son with him; whom I shall put both together, because both were in the same
fault of disloyalty, to the King, and both tasted of the same sauce, and
suffered the like punishment. This man was the first that so unjustly, and so
insolently durst presume to enter into Hull, the King's own proper Town, and
there to seize upon the King's Magazine, and his own peculiar goods, and when
the King came in his own person to require admission into the same, he very
undutifully, and uncivilly, to say no worse, refused to receive him in, but
kept him out, with unseemly terms of denial, and, as they say, with a great
deal of Scorn, and Contempt.

And how did the just God approve of these unjust doings? You may guess by the
subsequent punishment, which both the Father, and his Son have undergone And
truly I cannot think of their punishment, but I must remember the Story, that
you may find in Herodotus touching Hermotimus, and Pamicetius: Herodot. lib. 8.
for Hermotimus taken Prisoner in War, was sold unto Pamonus, that was a base
Merchant, and which made a Trade of very dishonest gain; for, The Story of
Hemotimus, and Pamonius.
seeing that gelded Youths, were much more set by for all manner of services
among the Barbarians, then those that were ungelded, as Xenophon alleges
Cyrus to have therefore committed the keeping of his body rather to Eunuchs,
then to others, this base Merchant bought all the fair Boys, that he could get
for money, in all Ports, and Faires, where he went to buy them, and then
gelding them, The great price of Eunuchs.
he went to Sardis, or Ephesus, and sold them again, almost for their weight in
gold; therefore he used Hermotimus after the same manner, and they sold him to
one, that among other gifts presented him to King Xerxes, with whom, in success
of time, he grew into greater credit then all the other Eunuchs; and Xerxes,
making War upon the Graecians, took Hermotimus with him, who was sent upon some
business to the Isle of Chios, where finding his old friend Pamonius, he took
acquaintance with him, and recounted unto him the great happiness, and the
great benefits he enjoyed, by his adventure, and the good that Pamonius had
done him; and therefore promised, that, if he, and all his Family would remove
to Sardis, he would enrich him with much wealth, and advance him to great
honor; which offer, the Covetous, and Ambitious Merchant willingly accepted,
and soon transported himself, with his Wife, and Children, and all his whole
family thither; to whom Hermotimus, when he had him within his power, said, O
thou the most Wicked of all men, that usest the vilest, and most detestable
Traffic, that can possibly be devised: what hurt, or displeasure did thou
ever receive at my hands, or through my means, that of a man, am now made of
thee, to be neither Man, nor Woman? Did thou think that the Gods were
Ignorant of thy Practice, and do thou not now see, how that they, doing
right, The just Judgment of God upon Pamonius.
and justice unto all, have most justly delivered thee, as a most wicked
Wretch, into mine hacds, that thou may find the just punishment, which thy
wickedness has deserved: so he caused his four Sons to be presently brought
into his presence, and compelled the miserable Father to geld them all with his
own hands, and then he forced the distressed Children to geld their own Father.

So when Sir Hotham, and his Son, had most disloyally played their part, in the
House of Commons, against the King, and then more egregiously, by seizing upon
Hull, and with very undecent usage, and reviling terms, denying the King
entrance into his own Town, as I said before, had showed themselves to be, as
they were, arrant rebels, and stiff Traitors, the Parliament, within awhile
after, finding, that these false fellows had played foul with them likewise,
and repenting them of their former Wickedness, or rather, as I conceive
corrupted with the greedy desire of some great reward, promised by some of the
King's Friends, that knew how to catch ambitious Worldings, had resolved to
comply with his Majesty, and to deliver his Town, and Magazine unto him, they,
like Hermotimus, having most cunningly gotten them into their hands, wrought
the Son, in hope to get pardon for himself, to accuse, and to betray his
Father; and then, with the like Subtlety, and for the like hope, they brought
the Father to accuse his Son: and so being both found guilty, and condemned,
they chopped of both their Heads, as the just reward of their former
Wickedness; God now rendering unto them what they had before so well deserved,
and suffering them willingly, and wickedly to do that to each other, which
Pamonius, and his Sons did most unwillingly, to be the Authors, and instruments
of each others Punishment: which should be a warning to all Transgressors, to
fear the Vengeance of Allmighty God.

Thirdly, The Lord Brooks.
The next Member of the Long Parliament, that I shall set down in my Catalogue
of disloyal Subjects, is the Lord Brooks; a man, whose former life, and
Conversation (which I knew by his own penitent Epistles and Letters, that, from
beyond the Seas, he wrote to his Uncle Sir Fulk Grevil, afterward Lord
Brooks, who showed them unto me) was very loose, and dissolute; and how, in a
short time, by some strange Conversion, far unlike Saint Paul's, he passed from
one extreme to another, Four remarkable things concerning the Lord Brooks.
from a very dissolute Youth, to a most resolute Saint, I know not: but out of
many remarkable things, written of him immediately after his death, I shall
only set down here these few particulars.

First, Fulke Grevil, that was his Governor, and loco Parentis, his
Maintainer, and upon my Knowledge a very bountiful Maintainer of him too; so
afterward in his too much preciseness, he did in like manner wholly reject his
Duty, and Obedience to his King, that was Pater Patriae, and a very gracious
King to him too; yea, he became a very obstinate, violent, and a most virulent
Opposer of his King; as if he could not be a Saint in the Service of God,
except the became as a rebel to oppose his King: but so it is most commonly
seen, that they, which are undutyful to their Parents and Governors, will
seldom prove faithful to their Kings or Princes.

Secondly, Bishops, and and all the grave and learned Doctors of God's word;
and he was no less a Profaner of God's House, which is the material Temple, and
the place, where God's Honor dwells, while the Saints are Pilgrims in the
Wilderness of this World.

Thirdly, Saint, to be given either to Evangelist, or Apostle; and especially
to any other departed Saint or Servant of God, as Saint Augustine, Saint
Ambrose, and the like, though he could not deny them to be with God in Heaven;
as if the Saints in Heaven, for fear of Idolatry or Superstition, were not to
be acknowledged for Saints now on earth, but that this Sanctity must be
appropriated only to themselves, that are such furious Zelots against the
reverend esteem we bear to the Saints in Heaven, though we neither invocate
them for help, nor adore the best of them with the Church of Rome, no more then
they: but knowing, that not one is in Heaven, but he is a Saint, we give this
Title of Saint to them, of whom we doubt not of their being blessed with God.

Fourthly, Letany, and the holy desire of God's Servants, that it would please
God to deliver them from sudden Death, which all good Divines, and faithful
Servants of God did ever acknowledge for a temporary Judgment of God, and
therefore prayed, that, whenever it pleased him to call for their Souls out
of this earthly Tabernacle, he would be pleased to grant them some time and
space to call upon him, for the forgiveness of their Sins, and to commend their
Souls into his Hands, and so forth. Yet this Lord could not away with the
Prayer, nor abide to hear of this Petition; but would have every man, at all
times to be so prepared for death, that he needed not at any time to pray
against sudden death, and we say likewise, that every man ought to expect death
in every place, and to do his best endeavor to be prepared for death at all
times; yet, that neither this Lord, nor the best Saint on earth can be so well
prepared at any time, but that he ought, as he has need, to pray for pardon of
the Defects, and Imperfection of his Preparation; and therefore to pray for
time to make that Prayer, and then, as for time to dispose, and fit himself for
God, and to make his peace with him through Christ, so to set his House in
order, as the ^rophet says to Ezechias, and to settle his Estate among those,
that depend upon him: which has been ever held to be, as it is indeed, a
Blessing, and a great favor granted from God, to preserve love, and to
continue peace, and amity amongst a man's Children, and the rest of his Friends
and Posterity.

But here in this Lord we may behold, and adore the Judgment of the just God,
how that as Goliah's Head was cut off with his own Sword, so, Judicium suum
super caput suum, this man's Judgment and his practice fell upon his own head,
and the Stone, that he threw at another, lighted upon his own Pate: for in the
Prosecution of his hate against his King, as a just reward of that Service, his
Lordship being in Litchfield on Saint Chad's day, the Founder of that Church,
while he viewed the College, or Close, as they term it, and Church of Saint
Chad, to batter them down with his Canons, for the Fideliy and Allegiance of
that Fraternity unto their King, being all harnessed, Cap-a-p^, from top to
toe, as he lifted up his Helmet to see the same more clearly, behold you, and
see the just hand of God directing the hand of a youth, that was a Prebend's
Son, with a Fowling-Piece, to hit him just in the eye; that, as formerly he
could not see the truth, so now he could see nothing, but fell suddenly dead,
and never spoke word, no, not so much as, Lord have mercy upon me: so the Lord
God showed himself just, and righteous in his Judgments, and holy in all his
ways; and let all the Sons of men acknowledge the same, and all wicked men fear
his Justice.

Fourthly The next man, Fourth Man.
that I shall bring upon the Stage to answer at the Bar of Justice, is Master
John Pym; a man, that was in an Office of great trust, and of much profit, and
gain under the King: and because, as the Proverb goes, Much would have more,
his Covetousness egged forward by his Ambition to be great, snatching at more
then was just, laid him open to lose what was due, and to be deprived of his
place, that was so good. Then he, like the unjust Steward spoken of in the
Gospel, took unjuster Courses against his Master; for he not only advised with
himself to detain more of his Master's goods in his hands, and to deceive him
of so much, as might well enable him to live well, and in good sort, as his
false fellow-Steward, that Christ speaks of, had showed him the way before,
but as after Ages grew more subtle, so they became more wicked, then the former
times, even so this unjust, and unthankful Servant became more wicked then
before: for now he lays up such hatred, and malice against his King, and
seals it in the depth of his Heart, wherein the same boiled like new Wine,
that wanted vent, so that, it was like meat, and drink to an hungry Stomach,
for him to find any Opportunity to broach the same against the King. And the
Long Parliament, that consisted of very many discontented Persons, and men both
disaffected to his Majesty, and distasting his present Government, made him a
fair way to lay open all his Malice, and what he formerly vented in his private
Discourse by retail, he does it publicly now in gross, and he does it to the
full: and having a tongue apt to speak, and not unskilful in the art of
Rhetoric, he begins first to make his Oration against the Earl of Strafford,
as knowing, that whatsoever evil was proved or conceived against him, the same
reflected most upon the King; then, after the taking of this great Earl, and
prudent Counselor of the King, out of the way, making more bitter Invectives
against his Majesty, then ever Cicero's Philippicks were against Marcus
Antoninius, or his Actions against Verres, he so still passed on, till he had
poisoned the greater part of that House, and the seditious vulgar, that
understood his Proceedings, with an evil conceit against the good King.

And now seeing himself backed with the wild part of the House, and the
strength of the rude multitude, no mean revenge will serve his turn, but with
his Rhetorical Orations, and Speeches, filled with Gall against the King,
though as yet somewhat obliquely, he labors to disrobe, and rob the King of
all his chief Friends under the Notion of evil Counselors; and withal
secretly complies with the Scots to assist him, and the rest of his seditious
Compeers against his Majesty.

But, the King having full intelligence both of his, and his partners vile
practice against his Majesty, labored to bring them to their Trial in the
usual legal way, for their underhand Treachery, and Confederacy with the Scots
to bring a foreign Army to invade his Dominion; and then to save himself, and
the rest, they fly to the City of London, and in a short space drew the
Citizens, and, with them, the whole Kingdom to engage themselves, in a
desperate civil War against their lawful Sovereign.

Then the King found himself too weak, to bring this strong Rebel, to any
trial; yet the hand of God was not to short to fetch him out of his guarded
Palace; for he is the Lord of Hosts, and has as well his great Army of little
ones, as the Rats, and Mice, that devoured Popiel the second King of Polonia,
in anno 830. for his treacherous poisoning of his Unckles; the Moales, that
undermined a City in Thessaly; and the Worms, that destroyed Herod the King; as
also his strong Army of great ones, as the earth to swallow up Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, the Sea to overwhelm Pharaoh, and all his Host, the Stars in their
Order too fight against Sisera, and his Angels to be at his Command, to
overthrow his enemies.

And therefore he sent his Sergeant to arrest him, and to fetch him out of his
strong hold, that he should do no further Mischief against his Anointed. And
how he died, I leave to the Report of them, that knew the manner of his death
better then I can set it down.

I did intend further to show unto you the just Judgment of God upon Colonel
Hamden, that for his disloyalty to his King was shot, whereof he dyed, on the
same Plot of ground, where he first mustered his Soldiers against his King;
even as the Lord threatened the like Judgment against Ahab. And upon the Mayor
of York, that, on that day twelve-Moneth, that our King lost his life, made a
Bone-fire for joy, that the King had so lost his life, but on the same day
twelve-Moneth after hanged himself. And especially upon Colonel Axtel, that
has been the ruin of so many Churches, and the Suppressour of so many honest
conformable Ministers, and other good Protestants, and played so many Tyrannical
parts about Kilkenny, and in my Diocese of Ossory, as I am not able in a short
time, and with few words to express it: and upon diverse others, but my
Occasions at this time will not give me leave to perfect what I have begun.

And therefore I must now here make an End, and commend us all to God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom be all glory, and honor for evermore. Amen.

Jehovae Liberatori.
The Author's Prayer, after he had finished the Reparation of the Chancel, and
Quire of the Cathedral Church of Kilkenny.
OEternal, Almighty, and most merciful Lord God, that have created all things
by thy Power, governest them by thy Wisdom, and preservest them by thy
Goodness, and have disposed all thy Creatures to be for the Service of man, the
Sun to give him light by day, and the Moon by night, the Earth to feed him, and
the Angels of Heaven to attend him, that he dash not his foot against a Stone;
for all which great love, and bounty of thine toward man, thou requirest no
more, but that he should be thankful unto thee, and praise thee for thy
goodness, and declare the wonders, that thou do for the Children of men;
and, as Moses says, what does the Lord our God require of us, but to fear the
Lord our God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
our God with all our hearts, and with all our souls, and to keep his
Commandments, and Statutes, which he commanded us for our good: for the
discharging of which duties, and the performance of our Service unto the Lord
our God, though, as Saint Stephen says, the most High dwells not in Temples
made with hands, when as the heaven, and the heaven of heavens cannot contain
him, which is above the heavens, and below the earth, and fills all places,
and beyond all places with his Presence; yet our Forefathers most religiously,
according to the President, that King Solomon left us, and the good Examples,
that the Primitive Christians gave us, have erected Oratories, and built
Temples, and Churches, where the Saints, and Servants of God might meet, to
praise the Lord for his manifold mercies; to beg his favor, and graces, to
help, and to supply their wants, and necessities; to understand his Will, and
to know his Commands, and to do all other the best Service, that they could do,
to the Lord their God; and to that only end they have set them apart, and
alienated them from all secular, and profane uses, dedicated them wholly for
God's Service, and consecrated them by Prayers to be Sanctuaries for them, and
their Posterities to serve, and to honor God in.

But, O Lord our God, we confess, and with grief, and sorrow of heart we do
confess, that we have sinned with our Fathers, and with our Teachers, that have
mis-taught us, to do amiss, and to deal wickedly, to profane those thy
Sanctuaries, to destroy thy Temples, and to make those houses of thee, our God,
to become Dens of Thieves, Cages of unclean Birds, Stables for our Horses, and
the Receptacles of other bruit, and fouler Beasts; and as the Prophet says of
the Heathen, so we may truly say of our selves, Thy holy Temples have we
defiled, and made thy Churches heaps of Stones, the Monuments of thy Martyrs we
have thrown down, and the dead Bodies of thy Servants we have given to be meat
unto the Fowls of the Air, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts of the
Field.

And, for this our great Wickedness, we are become an open shame to our
Enemies, and a very scorn, and derision unto them, that are round about us; and
we do confess, that we have justly, and most justly deserved all the evils,
that are come upon us, and we say with Ezra, that thou our God has punished us
less, then our Iniquities deserve.

Yet thou, O Lord God, like a most gracious Father, did not suffer thy wrath
to burn like fire, to increase more and more, and to continue, as our
Iniquities continued, but in the midst of thy Judgments thou have remembered thy
mercies, and commanded thy destroying Angel to put up his Sword, and to punish
us no more, but to turn our heaviness into joy, by rooting out our Oppressors,
and the Depravers of thy Service, and restoring to us our most gracious King:
for which great Blessings, and inestimable favors of thine, O gracious God, we
laud, and praise thy glorious Name, and we will thank thee, and magnify thee
for ever.

And now, O Lord, seeing we are taught by thy holy Prophet, that Holiness
becomes thy House for ever; and thou have commanded thy people of Israel, that
they should keep their Tents, and Habitations holy, and clean, lest thou, that
can abide no impurity in thy sight, should depart from them; which was a
Type to signify unto us, how much more holy, and clean, thou would have us
to preserve thy House, where thy Service is celebrated, thy Name magnified, and
thy Presence promised to be assistant unto thy Saints: we do therefore in all
humility beg of thee, and from the bottom of our hearts beseech thee, to blot
out, and pardon all the Abuses, Profaneness, and Wickedness, that has been
done in, and against this House: and we pray thee to accept of these our
Prayers, and Supplications unto thee, to sanctify the same, and to make it a
fit place for thy Service; and so to preserve it an holy Tabernacle for thy
Majesty, to be present with thy Saints, to have thy Name magnified, thy people
instructed, and their Petitions presented unto thee; and, when they do pray
unto thee in this place, do thou hear them out of thy holy Heaven, and let
thine Eyes be open toward this House, night and day, even toward this place,
of which thou have said, My Name shall be there; and thy dear Son, and our
blessed Savior, Jesus Christ, has said, Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, I will be there in the midst of them; and this House,
being erected for the gathering together of thy Saints, dedicated for thy
Service, and by our Prayers consecrated for thy Worship; we do most humbly
beseech thee to be present amongst us, to hear our Prayers, to grant our
Requests, and to give us strength, and enable us through thy Grace to finish
the Reparation of this House with Joy, and to thy Glory, which with such
Alacrity we have begun, and we pray thee likewise to guide us by thy blessed
Spirit to walk according to thy Will, that our sins may not provoke thee, to
suffer the Sectaries, and the Enemies of thy truth, and the Depravers of thy
divine Service to profane the same any more; grant this O blessed Lord for
Jesus Christ his sake, to whom be all Glory, and Dominion for ever and ever.
Amen.


