An Abstract of Their Majesty's Commission, under the Great Seal, dated the
15th day of June 1694. For taking Subscriptions for the Bank, pursuant to the
late Act of Parliament.
The Commission recites the Act of Parliament, as follows, viz.

WHEREAS by an Act, Entitled, An Act for Granting to Their Majesty's several
Rates and Duties upon Tunnage, etc. it is Enacted, That for four years, from
the first of June 1694, there shall be paid upon the Tunnage of all Vessels,
wherein any Goods shall be Imported from any the Countries in the Act named, or
Coastwise, from Port to Port in England, the several Rates in the Act
mentioned, and certain Additional Duties of Excise, on Beer, Ale, and other
Liquors.

And that Weekly, on every Wednesday, if not an Holy Day, and if it be, the
next day not being an Holy Day, all the Moneys arising by the said Rates shall
be paid into the Exchequer.

And that yearly beginning from the first of June 1694, the Sum of 140000 l.
arising out of the said Duties and Rates (in case the Weekly Payments extend
thereunto) shall be the yearly Fund, (and if they do not extend thereunto) then
the said Weekly Payments, so far as they will extend, shall be part of the
yearly Fund: And in Case the Duties and Rates shall be so low, as that within
any one year the Weekly Payment shall not amount to 140000 l. or be sufficient
to answer the Recompenses by the Act intended; in such Case, the Commissioners
of the Treasury are strictly enjoined, without any Warrant from Their
Majesty's, their Heirs, or Successors, to make good such Deficiency, out of any
Treasure or Revenue of the Crown not Appropriated.

And that it should be Lawful for Their Majesty's, to Commissionate any number
of Persons to receive such Subscriptions as should be made before the first of
August next, by any Natives or Foreigners, or Corporations, toward paying,
into the Exchequer, the Sum of 1200000 l. and that the yearly Sum of 100000 l.
shall be Appropriated to such Subscribers, etc.

And that the said Weekly Payments, as they come in, shall be divided into 5/7
parts, and 2/7 parts, which 5/7 parts shall be Appropriated to the paying of
the said 100000 l. per Annum, and shall be paid as the same comes into the
Exchequer, to the use of such Subscribers.

And that Their Majesty's may appoint how the said 1200000 l. and 100000 l. per
Annum, shall be Assignable; and may Incorporate such Subscribers by the Name of
the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, subject to the Condition of
Redemption.

And if 1200000 l. be not paid into the Exchequer by the first of January 1694.
then the Subscribers shall have only after the Rate of 8 per Cent. per Annum;
And the Commissioners of the Treasury are required without any Warrant from
Their Majesty's, Their Heirs or Successors, to pay the said 100000 l. per Annum.

And that no Person or Corporation shall Subscribe more than 20000 l. and every
Subscriber, at the time of his Subscribing, shall Pay part of his Subscription,
and in Default thereof, such Subscriptions shall be void; That the Residue of
the Subscriptions shall be paid into the Exchequer before the first of January;
and in Default thereof the part shall be Forfeit: And that none before the
first of July shall write above 10000 l.

Provided if 1200000 l. or a Moiety be not Subscribed by the first of August,
then the Power for erecting a Corporation shall cease; And in such Case, so
much of the 100000 l. as shall belong to the Subscribers may be Assignable, and
that the Moneys payable by the Act, to any Person, shall not be Chargeable with
any Duties or Impositions, as by the said Act may appear.

Their Majesty's being Resolved, That if the whole 1200000 l. or a Moiety or
more thereof be Subscribed by the first of August next, to Incorporate the
Subscribers, have nominated and appointed, A. B. etc. (the Commissioners named
in the Commission) or any 5 or more of them to take the voluntary Subscriptions
of any Natives, Foreigners, or Bodies Politic, before the said first of
August, toward raising the said 1200000 l. taking care that none write above
20000 l. And that before the first of July none write above 10000 l.

That within Ten Days after the date hereof, the Commissioners, or any Five or
more of them, shall provide a convenient public Office, within the Cities or
Suburbs of London and Westminster, for taking Subscriptions, giving such
public Notice thereof as they think fit: And also a Book or Books of Vellum
for the said Subscriptions, to lie open every day but Sundays, from 8 to 12 in
the morning, and from 3 to 8 in the afternoon, until the first of August,
unless 1200000 l. be sooner Subscribed.

That in the Title of every Book shall be written, That the same contains the
Subscription, Authorized to be made by the said Act, and this Commission, of
the respective Sums which the said several Persons shall set against their
Names, part of which Sums is to be paid by each Subscriber at the making such
Subscription, to the Hands of the Commissioners, and the Residue as is
hereafter directed.

That the Commissioners take care that the Sums be written in Words at length
as well as Figures, with a Column for the Day of each Subscription.

That the Subscription shall be attested under the Hands and Seals of two or
more of the Commissioners present at the taking them.

That no Subscription be made after the First of August, and that the
Commissioners or any five or more, after the First of August, or after the said
1200000 l. is Subscribed, (which shall first happen) make true Duplicates in
Parchment of the whole Subscriptions, and deliver the same attested by Five or
more of the Commissioners, into the Auditors Office of the Exchequer to be
there Recorded, that it may appear whether the whole 1200000 l. was written
within the time limited, and by whom.

And Their Majesty's do enjoin the said Commissioners, or any Five, to receive
from every Subscriber at the time of his Subscribing a part of his Subscription
in ready Money.

And that the Commissioners, or any 9 or more, may appoint Cashiers for keeping
the Money to be approved of by the Commissioners of the Treasury, or any three,
taking such Security as the Commissioners think fit in Their Majesty's Name, to
be approved by the Commissioners of the Treasury, as aforesaid. And Their
Majesty's Command the Commissioners and Cashiers, who shall receive the said
Fourth part, to keep it safely till it shall be payable into the Exchequer, as
is hereafter directed, viz. Their Majesty's Command the said Commissioners and
Cashiers, that in case the whole 1200000 l. or a Moiety, or any greater part be
Subscribed before the First of August, as soon as the Charter shall be passed
under the Great Seal, to pay all the said Fourth Part into the Exchequer, in
the Name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England.

And upon such Payment the Commissioners of the Treasury and Officers of the
Exchequer are required to strike Talleys, Importing so much received from the
said Corporation, by the hands of the said Commissioners, and to draw and Sign
Exchequer Orders for paying the said Corporation, and their Successors for ever
(Subject to the Condition of the Redemption) a proportionable part of the said
100000 l. per Annum, for every Sum of the first fourth part so paid.

And in case 600000 l. be not Subscribed by the First of August, Their
Majesty's Command the Commissioners and Cashiers who shall have the Custody of
the 4th part, to pay the same into the Exchequer in the name of the
Subscribers, their Heirs, etc. and upon every such Payment, the Commissioners
of the Treasury, and the other Officers are to Strike Talleys for the same,
Importing so much received from the respective Subscribers, by the Hands of the
Commissioners, and to draw Exchequer Orders for paying the said Subscribers,
their Heirs, etc. for ever (Subject to the said Redemption) proportionable
parts of the said 100000 l. per Annum, for every Sum paid into the Exchequer;
and this Commission, or the Enrollment thereof shall be to the said
Commissioners of the Treasury and Officers a sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

And as to the remaining parts of the said Subscription, Their Majesty's
declare the 2d 4th part shall be paid into the Exchequer by the First of
October next: And the remaining 2/4 parts shall be paid before the first of
January next.

And if 1200000 l. or a Moiety or any greater part thereof be subscribed by the
first of August, then all the Money subscribed (the first 4th part only
excepted) shall be paid into the Exchequer as the Governor or Deputy Governor
of the said Corpovation, and 13 or more of the Directors in the said intended
Charter shall appoint, so as a full 2d part be entirely paid into the Exchequer
by the first of October next, and the remaining parts before the first of
January next. And if 600000 l. or more, be not Subscribed by the first of
August, then all the Money Subscribed (the first 4th part only excepted) shall
be paid into the Exchequer by the several Subscribers their Heirs, etc. by the
Times and Proportions before limited.

And upon every such payment of any of the last parts. Their Majesty's Command
the Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Officers of the Exchequer to strike
Talleys as well for the Money paid in by the Corporation, as by the
Subscribers, and draw such Exchequer Orders as aforesaid, for the
proportionable parts of the said yearly Fund, to be paid in each case
respectively, either to the Corporation or Subscribers, according to the Act,
Subject to the said Redemption.

And Their Majesty's Command the Commissioners, or any 5 or more receiving the
said first 4th part, to give the Persons paying the same a Receipt in Writing
for the several Sums so received, and enter the same in a Book inserting the
day of such Payment, the names of the Commissioners receiving the same, and the
Name and Abode of the Persons paying the same, with their proper Additions and
the Sum paid.

And that the Commissioners, or any five, after the First of August, without
delay, shall make a fair Account in Parchment of all the said Receipts, with
the particulars expressed, as aforesaid, and deliver the same, attested by any
five or more Commissioners, into the Auditors Office of the Exchequer, there to
be Recorded, as well to charge the said Commissioners or their Cashiers with
the Money, as to guide the Commissioners of the Treasury, and other Officers,
with the payment of the Appropriated Fund.

Their Majesty's require the Commissioners to meet and attend at the public
Office; and if it shall be thought most Convenient to have several Offices, the
Commissioners may Subdivide themselves, taking care that some attend in each
Office, and that they and their Cashiers diligently attend Their Majesty's
Service.

And the Commissioners of the Treasury, etc. are required to be assisting to
the Commissioners, and out of any of Their Majesty's Treasure (not appropriated
by Act of Parliament) to issue and pay to such Person as they shall appoint,
such Money as shall be necessary to be laid out in the Execution of the
Commission.

And that the Corporation may be settled to the Satisfaction of the Subscribers,
Their Majesty's direct, That the Commissioners, or any five or more, after the
First of August, or so soon as 1200000 l. is subscribed, which shall first
happen, do affix public Notice on the Royal Exchange, for all those who have
subscribed, They must take the Oaths before they Vote.
not less than 500 l. and paid their Fourth Part, to meet on a Day appointed,
which is not to be sooner than four Days, nor later than eight Days after the
Notice, to Elect Persons qualified, as hereafter mentioned, to be the first
Governor, Deputy, and Directors of the intended Corporation.

And that all the Subscribers, their Heirs, etc. may meet and Choose out of the
whole Subscribers (of whom none shall have more than one Vote) one Person, who
has subscribed in his own Right 4000 l. at least and paid Part thereof at
least, at the time of his Subscription to be the first Governor, and one other
Person, who has Subscribed 3000 l. at least, and paid Part thereof, in manner
aforesaid, to be the first Deputy Governor, and Twenty four other Persons, each
of which have severally Subscribed in their own Right 2000 l. at least, and
paid Part thereof as aforesaid, to be the first Directors, which Elections
shall be determined by the Majority of Votes then present, and in case they be
equal, then by the Commissioners, or the Major Part of them.

That the Persons so Elected shall be inserted in the said intended Charter,
and made the first Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, to continue in
their Offices from the Date of the Charter till the 25th of March 1696, and
till others be chosen in their Rooms, and Sworn, subject nevertheless to the
Restrictions and Provisoes in the said Act, and to such other Rules as shall be
inserted in the Charter, the Draught whereof is contained in the Scedule
annexed.

Provided no Subscriber shall be capable to Vote in the Elections of the first
Governor, Deputy, or Directors, until he has taken the Oath following, viz. I
A. B. do swear that the Sum of 500 l. by me Subscribed (or the Sum of 500 l. of
the Money by me Subscribed) is my own proper Money, for my own Use, and in my
own Right, and not in Trust for any Person whatsoever.

Provided nevertheless, That any Quaker, who has Subscribed 500 l. as
aforesaid, and made and signed the Declaration following, viz. I A. B. do
sincerely and solemnly declare, in the Presence of God, that the Sum of 500 l.
by me Subscribed (and so on as in the Oath aforesaid) shall be capable to Vote
in the said Elections of the first Governor, Deputy, or Directors.

Provided that no Subscriber shall be capable to be chosen the first Governor,
Deputy, or Director, unless he or they be a Natural Born, or Naturalized
Subject, and has, They must take the Oaths before they stand Candidates.
or have taken an Oath, that the Sums, which in the respective Cases of
Governor, Deputy or Directors, are requisite to be subscribed as aforesaid, are
his own proper Moneys, subscribed for his own Use, and in his own Right, and
not in Trust for any other Person; and any two of the Commissioners are
empowered to Administer the said Oaths and Declarations to the Persons who are
to Choose, or be the first Governor, Deputy, and Directors.

And that all Subscribers may be assured and satisfied, the Powers vested in
their Majesty's, by the Act to Erect a Corporation, shall be truly executed,
Their Majesty's Promise and Declare, and also Covenant, Grant, and Agree with
the Commissioners, on behalf of themselves and every Subscriber, that in case
the whole 1200000 l. or a Moiety, or any greater Part thereof shall be
Subscribed on the said Act, or in pursuance of this Commission, before the
first of August next, then immediately after the said first Day of August, or
so soon as 1200000 l. be Subscribed, which shall first happen, Their Majesty's
will Grant a Charter to Incorporate all the Subscribers then living, who shall
not have Assigned their Interest, and (in case any of them be dead) their
Heirs, and (in case any of the Subscribers shall have Assigned their Interest)
their Assignees to be one Corporation, called the Governor and Company of the
Bank of England, with such Powers, Privileges, etc. and under such Rules,
Power of Redemption, and Restrictions, as are contained in the said Act, or
intended by the Schedule annexed, and with such further Power as shall be
advised by the Subscribers Council, and approved by Their Majesty's Attorney or
Solicitor General.

And Their Majesty's direct, That the whole Sum Subscribed, shall be, and be
called, A Common, Capital, and Principal Stock: And that every Person,
according to the Sum subscribed and paid, shall have an Interest and Share in
the said Principal Stock of 1200000, and in the said yearly Fund of 100000 l.
per Annum; which Interest may be assigned to any Persons or Bodies Politic,
and so over (toties quoties) as fully as any other Interest which is by Law
assignable; which Assignment shall vest the Interest in the Assignee, his
Heirs, etc. and after such Assignment, it shall not be in the Power of the
Assignor to revoke or void the same, so as it be made in Writing, and Registered
in manner following, viz. All Assignments made before the first of August, or
the full Subscribing of the said 1200000 l. (which shall first happen) and
before Granting the Charter, shall be entered in the Auditor's Office of the
Exchequer, within six days after the making thereof: And all Assignments made
after the said Charter, shall be Registered in the Form thereby prescribed.

And if for Default in Subscribing 600000 l. before the first of August, the
Powers in the Act for Erecting a Corporation shall cease, then all Assignments
shall be entered in the Office of the Remembrancer in the Exchequer, as the Act
directs.

Provided, That the Commissioners joined in this Commission shall be liable to
Their Majesty's, every one for his own Actings, and not one for another, or for
the Cashiers, or in any case where there is not particular fraud.

Provided, That every of the Commissioners acting in this Commission be Sworn
to the faithful Discharge thereof; and Their Majesty's empowereth the Lord
Keeper, Lord Chancellor, and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, or such two of the
Commissioners as shall be first Sworn before some of them to administer such
Oaths in these Words, viz. I A, B. do swear, that I will faithfully execute the
Trust in me reposed, as one of the Commissioners appointed by Their Majesty's
for taking Subscriptions, and doing other things pursuant to the Act of
Parliament, to the best of my Skill, without Deceit.

Provided, That if any of the Commissioners dye before all things hereby
intended are accomplished, this Commission shall not determine, but be
performed by the rest, so there be a sufficient Number left.

And in Default thereof, Their Majesty's promise, That a new Commission shall
be granted for the Accomplishment of all things intended for the Security of
the Subscribers.

Provided also, that any of the Commissioners may be Subscribers, and the rest,
or so many as aforesaid, may take such Subscriptions from any of the
Commissioners, and receive the Money, and do all other things thereupon
directed, as in the case of other Subscribers; and that where any of the
Commissioners Subscribe, such Subscription shall be made before, and attested
in the Book by some other of the Commissioners who are to give Receipts for the
same.

And Lastly, That this Commission, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be a
sufficient Warrant to every of the Commissioners for all Things done in
pursuance thereof.


