A LETTER, From WILLIAM King of England, to the Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland, at their Meeting at EDINBURGH.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE are very sensible of the Kindness and Concern that many of your Nation have
Evidenced toward Us, and Our Undertaking for the Preservation of Religion and
Liberty, which were in such imminent Danger; Neither can we in the least doubt
of your Confidence in Us, after having seen how far so many of your Nobi^ity,
and Gentry, have owned Our Declaration, Countenancing and Concurring with Us in
Our Endeavors, and desiring that We should take upon Us the Administration of
Affairs, Civil and Military; and to Call a Meeting of the Estates, for securing
the Protestant Religion, the ancient Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, which
accordingly We have ^one.

Now it lies on you to enter upon such Consultations as are most probable to
settle y^u on sure and lasting Foundations, which We hope you will set about
with all c^venient speed, with regard to the public Good, and to the general
Interest and I^^nations of the People, that after so much Trouble, and great
Suffering, they may Li^e Happily and in Peace; and that you may lay aside all
Animosities and Factions, that may impede so good a Work.

We were glad to ^^nd that so many of the Nobility and Gentry, when here at
London, were so much inclined to an Union of both Kingdoms, and that they did
look upon it as one o^ the best Means for procuring the Happiness of these
Nations, and settling of a lasting Peace amongst them, which would be
advantageous to both, they living in the sam^ Island, having the same Language,
and the same Common Interest of Religion and Liberty, especially at this
Juncture, when the Enemies of both are so restless, endeavoring to make, and
increase Jealousies and Divisions, which they will be ready to improve to their
own advantage, and the ruin of Britain. We being of the same Opinion, as to
the usefulness of this Union, and having nothing so much before Our Eyes, as
the Glory of GOD, the Establishing of the Reformed Religion, and the Peace and
Happiness of these Nations, are Resolved to use Our utmost Endeavors in
advancing every thing which may Conduce to the Effectuating the same: So we bid
you heartily Farewell, From Our Court at Hamptoun, the seventh day of March,
1688/9.

WILLIAM R.

Edinburgh, Printed in the year, 1689.


