Their Majesty's COMMISSION FOR THE REBUILDING OF THE Cathedral Church OF S.
PAUL In LONDON.

W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal English blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Printed by Benj. Motte. MDCXCII.

Their Majesty's COMMISSION.
WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To our Trusty and well
beloved Sir Thomas Stamp Knt. Lord Mayor of our City of London, and the Lord
Mayor of our said City of London, for the time being;

The most Reverend Father in God, John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
of all England, and Metropolitan, and the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury for the
time being;

The most Reverend Father in God John Lord Archbishop of York, Primate and
Metropolitan of England, and the Lord Archbishop of York, for the time being;

The Right Reverend Fathers in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London, Thomas Lord
Bishop of Rochester, Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely,
Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and the Bishops of London, Rochester, Worcester,
Ely, and Lincoln, for the time being;

Our Trusty and well beloved Sir John Summers Knight, Our Attorney General, and
Thomas Trevor Esquire Our Solicitor General, and Our Attorney General and
Solicitor General, for the time being;

Sir Thomas Meres Knight;

George Oxenden Doctor of Laws, Principal Official of the Arches Court of
Canterbury, and Vicar General to the Archbishop of Canterbury's Court, and the
Principal Official of the Arches Court of Canterbury and Vicar General to the
Archbishop of Canterbury's Court, for the time being;

Sir Charles Hedges Knight, Doctor of Laws, and Judge of Our High Court of
Admiralty of England, and the Judge of Our High Court of Admiralty of England,
for the time being;

Sir Richard Raines Knight, Doctor of Laws, Judge of the Prerogative Court of
Canterbury and the Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury for the time
being;

Sir Thomas Pinfold, Knight, Doctor of Laws, Our Advocate General, and Our
Advocate General for the time being;

Henry Newton, Doctor of Laws and Chancellor of the Diocese of London, and the
Chancellor of the Diocese of London for the time being;

Sir William Ashurst, Sir Richard Levett, Knights, Sheriffs of our City of
London, and the Sheriffs of our said City for the time being;

William Sherlock, Doctor in Divinity, Dean of the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, London, William Holder, Doctor in Divinity, Henry Godolphin, Doctor in
Divinity, William Stanley, Doctor in Divinity; Residentiaries of the said
Cathedral Church, and the Dean and Residentiaries of the said Cathedral Church
for the time being;

Sir Christopher Wren, Knt. Surveyor General of our Works, and the Surveyor
General of our Works for the time being;

Sir William Trumball, Sir Thomas St. George, and Sir Henry St. George, Knts.
Greeting.

Whereas our late Royal Uncle King Charles II. of blessed Memory, was
Graciously pleased out of his Pious and good Intentions toward the Rebuilding
of the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, in London, to Constitute and Appoint
several Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and other Persons of known Worth and
Integrity, Commissioners in the Commission under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date the Twelfth Day of November, Anno Domini, One Thousand Six Hundred
Seventy and Three: The like Commission was also Granted by the late King James
the Second, under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Two and Twentieth
Day of January, in the First Year of his Reign: since which time a considerable
Progress has been made in the said Building.

Now to the Intent so good and great a Work may be Effectually carried on, We
are Graciously pleased to renew the said Commission, and have Nominated,
Constituted, and Appointed, and by these Presents do Nominate, Constitute, and
Appoint You, to be Our Commissioners for Carrying on, Finishing, and Adorning
of the said Cathedral Church of S. Paul, London.

And We do by these Presents give full Power and Authority to you, our said
Commissioners or any six or more of you, whereof the Lord Bishop of London, or
the Dean of St. Paul's for the time being to be one, to demolish and take down
what is yet remaining of the old Fabric, and carry on the new Work, or such
part or portion of it, and in such Order and Method, and by such Ways and
Means, and according to such Rules and Directions as to you shall seem best;
and to call to your Aid and Assistance, such skilful Artists, Officers and
Workmen as ye shall think fit, and to appoint each of them his several Charge
and Employment; to minister to such Artists and Officers, and to all and every
other person and persons to be employed in the said Service, to whom you shall
think meet, such Oath or Oaths for the due performance of their several Duties,
Employments, Offices, Charges and Trusts to them or any of them to be
committed, as shall by you be thought reasonable and convenient; and out of
such Money as shall be received for this Work, to allow to them, and every of
them, such Salaries, Wages, and Rewards respectively as to you shall seem
fitting and proportionable to their Employment, and the Service they shall do;
and to Consider, Advise, and Agree of, and set down particular Orders and
Instructions, as well for the safe, and well keeping, both of the Money from
time to time, brought into the Treasury, and of the Materials and Provisions to
be from time to time brought into the Stores; and also for the faithful and
frugal issuing out and disposing of the same, for the Public Use intended, and
no other; and to direct and appoint by whom, and in what manner the Books and
Accounts of both shall be from time to time kept, controled, audited, and
transcribed, and certified; and to put such a Cheque upon the Receipt and
issuing out of both, as you shall judge necessary; And out of your selves, and
such other Persons of known Ability and Integrity, as you shall choose from
time to time, and as often as you shall judge it Expedient, to appoint,
constitute, and make, such and so many Sub-Committees as you shall think meet,
for the better managing and carrying on of this whole Work; and to invest them
with such powers pursuant to the Authorities hereby given, as shall be
requisite; and to revoke, annul, and determine the same; and to revive, and
make new the said Sub-Committees, or any others, when, and as often as you
shall find it needful and conducing to the Service; and Advise, Treat, and
Consider of all other things, ways, and means for the better Advancement and
Furtherance of this Great and Excellent Work, and to the finishing and
perfecting the same, and to put the said ways and means in due and speedy
Execution; and finally to Consult of, and Frame meet Orders, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, for the better preservation and maintenance of the said
Cathedral Church in time to come, and for preventing and suppressing of all
present and future Annoyances and Purprestures, and Encroachments, which do,
shall, or may any way tend to the Damage or Hurt, Blemishing or Disgrace of the
same; And the said Orders, Ordinances, and Constitutions being reduced into
Writing, to present to Us; to the end the same being by Us perused and
considered of, may receive Our Royal Approbation and Allowance, with such
further Orders from Us for the strengthening the same by Our Royal Signature, or
under Our Great Seal of England, or otherwise as We shall find meet, that so
they may be put in due Execution accordingly.

Now, forasmuch as it appears to us, that a Considerable Sum has already been
expended upon the said Work, and that the same is very well advanced; lest
after so great an Expense, there should be any obstruction in so good a a Work,
We do further hereby give and grant unto you the said Henry Lord Bishop of
London, and to the Bishop of that See for the time being, and to you the
present Dean and others Residentiaries of Our said Cathedral Church, and to
your Successors, the Dean and others Residentiaries thereof for the time being,
full Power and Authority to Receive and Take the free and voluntary
Contributions of all Persons whatsoever as shall willingly Contribute to the
said Work, and to Constitute and Appoint such other Person or Persons, as you
or any Three or more of you (whereof the Lord Bishop of London, or the Dean of
S. Paul's to be one) shall think most ready, to assist in Gathering and
Receiving the said Contributions; and also to provide and keep Books or
Registers, such as have been formerly kept upon the like occasion, to take the
said Subscriptions.

All which Moneys already so subscribed or given, raised, collected, or
received, or which shall hereafter be given, collected or received, as also
such Money as shall become due and payable by virtue of a late Act of
Parliament, by an Imposition upon Coals, and shall be issued out by Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, and the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, or any two of them,
for the use of the said Cathedral Church according to the said Act, shall be
paid to such Person or Persons as by any six or more of you Our said
Commissioners (whereof the Lord Bishop of London, or the Dean of S. Paul's for
the time being, to be one) shall be from time to time chosen and appointed to
Receive the same, and to give Acquittances and Discharges for it to such Person
or Persons as shall pay it as aforesaid.

And for the further easing and defraying of so vast an Expense as this Work
shall require, and in order to the better Recovery, and Preservation of
whatsoever has or shall be given, or intended to be given, purchased or
provided for that purpose, being very desirous that a true and perfect
discovery may be made, as well of all such Legacies, Bequests, Gifts both of
Lands and Sums of Money, or other Profits, as have been at any time heretofore,
or hereafter shall be given, subscribed, or intended for the Rebuilding,
Maintaining, Repairing or Adorning of the said Church; as also of all
Materials, Instruments or Utensils at any time purchased or prepared for that
Work, but Fraudulently and Sacrilegiously concealed, detained, or converted to
private use and advantage: We do by these Presents, give and grant unto you, or
any six or more of you (whereof the Lord Bishop of London, or the Dean of S.
Paul's for the time being to be one) full Power and Authority, as well by the
Oath of Honest and Lawful Men, as by the Examination of Witnesses upon their
Oaths (which said Oaths both to Jurors and Witnesses, you or any six or more of
you, as aforesaid, are hereby Authorized to administer) or without Oath, and by
all other Ways and Means whatsoever, from time to time to inquire and examine
as well of and concerning all and every Sum and Sums of Money, or other Gifts
whatsoever, which heretofore have, or hereafter shall be given, bequeathed,
subscribed, advanced, raised, collected or received for or toward the
Reparation or Rebuilding of the said Cathedral Church, or for Beautifying or
Adorning thereof, or for providing of any Instruments, Utensils or Ornaments
for the same, and touching the Payment and Employment thereof, and what remains
yet unpaid or unaccounted for, and in whose Hands; as also of and concerning
all and every the Materials and Utensils at any time provided for the Repairing
or Rebuilding of the said Church, or any belonging to the same, or of the
particular value thereof, and how, and by whom the same, or any part thereof,
has been taken away, disposed, conveyed and employed otherwise than to the use
intended; and to send for, and Convene, and Cause to come before you all such
Farmers, Tenants, Trustees, Treasurers, Receivers, Accountants, Clerks, and
other Officers and Ministers, Parties and Witnesses whatsoever, which are any
way concerned, or can give Testimony touching the Premises, and which you
shall think necessary to call before you, and to Examine them severally upon
their Oaths, and to Cause all and every Person and Persons whom you shall think
good from time to time, to bring and show before you, either upon Oath or
without Oath, all and singular such Books and Records, Registers, Surveys,
Accounts, Evidences, and other Notes and Writings any way relating to the
Premises, and remaining in their Hands as you shall think fit to be produced,
whereby the truth of the Premises may the better and more plainly be found out
and discovered, and to let you have use and perusal of the same.

And for your ease and better Expedition in the Execution of this part of Our
Commission, Our Will and Pleasure is; And we do hereby Charge and Command, that
all such Surveyors, Actuaries, Registers, Officers and Ministers whatsoever,
which you or any six or more of you, as aforesaid, shall think fit and require,
shall be ready and attendant upon you or any six or more of you, for the doing
and performing any thing necessary and expedient to be done in the Execution of
this Our Commission.

And we do hereby Require and Command all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
Constables, Bailiffs, and all other Our Officers, Ministers, and Loving
Subjects whatsoever, upon any Warrant or Precept to be issued from you, Our
said Commissioners, or any six or more of of you, as aforesaid, to Return
Jurors, serve Orders and Summons, and be aiding and assisting in all things
tending to the effectual Execution of the said Commission: And we do hereby
Authorize you, or any six or more of you as aforesaid, to demand and call for,
and Order to be paid into the Hands of the Receiver or Receivers so appointed,
as aforesaid, all such Sum and Sums of Money as by the Means and Methods, and in
any of the Cases aforesaid, now are, or hereafter shall be found to be
remaining in the Hands of, or due and payable by, or Chargeable upon any Person
or Persons whatsoever, with Damages for the same; or such Compositions either
of Principal or Damages as you shall think fit to be made therein; and in
default of payment, to inform Us and our Council of such Person or Persons so
found to be Indebted, which shall in Contempt of this Our Commission, refuse to
pay the said Debts. And out of such Money as shall be discovered, recovered, and
received, to allow fitting and proportionable Salaries, Gratuities and Rewards
to such Clerks, Messengers, and others who shall any ways advance the said
Service, or be employed in discovery or getting in the said Moneys.

And lastly, Our Pleasure is, That this Commission shall continue in force;
And, We do hereby Authorize you Our said Commissioners, or any six or more of
you (whereof the Lord Bishop of London, or the Dean of S. Paul's for the time
being, to be one) to proceed in the Execution thereof, and of all and every the
Matters and Things therein contained from time to time, as often as you or any
six or more of you (whereof the said Bishop, or the said Dean for the time
being, to be always one) shall think convenient, although the said Commission
be not continued from time to time by Adjournment. And for doing of all this,
and for using and exercising all and every the Powers above herein granted, or
mentioned to be granted, in such manner as is above directed, these Presents
shall be unto you, and unto every of you, and to all other Persons Employed
therein, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge. In Witness whereof We have caused
these Our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness Our Selves at Westminster, the Third day of June, in the Fourth year
of Our Reign. PER BREVE DE PRIVATO SIGILLO. Chute.

God save the King and Queen.

