By the King, A PROCLAMATION For Apprehending and Securing the Person of Robert
Fielding.
WILLIAM R.
WHereas His Majesty has Received Information, That Robert Fielding did on the
El^ven^h ^ay of this Instant January Challenge, and in a violent manner Assault
and dangerously Wound Sir Henry Dutton Colt, One of His Majesty's Insti^es of
the Peace for the County of Middlesex, for doing his (...)uty, in the Execution
of his said Office of Justice of Peace, and that he the said Robert Fielding
has since withdraw^ himself from his usual Place of Above, and is ^led from
Justice; His Majesty therefore being Resolved to Protect all His Officers and
Ministers in the Execution of Public Justice, from all Insolences and
A^fronts that shall be Offered to them by any Ill Disposed Persons, and that
all such Offenders should be punished according to their Demerits, and the
utmost Severity of the Law, Has thought ^it, by and with the Advice of His
Privy Council, to Issue this His Royal Proclamation, hereby Commanding and
Requiring all His Loving Subjects to Discover and Apprehend the said Robert
Fielding where ever he may be found, and to Carry him before some Justice of
the Peace, or Chief Magistrate of the County, Town or Place where he shall be
Apprehended, who is hereby Required to Secure him, and thereof give Speedy
Notice to His Majesty's Privy Council, or One of His Principal Secretaries of
State. And for the Encouragement of all Persons to be Diligent and Careful in
Endeavoring to Discover and Apprehend the said Robert Fielding, His Majesty
does hereby Declare, That whosoever shall Discover and Apprehend the said
Robert Fielding, and shall bring him before some Justice of the Peace, or Chief
Magistrate, as aforesaid, shall Have and Receive, as a Reward, the Sum of Two
hundred Pounds, which said Sum of Two hundred Pounds shall be forthwith Paid to
him or them by the Commissioners of Our Treasury for the time being, who are
hereby Authorized and Required to pay the same accordingly. And His Majesty
does hereby strictly Charge and Command all His Loving Subjects, as they will
Answer the contrary at their Perils, that they do not any ways Conceal, but do
Discover the (...) Robert Fielding, to the end he may be Secured and Proceeded
against according to Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Sixteenth Day of January, 1695/6. In the
Seventh Year of Our Reign. God save the King.
London, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased* Printe^ to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695/6.


