THE Doctrine OF THE COVENANT OF REDEMPTION.

Wherein is laid the Foundation of all our HOPES and HAPPINESS.

Briefly Opened and Improved.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

Psalm. 89. 3. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, I have Sworn to David my
Servant.

Boston, Printed by Benj. Harris over-again^ ^^e 5word^-House. 1^92.

To the Reader.
THE Great and Glorious God who has an absolute Dominion over his Creatures,
might (had he pleased) have dealt with. Men in a way of Sovereignty only,
requiring Duty and Obedience from them, without any promise of reward. But he
has seen Good to transact with them in a Covenant way. There are but Two
Covenants essentially differeing which the Most High has made with men, Viz.
That of Works, And that of Grace. The first Covenant which man whilst in
Paradise, was concerned in, is rightly termed a Covenant of Works, because
Works or Doing, was the Condition of it. Thi^ was soon broken, and so made
Null, (...) then the Lord out of his Infinite Goodness, was pleased to
establish another Covenant The first was made with a Righteous P^^son, and so a
Covenant of Wor^^ between the Holy God and him. This latter was made with
sinners and is therefore a Covenant of Reconciliation. And it is sitly styled
the Covenant of Grace: Not but that there was Grace in the First Covenant, for
His Divine Majesty did infinitely condescend in binding himself to his
Creature: but to do thus to a fallen, forlorn sinful Creature, is by way of
Eminent Grace. The Scripture speaks expressly of Two Covenants, Gal 4. 24. And
that not only as Diverse, but as Opposite and differeing in their Natures. The
Law of Faith is set in direct opposition to the Law of Works. Romans 3. 27. For a
man to find the Life of his hands, to live by his own Righteousness; and for
him to depend solely upon the Righteousness of another, that is, of Jesus
Christ for Life and Salvation, are contrary things. And from thence it is
impossible for a man to be under both the Covenants at the same time; he cannot
be the Child of two Mothers, the Child of Hagar, and of Sarah too.

That the Covenant of Grace has for the substance of it been the same in all
Ages, differing only in Circumstances and as to the manner of dispensations is
denied by the Old Pelagians, and by Socinians, Arminians, and some Baptists at
this day. But the Scripture assures us, That Believers under the Old Testament
were not made perfect without us. Heb. 11. 40. They and we are saved by the
same Christ and by the same Covenant, the Mediator of the Covenant has always
been the same, Yesterday, to day, and for ever the same. The Son of God was an
Intercessor for his People before his Incarnation. Zach. 1: 12. Believers under
the Old Testament were secured by him. Neither is there salvation in any other.
If then the Partriarchs were saved (as we know they were) it was by Jesus
Christ: No man was ever saved since the world began but by him. Under the
Old Testament Faith in Christ was necessary in order to Justification and
Salvation To him give all the Prophets Witness that through his Name, whoever
believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Promises which do concern
Spiritual and Eternal as well as Temporal blessings, were made to Old Testament
believers. Our Savior proves that the bodies of Saints shall have a Glorious
Resurrection to Eternal Life from the Covenant made with Abraham. They of old,
Looked for a City which has Foundations, whose maker and builder is God. Which,
if Heaven (and not Temporal Blessings only) had not been Promised them, they
would not have done. Now if there is an Identity as to the Mediator, the
Condition, the promises of the Covenant made with Believers in the days of the
Old Testament and of the New, the Covenant must needs be effectually the same.
When therefore by the Old and the New Covenant, that of Works and of Grace are
intended, the distribution is of the Genus into its Species. But when the
Covenant of Grace as under the Legal or Evangelical dispensation, is meant (and
so it often is in the Scripture) the distinction is of the same subject
according to its various adjuncts.

There is another Covenant which that of Grace is built upon, Viz. The Covenant
of Redemption. That there have been blessed Transactions between God the Father
and the Son from the Days of Eternity, concerning the Salvation of the Elect,
is a glorious Truth, which (not the light of nature but only) the written word
of God has revealed; That speaks of Gods Purpose and Grace given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began, and of Eternal Life promised before the world
began. These transactions were Foederal. The father said of the Son [im Tasim,
si posuerit] If he shall make his Soul an offering for Sin, Isa. 53. 10.
Whatever is required to a complete formal Covenant between two distinct Persons
is to be affirmed, concerning what has passed between God and Christ with
respect unto the Redemption of those that were from Eternity given to him;
Articles of Agreement (to speak after our Nature) have been concluded,
accepted, and exactly kept unto by them both. On this account the Lord Christ
is said to be a Surety. He is not only Fidejussor but Expromissor. He has so
undertaken to answer for his Elect, as that they were many of them set at
liberty before the price of their Redemption was actually paid and that by
virtue of this Covenant, wherein the Father did take the word of his Son Jesus
Christ, that the thing should in due time be performed. As to the Efficacy of
his Death, He was slain from the Foundation of the World. Believers that dyed
in the beginning of time went to heaven because the Son of God had promised to
lay down his life to satisfy divine justice in their behalf. Concerning the
Covenant of Grace, this Author has Published a judicious Treatise ten years
since, whereby the Churches have been edified. He has here, with the like
solidity discoursed on the Covenant of Redemption, showing himself a workman
that needs not be ashamed. The Reader will find therein Gospel Mysteries, with
Brevity and yet Perspicuity (which is rare) explained, confirmed, applied, so
as that both Learned and Unlearned (God has made us Debtors unto both) may
thereby be built up in their most Holy Faith; in some more disputable Points,
He expresses his own Judgment without reflecting on those whom He differs
from. It has been controverted amongst very Learned men, whether it is
consistent with the Rectoral Holiness of that God who cannot look upon
iniquity, to pardon sin without satisfaction made to his injured justice.
Grotius, Vossius, Voetius, Turretin, Heidan, and of our own Divines, the great
Owen and Mr. Burgess have inclined to the Negative in the Question mentioned.
But others of great name and worth, (and in particular Dr. Twiss concerning
whom our Mr. Norton in his Life of Mr. Cotton does truly affirms that he was if
any of this age a Star of the first Magnitude) are for the Affirmative, with
whom the Worthy Author does concur, but with such Modesty and Cander as no
Ingenious person though of a differing Sentiment, can be offended at him. In
Questions so Extrafundamental, (as long as the best of us know but in part) we
may (to use Austins expression) be diversely persuaded Salva side et Caritate.

Now the God of truth, bless these endeavors for glory to his own Name, the
edification of his People, and the rejoicing of his Servant, and Grant that
both Speaker and Hearers, Writer and Readers, may have Joy together in the Day
of Christ.

Boston, New England. February 6th. 1693. Increase Mather

CHAP I. An Introduction.
THE Unparalled and Incomprehensible Love of God to Sinful Man, displayed in
the wonderful Affair of his Redemption and Salvation; is the great thing
celebrated in the Scriptures; and is that which invites our most frequent, and
raised Meditations. Paul therefore prays for his Ephesians, that they, together
with all Saints, might be able to comprehend it, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. Nor is
there one passage in this whole Transaction, but what is admirable and
precious; it being the foundation of our hope to enjoy Eternal Life, who are by
Nature Children of Wrath; and but for it, the whole forefeited Race of Adam
must have perished hopelesly and everlastingly. The Contemplation of this is
truly surprising: Time is too short; Eternity but long enough to spend in the
Survey of it. This Love is a Fountain which sprang up in, and runs down to
Eternity. It never knew a beginning, nor shall ever come to an end.

Now there are two general heads, unto which our Speculation of this Glorious
Mystery may be reduced.

1. The Provision which God made for our deliverance before time, in the days
of Eternity.

2. The things which are done in time for the actual Accomplishment of it. They
that would Search the Love of God to the Original, and follow it up to the
Wellhead of it, must ascend beyond the Creation of the World, and look for it
in that Eternity which had no Beginning. Not only the things that he has done
for us, but the thoughts also which he had of us, do Recommend his Transcendent
Good Will unto us; the Meditation of them was very choice to David, Psalm. 139.
17. That God bare Love to his People of Old, He Himself assures them, Jer. 31.
3. These Thoughts of his had lain hid from us, but that he was pleased to
Reveal them to us in his Word, from whence we must borrow our Information: and
it is our Duty and will be our Advantage to enquire into it, so far as we have
Scripture Light to direct us. The former of these is that which is Designed in
the Ensuing Treatise, by Divine Assistance. and in truth, all our Speculations
about the latter will be dark, short, and confused, except we trace them
hither. We shall neither know where our Salvation began, nor what Security
there is for it, or how to act our Faith aright about it. Here is the Idea or
Exemplar of all that is done in bringing of Fallen Man to Glory: here is the
Ratification or Establishment of the whole concern: here we are acquainted with
the leading Causes to, and unfailing Assurances of the Vocation, Justification,
and Glorification of all Gods Chosen Ones: for here we find the first Link of
that Chain, and that which fastens all, Romans 8. 29, 30. The best and most
suitable notion under which this great Affair may be represented to us for our
Information, and satisfaction, is that of a Covenant; which being of so much
use among men, is the more easily understood: and because it carries in it the
strongest confirmation of things that Humane Nature is capable of, must needs
be most accommodated to the establishing of our Faith. Nor is this a mere
notion of man's Invention, but that which has clear and firm footing in the
Word of God, as will in its due place appear. Now this Covenant, is by some
Divines called the Covenant of Suretyship; by others, the Covenant of
Redemption; because there was in it a full Suretyship given for, and a firm
Compact made about the Redemption of a number of Mankind, in order to their
Salvation.

The enquiry into, and right stating of the Doctrine of this Covenant, is of
excellent advantage for our better understanding of the whole tenor of the
Scriptures; the avoidance of many pernicious Errors which the ignorance of it,
has given advantage to take rooting among such as call themselves Christians;
the true apprehension of the Terms of the Gospel Covenant; and the comforting
of the Hearts of Gods Children, against the many Temptations which assault
them. I shall therefore, as God shall please to assist me, endeavor to pursue
it in this method.

1. To state the right notion of this Covenant? 2. To prove from the Word of
God, that there is such a Covenant. 3. To Explain it in those several things
wherein the special nature of it may be rightly concerned. 4 To show the
necessity of it in order to Fallen Man's Salvation. 5. To show the Influence
which it has into the Covenant of Grace which is made with us. 6. To draw some
practica Inferences from it.
CHAPTER 2. The right Notion of the Covenant of Redemption Stated,
THere are two enquiries apt to be made about a matter of Discourse, viz.
Ansit, and Quidsit, whether the thing be, and what it is. If the thing it self
be taken for granted to be, the former is Superseded; but it it be Suspected,
it must be Cleared: and either of these seems to claim the Precedence: for,
though words be to signify things, yet they are often Dark, Ambiguous
Aequivial; and till we know what they Indigitate, how shall we determine
whether the thing be? And yet on the other hand, till we are satisfied that the
thing is, it is superfluous to enquire into the nature of it, lest our dispute
should prove to be about a non entity. To avoid both of these, I shall here
only give some brief general account of the thing intended by the Covenant of
Redemption, in order to the proof of the Assertion that there is such a thing;
leaving the full explanation of it till afterward.

Let it then be here observed. It is certain that the whole concern of Man's
Redemption and Salvation, had it consideration and determination in Gods
eternal Decree. It is a sure rule, That whatsoever God does in time, he
purposed to do it before time: for he works all things according to the
counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. God is a wise Agent; he must therefore know
his own works; and this knowledge must be eternal, or else it could not be
Divine, Acts 15. 18. Known unto God are his works from the foundation of the
world. He is a free Agent, and so he does nothing but what he will do: And that
will had no beginning, being Immutable, Job 23, 13. he is of one mind and who
can turn him? Now although the Decree of God, be with respect to him Decreeing,
but one simple and undivided act; yet, in reference to the things Decreed, it
is various, or has many parts, in it: for which reason the scripture speaks of
many thoughts and many purposes of his.

Among these Decrees, Those of Predestination deserve to be peculiarly remarked
by us; because they contein in them the Idea of that special government by
which God leads all reasonable creatures to an everlasting state of happiness
or misery. And among these, that of Election carries in it matter of singular
and eminent comfort to all true believers, who by the knowledge of their Faith,
come to be acquainted with their Interest in, and Title to it. In which Decree
of Election, there was not only the designation of the end, unto which the
Creature was appointed, but also the laying out of the whole way in which they
were to be brought unto the Attainment of that end. The end to which men are
appointed by Election, is Eternal Life. That which is the end of our Faith, is
the Design of Gods Election, and that is our Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Among the
means, that which shines forth most illustriously, is man's deliverance from Sin
and Wrath by the Obedience of Christ, who is the Eternal Son of God, and in
fullness of Time was made man, in order to his Redeeming of us. This way of man's
Redemption, had a room in Gods Eternal Purpose: Our Election therefore was in
him, and that before the Creation, Ephesians. 1. 4. Not that Christ as Mediator was
the Meritorious procuring Cause of our Election; but because in and by him we
were to be made partakers of all the benefits which were to be the Fruits of
this Electing Love to us. Hence then the Son of God was appointed to do those
things for us, which were to procure all these benefits to be bestowed on us;
and for this reason is he said to be Slain from the Foundation of the World,
Rev. 13. 8. not that he was actually so, but because of the Designation of it;
and so the Apostle expounds it, 1 Pet. 1. 20. who was verily Foreordained
before the Foundation of the World.

This Article in the Decree, is in the Scripture represented unto us, under the
notion of a Covenant between God the Father, and God the Son; as will appear
afterward, together with the reason why it is exhibited under such a notion.
So that by the Covenant of Redemption, under our consideration, we are to
understand, An Everlasting Compact clearly made, and firmly Ratified, between
God the Father, and God the Son, about the Redemption and Salvation of a number
of the Children of Men; and this is a Covenant distinct from that which we call
the Covenant of Works, which past between God and Man at the first in Adam; as
also from the New Covenant, or that of Grace, which is Indented between God and
Man, in Christ as the Mediator of it. This is the thing about which our Enquiry
is, and which may be laid open in the Sequel.

CHAP. 3. Scripture Evidence that there is such a Covenant of Redemption.
THat the Word of God does not in Terms mention such a Covenant by such a
Title, must be acknowledged: but that it does give us the account of a
Covenant, which cannot be Interpreted of any other, yea which fully amounts to
the thing, may safely be affirmed. We read, Psalm 89. 3. I have made a Covenant
with my Chosen, I have Sworn to David my Servant. There are diverse Texts in
Scripture, especially in the Old Testament, which have a double reference,
partly to the Type, partly to the Antitype; or to the Antitype under the Type:
This Psalm is one of those portions of Scripture, in which David is made a
notable Type of Christ: Him therefore it mainly aims at. The Covenant with him,
is here made the foundation of all Consolation to the People of God: Here then
we have.

1. The Subject Matter, viz. A Covenant.

2. The firmness of it; I have made; Hebr. Cut, alluding to that Custom
mentioned, in Jer. 34. 18. which was a solemn ratification; and I have Sworn;
noting the Immutability of it, according to Heb. 6. 17, 18.

3. The Parties in it; God on the one hand; I: God is the Speaker, Christ on
the other hand, expressed in two words: My Chos^n: noting both his Excellency,
and his Election; David my Servant; which must needs ultimately aim at Christ,
as many Expressions in the Psalm will undeniably evince, especially those in
verse 19. 22, verse 28, 29. 35, 36. Christ is therefore elsewhere called David,
see Jer. 30. 9. Ezekiel. 34. 34, 37. 24. and if we would know what Covenant this
is, the Context clearly indicates it, to be that which concerns the Redemption
and Salvation of the People of God: for it was that wherein he was made helpful
to his People, verse 19. wherein he was Anointed to his Offices of a Mediating
Redeemer, verse 19, 20. made Gods Firstborn, verse 27. and has an abiding
Seed, verse 36. we also read, Zech. 6. 13. The Counsel of Peace shall be
between them both; which clearly points to this Covenant under consideration.

But I shall essay a little more particularly to make the thing evident. I will
not here insist upon the opening of the nature of a Covenant in general, having
done it in another Treatise; the sum whereof is.

That it is a mutual obligation between two parties. That which I have now to
do, is to make it manifest, that there is such a transaction between those two
glorious persons, which amounts to, or is suitably expressed by a Covenant; and
that with respect to fallen man's Redemption. In order to the clearing up of
which, let it be observed.

That God in discovering of his mind to us, is pleased to accommodate his
language to our capacity, clothing divine truths with such words, as may best
suit our understandings. When therefore we say, there is such a Covenant, it
intends that there is that which is Analogous unto, and holds a full proportion
with such a thing; and is best accommodated to our understanding and faith by
such a resemblance. For evidence of this, let us lay together these
particulars, and they will amoun to a Demonstration.

1. That God has from all Eternity Elected a number of Mankind to Glory. The
Scripture is so full and clear for this, that it would be superfluous to insist
upon it. This is the beginning of all saving good which comes to any of the
Children of Men. From hence it is that Salvation takes its rise, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4,
5. 1 These. 1. 4. 5. Hitherto is the application of grace in Effectual Vocation
restrained, Acts 13. 46. To. 11. 7. and what else can be designed in that
Everlasting Love that God bears to men, from whence their Conversion proceeds?
Jer. 31. 3. nor can all the Evasions of men, elude the application of these,
and many more Scriptures, to Eternal Election. If Redemption and Salvation
belong to the Works of God, then there was a Decree that past concerning them,
unless we will deny that God works in them as a Cause by Counsel.

2. That in this Decree of Election, God has appointed for his Chosen, not
only the end to which he will bring them, which is Glory; but also the means
which are requisite in order thereunto. For this reason it is called the
Counsel of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 11. now Counsel has a proper and next reference
unto the means. Counsel according to our conception of the thing, is a
deliberate enquiry after the most suitable way for the accomplishing of a
Design which one has in his thoughts; and is ascribed to God after the manner
of men. Wise Agents will contrive their Business in order to their setting
about it. Gods Purposes are displayed unto us under the consideration of end
and means. He determines with himself, both what to do, and how to do it: and
this properly refers to the Eternal Idea of his; and for this reason he assures
his people that he knows what his own thoughts are, Jer. 29. 11. i. e. what
methods he has contrived for the management of their Affairs.

3. Gods ultimate end in this Design, being the advancement of the glory of his
Grace; hence by a wise and blameless Counsel, he ordered the permission of man
to fall into such a State of Misery, as to put him into an absolute need of a
Redeemer. That man's Fall came within the compass of the Decree, must needs be
concluded, except we will assert some things to come to pass against or beside
Gods Will; which is to deny his actual Supremacy over the whole Creation; or
how is that Ephesians. 1. 11. true? Man therefore had not Fallen, if he had not
purposed to permit it; In which he acted his holy Sovereignty beyond the
capacity of any Impeachment by the Creature. His spotless Holiness so ordered
it, that no Iniquity could be laid to his Charge on this account, Psalm. 141.
17. That the glory of his Grace was the end of this, so far as his Elect were
involved in it, herein appears, because he took the occasion from hence, for
the Illustration of that precious Attribute, Romans 5. 20. and but for it the
whole concern of Gospel Grace had been excluded; and that this Fall of Man put
him into an absolute need of a Redeemer is manifest, both from the rigor of
the Law, exacting death of all its Transgressors, without any abatement, Ezekiel.
18. 4. Matthew. 5. 17. the utter impotency of man, by the deadly influence of the
Apostasy, to do any thing toward his own delivery, being left by it without
strength, Romans 5. 6. and the dreadfulness of the misery which he was under the
efficacy of, and must undergo, if there were no Redemption for him, Romans 6. 23.
either he must perish with an Everlasting Destruction, or there must be a
powerful Redemption laid in for him. This is the fearful condition in which
this whole Race is involved.

4. Hence, among the means, the Eternal Son of God was set apart in the Decree,
to be a Redeemer. The Son of God was not only an actual Redeemer in time, but a
chosen Redeemer from Eternity, and for that reason is called Gods Chosen One,
Psalm. 89. 3. and his Elect, Isa. 42. 1. That the Son of God came within the
compass of the Decree, and had his Name written there, as one who was to become
a Ransom for his People, is manifest by Scripture Testimony, Prove. 8. 23. I
was set up from Everlasting. It is the Son who is the true Wisdom, that is
brought in speaking here: the word [Set up] denotes the constituting of one in
some Office; and therefore a noun from it signifies a Governor. It does not
design his natural Coessentiality with his Father, but his being ordained to
some Employment; and what was that but this of a Redeemer? hence is he called A
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. which must be intended
with respect to the Decree. Hence our Election is involved in his, Ephesians. 1. 3,
4. Christ was not sent in haste into the World: it was not a rash and
indeliberate Undertaking of his, but it was all Determined in the Counsel of
God, in every passage relating to it, Acts 2. 23. 8. 4. 27, 28. when therefore
he came in the Flesh, he professes that it was to do his Fathers Will, Psalm.
40. 7.

5 The Decree of God is a firm, stable, Immutable Purpose of his. A very
Heathen could say, Nulla est Litura in Decretis Sapientum. The Medes and
Persians, under a proud opinion of their infallible Wisdom, set a Stamp of
Immutability upon all their Laws. But this is peculiar and proper to the
Purposes of God. Gods Wisdom is like himself, Infinite: he can never be wiser
than he was, then when he established his Decree. He did it in Counsel, and his
after thoughts cannot mend his former. It was his Will that things should be
so, and he has but one Will, which is not to be altered, Job 23. 13. Nor can
he ever want for Power to put that in Execution, which he has purposed; for he
can do every manner of thing. The Records of Eternity shall stand unshaken;
what he has said shall certainly come to pass, Prove. 19. 21. Psalm. 102. 27.

6. The Son of God, who was thus constituted Redeemer in the Decree, is a
Person in the Godhead, infinitely free and uncompellable. Though the Doctrine
of a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Divine Essence, be a Mystery beyond
the capacity of our short Understandings to fathom; yet in as much as these are
exhibited to us under the notion of three Persons, each one having a distinct
Subsistence, (though all have but one and the same Essence) we must therefore
allow to each of them all that is Essential to the God head: and thus we are to
conceive of each of them to have a Divine Will; though it be one and the same
in all. The Son of God, being God, is in this respect Coequal with the Father;
for this reason he challenged this Equality as his due, Phil. 2. 6. and God
calls him his Fellow, Zech. 13. 7. He is thereupon incapable of Compulsion. So
that, upon an impossible supposition, that the Son had not complied with his
Fathers Will in this matter, he could not have been Decreed to be a Redeemer;
and from this very Argument the Apostle proves, that what Christ did upon this
account was his own voluntary act, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7. The Father no sooner
proposed it to him, than he readily complied with it.

7. Hence, to the firm and immutable constituting of the Son of God a Redeemer
in the Decree, there past an Eternal Transaction between the Father and him,
which is best shadowed to us, by the notion of a Covenant: and because it had a
proper respect to the Ransoming of his Chosen from sin and misery, it may there
fore well be called the Covenant of Redemption. If the Son of God became a
Redeemer by his own Consent freely, and was determined unto it before the World
began, it infers, according to our Capacity, that there was something
propounded to him, and that he did accordingly accept of it.

The Transactions between the Glorious Divine Persons; Infinitely Transcend our
Understandings: but if we will form a Conception of them, it must be after this
manner: and God is pleased so to declare it unto us, that we may be able to
entertain it in our Faith; and in as much as this stands among the Decrees of
God, in which there is the whole Idea of this work, and it is in all of it
ratified unchangeably; there must together with the mention of all those things
which relate to it, be also a final and determinate conclusion about it; all
must be ratified. In this regard the Counsel of Peace is said to be between
them both, Zech. 6. 13. hereupon also, the proposal of it by the Father to the
Son, is represented under the form of a Covenant, Hypothetically propounding
both a Condition and a Reward Isa. 53. 10. and in Psalm 110. 7. there is a
Connection which amounts to the same thing, for in a Copulate Axiom, where there
are things joined together, that are consequent the one upon the other, it
bears the force of a Connex; and so it is in the Text; and this may suffice for
the evidence of the thing, or that there is such a Covenant.

CHAP. 4. Of the Parties in the Covenant of Redemption.
IT follows now that we come a little nearer, and make a more distinct Survey
of this Covenant, according to the Light afforded us concerning it in the Word
of God. I shall therefore here explain it in such things wherein the special
nature of it, and its difference from other Covenants may be discerned;
especially the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace; and here may these
things be Enquired into.

1. Who are the Parties in this Covenant? 2. Whence this Covenant had its rise,
or what was the ground of its being made? 3. When it was made? 4. Whether it be
a Covenant of Works or of Grace? 5. Who are Covenanted for? 6. What are the
Articles of it?
1. Who are the Parties in this Covenant?

A. It is a general Observation that in all Covenants there are two Parties,
and there can be neither less or more; for the notion of a Covenant belongs to
the Head of Relation, which has but the Relate and the Correlate, and cannot
exceed. If then there are diverse parties, they suppose diverse Covenants. In the
Covenant of Works, God and Man immediately were the Parties: In the New
Covenant they are God and Man, through the Interposition of a Mediator, unto whom
both Parties have a respect. But in the Covenant of Redemption they are God and
the Son. This is agreed on among all those that acknowledge such a Covenant,
but under what consideration, it is debated with reference to each party, and
may be here particularly Explained.

1. God is one Party, Psalm. 89. 3. I have made: The Party that speaks there is
God himself. But it may be asked, whether he be to be considered Essentially or
Personally; and so is to be applied to the Father? In the former Description
given of this Covenant, I have expressed it as belonging to God the Father.
There are some Divines who would have it taken Essentially, and assigned to the
Deity, considered in the Essence, and not in any particular Subsistence, lest
otherwise the Holy Spirit, the Third Person in the Sacred Trinity should be
excluded from being personally concerned in this Covenant. This Debate needs
not be eagerly pursued, being easily reconcilable: here then observe.

1. That the Decree in which this Covenant is to be found, is properly an
Essential Act, or belongs to all the Three Persons in common, as they are one
in the Essence. Acts properly personal are only such as flow from their
Relative Properties, or at least have their Foundation in these Relations. The
Decrees is an act of Divine Counsel, exerted by the Divine Will, which is
undivided, and common to the three persons: and thus the Deity is the one party
Covenanting, because the Essential acts of the Trinity are undivided, Joh. 5.
17, 19.

2. That in these Essential Works, the Scripture frequently observes a personal
propriety, and an order of working according to the order of their Subsistence
and manner of working: so that in whatever work, any one persons order of
Subsistence, and manner of working does principally appear, it is, by way of
specialty, ascribed to that person; not because that person is alone in it, but
because God does herein manifest himself to us most clearly in such a manner of
being or Subsistence. The Father is the first Person, hence beginning Works are
Attributed to him, as Election and Crea^ion. The Son is the Second Person, and
therefore secondary works are ascribed to him, such as Redemption. The Holy
Ghost is the Third and Last Person, and therefore finishing works are given to
him, such as Application. The Father works of himself, by the Son and Spirit.
The Son works from the Father by the Spirit. The Holy Ghost works from them
both; Joh. 5. 19. 16. 13. and this Order is to show the Oecononomy of the
Divine Persons. Now in this regard, Essential Works may have a peculiar
Appropriation to a person not exclusive, but inclusive of the other.

3. That Jesus Christ in making mention of this Covenant, acknowledges the
Father to be the Party whom he had Indented withal. See Psalm. 2. 7, 8. the
mentioning of the Son here spoken to, and owned, points us to the Father under
the Personal Relation. So also in Psalm. 89. 26. which Psalm has a proper
reference to this Covenant; and how often in the Gospel have we Christ
declaring his Mission to be from his Father? more particularly in John 17. he
challenges of him the performance of the Promises of this Covenant, and truly,
as this Covenant is the beginning of all our Salvation, and the spring or
Original from which all the good that we hope for, so it is fitly attributed to
him, who is the first of the persons.

2. The other Party is the Son of God, the Second Person in the Trinity, who is
Coeternal with the Father. The Covenant being Eternal, there could not be any
party in it, but one who was an Eternal Person. Whosoever is engaged in a
Covenant, which is a voluntary act, must be presumed to Exist, either in
himself, or in his Representative. Nor is this disputed whether the Son of God
be the other party: but yet there is no little difference in the notions about
the qualility or respect in which he stands as a party in this Covenant. The
Son of God is considered under a treble notion.

1. Merely as he is a Divine Person, and so is only God.

2. As he has assumed our Nature into Union with his Person, and so is God-Man.

3. As he has a Mystical Union with all the Members of his Church, or with all
Believers, in which sense he is also called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and under
which of these considerations, he is a party in this Covenant, is variously
apprehended. Here then we may conclude.

1. That Christ Mystical is not the party in this Covenant; my meaning i^, that
the Members of Christ, or his Spiritual Seed, were not jointly Covenanters with
him here. The People of God are considered as a party in the Covenant of Grace,
with whom God Indents through a Mediator: but they have no such consideration
here. It is true, they are taken notice of in this Covenant, yea, it is for
them that Happiness was contrived and secured in it, but that is as they stand
related to the Terms of it. The Elect are not Agents, but Patients here. There
is nothing in it required of them to be done by them, but all is to be done for
them. They are not Undertakers, but are Undertaken for, Isa. 53. 10. and this
is one difference between these two Covenants.

2. Hence it is the Person of Christ alone that is the Party. It must be either
Christ personal, or Christ Mystical: not the latter as is already declared. He
was alone in this Undertaking. He only was to perform the work of Redemption,
and had no Coadjutor, Isa. 63. 3. Redemption-work is appropriated to him. As he
was to have the whole honor of our deliverance paid unto him, so that none
might share with him in the Glory of it, he took none into Partnership with him
in the work, but took it wholly upon himself: nay there was none in Heaven or
Earth to be found to Undertake in this Business besides him, and therefore he
stood alone in it.

3. Christ merely considered as the Eternal Son of God, and the Second Person
in the Blessed Trinity; and not as God and Man, by the Assumption of our
Nature, is the other party in this Covenant. I know there are weighty Divines
of another Persuasion, who labor by many arguments to prove that the Son of
God, was looked upon as in our nature, or with respect to the Futurition of his
assuming it, in the Indenting of this Covenant: But I suppose that conception
will overthrow the very notion of a Covenant in this matter. The present
conclusion that has now been laid down, will be apparent by these things.

1. This is (as has already been observed) called a Covenant only by way of
Analogy, as it is accommodated to our understanding; it being nothing else but
that Article in the Decree, which concerns the Redemption of Man by Christ.
There must therefore be such an Analogy observed in our conceptions of it, and
it must be Interpreted by notions proper to a Covenant. Now, though the Father
and the Son be one in Essence, and so have not two Wills, but one undivided;
yet they are Two Persons, and as such, are conceived by us as consulting,
deliberateing and concluding about things: hence the Divine Persons are so
represented, Genesis 1. 26. and the reason of it is, because the things done are,
to our manner of conception, the Fruits of Counsel. That there was not only a
Divine Will in the Father sending, but also in the Son consenting to be sent by
him, we must needs entertain; else we can have no rational and regular notion
of a person sending, and of a Person sent. Although these are but one Will, yet
it comes under a distinct consideration by us, though the manner of it be above
our conception.

2. Christ, not only as he is Man, but also as he is Son, is in the Oeconomical
Dispensation of things, Subordinate; to his Father. Though in the Divine
Essence he is Equal as he is God, (for, where there is a complete sameness,
there must needs be a perfect equality) yet in the Economy of the
Administration of the Affairs of his Kingdom, he is Subordinate; The mere
Assumption of our Humanity did not make him so; for his Person was not degraded
by his Incarnation: he was still, in regard of that, In the Form of God, and
counted it no Robbery to be Equal with him, Phil. 2. 6. but he voluntarily
complied with his order. This is the common consent of Orthodox Divines, and
that according to Scripture, Gal. 14. 29. My Father is greater than I. Not as
^he is God, for so he asserts, Joh. 20. 30. My Father and I am one; but as he
is the Father; considering Christ, not as man, but as Son. For this reason he
is said to be Sent by the Father: which must needs have reference to the
Eternal Covenant; and that this relates to his Person, therein appears, because
how else can we Terminate the Incarnation upon the Son, as the Person assuming.

3. Though it be true, that without the Humane Nature Assumed by the Son of
God, the work of Redemption could not have been performed by him (which is the
main stress of the reasonings for the other assertion) yet the Son of God both
could and did undertake for the doing of this work, without the Humane Nature
Assumed. The Incarnation therefore of the Son of God is rather a Condition of
Redemption, or a thing requisite in him who was to be a Redeemer, in order to
his fitness to go through with that great Undertaking; than a quality needed to
render him a party. Though the Son of God could not actually Redeem us, but in
our Nature; yet* without our Nature he could Covenant to Redeem us. Though he
could not perform Obedience, active or passive, to the Law, but in our Nature;
which was only concerned in this Obedience, as to the actual performance of it,
yet he could Undertake without it, to obey the Law in it; and that is
sufficient with respect to his Covenanting about it.

4. The Son of God became man according to Covenant; and therefore is not tobe
considered as man in the act of Covenanting. The Incarnation of the Son of God
was one Article in this Covenant, as will be afterward observed; it was one of
the things undertaken by him, and for which he engaged. The futurition
therefore of his being man depended upon this proposal and undertaking; and for
that reason must needs presuppose it. Nor was it necessary that the person
Covenanting must so be looked upon as man, for the Saving of the Elect before
his actual coming in the Flesh; it was sufficient that the person was designed
to this before time by promise or Covenant.

5. The Covenant of Redemption was an Eternal Covenant; and therefore the party
as such must come under an Eternal consideration, and that could only be in
regard of his being the Eternal Son of God, or with respect to his Divine
Personality. Though in the Decree, Christ is no sooner appointed to be a
Redeemer than he is designed to be man, and therefore this also had an Eternal
consideration in that; because the Decree was from Everlasting: and though in
Eternity there be no Priority or Posteriority of time; for that would be to
confound Time and Eternity: yet in the things themselves, there may be
considered a priority and Posteriority of Nature and Order. Thus the cause is
in order of nature before the effect: thus the Persons Covenanting are in order
before the Covenant it self: and hereupon the Undertaking of the Son of God to
be man, is in order before the futurition of his Incarnation. It has a Causal
Antecedency to the futurity of this Assumption, because that which made it
future from Eternity, was the Compact which past between his Father and him
about it in the Days of Eternity.

CHAP. 5. Of the Rise of this Covenant, or the Grounds of its being made.
IT now follows, in the next place, that we enquire, from whence this Covenant
had its Rise, or what was the ground of the making of it.

This will be best understood by our careful observing where this Covenant is
placed; and that is under the head of Election and it refers unto the means
which were in it Ordained for the accomplishment of it in the Salvation of such
as were Chosen. In the Decree (as in the prudent purposes of all wise Agents)
there is the resolving of the End, and the laying out of the means by which it
is to be advanced. These are inseparable in Gods Purposing, but distinguishable
in the things purposed. In the Decree we find such a thing as Election, wherein
God has appointed men unto Salvation, and also contrived the way in which he
will accomplish it; and to this way does the Covenant of Redemption appertain:
and therefore the rise of it was the mere good Pleasure of God, to advance the
glory of the Riches of his Grace, by the Redemption of his Chosen, and bringing
of them to Enjoy Eternal Life; for which end, he appointed his own Son to be
the Redeemer, and Indented about it in a free Covenant.

Here let it be observed.

1. That a Covenant is not a Natural but a voluntary act. In every Covenant
there is a consent of the parties Covenanting, to the Articles upon which it is
built. Now consent is performed by the Will: and therefore there was no natural
necessity of any such Contract as this between these glorious Persons: so that
it was Gods mere good pleasure that gave Being to it. The very thing about
which it is concerned was arbitrary with God. There was no necessity lying upon
him to save any of the race of fallen man, who had by their own fault destroyed
themselves: and therefore there could be no necessity lying upon him to contrive
and fix a way in which this salvation was to be brought about. God does nothing
necessarily but what he does naturally all his other acts are free. Election is
a voluntary thing. Ephesians. 1 5.

2. The consideration when this Covenant past, tells us that there could be
nothing in the Creature to move these glorious persons to indent it. It must be
mere good pleasure and nothing else, whatsoever can be said of the creature
which men can suppose to have argument in it to move toward such a thing, is
Posteriour to, and Consequent upon the Decree, to which this Covenant belongs.
The object of it was a possible being; which as it had no being in it self, so
was here appointed to have a being, and to pass through all these changes that
have befallen it, being Predestined thereunto. So that we can look at no
consideration on this account, but what falls behind of having any possible
influence into the Covenant. Not the state of integrity, in which man was at
first; for in that state, had he continued in it, he had not needed a Redeemer.
Not the miserable Estate he fell into by the Apostasy; for, though that was a
step toward his Redemption, because it put him into a capacity for it, and
brought him under a necessity of it; yet it could not put God upon thinking of
his Recovery; because his Misery was deserved, and the Justice of God was
concerned in it: and besides, this fell under the Decree of Election, as a
Medium toward the Declaration of Gods rich mercy in saving him. Not the
prevision of any good nature or inclination in him; for there is not any such
thing truly in any sinner by nature, nor the least disposition toward the
acceptance of this Redemption on Gospel-terms, unless God do work it in him:
nor is this always wrought in such as are supposed to be naturally best
inclined, but at Gods pleasure, Romans 9. 18. God therefore could have nothing
out of himself to move him.

3 The ultimate end of Gods desi^n in this Covenant, was the Illustration of
the Glory of his Rich Grace in them ^^at are saved, so we are told. Ephesians. 1. 6.
God is his own last end in all his works of Efficiency, and therefore had that
ultimate respect in all his Decrees. There are several respects to his Glory
which his several Works do bear: that of Fallen Man's Salvation was peculiarly
designed for the Exaltation of the Praise of his Grace: That this Article might
have a special manifestation by it. Hither then Election had an eye, and
consequently, all the Contrivances that were laid for the bringing about of the
Salvation to which men were Elected, were measured accordingly. Infinite Wisdom
sought out the best way to make this Attribute to shine in its Luster so as
might be admirable; and it contrived this, which is ratified in this Covenant.

4. Because there was a wonderful Love at work in it, to those that were
Redeemed; hence the ^is;e of this Covenant may well be assigned to the love of
God which he bare from Eternity to his Elect. He Chose them, and so Covenanted
with his Son that he should Redeem them; and why did he so? it was because he
loved them. The reason of this love is his good pleasure. The first act wherein
this love was expressed, was in Choosing us in Christ, and Covenanting with him to
Redeem us; in which he laid a sure and firm foundation for our Salvation: Gods
sending of Cbrist is for this reason ascribed to his unparalleled love Joh. 3.
16. 1. Joh 4. 10.

5. That which streins this love up to the highest degree, is that it was a
free and deliberate act, both on the part of God the Father deputing, and of
God the Son accepting and undertaking in this business, we cannot conceive how
there should be any other way in which grace could possibly more shine forth
than in Christ's Coming upon man's necessity, to do and die for him. A greater
love than this cannot possibly be thought of, than that God should not spare
His Own Son, and that Christ should not withhold himself. The Apostles argument
concludes this to be the greatest gift, Romans 8. 32. Now the putting of this
into a Covenant adds Emphasis to it: that it should not only be thought of,
but indented for, and firmly Ratified in an Everlasting and unchangable
Compact: that thus the sinners eternal salvation should be made sure against
all that might be supposed to offer to prevent it. It was therefore that Grace
might appear to be Grace indeed, and his love might be commended to us as most
surprising, that he put it into such a method, which Infinite wisdom concluded
upon as most proper to set it off by: and therefore, when God would call us to
the contemplation of his great love to us, he leads us up thus far. Jer. 31. 3.

CHAP. 6. When this Covenant was made.
THE next enquiry is when this Covenant was made? This question seems to be
here superfluous, since we have already taken notice that it was an Eternal
Transaction: and being before time, it must needs also be without beginning:
Jesus Christ therefore speaking of this design, says, I was set up from
Everlasting, Prove. 8. 23. and for this reason it is said of him, that he was
Foreordained before the Foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1. 20. It was agreed
upon before time was between God the Father and the Son, that he should in time
accomplish the Salvation of the Elect; but yet because, though in eternal Acts
there is no succession, yet, as we before observed, there is an order, it may
not be unprofitable to consider in what order this Covenant stands, and that
for two reasons.

1. Because of the Sub^apsarians, who though they acknowledge the Eternal
Predestination of men to an Everlasting State of Happiness or Misery, do yet
place it in order after man's Apostasy, and build it upon that.

2. Because of the forementioned Judgment of those who presuppose the Decree of
Christ's Incarnation, in order to the making of this Covenant with him
considered as God and Man; wherein they do evidently make that Decree
Antecedent to, and wholly distinct from this Covenant. Both of these do
certainly misplace the Covenant, and give it a wrong station.

As to the former of these it may suffice to make these few Remarks.

1. That he who will rightly conceive of a Decree, must reduce all that refers
to it to the two heads of End and Mean^. There is nothing that belongs to any
Purpose, but it is either the thing purposed, or the way in which it is to be
compassed: and therefore one of these two will take in whatsoever can be
mentioned concerning it. But this is a principle against which I apprehend no
rational objection can be made, being adapted to the common sentiments of
Mankind.

2. That Gods design in his Decree was his own Glory; and that which Election
had a peculiar respect to, was the Glory of his Grace. All Gods works of
Efficiency were to set forth his perfections, and thereby exalt his Declarative
Glory; which he accordingly disposed in his Eternal Decree, and has a respect
to in his Efficiency, Prove. 16. 4. In the choice which he made of men to
Salvation, he contrived the advancement of that precious Attribute of Grace.
This is pointed to as the end of all, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. It was to the praise of
the Glory of his Grace.

3. That the object of this Decree was Ens possibile, a possible Being. All
Beings are either the first, or from the first. The first Being can be but one,
and that is God. He only enjoyed a never Beginning Eternity; all other are the
offspring of time, before which they had no Existence: and because they were to
be from him, not by any necessity, but by a voluntary act, hence, God being a
Cause by Counsel in all his free and transient acts, there must a Purpose pass
with him in order to their Being: Antecedent to which purpose, in our
conceptions, there could be no other consideration of the thing but as a mere
possibility for it was by virtue of this purpose that it Past into a Futurition.

4 All therefore that concerns this possible being in order to its reaching the
designed end, belongs to the means. Hitherto, in respect of the Subject under
our present consideration, viz. man, refer; His Creation; the state of
integrity in which he was made; the Covenant of works which God put him under;
the permission of the Apostasy by which he fell under the Curse of that
Covenant, and so came to stand in need of Redemption. Either these things
belongs to the Decree, or else there was no Decree about them; and so they fell
out besides Gods intention; or else we must assign two Decrees to God, and so
two ends, and two orders, of Media respecting the same Subject; and so we must
suppose that God lost his end in the First, which put him upon a new
contrivance in the latter. How unbecoming it is to entertain such conceptions
about the great God, let any Christian Judge. If then they appertain to the
Decree, it must be either to the end or the means: not to the end, for that is
the glory of Grace, which is not the things themselves, but that which Results
from them: they then are but steps to it, and so must be of the means.

5. All the means as they refer to the Decree, are Coordanate. In the execution
indeed they are Subalternate, but not so in the purpose: I mean that though
they are put into an order in the Decree, yet in the act of Decreeing they are
all together. They are a Chain linked in one, and do all together make but one
entire Medium; nor can we rationally conceive them to be here separable. If we
consider the Permission of Man to fall, antecedent to the Future Coming of
Christ to Redeem him, we can in no sense allow it to be a designed medium of
the exaltation of free grace. If we consider of Christ as appointed to the work
of Redemption, without the consideration of Man's Apostasy, we cannot conceive
what he should come for. And for this reason the Covenant of Redemption cannot
in order follow the Decree of permitting man to fall, but must be together with
it.

As to the Second, let it be remembered, that it has already bin made to
appear, that the Covenant was made with the Second Person, and that his
Incarnation was one thing put into the Covenant: so that it was this Covenant
which gave Futurition to it: and therefore to suppose a Dtcree for the son of
God to become man, antecedent to, and distinct from this Covenant, is not only
Superfluous; for what need is there of two acts to pass for one and the same
thing? but it is indeed to vacate the very Notion of the Covenant, by taking
away the whole that belongs to it, and assigning it to a Decree supposed to be
distinct from it: for if we look upon Christ as God-Man, or Decreed to be so,
we must conceive that he has voluntarily Undertaken it, for he was not so
necessarily: and then we must also suppose it was for something; and that must
be in order to his being a Redeemer; for on no other account did he ever design
it: and if this be the Covenant it self, how should it be before it? Besides,
the Decree being (as has already been observed) not a personal but essential
act, we may therefore safely and intelligently say, That one God in Three
Persons, in Decreeing of the means of man's Salvation, stated and ratified this
Covenant.

CHAP. 7. Whether it be a Covenant of Works, or of Grace.
IT may furthermore be Enquired, whether this Covenant of Redemption is to be
accounted a Covenant of Works, or of Grace; and here let me premise: That it is
certainly a Covenant distinct from both of those which ordinarily come under
these Denominations among us. It is neither that which was made with Adam in
Innocence; nor that which is made with us in and through a Mediator, for in
both of these man is of one party; whereas he is not so in this, but only a
Subject in respect of which it is made: But if the enquiry be, under whether of
these considerations it is to be looked on in it self, it may be readily
replied, that according to its respects, it may be accounted either the one or
the other. Here then we are to look upon it, either with reference to the
matter of it, and the terms between the parties, or to the end and design of it.

1. If we consider the matter of it, and the terms which were agreed on between
the Parties Covenanting, it fully agrees to a Covenant of Works; and indeed it
bare a proper respect to the Covenant of Works which past between God and man
at first. for Christ was to be the Second Adam; and therefore he was to do that
for us which the other failed of doing, and to restore us from that misery,
which he by his failure brought upon us: hence that, 1 Cor. 15. 22. As in Adam
all die even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But yet it was not the same
Covenant with that; not only because he was a diverse party, but also because
he was differently concerned: for Adam was only to obtain the Blessing by his
Active Obedience, and to fall under the Curse by his Disobedience, and that
irrecoverably as to any power in himself, whereas the Son of God was to merit
by his doing, and to make Satisfaction by his Suffering. But yet it ran in the
tenor of a Covenant of Works, in which there is a work to be done, and a Reward
to be given on the account of it. He was to purchase and pay for what he had,
and that to the full price: on which account the Inheritance is said to be
Purchased, Ephesians. 1. 14. and he is said to give himself a ransom, 1. Tim 2. 6.
but this will be more fully spoken to, with the reason of it hereafter.

2. If we consider the end and whole design of this Covenant, it issues in
being a Covenant of Grace. Though it were so laid that Grace might appear
consistent with Justice, and therefore there was a work to be done for the
making way for it, yet it carried Grace in the aim of it, as will appear; for,

1. The last end of it was for the advancement of Rich Grace. Ephesians. 1. 5. 6. and
the very Satisfaction made unto Justice in order to it, puts a great luster
upon this Grace, in as much as Christ was to remove that obstacle out of the
way by his obedience which man's sin had thrown into it. It was that God might
express his free and undeserved favor to a number whom he had Chosen to be
made partakers in it: that he might bestow upon man a Salvation which he never
Labored for; bring him to an heaven he never earned; enrich him with a portion
which he could never have Purchased; and free him from a Misery which would
else have Swallowed him up for ever, and which he had Procured to himself.

2. Hence all the means which were agreed upon between these parties for this
end, were the contrivances of this Grace. The whole Plot was so laid out, that
in all of it there should be the Beams of Divine-Love and Favor shining forth:
for,

1. The whole provision of a Redeemer was of Grace: whether we consider it on
the Fathers part Proposing the thing, and accepting of the way: He was under no
necessity to offer such a Proposal; it was absolutely free, yea, that he would
be reconciled to sinners in such a way, was Grace The case is Criminal, man by
his fall becomes a Delinquent; Justice might have fallen upon him, and refused
to have taken any other in Exchange. Though the Satisfaction be valuable
enough, yet the receiving it thus is voluntary, therefore it is Grace. Had God
said the sinner himself shall Die, it had been just: or if we consider it on
the Sons part undertaking it; he had no obligation lying upon him by any kind
of necessity; he was God blessed for ever before: his Divine Essential Glory
could not be augmented by it in the least, he had no Consanguinity to move him,
for it was the Son of God that Covenanted, he took up the kindred or relation
by Covenant: see for this Phil 2. 6. 7. it was therefore of mere grace.

2. The work it self which he undertook to perform, considered with relation to
this those for whom he was to do it, was also Grace. The Covenant of works
requires of those that are under it, either to Do or to Suffer: but that when
we fell short of doing, and have thereby exposed ourselves unto Suffering,
another should interpose, and undertake to do and Suffer for us, this it
requires not. The Son of God was in himself naturally under no Law, and
therefore his putting of himself into such a condition as to be under it, and
this that so he might do the greatest kindness, must needs be of Grace; and
that was the very design of this Covenant, Romans 8. 8. God Commends his love,
in that whiles we were yet sinners, Christ Died for us. so, Gal. 4. 4. he was
made of a woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the law.

3 All the proffers of Salvation, which are in the Gospel made unto Sinners,
are the results of this Covenant: Here they have their Foundation. We find that
all the good that is t^ndered to Fallen men in the Gospel, is offered freely.
We must indeed come for it; but without money, and without price, Isa. 55. 1.
we must take it indeed, if we will have it, but it must be freely, Rev. 22 27.
But whence is it that there are such liberal offers made to the children of
men? why it flows from the Covenant of Redemption, and had it not been for
this, there had never any such ^^ews been heard of in the World. Here was the
Foundation laid for all the Saving Grace which is Dispensed in time to any of
the children of men; and so it must needs be a Covenant of Grace.

CHAP. 8. Who are Covenanted for?
THE Title put upon this Covenant, viz: of Redemption, supposes a Subject unto
whom this Redemption is to be applied, and consequently for whom it was
undertaken. But it is requisite that we Fix the due limits here, or else we
shall be at a great loss in an Essential Point relating unto this Covenant, for
only the Redeemed, and all of them are to receive the benefits of it; here then
let these things be considered.

1. It supposes subject that stands in need of Redemption. To have undertaken
it for any other, had been Supervacaneous. And there could be no other such
monument but such a creature as is forfeited, and fallen into misery, and
cannot get out ^^ it again, till it be bought out, and rescued from it, Romans 5.
6.

2. There are two sorts of creatures that are reduced to this exigency, viz:
fallen Angels and men. As to the Angels which kept their first station, though
they needed Confirmation, yet not Redemption: and that this Confirmation of
theirs does derive from this Covenant to them, is nowhere in Scripture so much
as insinuated. But those once Angels, now Devils are become miserable by their
woeful revolt from God, being fallen under a Righteous Condemnation; and
therefore they so far need Redemption, as that without it they must needs be
Eternally miserable, and all mankind are by the Apostasy come under this
infelicity: they are a company of dead Creatures, by virtue of that sin, the
Guilt whereof lies heavy upon them, Romans 5. 12.

3. The Fallen Angels, or Devils, stand no way related unto this Covenant: but
only men. God never thought of, or contrived a way for the Jayl-Delivery of
Devils, but has left them hopelesly under the Sentence which fell upon them
when they rebelled against him, and therefore their misery is beyond all hopes
of remedy: they are said to be Reserved in Everlasting Chains, Jude, 6. But God
had more Gracious thoughts for man: and in this respect we find, that the Son
of God in pursuit of this Covenant, meddled not with the Assumption of the
Angelical nature, but took that only of Humanity, Heb. 2. 16. And the reason of
this was because he had not covenanted to redeem Ang^l^ but only men.

4. That all mankind universally were not included in this Covenant, so as that
the Son of God undertook to pay the Redemption price for them. How far there
was some benefit to redound from it to mankind, I here dispute not: But that
Christ became Surety to pay the Price for all, is not to be believed. As to the
notion or distinction, of his redeeming all Sufficiently, and only some
Effectually, it cannot be reconciled to sense, how then shall it be believed?
It is one thing to pay a Price of sufficient value to redeem all, and another
thing to pay it for their Redemption: and to suppose that he did it for this
end, and yet they should perish at the last, is not only besides, but against
Scripture, Joh. 6. 39. This is the Fathers Will that has sent me, that of all
that he has given me, I should Lose nothing; yea, if we consider the nature of
the Covenant, it will evidence it to be inconsistent. The end of it has been
shown to be for the Glory of Gods Grace, in the Salvation of his Redeemed: this
Covenant was a Medium to that end, and therefore all that were so Covenanted
for must certainly attain it, or else the Covenant so far loses its design.
This therefore is that which Christ Intercedes for in behalf of those whom he
has Redeemed, Joh. 17. 24. these are they whom his Father gave him, that he
might Redeem them.

5 That Those whom he Covenanted for, were a Definite Company of particular
persons. Not only was the number of them agreed upon in this Transaction, but
the individuals also were Determined. Here observe.

1. The Covenant did not run Illimitedly. That he should pay a price for all,
and that offers should be made to all, and that as many as would accept of
them, might be made to partake in the benefits of it, was not the form in which
this Covenant ran: There is indeed such an offer made in the Promulgation of
the Covenant of Grace by the Gospel, to all unto whom it comes on such a
condition: but, neither is this to all men, nor yet does the Covenant of
Redemption run so. and there is this reason for it among others, because it is
one Article in this Covenant, that whom Jesus Christ does Redeem, he shall
save, and in order to it bring them to himself, John. 6. 37. and but for this,
none would come to him, vorse. 44. and then where would be the seed that should
serve him, and be counted to him for a generation?

2. Nor did this Covenant run upon the Previous qualities of m^n before
Conversion. It did not say that such sorts of persons should be redeemed, and
others not: but it took in, as God saw meet, all sorts of persons, Jews and
Greeks, Barbarians and Scythians; of every age, sex and disposition, some that
proved civil before they were savingly changed; others who before they were
brought home to Christ, were the vilest and most debauched of mankind. This
appears to have been so, by the event, for which we have plentiful Scripture
Testimony; and therefore it assures us, that it was not upon these terms that
it stood-

3. But it took in so many Individual persons, chosen according to the
Sovereign pleasure of God. Hither the Apostle limits it, Ephesians. 1. 11. The Lambs
Book of Life, in which names are written, mentioned, Rev. 21. 27. refers
properly to this Covenant: and they are persons who are written here; they have
their names in it. The Son of God knew from eternity whom he was to Redeem, and
God knew them. This is the Foundation of which the Apostle speaks, which has
such a Seal upon it, 2. Tim. 2. 19. who are his, this Indigitates the very
persons: Our High Priest therefore had their names written upon his brestplate
when he was to offer the Sacrifice for them, and make expiation in their behalf
in the Holy Place.

CHAP. 9. What are the Articles of the Covenant?
IT Belongs to the nature of a Covenant that there are terms agreed upon, and
concluded between the parties in it; or something in which each obliges
himself to the performance of: and by the distinct knowledge of these it is,
that we come to have an insight into the particular nature of any Covenant. It
is therefore needful that we take the account of the Articles of the Covenant
of Redemption, that so we may discover the main and essential difference
between that and the Covenant of Grace, to prevent our confounding of them one
with the other. Here let it be observed that this is one of those Covenants
which is made between equals and therein is diverse from the other, which is
made between a Superior, and inferior* They are equal, whether we consider
them in their nature, Phil. 2. 6. or if we consider the things arising from it;
the Glory of One God in Three Persons is the design which was laid in it: or if
we consider the mutual obligation: they stand equally bound each of them to the
terms which he Undertakes. Now for a more distinct and particular view of these
Articles, it may be Enquired,

1. What were the common Terms between both the Parties? 2. What were the
Obligations lying upon each Party by himself?
1. What were the common Terms between both Parties?

A. They were such as these that follow, viz.

1. That a certain number of Mankind should be made the Monuments of Rich
Grace: or, That the Glorious Attribute of Grace should be exalted in the
Eternal Salvation of a Definite Company of men; and to this Article belongs the
consideration of man's being Created in his Integrity; put under a (...); and
permitted to fall from it, and make himself miserable, in order to the making
way for the Illustration of this Grace. That such a thing should be, was
voluntary on Gods part, and therefore there past a Decree for it: and this
being Essential, it belongs to all the Three persons. Hence the Scripture
speaks of men's being Ordained or appointed to Glory, and of their being Elected
or Chosen to the Kingdom: which expressions, denote this eternal designation,
which was agreed upon, and so past between God, Father, Son, and Spirit; see'
1. These. 5, 9. Mark. 13. 20. 1 These. 1. 4. 2 These. 2. 13. and all this was with
an eye to the glorifying of the Grace of God, Ephesians 1. 6.

2 That in order to the Illustration of this Grace in man's Salvation, the first
Covenant should be Satisfied in all the demands of it, That whatsoever that
required should be fully responded. The consideration of man's being under a
Law-Covenant, and forfeiting himself to the Curse of it, being supposed in the
former Article; there is a Proviso, that the Covenant shall not be baulked, and
that therefore the Salvation intended should make no breach upon, nor offer any
violence to the Rule of Justice; but that it should in all points be complied
withal, and man's Salvation be so effected as that no jot or tittle of the Law
should pass: for so it is brought about Math. 5. 18. and that Justice and Peace
should agree in one, Psalm 85. 10. that God should be Just in Justifying of the
sinner. Romans 3. 26.

3 That in order to the accomplishment of this great affair, there should be a
suitable and sufficient Redeemer provided, who should undertake this work, and
accomplish it in all things that were requisite for the completing of it. The
agreement about a Redeemer still belongs to the common consent among the three
Divine Persons, according to our distinct conception of it; for it is an act of
absolute Divine Sovereignty to accept of Satisfaction at the hands of any
besides the proper Offender, the case being Criminal: it must therefore proceed
from that Sovereign Will of his to determine that it should be so, from whence
alone it could be a thing acceptable to God, when therefore Christ appeared in
the Execution of his Work, God declared his acceptableness to him by a voice
from Heaven, Mat. 3. 17.

2. What were the Articles peculiar, or the Engagements lying upon each party
by himself?

A. Such there were, and here in general we are to observe: That though the
Parties were equal in their Covenanting, yet in the Covenant; one Party
Indented to be Inferior to the other. The Son of God was to take to himself a
Nature, in which he was to be his Fathers Servant, hence he is so called, Isa.
42. 1. and because there was something to be done by him first, in order to his
meriting of that which he was to receive of his Father for it; this may first
come under our consideration: Here then

1. We may consider the Engagement which the Son took upon himself. The work of
Redemption was laid upon his Shoulders, he was the party agreed upon, and
consenting to take that Province upon him in his own person: and it may suffice
to speak generally of this, and so his Undertaking may be comprised in two
things.

1. He accepted of and took upon him to perform the work of Redemption, and
thereby he received the Relative Title of Redeemer from Eternity. To this the
Scripture bears witness, when it tells us, that he was the Lamb slain from the
Foundations of the World, Rev. 13. 8. and when it says that we are Chosen in
him, to obtain Redemption by him, Ephesians, 1. 4, 7. which Scriptures clearly
express his designation to this Office (...) Work, and this being personal,
hence there was, not only the Father Propounding, but the Son also consenting
and accepting: so that this amounts properly to one Article of the Covenant:
for we cannot rationally suppose a person free, sovereign, and under no natural
obligation to it, to be designed, constituted, and set apart to an Office,
without his own free and voluntary consent. Hereupon it follows, that on this
very score or account, all the old Testament believers, dying before his
appearing in the flesh, went to heaven upon the credit of his undertaking;
having their sins discounted, and their happiness conferred upon them, in the
merit of that satisfaction and obedience which he had engaged for.

2 He undertook and engaged to do all that which was requisite for the
performance and accomplishment of this Redemption, and this is necessarily
inferred upon the former. He who takes upon him to do any work, engages
himself to do all that without which the work cannot be done. What this was
will appear, both by taking a view of that which was needful for man's recovery
from misery, and being restored to favor and happiness; and by observing what
it was that the son of God did actually perform. Whatever Christ did go
thorough here, was according to the foreknowledg and determinate Counsel of
God.; i. e. the Covenant between God the Father and the Son: and this was
summarily in two things

1 That he would assume to his person the nature of man, and thereby put
himself into a capacity of performing Redemption work. That the Covenant was
made with the Son of God not considered as God man, but only as Son, has been
already made to appear. This undertaking then is to be considered as an Article
belonging to it, and it must needs be so, for the Son of God could not be
appointed to be a Man but by a Covenant, because his consent was absolutely
requisite in such an appointment, it being a Covenant between equals, as is
granted on all hands: hence we must either unnecessarily multiply Covenants, or
else assign it unto this. The Scripture mentions no more but three covenants in
which God is concerned about man; viz: that of works that of Grace and this of
Redemption; and it must belong to this, if to any of these; for in the other
two, men themselves are parties. Besides, the Humane Nature to be assumed needs
not to be respected as Covenanting, but only ^ Covenanted for, inasmuch as the
Divine Nature assuming the Humane, wrought it into a perfect subordination to
itself: for it was not to have an Humane Personality, but to be of the Person
of the Son of God, and to be an organ or instrument in and with which the Son
of God was to do this work. It was a body, i. e. (an Humanity) Prepared for
him, Heb. 10. 5.

2 That in this nature he would become sponsor or surety for Gods Elect, and so
put himself under the law, and stand responsible to it for all that was
demanded of them whether of active obedience as they were Gods subjects, or
Passive, as they were sinners. Hence that Gal. 4. 4. 5. He was not only to be
in our nature, but also in our stead, he was to do that we might be happy, and
to die that we might be delivered from misery. This is included in Isa. 53. 10.
Thus he became a surety by way of exchange, not as bound jointly with us, but
as bound alone for us. Gods Holiness did expect Obedience, and his Justice did
exact Satisfaction from him upon our account. for this reason is he called, not
only a Lamb, but a Lamb slain from the foundation, Rev 13. 8. for then was his
death agreed upon and fully concluded: hence when they who were the instruments
of it, had w^^^^ed their malice upon him, the (...) of God acquaints us that it
was according to Appointment, a thing determined long before, Acts 2. 23. the
whole work that Christ did upon Earth, was nothing else but a fulfilling of
this Covenant: he did not do it by any compulsion, but voluntarily; so he tells
us, Joh. 10. 17, 18.

2. The obligations which God the Father bound himself in, in this Covenant,
were of two sorts.

1. Such as relate to Christ's help and Encouragement in the Undertaking and
Management of the work of man's Redemption: and these are principally three.

1. The Investing him with such Offices as were needful for the discharge of
this great Work. It was meet that the Son of God should come with Authority.
There were great things to be done in the performance of this Business; and the
acceptance of all depended on the good pleasure of God: The Redeemer therefore
must not only be designed but Invested. The Son of God was, in our Nature to be
Inaugurated in his Mediatorly Function; hence his being Anointed King, was
according to the Decree, Psalm. 2. 9, 8. and hereupon also he is said to be an
Everlasting Priest, Psalm. 110. 7. and a designed Prophet, Isa. 42. 6, 7. for
these Prophetical Predictions concerning him were discoveries of the Tenor of
this Covenant.

2. The fitting of him for this work, with all the things which were requisite
for his being every way furnished for the discharge of it, else his Offices had
been in vain. God is not wont to send a Messenger without Legs. If God calls
any to special Service, he furnishes him, and this was promised to the Son: he
was therefore to have an Humane Nature Hypostatically United to his Person,
without which he could not have actually appeared in the Business of man's
Redemption, or possibly have stood our Surety, according to the Tenor of the
first Covenant. This is by a Synecdoche called a Body, and his Father is said
to prepare it for him, Heb. 10. 5. and this refers to that ancient Covenant in
which there was such a provision made as is expressed in Psalm. 40. 7. He was also
to have this Humane Nature fitted and qualified with all the necessary
Endowments, whereby it might be capacitated for the doing of what was
requisite, and to this end was his Unction promised, Isa. 61 1, 2 whereby he
was not only In^ug^r^ted in his Offices, but also his Humane Nature was
Sanctified, and all those Graces which were needful for him in his active and
passive Obedience* ^ere put into him in an overflowing measure, Psalm. 45. 8.
Joh. 3. 34.

3. The affording to him all the supplies of all constant assistance in his
Work, that so it might not fail in his Hand. It was a great work, and it was a
frail nature in which it was to be performed; for this cause it would need
mighty assistance to support or uphold it so as not to ^ail. There was Infinite
Wrath which our Nature was to sustain, and therefore a mighty arm must be
underneath to bear it up, el^e it would have been broken in pieces by it.
Almighty Power therefore did stand engaged for him, whereby a good issue of
this Affair was secured. God promised him that he should not sink under the
weight of it, Psalm. 89. 21. Isa. 42. 4, 6.

2. Such as relate to the Fruit and Efficacy of his Undertaking: and these are
comprehended in two things.

1. The acceptance that this work should find at the Fathers Hands. We have
already observed, that not only the Valuableness of the Satisfaction offered,
but also the Acceptance of it with God, is to be considered in the making of it
a Redemption: because it is at Gods liberty whether he will let the Prisoner of
Justice go free, and receive another to stand in his room. Now God promised to
his Son in this Covenant, that he would take content in this Satisfaction of
his; that it should be a very grateful or pleasing thing to him; and
accordingly it is expressed concerning him, Isa. 42. 1.

2. The Reward which he should receive for this work of his. There was a Reward
Indented for, and Christ had an Eye to it in this Work, and Improved it for his
Relief, when he was under the sorest Agonies of Temptation, Heb. 12. 2. and
that was.

1. In regard of himself personally; that he should receive the highest honor
and glory in our nature, Psalm. 89. 27. this therefore was propounded after the
nature of a reward, Isa. 53. 12. Phil. 2. 8, 9. Yea, such a Reward is promised,
as shall give him full content, Isa. 53. 11. we find that his Work and
Recompense are put together, Psalm. 110. ult. He was to have the Everlasting.
Honor of this Work ascribed to him, and to Triumph gloriously

2. In regard of those who were to be Redeemed by him. As he Sanctified himself
for their Sakes, and undertook to Redeem them by Satisfying for them, as a
fruit of his Everlasting Love to (...) the Father promised him that he should
Enjoy them as a Purchase, and that they should be a Generation of his Praise,
Psalm. 22. 30. Isa. 53. 10. He was assured that not one of all those whom he was
to Dye for, should ever be Lost, or finally miscarry, but they should all of
them be brought to the Possession of that Glory which he should procure for
them: that they should be his Spouse; and therefore we have him claiming this
Reward, as that which he had Indented for, Joh. 17. 24. and these are the
Summary Articles of this Wonderful Covenant.

CHAP. 10. The necessity of this Covenant, in order to Man's Salvation.
IT may be enquired what ground there was for such a Covenant as this? or, what
reference Man's Salvation has to it, and dependence upon it? and the enquiry
into this will serve to set forth the Rich Grace of God to man, in those
Ancient Thoughts he had for him; and here in general it may be asserted, That
there was a necessity for such a Transaction to pass. But that this necessity
may be rightly stated; I shall first observe what sort of necessity it is, and
then clear it up.

1. A thing may be said to be necessary in a double respect, viz. Absolute and
Hypothetical; and there is a great difference between these.

1. Absolute Necessity, which may also be called Natural, is such as flows from
the very nature and being of the thing. Thus we say the fire burns necessarily,
because it is a natural quality of it, and inseparable from the form.

Thus it is natural and necessary for God to Love Himself; for the Father to
Beget the Son, for the Holy Ghost to proceed from them both. Whereas there are
other acts of God which are not Natural, but merely voluntary; as the Creation
of the World, the making these and those sorts of Creatures, and many the like.

2. Hypothetical or Conditionate Necessity is when upon the supposition of one
thing to be done, there is something necessary in order to it without which it
cannot be done: so that though it be not necessary to do the thing, yet if he
will do it, he must needs do thus or so in order to the accomplishing of it;
and this necessity flows from the connection of things one with another. An end
is not attained without the use of means; and there are means that are proper,
on which the attaining of the end has dependence, or without which it cannot
be reached; so that if he will not miss of his design, a person must
necessarily use the means that are so connected unto it; and when there are
various means or diverse ways to compass the design, the necessity is more loose
and disjunct, it being indifferent as to this or that, but yet it must of
necessity be one of them. But when the Medium is but one, it is then a
restrained necessity; either this way or not at all. Now the Necessity under
consideration is not of the first sort, or Absolute, but of the Second, viz.
Conditionate.

2. For the more clearing up of this, let it be considered.

1. That God was under no natural necessity to Save any of Fallen Man's
Posterity. There was no tie of Nature upon him, to give a pardon to, and bestow
Salvation upon any of that Ruined Progeny. He might have Damned them all,
without any injury to himself, or wrong done to them; and that he did not ^o
do, is a fruit not of Compulsion, nor of Nature, but of his mere Good Will,
Romans 9. 18. No man can give any other reason of the thing it self, than that
which he gives of the choice of the Subject in particular. The same reason why
he chooses this man, and not the other, is to be assigned why he chooses any at
all, and that is, because it so seemed good unto him, Mat. 11. 24. for they
were all equally capable.

2. That hence God was not under any natural necessity of engaging in this
Covenant, for the bringing about the Redemption of men. If the effecting of the
thing were arbitrary to him, then the Indenting about the doing of it must
needs be so too. If God might have left the whole Race of Mankind to have
perished for ever; and that he does not so do is contingent, i. e. free and
voluntary; than whatsoever refers unto the designation or appointment of it in
the Decree must proceed from the Sovereignty of his Will: and hitherto this
Covenant is to be referred. Yea, indeed if it had been natural, the notion of a
Covenant made about it had been impertinent; the fixing of a Decree concerning
it, had been superfluous; for what occasion is there for a Decree about natural
actions?

3. That natural Necessity destroys the very nature of a Covenant. For, a
Covenant is a voluntary obligation between persons about things wherein they
enjoy a freedom of Will, and have a power to choose or refuse. It is a
deliberate thing wherein there is a Counsel and a Consent between Rational and
free Agents. It is true, a person may be a Subject, and so under the Duty of
Consenting in a Covenant; so was Adam at the First: but still the act of
consent it self, is the act of a Cause by Counsel; and therefore it is not
absolutely necessary, so as that he could not but do it.

4. Whether there be a natural or absolute necessity, in regard of the Nature
of Gods Justice and Holiness, that there should be a counterprice paid to make
satisfaction for sin, in order to the sinners salvation, may be disputed, I
know this assertion is by some defended against the Socianians, and as stiffly
denied by other who are no Socinians, and suppose that there are other things
in Scripture sufficient to confute them. That because God is naturally Holy and
Just, therefore he must needs punish sin either in the Sinner, or in his
Surety, seems not to be evident. To say that God could not by his absolute
Lordship have Saved a Sinner without a Mediator, looks as if it laid him under
a necessity beyond what the Scripture will warrant. It is true;

1. That Holiness and Justice are Divine Essential Perfections. Every Attribute
of God, is God displaying of himself to us after such a manner: and though
these are manifold as they come to our understandings, yet they are in him one
and the same undivided Being. They are the things by which he makes himself
known to the Creature: and if he were not such an one in himself they would be
a false Representation, which is blasphemy to suppose. If there were no
Creature to be the Subject of the Application of these, yet God would be, and
is everlastingly Holy and Just: for if he will make himself appear to be so in
his Works, it is because he is so in his Nature.

2. That in all his Works of Efficiency, he aims at the Declaration of the
Glory of his own Perfections. What else is the Declarative Glory of God, but a
display of his Essential Glory to the Creature, so far as he sees meet? He had
all in himself before there was a World; but he would have a World to be a
Mirror of his Perfections; and those to be in it who should be able to read
them, and acknowledge him therein; and therefore these are to declare it, Psalm.
19. and he is said to be known by them.

3. That hence he contrived all in a con^ecency for the expressing of his
Essential Natural Perfections, and that by his Infinite Wisdom. It must needs
be acknowledged and asserted, that God had a respect to those Attributes of
his, which he would make known to the World, in the laying out of all his Works
of Efficiency in the Eternal Decree. Hence we have eminent displays of Gods
Holiness, in the Displeasure that he discovers against Sin; and of his Justice
in that he will not let it go unpunished. He therefore orders his Works so as
these shall have their remarkable manifestation, Psalm. 145. 17.

4. That the nature of Sin, as Sin, most properly appears in that it is against
God, and therefore cannot but be hateful to him in regard of his Holiness.
Holiness is God bound for his own Glory, and therefore set against whatsoever
stands in the way of it. We cannot then conceive, but that upon supposition of
Sin committed, God is provoked, and cannot possibly approve of it, bat abhors
i., Psalm. 5. 4, 5. Heb. 1. 13.

5. That there is an eminent display of Gods Holiness and Justice, in the
witness which he bears against Sin, by resolving to punish it either in the
Sinner or his Surety. Certainly God does herein appear to be Glorious in
Holiness, and eminently Just. It gives a clear and manifest declaration of it
to the Conviction of all: and indeed, were it not for that it so does, God
would never have put things in this way; for the Affair was contrived for this
very end: and Gods manifold and unsearchable Wisdom appears in his contriving
these means, so admirably suited to the advancement of his end, Psalm. 9. 16.

But that from hence the Punishment of Sin with Eternal Death, proceeds from a
^atural necessity, is a further enquiry. That ^in deserves it, is not to be
doubted, but that God is naturally obliged to punish it so, and cannot be God
unless he does, needs further consideration: and there are these things which
may be thought of about it.

1. That Holiness and Justice are considered in Efficiency as Relative
Attributes. ^ivines distinguish of those Attributes which appear to us in the
consideration of Gods Sufficiency; and those that are discovered in his
Efficiency. These latter are called Relative, because there is a Relation to
the Creature evidently appears in the display of them; and such are th^se.
H^liness is seen in Gods managing all the Affairs of the Creature so as to gain
Glory to himself by all. Justice, in Gods standing by his own Law, and the
terms of the Covenant which past between him, and Rational Beings: so that
these do suppose the Reasonable Creature as the Subject in which they are
manifested, and a Transaction between God and them, as the ground of that
proceeding: and therefore the declaration or display of them terminates on the
Creature.

2. That the punishment of Sin according to these, must also terminate on the
Creature. For God to Hate Sin, may be conceived to be in himself: but to punish
it, must have a Subject on which it falls, and that is a Creature, who is
punished: and this proceeds from the Relative consideration of these
Attributes, with regard to the Declaration of them. Punishment is the Execution
of a just Sentence unon a delinquent: and we may conceive Justice to be in God
Essentially as a Perfection; and consequently anger, which is nothing else but
his just displeasure at Sin: but not so punishment, which is a transient thing,
and passes on the Subject punished.

3. That hence punishment is to be reckoned to Gods works of Efficiency, of
which the Rule given by Divines is, Omne opus ad extra est Contingens. That all
Gods Acts or Works out of himself are Contingent, as they are opposed to
necessity of nature; i. e. they might have been, or they might not have been.
That they are voluntary acts of Choice, and depend on his Will. Whatsoever
concerns any Second Being, was at Gods pleasure, as to his treating with it,
and his Dispensations of himself unto it.

4. Hence all the Works of Efficiency are the Executions of a Free, Decree,
Ephesians. 1. 11. It refers to all Gods Dispensations both of Creation and
Providence: whatsoever God does by necessity of nature, needed not to have past
into a Decree. The Decree is acknowledged by all the Orthodox, to be a
voluntary Deliberation and Determination of a most free agent, prescribing to
himself an Idea or method for the order and way in which he will carry on those
Affairs he intends to manage, and although there is a sort of freedom which is
consistent with necessity; yet a thing cannot be both naturally necessary, and
yet arbitrary, because these two are contradistinct.

5. There was Gods absolute Sovereignty or Lordship in making of the Decree. We
may see Infinite Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Grace, in the contrivance it self:
and reason good, for it was contrived on purpose for the Declaration of these:
but in the contrivance it self, his Supreme absolute Liberty was asserted: and
therefore the Apostle reduces the answer to all the Disputes and Uprisings of
men's hearts, unto this, Romans 9. 20, 22. If God Decree, he cannot do it
otherwise than as God; But yet he uses his holy pleasure in it.

6. That the Punishment of Sin must have some referrence to the person, and
terminate there. If we consider Sin abstractly and separately, as it is an
obliquity, we cannot conceive how or after what manner it can be punished: The
penalty of it therefore must bring it under the consideration of a Guilt which
it leaves upon the Sinner, and by virtue of it exposes him to punishment. The
Sinner is the guilty person, and the Sin is his, and therefore if Sin be
necessarily punished, it would consequently follow, that the Sinner in person
must be punished, because the Sin is his, and the spot of it cannot be
Translated. If then this Guilt may be removed to another, it argues that there
is an arbitrariness in the punishing of it.

7. Hence the transferring of the guilt and punishment of Sin from the Sinner
to his Surety, seems to plead against this natural necessity: because, if the
penalty be removed, the Offender may escape and therefore Sin may go unpunished
in him: and that God will not remove it from him but in a way of Translation
seems to be voluntary, because he has contrived it as a way most suitable to
advance the Declarative Glory of his Justice and Grace. It is most certain,
that Christ in suffering for Sin, suffered Arbitrarily; there was the highest
Sovereignty expressed in it. The pardoning of the Sinner hereupon is equally
Arbitrary, and refers to the Covenant of Redemption: and how this should be
consistent with Relative Justice, except God had a Sovereignty in regard of the
thing it self, is very hard for any to tell.

8. That Mercy and Grace are also Divine Perfections. These are equally God
with the other. They are Divine A^ttibutes, and are as much Essential to God,
as his Holiness and Justice, though they are also Relative in the manifestation
of them. When God shows himself merciful and gracious in pardoning Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin, he shows himself to be God, which he should not do, if
these were not his Innat^ Perfections. These are therefore Letters of his Name,
Exodus 34. 6, 7. and by these he gives us to know him.

9. Hence we may seem to argue as strongly, that God Pardons Sin by necessity
of nature, as well as Punishes it. For surely he is gracious as well as Holy
and Just; and then by consequence God could no more have avoided pardoning than
punishing of Sin: but we are assured that his Grace proceeds according to his
good pleasure, Romans 9. 18. 21, 22. Besides, it is to be remarked that Gods
Holiness appears in the Illustration of every one of his Attributes, and
getting himself a Name thereby.

These considerations seem to have their weight. But it must be confessed that
Gods Judgments are a great deep, and Sobriety becomes us in our enquiry into
the grounds and causes of them. Sin is nothing less because God pardons it, and
the necessity of the interposing of a Surety for the procuring of this pardon,
will be built upon another sure Hypothesis, which the Scripture is full for,
and this leads to the next thing, viz.

2. Positively; there is a Connex or Conditional Necessity of this Covenant,
which we may take the account of in a few Conclusions.

1. That God, by his Relative Justice, stands firmly engaged to punish Sin.
Here let it be observed.

1. That there is a Rule of Justice. Justice appears in doing that which is
right. There must be something that must fix the bounds betwixt right and
wrong, or else there is no scope for Justice to exert it self. Justice appears
in the manifestation of Gods Righteousness: but that cannot be manifested, nor
can the Creature be brought to confess it to him, in respect of his Works, but
by being convinced that he does that which is right: and that must be by
reducing it to a Rule of Righteousness. God in Sovereignty may do what he will
with the Creature; and that is Just in it self, because he can do no wrong. But
Justice is here considered in distinction from his Arbitrary Supremacy, and
therefore must have respect to a Rule; this is implied, in Genesis 18. 25.

2. That Gods Decreeing Will is the Rule of his Relative Justice. The Decree
laid out the Rule: for God is Lord and Lawgiver. The Law of Gubernation, is
the Rule of Government. Men's Laws are called their Decrees, because they
deliberate about them, and then Decree them, and so make them authentic. Gods
Decrees are Laws, because in them he has voluntarily determined how to Govern
the Creature: and though his Wisdom has suited them to the natures of the
Creatures to be Governed; whence the Light of Nature may make great
discoveries; yet his Fiat makes them authentic: and there are some positive
ones too. We Define Justice, to be a constant resolution to do that which is
right: now Gods Will is the measure of that which is right: and as in the
Decree he laid out his own Efficiency, so also the Creatures Duty; and hither
the Rule must refer. The Creature is his, and therefore he may prescribe to it,
and it ows him Obedience. It is therefore observable, how often when God
publishes his Edicts, he gives no other reason for them, but, I am the Lord,
q. d. it is my will and pleasure, and who dares to Cavil at it.

3. That the first Covenant made with Adam, and the Law therein given him, was
an express of this Decree concerning the duty of men, and the rewards of
Obedience and Sin. It was because God had purposed thus to proceed with man,
that he published to him this Law, with the Sanctions of it; wherein he assured
him, that if he obeyed he should live, but if he transgressed, he should die,
Genesis 2. 17. and therefore what God has said on this account, he is resolved to
pursue it, Ezekiel. 18. 4. This Transaction is represented under the notion of a
Covenant, to signify that there was a mutual obligation: not only did God
oblige man in it, but himself too; and here was, as it were, a publication of
the Edict or Decree, that man might know what God was resolved on, and upon
what ground he himself stood.

4. Hence man by his fall coming under a Law of Death, Justice is strongly
engaged to see the Law Executed, according to the true intent of it. God having
given to man a Law, according to which he was to stand or fall, he must in
Justice judge him by the Law. Now Gods Holiness, Justice, Truth, Righteousness,
Immutability stand all concerned in it. Upon this account, Christ assures us of
the necessity that not one syllable, Letter, or point of the Law must fall to
the ground, in Mat. 5. 18. yea, God himself swears that he will do Justice,
Deuteronomy. 32. 40. etc. and indeed, because God was resolved to make sin a foil, on
which he would draw the Colors of his Holiness, in the displays both of his
Justice and Grace, he therefore inviolably fixed this Law or Covenant.

2. That hence Relative Justice requires that if sinning man be pardoned, his
sin must be satisfied for according to this Law, in a Surety. Here lies the
ground of the necessity. If any ask, why need God to lay a ground for such a
necessity, if he could by his Lordship have pardoned Sin without a Mediator? it
is easily replied, who are we to call him to an account? and it may as well may
be demanded, why did God let man fall into sin to necessitate the Intervention
of a Surety? surely he could have kept him from it, as he did the preserved
Angels It is enough, Infinite Wisdom contrived the way for his own Glory, and
Who shall teach him, who is most High. Here then let it be observed.

1. That the Covenant of Works did not exclude the Intervening of a Redeemer,
to take up the matter between God and the Sinner. It is true, it did not make
mention of such a thing; nor was it then meet to tell man, that if he should
undo himself, he should be repaired by another: that was not an Article
accommodated to a Covenant of Works; but it was reserved for another Covenant,
viz. that of Grace. But there was no obs^acle there, or provision against it;
for indeed that Covenant was one of the Media for the Illustration of the Glory
of Grace, and therefore it could not in Wisdom be made obstructive to it. God
is the best Interp^eter of his own mind, and he has thus expounded it, by
decla^ing that he has ordained his Son to be the Repairer of the Breach, and
to Redeem us from the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. That when the Law could not Save us,
he should, Romans 8. 3. and by making of so many precious P^omises to all that
believe in his Son, of Pardon, Peace, Salvation; of delivering them from the
Curse of the Law, etc. God therefore purposed this when he gave the first
Covenant, though he did not reveal it till afterward.

2. Yet the Covenant of Works positively and inexora^ly requires Satisfaction
for all the breaches made upon it. It will have Reparation for all damages, and
Thunders Curses upon all that become Transgressors of it in any one Arti^le,
Gal. 3. 10. and God, whose honor stands engaged to it, to see that there be no
injury offered to it, will take care that it shall be answered to the least
punct^lio, Math. 5. 18. This Law being at first given for a Rule of Relative
Justice, must be exactly kept to: so that there is no indulgence to be expected.

3. Hence without the coming in and undertaking of a sufficient Surety, there
can be no discharge to man who is become a Delinquent. The Scripture tells us
that the Sinner is Guilty: that he is bound fast; that he is concluded, or shut
up under Sin. The word that is Translated, is in danger, Mat. 5. 21. Signines,
is held fast. It is a Metaphor from a condemned man, who is manacled or
fettered against the day set for his Execution. Now the Law sets no such at
liberty, but by an exchange. If it remove the Curse by taking it off from the
Sinner, some other must become a Curse in his room, Gal. 3. 12. 2 Cor. 5. ult.
and it must be one that is sufficient; one that can and will make reparation
for that Sin; otherwise the Sin is not legally punished.

3. That none but the person of the Son of God could be a suitable and
sufficient Surety for sinning man. This will best appear, if we consider, what
was requisite in such a Surety, viz.

1 He must be one that might be both God and Man in One Person. The nature of
this Suretiship, having a reference to the Law of the first Covenant, required
that he must be Man, because it was Man that had sinned, Heb. 2 14. The nature
of the work to be done in this state of Suretiship, made it necessary that he
should be God, as will appear in the following Considerations. Now, though the
reason why this best suited the Second person in the Trinity, rather than any
other, be abstruse to us, yet in the Economy of these affairs, it better
became the Son than any of the other persons. It was meet that the Father
should appoint the person, and that the Holy Ghost should finish this Affair,
which is done in Application: but Redemption, which must Intervene, best suited
the Order of personality, to be the Province of the Second Person.

2. He must be one whose Obedience must be of equivalent worth to that of all
those for whom he became a Surety, and whatever may be pleaded in point of
Active Obedience, that that of a mere man might answer the Covenant; for the
First Adams would have done, if he had stood, who was but a mere man: yet as to
Passive Obedience or Suffering, Adam could not expiate his own Guilt by
suffering, much less that of his posterity, who are every one of them become
guilty. It could not be any less a personage that might engage on this account
than the Son of God, the Law else could not have been satisfied, but violence
must have been done to Relative Justice, if the Debtor be discharged before all
his Debts are paid. He must be one that could put an Infinite merit into his
Obedience, who could do this: and who but the Son of God had this ability?

3. Hence he must be one able to bear and not sink under the weight of all the
wrath which man had pulled down upon himself by his Sin. Now this was Infinite
Wrath, and therefore the power that was requisite for the sustaining of it,
must needs exceed that of a mere Creature. This was the Glory of his
Redemption, that the Work was laid upon one who was mighty to Save, Isa. 63. 1.
Psalm. 89. 19. If he had broken under it, the design had surely miscarried, and
the Salvation of Fallen Man had still been left an hopeless thing.

4. He must be one whom God the Father could accept of, and take content in.
None could force a Surety upon him; no Law tied him to accept of any; it was
his mere pleasure to do it: had he refused it from one that was never so
sufficient, it had been no Injustice. Needs therefore must it be one in whom he
could confide, whom he could trust, and devolve this work upon: and such only
was his own Son. There was none found in Heaven or Earth besides; but of him he
gave that Testimony, Math. 3. 17.

5 He must be one who bare us good will, and took delight in the work of
Redemption. It was certainly a very great Love to Mankind that could move him
to engage in such an Undertaking as this; to expose himself to so sore a
Travail of Soul, and submit to undergo such grievous things as it was requisite
for him to do in the making of satisfaction to the Justice of God, and
answering all the demands of the Law, and t^ere was none but the Son of God
that encertained such a respect for poor man in his misery: but he did, Prove..
8. 31. etc. Ezekiel. 26. 5.

4. That the Son of God could not become actually engaged to be man's Surety, so
as that our Redemption should be secured by it, but only by a Covenant: and
this will be manifest in the consideration of these things.

1. It was absolately free for the Son of God to choose whether he would be a
Redeemer, and Surety, or no. The Son of God is a Divine Person, and has all
personal properties belonging to him: Now one thing proper to a Person is, to
be Intelligent, and by consequence to have a power of Election. Christ was no
Surety by nature; it was none of his either Essential or Personal Properties:
and he could not be so by Coaction, for he is the Eternal Jehovah, and
therefore cannot be compelled. The Apostle plai^ly asserts his full liberty in
this matter in Phil. 2. 6, 7.

2 God the Father was not absolutely bound to accept any satisfaction at the
hands of a surety. Had the Son offered it, yet his Suretiship could not have
bee^ authentic, but by the intervention of the Fathers voluntary consent. I^
God ha^ said, and resolved, that fallen man should bear his own punishment, and
there should be no substitute accepted in ^i^ room, who should have opposed
him? he had Justice on his side; man wa^ the sinner, yea and he did so say
concerning the fallen Angels, and therefore they are all of them reserved in
everlasting Chains. The case was criminal, and an exchange of an offender for
an innocent person to suffer in his room, is scarcely allowable among men, to
be sure, the Judge may righteously refuse it. Nor did it flow from Gods natural
love to mankind; for he had as much for the Angelical nature, and for the
residue of men who were not included in this Covenant: it must then be of his
free choice.

3 Hence it follows, that neither could the work be sure to be done, nor the
reward of the work be certain to be received, but upon mutual compact or
agreement. There could have been no security on any hand without it; and
therefore without this it could not have been a certain truth from eternity,
that the Son of God should, in fullness of time, come into the world, and become
a Savior; the contrary to which the Scripture assures us. Now to sum up all
that has been said on this account; the Necessity of this Covenant lies in
these few following Conclusions.

1 That mankind stands under a Covenant of works, which requires Obedience of
him, and threatens disobedience with death. This Covenant being made with Adam,
as the head of mankind, it included all his posterity, who were to stand or
fall with him, in the first trial of his Obedience.

2. That Divine Justice stands engaged to this Covenant to see it rigorously
performed according to the true intent of it. Hereby was man reduced to that
exigency, that in case of Disobedience, he must unavoidably die, either in
himself or in his surety, Justice, lying in the way, must be satisfied, if
mercy appear.

3 That man is fallen under, and thereby became forfeited to the law, and
liable to the execution of the sentence of it. It was not his Original state,
but his Apostasy that reduced him to this exigency: but by reason of that,
Divine Justice has him in chase, and is pursuing him to Death.

4 That God will save a residue of that company, and deliver them from the
wrath to come. For, if God had purposed in himself to have destroyed all
mankind, and to make his wrath known in their personal eternal sufferings,
there could have been no necessity for a Covenant of Redemption. Justice had
its full scope to take place, upon man, being exposed unto it by sin; but mercy
had that lying in its way which left it no room for the exerting of it self
without such a Transaction

5. That for this end he will provide a Redeemer for men. He will lay in to
make this Salvation sure, and open a way wherein he may not deny himself, but
be both Just, and the Justifier of all those that believe in his Son: and that,
when man's case shall call for it; when his misery shall stand in need of such a
course to be taken for its succor, the remedy may not be to seek: In all these
respects it was necessary, and that because.

1 Without a Redeemer Justice and mercy could not have met in agreement in the
salvation of fallen man, either there must have been a Clashing between these
two Attributes, or else man must have been for ever under the wrath of God. If
there had been no Redeemer, there could have been no salvation according to the
Economy of the dispensation of the first Covenant.

2 The Futurition of a Redeemer depended absolutely on this Covenant. Here it
had its foundation and rise, as has been already proved. Those promises,
compacts, and engagements between God the Father and God the Son, gave the
fututition to Christ's coming into the World, doing the work of Redemption, and
receiving all the Rewards consequent upon it.

3. If this Redeemer had not come into the World, and performed the work of
man's Redemption, then

1. Man had continued for ever in a state of Condemnation. He had remained in
the same condition with Fallen Angels, an hopeless, forlorn, miserable
Creature. If Christ had not died, we had been without any Hope, for it is by
his Death that we are delivered, Romans 8. 14. But for this, the Condemnation
which fell upon us for sin, must needs have remained irreversible, and we must
all have perished indubirably.

2. Grace had been without its declarative Glory. That Attribute, which he had
a design signally to advance, and to make himself known in and by, to Eternal
Admiration, had mist of this Illustration, and never been thus spoken of.
Socinians indeed labor to persuade us, that the Satisfaction of Christ for
Sin, destroys the notion of Grace appearing in the Salvation of Sinners, and
denies the freedom of his mercy in his saving of them; and therefore they will
acknowledge no such Satisfaction. But it is a very great mistake, for this is
the very thing which enhaunceth this Grace of God, and puts a great many
wonders into the Declaration of it; for though it is not to be denied, that for
God to have ordained that sinful man should, upon the Confession of his Sins,
and voluntary submitting of himself to Gods Sovereignty, have received a free
pardon of all his sins, would have been a glorious declaration of free Grace,
and so a wonderful condescendency in God, thus to have past by the high
affronts which are by man's sin offered to his glorious Name; yet, to consider,
that when man was become so involved or entangled by a righteous, and yet a
rigorous Law, as that there was no possibility of his being saved without the
Death of a Surety for him; and that no less a personage would serve for this
than the Eternal Son of God; that the Father should voluntarily spare him out
of his own bosom, yea and freely appoint him to this Office, that he should by
submitting to the Law, yea doing and dying in our nature and stead, become a
Savior for us, that so we might not die but live, and mercy might flow down to
us, through his being made a Sacrifice for us, and suffering the whole weight
of Gods wrath on our account; this makes Grace to be the more gloriously
resplendent, yea, and raises it up to the highest pitch of admiration that can
be imagined.

CHAP. 11. Of the Influence that the Covenant of Redemption has into the
Covenant of Grace, which is made with us.
THE Foundation of Fallen Man's Salvation is laid in the Covenant of Redemption:
here was the price provided to buy him out of the hands of Revenging Justice,
and purchase for him the Eternal Inheritance. Here also was security given that
all those for whom it was provided should be made happy partakers in the
benefit of it. But still there is something wanting in order to the bringing of
them into the actual enjoyment of this Title, and having this Security made
over unto them, and for this the Scripture points us to another Covenant
distinct from this, which is by some called the Covenant of Reoenciliation; but
is more generally known by the name of the Covenant of Grace. Not as if the
former were not of mere Grace; but here, the Grace which was laid up in the
former, breaks forth and is applied effectually unto them, who were before the
heirs of it. Nor can these Covenants be confounded, without greatly darkning
the knowledge of the wonderful Mystery of the Love of God to men. These
Covenants are Essentially diverse one from the other, having neither the same
Parties, nor the same Articles in them. In the former the Father and the Son
are the parties, in this latter, God and Man. In the former, the Justice of God
was to be satisfied; in the latter, the Grace of God, which was so made way
for, is to be applied. In the former, the Law was to be fulfilled by Christ; in
the latter the Gospel is to be complied with by man. In the former, Christ was
made one party; in the latter he stands as the Mediator between both parties, 1 Timothy 2. 2. 5. In the former, God Covenanted for us, in the latter he Covenants
with us: there he promised us to his Son; here he promises himself to us. But
though these are two Covenants, yet there is a near Conjunction between them,
and the latter has a manifold dependence on the former: yea, such, as all the
Believers solid comfort, and permanent hope arises from it: yea indeed, all
the Grace that there is in this Covenant derives from that, as a stream from a
Fountain; and this may be observed more especially in five respects.

1. The Covenant between God the Father and God the Son, was that which opened
the way for his Covenanting with his people. Had not that Covenant been first
made, this would never have been heard of. The Covenant which God Indents with
his people is wholly of Grace, in all the parts of it, as it is made by him:
from the foundation to the top-stone of it, there is no other voice to be heard
but that of Grace. Now, had there not been an Antecedent Covenant, which man
had some relation unto, this might immediately; and without any previous
prepication have entered into. Grace is free, else it were not Grace; and God
might have expressed it to whom he saw meet. But when we consider how it was with
man when this Covenant was declared; viz. that he stood under an Old Covenant
of Works, and was related to it as a Transgressor; the Precept of it being
violated by him, and the Curse of it having taken place on him, and the Justice
of God standing obliged to the fulfilling of the Articles in that Covenant
which God had engaged in; it stood up as an high Wall of Separation between God
and Man, and called for vengeance to be executed upon him according to his
Earnings; nor could it be appeased without full satisfaction given to it for
the Injuries done it by the sinning Creature. All mankind stood thus Condemned,
and Men of Death. Hence it was necessary, that without a Covenant of Reparation
interposing, there could not be a Covenant of Salvation. Had not this great
Transaction past, the Covenant of Works must of necessity have taken place, and
we must have been judged and condemned, and for ever destroyed by it. God must
be Just, in being gracious: he must not deny himself or any of his Attributes:
Mercy and truth must correspond; and how could that be as the case stood, had
there not been such a transaction as this? If Justice had not interposed, Grace
might have proceeded without any more ado; but because God must be Just in
Justifying a sinner, there must be provis^ion made that he may be so: So that
this Covenant of Redemption may be looked upon as the procuring cause of the
Covenant of Grace: it opened the door to it, removed the obstructions that
would else have impeded it, and made the way for God to be gracious to poor
sinning man, and save him, without any injury done to his justice, or violence
offered to his law. Here it was that all was laid in that needed to satisfy
that to the utmost farthing: and when that is once appeased and its mouth
stopped, so that it has no more to say, Grace has now its full and free scope.
In this regard we shall find, the Apostle reducing of our Salvation to this
Covenant which was made with Christ before time, as the Root and Original of
it. 2. Tim. 1. 9.

2. The Application of the Grace of the Covenant of Reconciliation, whereby any
of the children of men are brought into that Covenant, and truly entitled to
all the good which is therein promised to the Children of God, bears an entire
respect to the Covenant of Redemption. That all the Children of men are not
taken into the New and Everlasting Covenant, is certain. That all those to whom
it is offered in the Gospel, do not cordially embrace it, is also evident upon
observation. So that the reason of the difference cannot be because some do
hear of it, and others do not. That any refuse to come into this Covenant, and
remain in their unbelief, when they are outwardly called, is their own fault,
and it will be charged upon their wilfulness, Joh. 5. 40. But that any do
entertain it, and actually close in with the terms of it, and believe in Christ
for salvation, is not of themselves or by any power of their own, but of God,
Ephesians. 2. 8 And if he should have done no more toward their believing, than he
did to the other, they would have been for ever under their unbelief. Now there
must be some reason assigned why God applies it to this and not to the other.
This cannot be in the Creature, because all are alike Children of wrath, and
equally guilty and filthy in their natural state as born, Ephesians. 2. 3. It must
then be in God. And as the Covenant of Redemption was a result of his mere good
pleasure, so the Application of the Grace of the New Covenant, is an act, of
his faithfulness to his promise to Christ in that Covenant. Hence, when God
comes with his Converting Grace, to bestow it upon any; when he powerfully
persuades the man to receive the word of truth, and accept of Jesus Christ upon
his offer and terms; and passes by that other who sits by him, and leaves him
to despise, and make light of the Grace exhibited to him; he evermore has his
eye upon, and proceeds according to the tenor of this Covenant. So that those
who were Covenanted for by Christ, and given him of his Father, are brought
into the Covenant of Grace by the Holy Ghost. The Spirit of God, when he comes
to make the Gospel Efficacious unto the salvation of sinners, by putting them
into the Covenant of Grace, he takes his measures by this Covenant: he reads
those ancient records, observes who they were by name, that were given to the
Son of God in that transaction; he addresseth these with his power, and causes
them to hear his voice that they may live; we have such an expression in Acts
15. 48. as many as were ordained to Eternal life believed. Yea and our Savior
Christ lays that down as a Rule which never fails, John 6. 37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come unto me. Christ first redeems them by Price, and
then the spirit delivers them by Power: he first buys them out of the hands of
Justice, and then the Holy Ghost comes and fetches them out of the Prison of
Sin, and from under the Power of Satan, and enlarges them. So that the
Covenant of Grace in respect to the extensiveness of it, to the Subject, is
made just as large as the Covenant of Redemption, that being the pattern
according to which it is made, and the reason of this is grounded in the former
consideration: for till men are bought out of the hands of the Law they are not
free to be indented with in a way of Grace they are not Sui Juris, they cannot
Covenant for themselves; they are the servants of sin and satan, and prisoners
of the Law: except therefore Christ have paid the price for them, they are in
no capacity for this Grace, but must abide under their former state of
Condemnation.

3 All the encouragement which an awakened sinner has to embrace and take hold
of the Grace which is exhibited in the Gospel Covenant, arises, or is fetched
from the Covenant of Redemption. There is a previous Conviction which is wont
to be wrought in the heart or conscience of a sinner, in order to the proposal
of the Terms of the Gospel to him: and this is requisite, for without this
Conviction he cannot be brought to see any need that he stands in of the
benefits of the New Covenant; and consequently cannot be persuaded to give them
entertainment. Now in the working of this Conviction, he is made to see and
apprehend his forlorn wretched state, and how he came to fall into it: that an
holy law has been broken by him; that by virtue hereof he lies under guilt,
and is fast bound by a Sentence of Condemnation, to suffer the wrath of God,
and vengeance of hell: that he has to do with a God who is a just and a
righteous Judge, who will stand to his word, and is unchangeable, and will give
accomplishment to all that he has said without fail. So that when he is under
the terror of these Convictions, and now the Grace of God is tendered him in
the Gospel, and he is spoken to, and treated with about the things of his
peace: he is told that God is Gracious, ready to pardon, willing to receive him
into favor, and to bestow salvation upon him; although these thing are glad
tidings in themselves, yet there will arise demurs and enquiries in him about
the matter, and he will be ready to say, how can these things be? he will
presently demand, how then shall the Justice of God be satisfied for me? how
shall the mouth of the law be stopped? how shall the first Covenant be fully
answered and stand inviolable? neither is it to be supposed, that such an one
can believingly cast himself upon the Gospel Grace, and place his reliance upon
Christ, till he be well satisfied upon this account. That is not to be
accounted for a true faith which rashly adventures upon accepting of tendered
mercy, and never considers how it comes, or in what way his sin may be so
pardoned, as that God may salve the honor of his Justice in the Applying of
Justification unto him. Now this discovery is to be made in the Contemplation
of the Covenant of Redemption: here alone it is that this is to beseen: for in
that it was that this provision was made: Here is the great discovery of the
Suretyship of Christ, in which he put himself in the sinners room and undertook
to satisfy for him, and God accepted of him in that Relation; and accordingly
all that he did afterward in the work of his Humiliation was on this score,
and in the Accomplishment of this Undertaking of his, and so it was done on the
account of us Sinners 2 Cor. 5. 21. Nor indeed could all that Christ actually
did and sustered give us a through satisfaction on this account, without our
being able to refer it to this Covenant, in which it is that we come to know
what is the Efficacy and Acceptableness of it. We cannot then enter into the
Covenant of Grace, without having an eye on the Covenant of Redemption: for in
the exerting of Justifying Faith, we do not only believe that we shall be
Saved, but we believe in Christ for Salvation, to come to us from his merit, by
the application of the virtue of his active and passive Obedience to us for our
Justification: and the acceptance of our persons and duties in him, being
Sprinkled with his Blood: and all this is a proper result from the Covenant we
are now treating of.

4. A true Believer, who is entered into the Covenant of Grace with God, cannot
strongly plead for any Covenant-mercy at his hands without running up hither.
It is true, the Covenant of Grace is sure: it has its firm and inviolable
promises belonging to it, and every one that has entertained it by a true and
living Faith, is under the promises of it, and has such a Title to them as can
never fail him. But let us observe, The Covenant of Grace has its Conditions;
and it is certain upon daily experience, that the best Believers do but poorly
on their part perform that which is required of them, and are often failing in,
and falling short of their Duty in this regard: i^ therefore they must always
fix their eye upon that, and look no farther than themselves, they would not
seldom, be driven off from Prayer, and lose their active hopes of acceptance
with God; especially when they are over taken with gross prevarications, and
woeful scandalous failures in their Covenant Obligations: and these things have
sometimes held them under doubts, and fears, and darkness: and where shall they
have their Souls lifted up again, and encouraged to go to God for the Grace and
help which they need, but by remembering the Covenant made with Christ, in which
they are given to him, and undertaken for by him? and not only so, but it is to
be remembered, that there is no Meritorious virtue in the best Obedience or
Covenant keeping which they over attain unto, to impetrate any mercy at the
hands of God for them. Their Righteousness when it is best, is but ragged and
defiled. There is something in all they do which wants a pardon, or else it
cannot be accepted of them; and all the right that we have in any of that good
which is laid up in the Promises of the Covenant of Grace, is derived to us
from the merit of Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction; and we can believingly
ask for it upon no other score. When therefore David pleads with God for good,
he begs of him to be his Surety, Psalm. 119. 122. All the Encouragement that a
Child of God has to be importunate with God, and wait on him with expectation
to be made to partake in his favors, which derive through the Covenant of
Grace, is in this, that he knows, or is made to have an active hope, that his
name is written in the Covenant of Redemption; and therefore he may boldly ask
it for Christ's sake; because he has both purchased this good at the hands of
God, and also that he did it for him in particular.

5. It is the Covenant of Redemption that establishes, or makes unchangeable,
all the mercies and promises of the Covenant of Grace. For; although it is so
that God, who is one party in the Covenant he unchangeable, and cannot falsify
his word which he has past; yet we who are on the other party, are mutable,
and consequent ly might violate the condition, and so come under a forfeiture,
and lose the Promises: and therefore such as look no farther than the Covenant
of Grace, and consider the conditions of ^^, and the threatenings annexed to it,
such ^^, Romans 8. 13. Hebr. 10. 38. and the like, have been ready to deny the
Doctrine of Perseverance; and set up the uncomfortable Doctrine of total and
final Apostasy, whereas this Covenant affords us a complete Salvo for all this,
because in it, there is a security provided for the people of God, and a
promise made to the Son that none of those whom his father has given him shall
be lost, or be suffered to draw back to perdition. The mercies of the Covenant
of Grace are sure mercies, because they are the mercies of David, Isa. 55. 3.
i. e. They are such as were promised to him; viz. to Christ, of whom David was
a Type. The promises indeed are invariable, but if it be enquired how they came
to be so, it is to be observed that they are said to be in him, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
It is he who gives them their confirmation: on this account it is that when God
speaks of his continuing his mercy to his people, notwithstanding all their
falls and false dealings in his Covenant, he Comemorates another Covenant as
the ground of his so doing, Psalm. 89. 33, etc. Not the Covenant which was made
with David's Children, which intends the Covenant of Grace, but that which was
plighted with David himself, i. e. with Christ, and that is the Covenant of
Redemption. Emblematical of this are these observable Scriptures, 1 Kings 15.
3, 4, 5. 2 King. 8. 16. 34. and a clear distinction is therefore made between
these two Covenants in that memorable place, Ezekiel. 16. 60. There is the
Covenant made with them in the days of their youth, i. e. in the Wilderness,
which was a Covenant of Grace, under Ceremonies, Signs and Types: this God
says he will Remember, i. e. graciously; he will perform the good for them
which was held forth in it, notwithstanding all they had done to provoke him to
the contrary. But how will he do this? he will establish unto them an
Everlasting Covenant, i. e. the Covenant of Redemption: and therefore observe,
he does not say he will establish it with them; but unto them; i. e. he would
make them receive the application of all the good which was provided for them
in it: yea, indeed, this is it which sets God on work, to bring about the mercy
intended for his Chosen, when they are doing all they can to withstand it, and
lay the greatest blocks in the way to it; because he has engaged to do this in
the Eternal Transac^^on that past between him and his S^^ about it.

CHAP. 12. The A^^^^^tion of this Truth by way of Information.
THE Doctrine of the Covenant of Redemption is not merely speculative, but
exceeding practical and it will not be amiss, to subjoin some brief improvement
of it, and here;

USE I.
May be by way of Information: there are several inferences which may be drawn
from and confirmed by it: let a few be here taken notice of:

INFERENCE I.
We may here see the ground of the certainty, and infallibility of the
Coversion and Salvation of all Gods Elect. The right conception and
consideration of this Covenant, will take away all doubts about it, and afford
many undeniable evidences of it; and in particular.

1. We may strongly argue from the inexpressible love of God, which herein
discovers it self abundantly. The same love which gave Christ for us in the
fullness of time, provided him for us in the days of Eternity; and that is set
forth as incomparable, Joh. 5. 16. God so loved, etc: there is no reddition.
Nay here is the Emphasis of it; he not only gave him for us when we needed him,
but he provided him for us before we needed him: that he made sure of this
salvation for us before all ages and generations. This Covenant was the Lords
own Doing every way, and may well be mavelous in our eyes. He first thought
of it, when there was none to put him in mind of it in his Infinite Wisdom; and
he Indented it: and sure he would never have done all this if his heart had not
been set upon the Salvation of his Chosen. It was he who propounded, and
ratified this Covenant with his own Son, Psalm. 89. 3. and would he have made
it, and so ratified it, with such firm and inviolable ^ngagements, if he had
not been fully resolved upon the unfailing accomplishment of it?

2 This will be farther pleaded: because the Individual names of those who were
thus to be redeemed by Christ, were put into the Articles of this Covenant.
There was not only an agreement made, that there should be a Common price paid,
a Common stock laid in, which might be sufficient for as many as would make
improvement of it; It might then have been uncertain whether any at all should
have been saved by it: but the very persons were covenanted for; and this is
evidently intended by the writing of their names in the Book of life, of which
mention is made in the Scripture, Rev. 13 8. 17. 8. Which is nothing else but
the book of the Covenant of Redemption, in which provision was made for the
restoring of dead sinners to life again by Jesus Christ, it is therefore called
the Lambs book, because these were given to him to redeem. And Names must needs
indigitate persons: so that the individuals were indented for, and this is a
book which has no blots in it: those that are here written must needs be
saved: what says Christ himself about it? Joh. 6. 37. All that the Father has
given me shall come unto me.

3. All these are firmly promised and engaged to Christ in this Covenant, they
shall be his Seed, upon the performance of the Articles that were proposed unto
him. This was one Encouragement that his Father offered to him, see Isa. 13. 10
Psalm. 22. 30. and how do they come to be the Seed of Christ, and consequently
the Children of God, but by being brought into the Covenant of Grace, and under
the Promise of Eternal Life, Gal. 3. 26. Now this was the Word and Promise of
God himself; The Unchangeable God, the God that cannot Lie: and it is made to
his own Son; and upon it he undertook the work, and went through it, in
expectation of the complete Accomplishment of it, Heb. 12. 2. for the Joy that
was set before him, etc. and what can we possibly conceive to be more firm?

4. The Sufficiency of the Redeemer must needs make this Salvation sure to
those for whom it was provided. In this Covenant God took care to provide one
who was every way able to do the work which he was to Engage in; and therefore
it was utterly impossible that it should fail in his hands. For this reason he
is said to be a strong Redeemer Jer. 50. 34. and Mighty to save, Isa. 63. 1.
see also for this, Deuteronomy. 33. 23 Psalm. 83. 19. He is able to bear down all
Opposition that can be made against him and there is no adverse power that can
so interpose as to obstruct this Salvation, but it is carried on with a strong
hand: needs then must it be without fail brought about.

5 By this Covenant, that which lay in the way as the great Obstacle or
hindrance of man's Salvation, is altogether removed, so as it shall no longer
impede it: viz. the justice of the first Covenant. Fallen man is by a Righteous
Law condemned, and Justice demands the life of the sinner for its satisfaction:
but in the Covenant of Redemption, Justice it self is not only pacified, but
stands as deeply engaged for the Salvation of Gods Redeemed, as any other of
the Divine Attributes: it is in Combination with mercy in this business, Psalm.
85. 10. and by virtue of this transaction, not only Grace and Mercy, but
Justice also appears gloriously, and triumphantly in the sinners deliverance, 1 John 1. 9. and what is there then that should impede this business?
Righteousness here breaks forth with Luster, and God no way wrongs either his
Truth or his Holiness, in saving the chief of sinners by Jesus Christ. For the
Son of God becoming a surety for miserable man, who was by the fall undone, and
became insolvent to the Law, he discharges him of all his Obligations to that
Covenant; and having given complete satisfaction to it in all its demands, the
sinner is, by the highest Act of Justice, discharged of that debt: and now God
declares his Righteousness in Justifying of him, Romans 3. 26. and therefore when
the Apostle makes a Challenge, he strengthens it by forming such an argument as
this, Romans 8 34. Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that Dyed.

6. Hence if any of Gods Elect should fail of being brought into the Covenant
of Grace, and so being saved; this Covenant would so far be defeated and made
void. For, if the Covenant were so made as that the Names of those who were to
be Redeemed, were all put into it, then either all these must be brought into
the possession of the good Provided for them or else there must be some of
those lost whom the Father had given to Christ, against which he himself
declares, and it would certainly tend greatly to his Dishonor. Those then who
have attained to be able to read their names written in the book of Lise, and
have so made their Flection sure, may hereby be assured, of their secure
standing in this Covenant, and comfort themselves in the confident expectation
of the unfailing assistance of the Grace of God, to Preserve them unto Life
Eternal, according to Phil. 1. 6.

INFERENCE II.
Here we see where and whence those Absolute promises Recorded in the
Scripture, have their Original. There is a great dispute in the world about
Absolute Promises. The Arminians, do wholly deny any such to be at all. The
Antinomians do err as much on the other hand in asserting them to be made to
sinners as sinners. A right understanding of this Covenant, and the true
rela^ion which these promises have to it, will give us light for the clearing
of all these doubts. Here then take these following Assertions.

1. That there are no promises of Gods special favor Recorded in His Word, but
what do belong unto some Covenant or other. All Gods dealings with mankind,
which refer to their Everlasting Estate, are in the way of a Covenant. As soon
as God had Created man, he plighted a Covenant with him, in which Life and
Death were set before him: and when the Covenant was violated by man's sin, and
he had forfeited the Life that was promised, and purchased the Death threatened
in that God having a design of saving a number of this unhappy race, made the
discoveries of an Hope to him, by bringing in a New Covenant, and this was
revealed unto man immediately upon his Apostasy. This indeed is a way best
suited to the nature of man; and God has vouchsafed thus to accommodate
himself thereunto, see, Psalm. 111. 9. Isa. 55. 3. And elsewhere frequently.

2 That it is of the nature of a Covenant Promise to be joined with some
Condition. This Conclusion follows from the consideration of a Covenant in
General, which is a Mutual Obligation, wherein there are two parties engaged
each to the other: so that the engagement on one part, stands related to the
engagement on the other part, and thereupon it is Hypothetical. A Covenant
Promise is a Promise which is made with a relative respect to something that is
expected from him to whom it is made, on the performance whereof the Obligation
of the Promise stands and on the failure whereof it becomes void: and therefore
there is sometimes expressed, always intended, a Threatening to take place
instead of the Promise, in case of such a failure: and a person has no farther
hold on the Promise, than as he is under the Condition of it. So was the
promise of the first Covenant, Isa. 56. 2. And therefore there was also a
Threatening, Genesis 2. 17. Thus also is the Gospel Covenant Promise expressed and
connected, Mark, 16, 16.

3 That these Absolute Promises are therefore called Absolute, because they
have to depending Condition in the Covenant of Grace. Hither we are to refer
all such Promises as do engage the giving of the conditions of the Covenant of
Grace to these or those. Many such as these are to be found in the Book of God,
particularly in Isa. 57. 18 Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. And several more of the same
Tenor.

These Promises can have no condition depending in the Covenant of Grace, for
so they would argue a contradiction; for God to say, I will Convert you, if you
will Convert yourselves; I will give you a New heart, if you will make a New
Heart to yourselves; I will give you Faith to believe, if you will believe in
your own strength. These promises represent God plainly undertaking, freely and
fully to work that in sinners, which is required in the Gospel Covenant, in
order to their being made partakers in the good therein promised; and for that
reason are they said to be Absclute, with respect to the Gospel Covenant,
because they bear no respect to the Condition which is therein propounded and
required so as to engage for it.

4. That all these promises have their Conditions, and the performance of them,
contained in the Covenant of Redemption. Hence it is that they are given in the
Word of God, to be the discoveries of the great Efficacy of that Covenant, and
to assure us of the certain and unfailing fulfillment of it: that no sin or
unworthiness of the Creature, shall be able to obstruct it, how much soever
they have done to throw blocks in the way, and to provoke God to reject them,
yet it shall not prevent the breaking out of his grace in the Accomplishment
thereof; because all that Gods Elect do or can do, to hinder their own
Salvation, and bring wrath upon themselves, is taken care about, and full
satisfaction is made for it in that Covenant by our Surety: and hereupon do
these Conclusions follow.

1. That those Promises are not of Universal Application. They do not engage
God to all men universally: they are not made to Sinners as Sinners; i. e. ^one
can challenge the application of them to themselves on that account, or for
this reason, because they are Sinners. But they are confined to the Election of
God, or to those who are comprehended in the Covenant of Redemption; and they
only do obtain them, Romans 11. 7. The Election has obtained. It is not for
every one that reads these Promises, to confide and lot upon it, that they are
made unto him, and to take them to be the ground of his Faith, and to conclude
that by virtue of them, he shall be Saved. God only knows whom they belong to,
before such time as there is a particular application made of them by his
Spirit, Romans 9. 6.

2. That no man can challenge these Promises as his own, till he be brought
under the Covenant of Grace, and the Conditions of it are wrought in him. These
Promises do not discover any other way of Salvation unto men, than that which
is Revealed in the Gospel. which is by Faith in Christ, and Repentance unto
Life: and therefore though these promises are not annexed to the Gospel
Condition, or depend upon it, yet they do engage for it, viz. to give a New
Heart; to bestow Faith and Repentance upon them, etc. and upon this account,
they discover themselves to belong to this or that man in particular, in the
application which the Spirit of God does make of these conditions to him: When
therefore the Condition is wrought in the Soul, then the man may and ought to
apply them, and take to himself the comfort of them, and acknowledge the Love
of God to him, and his Faithfulness to his own purposes, and promises which he
made to Christ in the Eeerlasting Covenant: but till then we have no assurance.
Our Election is only made sure, by securing our Calling, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

3. This notwithstanding, these promises are useful to be looked upon by the
Awakened, though at present Unconverted Sinner, to Engage him to wait upon, and
hope in God for the performance of the work in him, and that notwithstanding
his own sinful unworthiness and weakness: since they declare to him, that Gods
Grace is absolutely independent on any qualifications in the Creature, and
cannot be obstructed by the absence of them; and may thereupon direct him
whither to go for Grace to believe, and for Sanctification; and whence he must
derive it, if ever he partake in it. They say that God is the Author of all and
therefore all the Objections and Discouragements which they are ready to gather
from the conditions in that Covenant of Grace, and their own inability to
perform them, are here recovered, by showing them who is the Author of this
Grace: and because he has absolutely said that he will do it for some, it
gives us hope that if we wait upon him for it, he will do it for us.

4 Yea these promises signify to all where the Gospel comes, that there is no
hindrance on Gods part, why he may not come and pardon and heal the sinner nor
any impediment on our part by reason of Impenitency, unbelief, or great
transgressions, but that he may look over, break through, and for all them come
to us, and afford us this Salvation for his own Great Names Sake, and by virtue
of the Covenant which he has made with his own Son; and that notwithstanding
all our unworthiness, and indisposedness to entertain it. In a word, these
Promises signify that the business of Redemption is secured, and that God has
already taken up, and is satisfied in the Suretiship of His Son, and accounts
himself under an inviolable bond to perform the Good promised, for all those
who were appointed to be the Heirs of this great Salvation: and how much of
encouragement is there in this for poor guilty sinners that have no other hope
before them?

INFERENCE III.
Here we see upon how strong a foundation a believers hopes for Glory are laid.
We have observed that there is a near connection between the Covenant of
Redemption and that of Grace: and here is one principal inference which is to
bedrawn from the connection that he who by Faith in Christ is brought into the
Covenant of Grace, may derive the strength of hope and holy confidence to
himself from the Ancient Covenant of Redemption; because his being in this
undeniably supposes him to have been included in that: and then, no wonder if
his faith be often shaken, and his hopes unsettled, if he do not keep his eye
continually upon this. But a right speculation here will wonderfully nourish
and strengthen him. Hope is a believers Anchor, with which he keeps himself
from running adrift in hours of Temptation: it is that which he Lives upon till
he comes to Heaven, Romans 8. 24. How much then may he strengthen this by such a
contemplation? for from this Covenant there flow down to him these Glorious
discoveries.

1 Here he sees that satisfaction is made to the Justice of God for his sins;
and that his happiness is bought and paid for. He may here discern, not only a
sufficient price, but a Covenant price laid down; such as was indented for by
God himself, and therein all his demands answered; and therefore it is accepted
by him: to that the law has nothing, as a Covenant, to implead him for;
whereby all the charges of satan and his own misgiving heart that are made
against him are fully confuted: and it no ways dasheth his Hope to reflect and
consider what he has been in himself, (though it humbles and abaseth him)
considering what he now is in Christ Jesus, Rom 8. 1. Here he knows where he
has a right and title to the Glorious inheritance, and how it was procured for
him: that it is already bought and paid for in his name, and for that reason it
shall assuredly be bestowed upon him in due time.

2 Here he sees all the hard conditions of life, which are propounded in the
Law, to be fully satisfied and performed. The Law says do this and Live, ie.
do it perfectly and constantly, without any failure or defect: though this were
fair and easy to man in integrity, when he had the Image of God upon him, yet
now he finds it hard, yea an impossibility in himself to comport with all; and
the more he endeavors, the more apprehensive he is of his short coming: and
this makes a legal life to be an horrible slavery. But he here is certified
that Christ became surety for all this, and that he has fully performed those
terms to a tittle, and this upon his account; so that hereupon he has brought
him to stand upon better terms of Salvation, Gal. 4. 5. and now, his daily
defects, though they grieve him, yet they do not hinder or damp his expectation
of the life which is Promised.

3 Here also he sees Jesus Christ to be the undertaker for all that which is to
be do^e by him in order to Salvation i e. for the performing and accomplishing
of the very Gospel Covenant. When the law is satisfied for our offenses, there
is yet something to be done by us in order to Salvation The new Covenant
requires Faith, and Holiness, and Perseverance: and as we could not put the
First Grace into our selves, by conversion, so neither can we carry the work on
when it is begun, nor withstand all the powerful Temptations that ly in our
way, and be Faithful unto the Death, that we may receive the Crown of Life: and
yet all this must be, according to the tenor of the Covenant, and the looking
merely upon this, makes a Child of God sometimes to be afraid whether he shall
hold out, he finds so much strength set against him, and so much infirmity
attending on him. But here is his Hope settled; in this Covenant Jesus Christ
was the undertaker for this also; for he is to bring his Redeemed to Glory Heb,
2. 10. hence that Promise, Joh 6. 37. He gave himself for his Church, not only
to satisfy for them, but also to sanctify them, Ephesians. 5. 25. etc. so that now he
knows whither to go, and where to ask for all the help that he stands in ^eed
of where it cannot be denied him.

4 Here he also sees all his Objections satisfactorily answered, and Doubts
resolved. When any thing offers to perplex him he brings it hither, and here he
finds a full relief against it. If the Terrible Aspect of Gods Justice
Terrifies him, he comes hither and finds it to be satisfied, and kissing of
Mercy. If the consideration of Gods spotless Holiness startles him, he sees it
glorified in Jesus Christ, and mightily advanced in bringing so much Honor to
God by this way of Salvation thus laid out. If the thoughts of his Sins Amaze
him, and the Terrible Threatinings against them become a Terror to him, here
he finds the Curse exacted, and all his Sins satisfied for, and the whole
penalty of them born: when his sins look never so great and formidable to him,
here he finds, a sacrifice provided which is of infinite value. If his own
Righteousness ashame him, by reason of the wo^ul imperfection of it, and the
many blemishes that there are upon it, here he discovers One that is Perfect
and Everlasting laid in for him. If his own Weakness discourage him, and he be
ready to sink under the sense of it, here he finds a strength prepared for him,
Even an Everlasting Arm underneath to support him. So that in nothing that can
carry any appe^rance of a Discouragement in it, is he at a loss in this
Covenant to find a full relief against it.

5. And here he has strong grounds of Confidence against all the Enemies of
his Salvation. He need not be afraid of any accusations they can bring in
against him, before God, though he knows that there is too much that can be
truly said against him, by reason of his daily sollies, short comings,
aberrations: because he knows that, his name being in the Covenant, that will
speak more for him, than all they can do against him; and his Redeemer at the
Right Hand of God is his Advocate, to answer all that can be brought in against
him by way of accusation, Romans 8. 34. Nor needs he be afraid of their
underminings, or forcible opposition, though he knows that they are too subtle
for him, and a great deal stranger than he is; because he is assured of this,
that his Redeemer is Strong, and Faithful, and must answer for him to God,
being in that Covenant engaged to bring him to Salvation. And what should
impair the hopes of such an one? Or who shall be able to make him ashamed of
this Hope?

INFERENCE IV.
Here we see the True and proper ground or reason of the Justification of a
sinner. This Article has a great deal of Mystery in it, and many are lost in
their Speculations about it, for want of a Clue to lead them through i^. But
the consideration of the Covenant of Redemption, will clear this great Truth
from all difficulties which men are pe^plexed with about it. The Justification
of a sinner, though as it is conferred upon him in a way of Imputation, it is
an act of Rich Grace; yet in it self it is a Law act, and ought to proceed
according to Truth and Equity; it is a Scripture Assertion, Prove. 17. 15. And
the consideration of this oftentimes makes an awakened soul to stumble and
haesitate: he is ready to say, shall not the Judge of the Earth do right: now I
have sinned, I have transgressed the Law, and it can never cease to be a truth,
that I have so done: how then shall God Pronounce me just, righteous,
acquitted, who am a sinner. What Truth can there be in such a sentence? for my
Faith cannot make the least satisfaction for my sins; and my obedience is
imperfect, and if God should be strict to mark the iniquity mixing with it, I
could not stand: where then is the Righteousness of God, which is so much
celebrated in Scripture, how does he stand to his own Law, which says that the
sinner shall die? Now all these scruples will come to be fully taken off, and
the Soul will be abundantly satisfied in the Contemplation of this Covenant.
for;

1 If faith in Jesus Christ were only propounded in the Covenant of Grace, for
our Justification, we could not possibly reconcile the Law and Grace, if there
were no farther discovery made of the reason and ground of this. If God had not
stood engaged in the first Covenant to the terms of it, and his Holiness and
Justice been concerned in that engagement, it had not been so hard to
understand how he might acquit the sinner by bestowing of a Free Pardon upon
him, and there would have been no need for us to look any farther than to Grace
in it, supposing it consistent with Sovereign Holiness thus to have done. But
when we remember that there was such a Covenant, and that both Gods Holiness
and Justice, and truth were deeply concerned in it, to see to the complete
performance of it, and that therefore the breach of it must be satisfied for, or
else there can be no pardon or acquittance given; how shall we take up
satisfied in such an Offer, until we see how or in what way this satisfaction
can be made? and when we are Convinced, that neither our Faith nor Obedience
can be Meritorious, or answer the Demands of the Law, we must needs look yet
farther?

2. Hence, in the Covenant of Grace, the Obedience of Christ is propounded to a
sinner, as the Matter of the Justification which he is to believe in him for.
Christ's Righteousness is exhibited as both the Meritoorius, and also the
Material cause of our being acquitted before God. To persuade us to Embrace it,
and Cast ou^selves upon it, it presents it before us as a Perfect
Righteousness, which is every way full, and answerable to the Law in all
points, having enough in it to answer all the Demands of that whatsoever, hence
we read, Rom: 5: 18, 19. How completely this makes up all that which was
procured by Man's Offense: but,

3 The way how this Righteousness came to be ours by Imputation, and so
accepted for us unto our Justification, is discovered in and by the
Contemplation of the Covenant of Redemption; in which we may Observe.

1. That we were there Covenanted for. This Covenant was not made with us but
for us. Though Christ were the only Party Covenanting with his Father, yet we
were the Subjects of the Covenant. That great Transaction was made with respect
to us, and in order to the bringing about of our Salvation: so that, as Christ
was the Redeemer, so we were the Persons to be Redeemed by Him; Galatians, 4: 5.

2. That hence all that Christ did in that Great Work, was for us, or upon our
account. He Lived not for Himself, neither Dyed He for Himself, but for us,
Gal. 2. 20. 2. Cor. 5. Ult. He had no occasion to put himself into the
Condition of a Redeemer upon his own account: He Owed no Active Obedience to
the Law for himself, being the Eternal Son of God: nor did he deserve to suffer
any Penalty for himself, for he was without sin; it was therefore for such as
did need all this to be done for them, Gal. 4. 4. 5.

3 That what he thus did was upon agreement between his Father and him. That
there first past a firm Covenant about it, before he engaged actually in the
doing of it: so that there was a firm Foundation laid for the securing of the
Fruit and Benefit of it, and for this reason, the Blood of Christ is called the
Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Hebr. 13: 20. Because it was Shed upon this
Compact.

4. That he had a firm and inviolable Promise from his Father, that all this
should be made ours, and that we should reap the fruit and benefit of it, Isa.
53. 10. It was a Promise made by God who cannot lie, and it was sealed by Two
Immutable things, Hebr. 6. 18. There was Gods Purpose and his Oath to confirm
it. Now when all these things are put together, they clear up the Righteousness
of Gods Proceeding: for though it be a sinner that stands at the Bar, and one
who is in himself by Law a man of Death; yet when it is made to appear that he
was redeemed by an Everlasting Covenant. That Temporary Covenant of Works
cannot infringe it, but must be subservient unto it. And since he is Righteous
in his surety, how Unrighteous soever he is in himself, God is Righteous in
Justifying of him, and no injustice can justly be charged upon him, in
declaring him to be Righteous, by virtue of this Righteousness. So that our
Justification is built upon a Foundation which is stronger than the Earth or
Heavens.

INFERENCE V.
Here we Learn that man's whole Salvation proceeds from God himself, It plainly
tells us how little hand poor man has in his own deliverance from misery, and
obtaining of blessedness, and this will be discovered in two Propositions.

1 That the foundation of man's Salvation was laid in this Covenant. From hence
it is that it derives its rise and original, that any of the undone Children of
Adam are brought to Inherit eternal Glory, they owe the whole acknowledgment of
it hither Fallen man could not have bin saved without such a Covenant: his
happiness absolutely depended upon the good will of God; and these are the
first thoughts that God enterteined in himself about man's delivery; and here
began the futurition of it. If God had not Chosen them first, they would never
have Chosen him. If Christ had not come to be a Redeemer, all the children of
men must have died hopelesly in their sins, and if God the Father had not
Covenanted with his Son about his coming on this great errand, he had certainly
never come again, if Christ's obedience had not been accepted with God upon the
account of those for whom he both Did and Died, it could never have been
Imputed to them so as to be accounted the procuring cause of their Salvation,
and if God had not thus Covenanted with his Son about it, it had never been
thus accepted. No one of these things could have been left out, in this great
affair. Now all this proceeds from God himself, it is his own doing, The
creature that is to be saved by it, was not there to speak for it self, for it
was before the Creation; so that neither was there any other Created being to
speak unto God in its behalf. If God had not thought of it and done it, it had
never been; for this was an eternal act; it past in the Divine Counsel, and was
ratified there before the world was.

II That all that which contributes to man's Salvation, arises and flows down
from this Covenant whatsoever else can be mentioned or thought of, that has
any influence into the eternal Salvation of the children of men, is hither to
be reduced, as to the Original of it, Here were the contrivances and ways for
the accomplishment of all this business laid out, and most wisely delineated:
Here was all that was needful to bring sinners to the actual possession of
eternal life prepared: yea the very Covenant of Grace in and by which the
Treaty is held and carried on between God and Sinners under the Gospel
Dispensation is here fountained. Not only the Redemption it self, but the
Application of the Redemption is wholly derived from hence in all the parts and
steps of it: in this Covenant it was that Christ was made all for us, that he
might be so to us 1. Cor 1. 30. All the Promises which were made, of providing
the Ordinances for, and giving them to men, of sending them the means of Grace
and the calls of the Gospel; of sending the Holy Spirit to them, and into them,
of drawing sinners home to Jesus Christ, and making them to comply with him on
his terms, of keeping them in him, and preserving them from Falling away from
Grace after they are in him; and of bringing them to, and making them to
inherit Eternal Glory at the last, they are all the promises of this Covenant,
and the engaged benefits of Christ's Undertaking were made to him upon it, and
were fulfilled eminently upon his having done the Work, Ephesians. 4. 10. etc. So
that all this is of God: because it is all of it laid up in Gods Covenant; yea
in such a Covenant wherein there were none engaged as Parties undertaking, but
such Persons as were God.

Hence also the Application of this good to us must needs be acknowledged to
this, and here must be assigned the reason why any of us do believe that we may
be saved: it was not because we were inclined or disposed to it more than
others, but because our Salvation was Secured for us in that Covenant, and must
be in this way Promoved: and how may this serve to hide pride from man, and
lead him up to an humble acknowledgment of the Fountain of all his hopes?

CHAPTER XIII. The Farther Application by Way of Exhortation, and Consolation.
USE II.
For EXHORTATION, and DIRECTION, to the People of God; and that in Four
Respects.

1 Labor to Clear up and to be satisfied in your Interest in and Relation to
this Covenant. Rest not Contented till you have gotten some good Evidence that
your Names were written in the Book of Life, and to move you hereto, Consider
these Two Things.

1. It is a Thing that may be known. Although the Eternal Transaction between
GOD the Father, and GOD the Son, be a Secret Hidden from the World, and no Man
can have any particular knowledge of it referring to himself, till he be made
partakers in the special fruits of it: yet the Believer in regard of himself,
may obtain a clear acquaintance with it: he may be able to discern and read it.
There is a way Revealed in the Scripture whereby we may come to know what was
contrived about us in the days of Eternity, and be assured that Jesus Christ
has paid the full Price of our Redemption: not only that he has done so for
some, but for us in particular. Were it not so, that Precept in, 2. Pet. 1. 10.
had been superfluous: yea all the Commands given us to Prove and Try our own
State were vain: For unless our Trial Issue here we are still left at a loss.
But there is a Promise made to the People of God that (...) him, that He will
show them His Covenant, Psalm. 25. 14. i. e. The Great secret of the Covenant of
Redemp^ion, shall be discovered to them, by making of them to know that God
loved them with an Everlasting Love.

2 The foundation of all your Consolation is laid in this Covenant. All the
Comfort of the Children of God resolves ultimatly into this, that Christ Loved
us and gave himself for us: but this he did not do for all the world but only
for a select company, whom his Father had given unto him, and these are they
whom he Covenanted for before the world was made. If ever we be saved, it must
be by the virtue and application of the satisfaction of Christ to us; this is
applied to none but those whom he indented for, and was appointed by his Father
to Redeem: so that if we would know whether our sins are Pardoned, and Justice
be atoned to us, it must be by knowing that Christ's death is become ours, and
accepted for us: and the way to be satisfied in this, is by finding our names
^^ that roll or list, which was entered in ^he record: of Heaven before time
was: and till we come to understand this, how can we be free from the fears and
terrors of the wrath to come!

Now the Scripture way wherein we are directed to arive at this knowledge, is by
following of the streams up to the fountain. There are some streams of common
bounty, which flow from God the Fountain of Goodness, to all the World; he
being the common Benefactor to all his Creatures; and there are none but do
partake more or less of his Benignity, Psalm. 145. 9. Mat. 5. 45. But yet a man
may swim in the fullness of all these favors, yea be glutted with them, and yet
be an utter stranger to this Covenant, Psalm. 17. 14. These are kindnesses which
God can allow to his Enemies. But there are other distinguishing favors, which
the great King reserves to bestow only on those whom he has set his heart
upon, and is resolved to make them his special favorites: so that whosoever is
made to enjoy any of these, he may hereby certainly know that God has a mind
to honor him, and intends Eternal Life for him. There are peculiar tokens of
the Love of God which he gi^es to none but such as have found Grace in his
sight; and those that enjoy them, may from thence unerringly conclude that they
were given to Christ in an Everlasting Covenant. We may read the descent of
these in Romans 8: 29. 30. There is a white Stone, and a new Name which is not
Legible by any but him who has it. This God bestows upon none other but those
who were thus Covenanted for. There is a powerful work of Conversion wrought in
the Soul, by causing the man to pass from death to life, the donation of the
Spirit of Adoption by which we are enabled to Cry, Abba Father, the infusion of
the Grace of Sanctification, in which there is a wonderful change made, a New
Creature brought forth, all old things past away, and all things become new in
him. Now these are all the gifts of saving Grace, they are the secret
conveyance from the Wellhead of Electing Love, they are the Covenant Mercies,
and things that Accompany Salvation: if then you are called by his power,
seized by his Spirit, sanctified by his Grace; you may by this be assured that
you were Chosen in Christ, and Covenanted for with him. These benefits are not
scattered promiscuously, but are given peculiarly. Labor therefore to have and
discover such Operations as these in your hearts, and to be more and more
acquainted with the reality of them: this will be the way to derive joy and
consolation from the Fountain, and fetch down comfort into your Souls as far as
from Eternity.

2 Be exhorted to make improvement of your interest in this Covenant, for your
establishment against the temptations which may assault you. We may safely
determine, that all the shakings or unsettlings of a believers says, and all
the discouragements under which he Labors at any time, do arise either from a
want of his being fortified in this Covenant, or from a neglect of applying and
improving it seasonably: For this has enough in it to dissolve all doubts, and
answer all objections, if it be wisely improved by us: use it therefore;

1 To silence all the accusations which may arise from the Covenant of Works. A
Believer is sometimes greatly Puzzled, and in a Shock of sore Temptation he is
hurried to the Old Covenant, where sin is declared against, and the sinner is
condemned, and Justice stands engaged to do execution accordingly: and now he
is greatly perplexed to think how the Law and Grace can consist, and so how
such a Sinner as he is can be Saved, and he is ready to sink under it. Indeed
in the Covenant of Grace he hears of pardon and forgiveness, which are assured
to the Sinner upon believing, and that is a precious thing; but he knows not
how to reconcile this to what the Law says; that God is Holy and of purer eyes
than to behold Iniquity, that Sinners shall not stand in his sight; and such an
one has he notoriously been; and how should he make those things to bear? Now
Repair to the Covenant of Redemption, and take a through view of it, and there
you shall find that all this is sufficiently taken care about, and every
difficulty that you can think of, is altogether removed. The Covenant of Grace
indeed speaks of favor and mercy to Sinners, freely to be bestowed upon them
by God through Christ, but in the Covenant of Redemption you may see how all
this is brought about, and be satisfied ^^ it: for in this Covenant there is an
O^fering provided, a complete Sacrifice la^^ in: here is the Blood of a Savior
to be shed, his precious life to be laid down in exchange for the life of the
Sinner, in which there is infinitely more value than in the lives of all the
World; and therefore all the Law require^ at the hands of the Sinner is here
answered. Here is Justice sitting in Triumph, Holiness gloriously Exalted, the
Law fulfilled to the utmost of all that it can demand: here God declares his
hatred against Sin sufficiently, and all that was demanded in the Covenant of
Works, is made good to the utmost farthing; and now what should hinder the
flowing down of the Grace of the New Covenant to the Salvation of Gods Elect,
since it appears, that he can be both Just and the Justifier of them that
believe?

2 To remove all the doubts that may arise in you respecting the Covenant, of
Grace. In this very Covenant, Satan the adversary of Gods People seeks to find
many slaws, and thereupon to pester their minds and disturb their tranquillity,
so as that many times they cannot with that quietness repose themselves upon
it, or suck that sweet and comfort out of it, which is therein provided for
them: and the usual stratagem which he is wont to entangle them by, is the
consideration that though there are very great and Precious Promises held out
to the Children of God in that Covenant, enough to satisfy their most enlarged
desires, if they could appropriate them to themselves; yet in the Gospel all
these Promises come with conditions annexed to them, and therefore they are no
farther ours than the condition is to be found wrought in us, and we can no
more use Them for our Establishment, than we are able to make out these
conditions: and these conditions are of two sorts; viz. either such as are
required in order to our being made Partakers in these Promises, or such as are
requisite in order to our coming to the complete fruition of the good laid up
in them. Respecting the former, there is so much Counterfeit in the world, and
it is a thing so easy to be mistaken about: and led into a vain presumption,
yet he troubles them with doubts whether they are indeed true Believers, or
have sincerely Repented and Turned to God. Now for the clearing up of this,
they are to confer the Rules given in the Scriptures, and wait for the
Co-Witness of the Spirit.

But to the latter, the trouble is, a believer finds Satan filling him with
fears whether he shall ever be able to perform them: his faith is so weak, and
the Temptations which Assault him are so strong, that he shall fail, and his
faith give in: his Obedience is so poor and uneven, that it will never find
acceptance with God: and this Perseverance is a Terrible thing; how shall he
ever be able to hold out against all the Furious Shocks which he is to
encounter, and be faithful to the Death, and if he do not, be must expect to
lose the Crown: It is an hard thing to maintain his Integrity, in the midst of
all the Allurements and affrightments that are in his way, and if he fail or
fall short he is lost after all: Now if you find your selves to be at any time
thus shaken, your business is, presently to repair to the Everlasting Covenant,
and there you shall find satisfaction and good security against these fears.
For,

1 You shall here find all these conditions which are thus required of you in
the Covenant of Grace to be firmly and faithfully undertaken for by the Lord
Jesus Christ. For, we observed before, that in the Covenant of Redemption, one
Condition that was laid upon and required of the Son of God, was that he should
bring many Sons to Glory; and for that end he undertook to do all that for them
and in them, that was requisite for the accomplishment of it: so that he stands
obliged not only to answer the Law for them, but the Gospel too. The fulfillment
of every condition that is necessary in order to their Participation in Life
Eternal, is incumbent on him to see to; If there be any thing, which is a
necessary medium to Glory, required of us, he is engaged to see it done in us
and for us, else it would not be a Complete work of Redemption. If He should
deliver us from the Law, so far as to make it a possibility for us to be saved
by Grace, and yet leave us to Perish for want of the Evangelical Obed^ence,
without which there is no Salvation, we were in a miserable state; for we can
no more do this of our selves than we could the other: but it is far otherwise.
That would be an Arminian mock Redemption; and it would be but to save us from
one Hell, to throw us into a Worse. But, as the Son of God was to answer the
Law for us, so was he to give us the Grace and Strength to answer the Gospel in
all the Demands of it: and therefore the security is in him, whose Strength
will Manifest and Magnify it self in our Weakness

2. Hence you shall here find all those Absolute Promises which are upon
Scripture Record, given for your comfort. It is true an Unbeliever can make no
challenge of them to himself, or make a living of them: they are not a Dish
that is set before every one to feed upon: but a believer may and ought to
reckon them to be his own, and to suck all the Marrow and Fatness out of them.
And when you have well pondered of these Promises you may strengthen your Faith
by arguing after this manner; viz. That although in the Covenant of Grace all
these things are required of you, and they must be found in you if ever you be
saved; yet in the Covenant of Redemption all this is undertaken for: for this
is the proper language of these Promises. When God says He will give you a New
Heart, and put his Spirit upon you, and put his Fear into your Hearts, and you
shall never depart from him, and the like; these Promises belong to some, there
are they who are designed and pointed at by them, and who are they but such as
are Ordained to Salvation from Eternity? and these are they who are Effectually
called in Time. You may therefore upon the consideration of your vocation be
assured of the Accomplishment of them in you; for though you might fail, yet
God cannot.

3. Hence also Jesus Christ has Promised to send his Spirit into the hearts of
his people, to dwell in them, to teach them, to keep them by his Power, and
that through Faith to Salvation. When Jesus Christ left this earth as to his
bodily presence, he then gave his Spirit to be the Guardian of his People, that
they might not be left Orphans: and it is he who has undertaken to do all that
in them and for them which they need: to keep their weak Grace alive; to
prevent its being quenched by the many waters of Temptation that would
otherwise swallow it up, and utterly extinguish it in them: and this is a Fruit
also of the Covenant of Redemption. And hence it comes to pass, that though
Adam in his integrity, lost all his stock by the prevelancy of a Temptation,
that was too hard for him, yet a believer in the hand of the Spirit of God,
notwithstanding all the frailties that attend upon him, shall never lose his
little stock, but both keep and increase it. So that if, when we look upon the
Condition required in the One Covenant, we lay by it, the consideration of the
undertaking and Provision that is made for the performance of it in another
Covenant, that may quiet and satisfy our souls in this regard, and enable us to
Triumph over all Doubts and Fears, which Assaults us.

3. Be therefore directed whither to go for all the strength and assistance,
for the discharge of the Duty, which is lying upon you, and required of you in
your place and station; and for comfort in the doing of it. We are often
discouraged by the weight of Duty, and are ready to sink under it, upon the
experience we have of our own imperfections; whereas if we look back unto this
Covenant we shall there find that taken care for effectually; for here we may
observe.

1. That the Perfect Obedience which was required, and was to Merit our
acceptance with God, was laid upon Jesus Christ; and hereupon it is taken off
from us.

He was to do as well as to Die. We have taken notice that his Active Obedience
was required in, and became a Condition of this Covenant, as well as his
Passive; and God has respect to it: he looks upon i^, and imputes it to us:
and so the Law is answered, and all the happiness which man once forfeited is
purchased. What though we cannot perfectly obey? yet because he has done it
for us, there is our Security, and we may account it ours, because it was
performed in our Name.

2. That Sincerity, under our greatest imperfections render our performances
acceptable to God. If our hearts be right in the Duties we do, if they are True
and Faithful to God, if we can truly plead Uprightness and Integrity; they
shall preserve us. No weakness that inf^uenceth our Obedience, shall cut it off
from his favor, or prevent his smelling a savor of rest in it. He that had
not a Lamb to offer, might offer Two Turtle Doves. The ground of this is here,
because Christ is accepted for us in the Covenant of Redemption, and so we come
to be accepted through him in the Covenant of Grace.

2 That Christ is engaged not only to do for us, but in us, too, all the works
that are needful. All that is requisite to our pleasing of God, and obtaining
of Glory. His Almighty power stands concerned in it: hence Paul's Prayer for his
Colossians, Col. 1. 9, 10, 11. In a word, This Covenant has provided a Christ
for us to go to for all that we can stand in need of, in order to the bringing
of us home to the Kingdom: For the Subduing of all our Enemies the Conquering
of our Corruptions, the Recovering of us from our Apostasies, the Establishing
of our Grace, the Perpetuating of our Perseverance; So that there can nothing
be wanting for the satisfaction of a believing Soul, but here it is to be had
fully: and the encouragement to go to him with boldness for it, is fetched from
the consideration of this Covenant; Because GOD the FATHER stands firmly
Engaged to His SON, for the doing of all this for us; and he cannot deny us
when we come and humbly and believingly claim it at his hands, upon this scope.

4. Labor we to see, admire and Magnify those riches of Grace that are laid up
for poor man in this Covenant. The Covenant of Redemption has matter enough in
it for us to study upon and contemplate for ever. A believer, when himself,
cannot look upon this Covenant without admiration, and Ecstasy: it is full of
unsearchable wonders. Here are the greatest engagements imaginable to oblige us
to love and serve God. Here is matter enough to Elevate our Praises to the
highest strain! for,

1 Here we learn what were the Everlasting thoughts of God concerning us, even
thoughts of mercy and peace, when we find our names written in That Book, we
are sure that God Remembered us before we were or any other creature to make
mention of us to him: and what a sweet and ravishing contemplation is here. The
Physician was provided before the Malady was contracted, when we were not, God
thought of us for good, and made the way of this good sure and unalterable: he
enrolled a Covenant for us in the Records of Eternity. The Father and Son did,
of their own accord, thus consult for the Everlasting welfare of a company of
worthless Worms: they contrived the matter between themselves, resolved to
build the Declarative Glory of Divine Grace upon so mean a Subject as sorry
man. Here we see what a difference was put between us and the Children of
Wrath; how precious Gods thoughts of us were, that among such multitudes whom
he passed by, he should fix his heart upon us, and mark us out for a Kingdom,
and how astononishing a thing is this?

2. Here also we may observe the Infinitely Wise Contrivance of man's Salvation.
There are all the Mysteries of Wisdom concerned in this Covenant. Here is a way
found out to Save Fallen Man, which would altogether have puzzled and non-plust
the Understandings of Angels and men; if they had sat themselves to study about
it, it would never have come into their thoughts. Nay, the Angels themselves
are still amazed at it, and desirous to be Gazing into the Mystery of it,
although it be Revealed. Who could ever have told God, had he seen meet to
enquire of him, how a Sinner should be Saved, and Justice remain Inviolated.
Now in this Covenant, we see that all things are so contrived as that there is
no flaw, nor any the least disagreement between the Covenant of Works, and the
Covenant of Grace, but both have their honor and glory, and yet the sinner is
saved out of the hands of the Law, and delivered from Wrath and Vengeance, Romans
3. 26.

3. Here we see how sure a ground and foundation there is laid for the certain
Salvation of all Gods Elect; in that every thing which was requisite to i^, in
all the parts of it, is here fully provided: and all that might possibly have
hindered it, is taken care about that it be removed out of the way. The Guilt of
Sin lay as a great Mountain to separate between God and us; and as long as it
there lay, there was no coming at him: he was a consuming Fire; but now this
Guilt is removed away, and this Mountain is thrown into the depths of the Sea.
The pollution of sin lay as a woeful obstruction to man's happiness, and whilst
it abode, he must needs be miserable: but here is a washing and a cleansing
prepared, a Fountain opened for it, which can take it all away. There was a
Legal Obedience required as the Condition of man's happiness, and without such a
Righteousness, he could not be entitled to it: but here is an Everlasting
Righteousness brought in, and whatsoever else might be mentioned, here it is to
be found: so that there is now nothing to hinder the Eternal Salvation of every
Believer.

4. Here we may read the Faithfulness of God to his own Word and Promise made
to his Son; when we find our selves Converted, and made partakers in saving
Grace; and so we may be led up to the true reason of our accepting of Christ,
by faith in him, not to be in us, or any natural good dispositions of ours, but
in the fidelity of God. If he should have let us alone to our selves, and not
have sought us up and brought us home to Christ, as we should never have come
to him, so we could never have accused him of falsehood; for we did not know our
selves to be the Subjects of those promises, till by the effect he made it
known to us. But because he had promised it, therefore he fulfilled it: and
this is the reason why the Gospel which became a savor of Death to others, was
made a savor of Life to us: the same means that hardened others in their sins,
softened us, and brake us off from our sins, and brought us home to God; and
this will help to confirm us in the assurance that the same Faithfulness will
do the rest that remains to be done for us, in the accomplishment of our
complete Salvation.

5. Here also we may acquaint our selves with what deep engagements Jesus
Christ has laid upon us to love, and fear, and serve him, in that he undertook
for our Redemption and Salvation from Eternity; and that which serves more
especially to set forth our Obligation and Debt to him in this respect, is the
consideration how he was circumstanced in this Covenant, in thr^^ or four
respects.

1. That it was a free and voluntary engagement on his part. He was under no
tie of natural necessity to do this work. He was a person at full and free
liberty in himself to be engaged or not engaged for us. It was at his own
pleasure whether he would become a Surety, and give himself up for our
Redemption: Hence that Joh. 10 18. I have Power, etc. the word implies a
Liberty or a Right to a Thing. He was a Divine Person, and therefore enjoined
in himself the highest Liberty and Sovereignty over his own actions. If he had
refused to do this for us, he had not injured us at all. And needs must it be a
very great bond which is laid upon us, by one that does us the greatest
kindness, who was no farther obliged to it, than he himself pleased to make
himself to be: for the more free the love is, the greater does it appear to be.

2. That he thus engaged for us before we desired it of him. He did not tarry
to be asked by us; he did not wait for our peti^ions to be put up to him
requesting him that he would put in for us, and become our Propitiation: but
before we had a being, or were in any capacity of enquiring after him, he then
put in, undertook, and made himself fast by a Convenant and a Promise. It had
been incomparable love for him to have undertaken such a thing for us, upon our
most ardent and importunate entreaties: yea it would have looked like a thing
that was unreasonable, for us ever to have requested him to engage himself in
our behalf: but for him to interpose, and take up our cause, and become
responsible for us, Unsought! this carries the greatest Force in it, 1 John 4.
9.

3 That the (...) took upon him (...) most condesc^ (...) been,; viz (...)
sinners room (...) provoked the (...) against him (...) Wrath an^ (...) Law
were (...) him now (...) our sins (...) to the (...) for us, (...) to suffer
(...) against (...) and dre^^ (...) God, (...) in maki^^ (...) Who (...) like
unto (...) things an (...) tention, 1 (...)

4 The (...) for, (...) men, no^ (...) ^^emies Rom^ (...) ^ittle kindne^ (...)
is a great (...). They (...) (...)


