By the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by a Statute made in the Iwenty seventh Year of the Reign of the late
Oueen Elizabeth, it is, amongst other things, Enacted, That if any of the
Subjects of this Kingdom (not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such
Priest, Deacon or Religious or Ecclesiastical Person, Ordained or Professed by
any Authority or Jurisdiction, Derived, Challenged, or Pretended from the Sea
of Rome) shall be of, or brought up in any College of Jesuits or Seminary
Erected or Ordained in any Parts beyond the Seas, and shall not, within Six
Months next after Proclamation in that behalf to be made in the City of London,
under the Great Seal of England, return into this Kingdom, and thereupon,
within Two Days after such Return, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or Two
Justices of the Peace of the County where he shall Arrive, Submit himself to
the Kings Majesty and his Laws, and take the Oath of Supremacy, That then every
such Person (which shall otherwise return, come into, or be in this Realm) for
such Offense of Returning or being in this Realm, without Submission, as
aforesaid, shall be adjudged a Traitor, and Suffer loss, and Forfeit as in Case
^f High Treason. And whereas by diverse other Statutes of this Realm great
Penalties are inflicted, is well upon the Persons Bred up in Foreign
Seminaries, as upon their Parents, Guardians and Friends, who shall send them
thither, or shall send any Relief or Maintenance to them there. And whereas His
Majesty has been Informed, That many of His Subjects of this Kingdom do Live
in, and are daily Conveyed into Foreign Seminaries, where they are Brought up,
and are Educated in Romish Superstition, to The great Detriment of this
Kingdom; His Majesty does therefore by His Royal Proclamation (with the Advice
of His Privy Council) strictly Charge and Command all His Subjects of this
Kingdom, who are in foreign Seminaries, That they do with all speed return into
this His Kingdom; and does likewise Command and Require the respective Parents
and Guardians to take the most effectual Care for such their return. And His
Majesty does hereby strictly Prohibit and Forbid all and every His Subjects of
this Kingdom whatsoever, for the time to come, from going to, or residing in
any of the said Seminaries; and does Likewise Prohibit and Forbid all and every
His Subjects to send any Relef or Maintenance to any of His Subjects or others,
who now are, or shall hereafter be, or reside in any Foreign Seminary: To all
which His Majesty does expect all due Obedience, letting the Offenders to the
contrary know, That they shall not only Incur His high Displeasure, but be
Proceeded against (for their respective Offenses) according to the utmost
Severity of Law.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Eleventh Day of Febrnary, 1699. In the
Eleventh Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.
LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.


