royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROITARTICLES OF PEACE BETWEEN The Most
Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the Third. King of Great Britain, and the Most
Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Fourteenth, the Most Christian King,
Concluded in the Royal Palace at Ryswicke the 10/20. Day of September, 1697.
By Command of Their Excellencies the Lords Justices.
I. THAT there be an Universal Perpetual Peace, and a True and Sincere
Friendship between the most Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM the Third, King of
Great Britain, and the most Serene and Mighty Prince LEWIS the Fourteenth the
most Christian King, Their Heirs and Successors, and between the Kingdoms,
States and Subjects of Both, and that the same be so sincerely and Inviolably
Observed and Kept, that the One shall promote the Interest, Honor, and
Advantage of the Other, and that on both sides a Faithful Neighborhood and
true Observation of Peace and Friendship, may daily Flourish and Increase.

II. THAT all Enmities, Hostilities, Discords, and Wars, between the said King
of Great Britain and the most Christian King, and Their Subjects, Cease and be
Abolished, so that on both sides They Forbear and Abstain hereafter from all
Plundering, Depredation, Harm-doing, Injuries, and Infestation whatsoever, as
well by Land as by Sea, and on Fresh-Waters, every where; and especially
throughout all the Kingdoms, Territories, Dominions, and Places belonging to
each other, of what Condition soever they be.

III. THAT all Offenses, Injuries, Damages, which the said King of
Great Britain and His Subjects, or the said most Christian King and his
Subjects have suffered from each other during this War, shall be forgotten, so
that neither on Account of them, or for any other Cause or Pretense, neither
Party, or the Subjects of either, shall hereafter do, cause or suffer to be
done any Hostility, Enmity, Molestation, or Hindrance to the other, by himself
or others, Secretly or Openly, Directly or Indirectly, by Color of Right or
Way of Fact.

IV. AND since the most Christian King was never more desirous of any thing,
than that the Peace be Firm and Inviolable, the said King Promises and Agrees
for Himself and His Successors, That He will on no Account whatsoever disturb
the said King of Great Britain in the free Possession of the Kingdoms,
Countries, Lands or Dominions which He now Enjoys, and therefore engages His
Honor, upon the Faith and Word of a King, that He will not give or Afford any
Assistance, directly or indirectly, to any Enemy or Enemies of the said King of
Great Britain; And that He will in no manner, whatsoever favor the
Conspiracies or Plots which any Rebels, or ill disposed Persons, may in any
Place Excite or Contrive against the said King; And for that End Promises and
Engages, That He will not Assist with Arms, Ships, Ammunition, Provisions, or
Money, or in any other way, by Sea or Land, any Person or Persons, who shall
hereafter, under any pretense whatsoever, Disturb or Molest the said King of
Great Britain in the free and full Possession of His Kingdoms, Countries, Lands
and Dominions. The King of Great Britain likewise Promises and Engages for
Himself and Successors, Kings of Great Britain, That He will Inviolably Do and
Perform the same toward the said most Christian King, His Kingdoms, Countries,
Lands and Dominions.

V. THAT there be a free use of Navigation and Commerce between the Subjects of
both the said Kings, as was formerly in the time of Peace, and before the
Declaration of the late War, so that every one of them may freely come into the
Kingdoms, Marts, Ports and Rivers of either of the said Kings with their
Merchandises, and may there Continue and Trade without any Molestation, and
shall Use and Enjoy all Liberties, Immunities and Privileges granted by Solemn
Treaties, and Ancient Custom.

VI. THAT the ordinary Administration of Justice shall be Restored and set
open, throughout the Kingdoms and Dominions of both Kings, so that it shall be
Free for all the Subjects of Either, to Claim and Obtain their Rights,
Pretentions and Actions, according to the Laws, Constitutions and Statutes of
each Kingdom.

VII. The Most Christian King shall restore to the said King of Great-Britan,
all Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever Situated, which the
English did Possess before the Declaration of this present War. And in like
manner the King of Great Britain shall Restore to the most Christian King all
Countries, Islands, Forts and Colonies wheresoever Situated, which the French
did Possess before the said Declaration of War. And this Restitution shall be
made on both Sides, within the Space of Six Months, or sooner if it can be
done. And to that end immediately after the Ratification of this Treaty, each
of the said Kings shall Deliver, or cause to be Delivered to the other, or to
Commissioners Authorized in His Name for that Purpose, All Acts of Concession,
Instruments, and necessary Orders, duly Made and in proper Form; so that they
may have their Effect.

VIII. COMMISSIONERS shall be appointed on both sides, to Examine and Determine
the Rights and Pretensions which either of the said Kings has to the Places
Situated in Hudsons-Bay; But the Possession of those Places which were taken by
the French, during the Peace that preceded this present War, and where retaken
by the English, during this War, shall be left to the French, by virtue of the
Foregoing Article. The Capitulation made by the English on the Fifth of
September, 1696. shall be Observed, according to its Form and Tenor; The
Merchandises therein mentioned shall be restored; The Governor of the Fort
taken there shall be set at Liberty, if it be not already done; The Differences
arisen concerning the Execution of the said Capitulation, and the value of the
Goods there lost, shall be adjudged and determined by the said Commissioners;
who immediately after the Ratification of the present Treaty, shall be Invested
with sufficient Authority for settling the Limits and Confines of the Lands to
be restored on either side, by virtue of the foregoing Article, and likewise
for exchanging of Lands, as may conduce to the mutual Interest and Advantage of
both Kings.

And to this end the Commissioners, so appointed, shall within the space of
Three Months from the Ratification of the present Treaty, meet in the City of
London, and within Six Months, to be reckoned from their First Meeting, shall
Determine all Differences and Disputes which may arise concerning this matter;
After which, the Articles the said Commissioners shall Agree to, shall be
Ratified by both Kings, and shall have the same Force and Vigor, as if they
were inserted Word for Word in the present Treaty.

IX. ALL Letters, as well of Reprisal as of Marque and Counter-Marque, which
hitherto have for any cause been granted on either side, shall be, and remain
Null and Void; Nor shall any the like Letters be hereafter granted by either of
the said Kings against the Subjects of the Other, unless it be first made
manifest, that Right has been denied; and it shall not be taken for a denial
of Right, unless the Petition of the Person, who desires Letters of Reprisal to
be granted to him, be first showed to the Minister, residing there on the part
of the King, against whose Subjects those Letters are desired; That within the
space of Four Months or sooner, he may inquire into the contrary, or procure
that satisfaction be made with all speed from the party offending, to the
Complainant. But if the King against whose Subjects Reprisals are demanded,
have no Minister residing there. Letters of Reprisal shall not be granted, till
after the space of Four Months, to be Reckoned from the Day on which his
Petition was made and presented to the King, against whose Subjects Reprisals
are desired, or to his Privy Council.

X. For cutting off all Matter of Dispute and Contention, which may arise
concerning the Restitution of Ships, Merchandises, and other Moveable Goods,
which either Party may complain to be taken and detained from the other, in
Countries, and on Coasts far distant, after the Peace is concluded, and before
it be notified there; All Ships, Merchandises, and other Moveable Goods, which
shall be taken by either side, after the Signing and Publication of the present
Treaty, within the space of Twelve days in the British and North Seas, as far
as the Cape St. Vincent; Within the space of Ten Weeks beyond the said Cape,
and on this side of the Equinoctial Line or Equator, as well in the Ocean and
Mediterranean Sea as elsewhere; Lastly, Within the space of Six Months beyond
the said Line throughout the whole World, shall belong and remain unto the
Possessors, without any Exception or further Distinction of Time or Place, or
any Consideration to be had of Restitution or Compensation.

XI. But if it happens through Inadvertency or Imprudence, or any other Cause
whatever, that any Subject of either of the said Two Kings, shall do or commit
any thing by Land or Sea, or on Fresh Water, any where, contrary to the present
Treaty, or that any Particular Article thereof is not Fulfilled; This Peace and
good Correspondence between the said Two Kings shall not on that Account be
Interrupted or Infringed, but shall remain in its former Force, Strength and
Vigor, and the said Subject only shall Answer for his own Fact, and undergo
the Punishment to be Inflicted, according to the Custom and Law of Nations.

XII. But if (which God forbid) the Differences now Composed between the said
Kings should at any time be renewed, and break out into open War, the Ships,
Merchandises, and all kind of Moveable Goods of either Party, which shall be
found to be and remain in the Ports and Dominions of the Adverse Party, shall
not be Confiscated or brought under any Inconveniency, but the whole space of
Six Months shall be allowed to the Subjects of both of the said Kings, that
they may carry away and Transport the foresaid Goods, and any thing else that
is theirs, whither they shall think fit, without any Molestation.

XIII. For what concerns the Principality of Orange, and other Lands and
Dominions belonging to the said King of Great Britain; The separate Article of
the Treaty of Nimeguen, concluded between the most Christian King and the
States General of the United Provinces the 10th day of August 1678. shall,
according to its Form and Tenor, have full Effect, and all things that have
been Innovated and Altered, shall be restored as they were before. All Decrees,
Edicts, and other Acts, of what kind soever they be, without exception, which
are in any manner contrary to the said Treaty, or were made after the
Conclusion thereof, shall be held to be Null and Void, without any Revival or
Consequence for the future: And all things shall be restored to the said King
in the same state, and in the same manner, as he held and enjoyed them before
he was dispossessed thereof in the time of the War, which was ended by the said
Treaty of Nimeguen, or which he ought to have held and enjoyed according to the
said Treaty. And that an end may be put to all Trouble, Differences, Processes
and Questions, which may arise concerning the same, Both the said Kings will
name Commissioners, who, with full and summary Power, may compose and settle
all these Matters. And forasmuch as by the Authority of the most Christian
King, the King of Great Britain was hindered from enjoying the Revenues, Rights
and Profits, as well of His Principality of Orange, as of other His Dominions,
which after the Conclusion of the Treaty of Nimeguen, until the Declaration of
the present War, were under the Power of the said most Christian King, The said
most Christian King will Restore, and cause to be Restored in reality, with
Effect, and with the Interest due, all those Revenues, Rights and Profits,
according to the Declarations and Verifications that shall be made before the
said Commissioners.

XIV. The Treaty of Peace Concluded between the most Christian King, and the
late Elector of Brandenburgh at St. Germains in Lay the 29 June, 1679. shall
be Restored in all its Articles, and remain in its former Vigor between His
Sacred Most Christian Majesty, and his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh.

XV. Whereas 'twill greatly conduce to the public Tranquillity that the Treaty
be observed, which was Concluded between His Sacred most Christian Majesty and
His Highness of Savoy, on the Ninth of August, 1696. it is Agreed that the said
Treaty shall be confirmed by this Article.

XVI. Under this present Treaty of Peace shall be comprehended those who shall
be named by either Party, with common consent, before the Exchange of
Ratifications, or within Six Months after. But in the mean time, the most
Serene and Mighty Prince WILLIAM King of Great Britain, and the most Serene and
Mighty Prince Lewis the most Christian King, gratefully acknowleding the
sincere Offices and Indefaticable Endeavors, which have been employed by the
most Serene and Mighty Prince Charles King of Sueden, by the Interposition of
His Mediation, in bringing this Happy Work of the Peace, with the Divine
Assistance, to the desired Conclusion; And to show the like Affection to him,
it is by consent of all Parties Stipulated and Agreed, That His said Sacred
Royal Majesty of Sueden, shall with all His Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces and
Rights be included in this Treaty, and comprehended in the best manner, in the
present Pacification.

XVII. Lastly, The Solemn Ratifications of this present Agreement and Alliance
made in due Form, shall be delivered on both sides, and mutual yand duly
Exchanged at the Royal Palace of Ryswicke, in the Province of Holland, within
the space of Three Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the Subscription, or
sooner if it may be.

In Testimony of all and every the things before mentioned, and for their
greater Force, and to give them all the Vigor and full Authority they ought to
have, the Underwritten Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiaries,
together with the Illustrious and most Excellent the Extraordinary Ambassador
Mediator, have Signed and Sealed the present Instrument of Peace. Done, etc.

Signed by the English and French Ambassadors, and by the Mediator.

SEPARATE ARTICLE.
Besides all that is Concluded and Stipulated by the Treaty of Peace Signed
this present Day, the 20th of September, It is moreover Agreed by the present
Separate Article, which shall have the same Force and Effect as if it was
Inserted Word for Word in the said Treaty, That the most Christian King shall
Covenant and Agree, and by the present Article He does Covenant and Agree, That
it shall be free of the Emperor and the Empire, until the First of November
next, to accept the Conditions of peace lately proposed by the most Christian
King, according to the Declaration made on the First Day of this present Month,
unless in the mean time it shall be otherwise Agreed between His Imperial
Majesty and the Empire, and His most Christian Majesty. And in case His
Imperial Majesty does not within the time prefixed accept those Conditions, or
that it be otherwise Agreed between His Imperial Majesty and the Empire, and
His most Christian Majesty, the said Treaty shall have its full Effect, and be
duly put in Execution according to its Form and Tenor; And it shall not be
lawful for the King of Great Britain, directly or indirecty, on any account or
cause whatsoever, to act contrary to the said Treaty.

FINIS.
EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer
to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1697.


