TO THE Present Authority OF PARLIAMENT NOW SITTING, And to all other Rulers
and Officers belonging to this Nation of England, who now bears chiefest Rule.

Some words of Reflection to you all, touching those who bear Rule before you,
whom the Lord has justly put dow^ from their Seats, which words may be useful
for so many o^ them as have escaped the hand of the Lord, as yet not to be
utterly cut off, before he proceed any further against them.

But this chiefly to you who are the present Rulers t^ put you in mind of
their neglect of the cry of the Righteous; Also to your selves a Warning and
true admonition.

Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy,

Psalm. 99. 5. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look f^^ Light,
he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darknes^

Jer. 13. 16. Bryan Wilkinson.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mou^^s near Aldersgate,
1659.

Friends,
THE former Parliaments and Rulers which were before you now of late years who
were worldly wise men, and accounted by many, even the wisdom of the Nation,
and these wise men the Lord God of heaven and earth, the great wise God who is
Lord over all, yet not known nor comprehended by all the wisdom of the world,
he unto them in the time of their sitting and Rule, did unto them send many
faithful messengers, servants and Prophets, even righteous men rising up early:
early did the Lord send unto them in the beginning of their times of sitting,
and Rule, and reign, and by them these Rulers were often and faithfully warned
time after time, in their times while they bear Rule; that they should Rule in
righteousness, and call to mind their former engagements and promises which
they made unto the Lord, and unto the honest hearted of the Nation, in their
way of worship toward God without restraint, these things were often laid
before them by diverse of the Lords people called Quakers, from a feeling
condition of the want of these things being fulfilled.

But these Rulers which were before you, they did nor regard the true messages,
but did slight the Lords servants whom he did send unto them, though Gods
witness in themselves did often let them see that their message was true, just,
and equal; but their message being a cross unto the wisdom of these Rulers who
had lost the tenderness in which they promised (take good notice of that) their
messages being a cross unto their wisdom their worldly honors, and worldly
interest, therefore instead of hearkening to the servants of the Lord, these
Rulers rather hearkened unto the Teachers of the Nation, even the false
Prophets who joined with them for worldly interests; and so went from the
witness of God in themselves unto the counsel of their own hearts, which were
one with the false prophets without, so the wisdom of God became foolishness
unto them, and so they broke Covenants with God and his people which formerly
they had made.

Then began they to despise the Lords servants when they went from the reproof
of the Lord in themselves; and so suffered them with the rest of the people of
the Lord to be persecuted, beat and whipped and imprisoned, and their goods to
be spoiled by the Priests of the Nation and others through unjust Popish laws,
which was set up and made by Popish governors for the maintenance and guarding
of Popish Priests and these laws persecuting Magistrates took hold of, and
persecuted them which bore a true Testimony for the Lord, as they were moved by
him, though formerly they had hazarded their lives with many of these Rulers
who gave them thus up into the hands of wicked men, and so every one as they
departed from iniquity, and bore a testimony for God, were unto this generation
made a prey.

Nevertheless the threatenings, scoffings, and revilings, the Barbarous and
cruel oppressions, hard yokes and heavy burdens, beatings, bruisings bloodshed,
prisons, and persecutions which was inflicted upon us in this time of these
Rulers neglect of true Justice, all this did not take away our confidence which
we have in the Lord, but unto him was our cause and innocence committed, and he
of us has never been sought to in vain. I say in these times of our troubles
the Lord was still our hope, and these Rulers was still warned, and our unjust
sufferings laid often before them; but they did not lend their ear so as to
take off these oppressions, but heardened their hearts, and encouraged the
Lords enemies, and ours, and so strengthened the hands of evil doers against
us, so that there was such cruel and horrible things committed in the Land upon
us, as never was heard of amongst a people who professed Christianity and
declared against Idolatry.

But the Lord being displeased with their hypocrisy, he broke these
Counselors one after another; for they took not Counsel at him, but against
him, and heardened their hearts, and did not obey the voice of the Lords
messenges, who time after time did warn them as they were moved of the Lord; so
the time of the Lords determination being finished, and the cry of the
oppressed waxing loud in his ears, the Lord would no longer strive with them,
but in his wrath he rose up against them, because they continued in Rebellion
against him, and some of them he cut off, in his displeasure for turning from
their righteousness, and many of them he has brought to shame, which before
they might have acted that, when they did bear rule, which God would have
honored them for, and their names might have been in memorial from generation
to generation among the Lords people, and great things might have been done by
them if their minds had been toward the Lord to have acted for him, and not
against him, which would have crowned them with honor and not shame, and the
hearts of the righteous would have rejoiced, and not have been made sad, and
the work of the Lord they would have put their hands to, and not have been
against it. But the work of the Lord must go on in this day of his power, and
who can let it? for woe be unto him that striveth with his Maker, or against the
Lord; for he is jealous of his Name, and none must be proud against him, for in
this day of his power he will bring down the lofty from their seats, and the
understanding of the prudent must come to naught.

But now to you who are the present Authority, that you in your time do not
forget the Lord; for the time is come that every one must be tried, and now are
you set up again that you may be tried, and now has the Lord a great work in
hand, and if you will stand up for him, he will be for you, and with you to
keep you together; if you do not, he will be against you, and break you to
pieces. But if you seek to honor him, then will he honor you, if you seek to
set up your selves, and the false Prophets who teaches for hire, and will not
teach without a set maintenance, this is not right in the sight of the Lord;
but he will ponder your ways and weigh you in his Balance, and you will be
found wanting to do that which shall be for him; But on the contrary, that
which is against him; for this thing will be abominable unto him, and you will
be found doing that which is evil in the sight of the Lord, and the hand of the
Lord will be against you for this thing more then it was against them which were
before you, they being examples unto you made who comes after them, for these
overturnings amongst you has been by him who throws down one, and sets up
another; But is now setting up of his own Son to reign, whose right it is,
which makes the heathen to rage and the people to imagine vain things. But be
ye instructed, and kiss the Son least he be angry, before his wrath be kindled
against you, in this his day, wherein many are offering gifts unto him, But
Cains sacrifice will not be accepted, nor Esaus tears obtain the blessing
again; Nor Judas repentance did at all avail when he had betrayed the blood of
the innocent into the hands of the Priests and Elders.

Now if you say all this is true, but what is it to us we have no such thoughts
to do as the other Rulers did before us, as to suffer any for conscience sake
to be beat, whipped or imprisoned, or to have their goods spoiled, or to give
up the innocent into the hands of wicked men. But the true work of the Lord is
the thing which we aim at, and the exaltation of his Son that he alone may
reign according to our former engagements and promises which we made unto him,
if it were so then may it be said the Lord be with you, but if any of you draw
back from this, the just God will have no pleasure in such, but his just hand
will be against them; but so many of you as do desire to do that which may be
right in the sight of the Lord, all self ends, self-interests, prejudice,
worldly honor, respect of persons, set aside, then to that of God in your
selves turn in, which lets you see that you are but men, and this is the light
which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, which is spiritual, and you
joining with this it, will make you like it, and like him from whence it does
proceed, even Christ the power of God to every one who believes, and as you
come to be like him, then will you do the will of God, and not your own, then
will you cease from your own works, and do the work of the Lord; now if you
say, what is the work of the Lord that we are to do in this day of his power,
that he will have his Son to reign in? or what can we do, if he take the
Government unto himself?

My answer is; that the work of the Lord in this day of his power is, that
every one may be brought to be subject to his own power, the power of God, and
this every one is to know in themselves which will keep in obedience unto him,
as they keep unto it, and teach them how to exercise their consciences both
toward God, and men; I say that this is the Lords work which he is begun to
work. Now your work and your places is to cherish such and to be a praise unto
them who does thus witness the power of God in themselves, in whose hearts the
righteous Law of God is set up which does regulate their ways and so teach
them the exercise of a good conscience both toward God and toward man; and as
you your selves are subject unto him who has enlightened you with his light,
with it he will let you see who are from the power of God, and no otherwise you
can see, and as you your selves are subject to the higher power, the power of
God, then with the light you will see how to exercise your power among those,
who are not subject to the higher power, and so be a terror to all evil doers.

Now Rulers are not a terror to good works, nor to them that do well, and this
I can speak by experience, who have had a share of such sufferings among the
Lords people now of late, who have suffered as evil doers, yet innocent, and
doing no evil, but good, and so the power which is a terror to him that does
evil, We had praise of the same, though much we suffered by blind persecuting
Magistrates, who were from the power of God, in themselves, and so turned the
edge of the sword against the innocent, and deeply have many suffered now of
late years, both in their bodies and estates by such blind persecuting
Magistrates, that never knew the power of God in themselves, from which they
should have acted, nor never knew the Powers that are ordained of God, but
acted by their own wills, being many of them men of prejudiced spirits, and
their ground from which they acted was from old popish Laws which was made and
set up by Popish Rulers, in the dark night of Apostasy, for binding and
compelling, killing and destroying, yet thinking they did God service, and
these Laws were one with the dark principles of these Magistrates now of late,
who thus did persecute without a cause, and so many of the Lords dear people.
both in ages past, and now of latest years for conscience sake have suffered
deeply by binding and compelling Laws, because they could not pay and conform
to such things as was required of them, and of such unjust sufferings we, who
are by Ishmaels generation called Quakers, have had the deepest share in, and
this you are not ignorant of; So now it lies upon you to remedy these things,
for the Lord does require it at your hands, for he has looked down upon the
afflictions of his people, and have beheld their grievious oppressions, and the
time is come that the Lord will ease himself of his adversaries, and avenge
himself of his enemies, who will not that he should reign: Now all binding
and compelling Laws, touching the worship of God makes many hypocrites both to
God and to men and this is plainly seen in these our days, for many now who
cannot give up themselves unto suffering, are miserably enslaved in themselves,
because of binding and compulsive Laws, and so remains under a condemned
estate in bondage; and if hypocrites and unbelievers are to be turned into the
lake, then what shall the portion of them be, who either makes Laws or upholds
laws, which makes hypocrites? and if the loss of a man's soul be of more value
then a whole world, then what or how shall they be able to answer the Lord, or
to stand in judgment before him, who by such laws does compel men to sin
against their own consciences? so this does lie upon you from the Lord, that
you do break off every such a yoke, and that you neither make nor uphold such
laws, ordinances, acts, or what you may call them, as we have so deeply
suffered by; Namely any law for payment of Tithes, or any law to limit the holy
One in any kind what ever, particularly that none be hindered as they be moved
of the Lord to speak the word of the Lord in any place or assembly of people,
for in these two things, especially has many Magistrates and Priests, who
leaned upon them, been the cause of many unjust sufferings, though for their
wicked covetousness the Lord has smitten many of them both:

Now there is no question, but you who are the present authority, has to do
with this generation of men, the Priests who have been such persecutors of us,
as the other Rulers had who were before you. Now I say unto you as from the
Lord, that in his true fear you stand, and that you join not with them whom
the Lord is against, who does not profit the people at all, but does cause them
to err as the false prophets did, whom the Prophet Jeremy speaks against, Jer.
23. 32. Now the Priests of England are such, this is a true testimony against
them, whether you can believe it or no; therefore be warned and take heed how
you give your strength unto them, for if you give it unto them, you give it
unto the harlot, for they who preach for hire and divine for money, are
adulterated from the Lord, yet they will lean upon the Lord, the Priests and
false prophets who taught for hire, did so in the Prophet Micahs days, Mic. 3.
11. the Priests of England does so, they preach for hire, and says, is not the
Lord among them, But they lean upon the Rulers of Eng. for to compel people to
hire them, and diverse of them, have thrust themselves among a people, and have
forced them in some places by orders which they have got from the Rulers of the
Nation, or by some order from some other Priest above them, which he has had
from the Rulers, I say some of them have by compulsion, come in to a parish
against the peoples mind, and when they are set down then from every house,
and from every quarter of the parish, they begin to look for their gain, but
such the prophet Esaias calls blind watchmen, and greedy dumb dogs; and now these
Priests who does thus, they will say my Parish, and my people, when many of the
people are against him, and some of these for conscience sake cannot go to
hear him at all, and yet of such he will look for gain from, is not here
horrible things committed in the land, Priests preaching for hire, and bearing
Rule by their means? but what will ye do in the end says the Lord.

Now if you say tithes were given by God, under the first priesthood, and why
may they not stand now for Ministers maintenance? I answer, no; for who ever
goes about to keep up Tithes under what pretense so ever, does deny Christ come
in the flesh, and so are the antichrists; for the Apostle to the Hebrews
says, Heb. 7. 5. that they who are of the sons of Levi, who receive the office
of the Priesthood, have a commandment to take Tithes, and in the 12 verse he
says, the priesthod being changed there is made of necessity also a change of
the Law, and in the 18. v. he says verily there is a disanulling of the
commandment going before; now the law being changed and the commandment
disanuled which was for tithes which God commanded, how can any who owns the
Apostles Doctrine, be subject to it, and deny the Apostles doctrine, and
consequently Jesus Christ his coming in the flesh? who is the sum of all
things before spoken of, who said unto those whom he sent forth, freely ye have
received freely give, and those whom he has sent forth, obeyed his voice, and
when they returned again, they wanted nothing, and they were to go whither
Christ sent them, and not to thrust themselves into places, nor to inquire
after places, and get places where they could, or liked, and there to sit down
for term of life, or till they heard of another place, which would be more for
their profit. O surely you cannot but see these things to be abominable, and
much it is, that they themselves who would be accounted Gospel Ministers does
not blush to think of these things. But surely they are very impudent, for they
have been sufficiently warned, and the truth plainly declared to them, and
their false ways and practices truly declared against, for which they do
account us to be their enemies, though nothing but the truth has been spoken
unto them.

And though you may count me so, for telling you the truth, yet whether you
will hear or forbear, this is truth unto you, that if you go about to set up or
to uphold such a Ministry or such a maintenance, or such a worship, as to make
the old Masse-houses which the Papists built for their Idolatrous worship, and
make them your chief places of worship, as the other Rulers did which were
before you; assuredly the Lord will be against you for these things, and his
presence will not be with you, for he expects far greater things from you now,
then what you saw when you were chosen at the first of all, nor will the Lord
suffer that to stand by you for which he has thrown others out before you; for
these old Masse-houses, falsely called Churches, the gleab land belonging them,
the tithes which has been laid to them, the augmentations, revenues, the bells
that hangs in them, and other maintenance, dues, customs, and payments which
are claimed as belonging them, besides many practices in their way of worship
in them, are as truly seen now to be Idolatrous and contrary to the mind of God
now in these days, as ever the groves, the high places and the Idolatrous
houses was in the days of Israel, and they have been as truly cried out
against, as from the mind of the Lord, as ever the other was by the true
prophets of God in that age.

So now be wise and be instructed ye Rulers of the Earth, that the mind of the
Lord you may come to know, and take heed how you go about to limit the Lord in
any kind what ever, for the Lord has sought out, and has found out many now
who does worship him in spirit and in truth, who neither can go to one set
place or another; But as the Lamb guids them who is the leader of them, whose
voice they know and follow, and after none other can they go, and such these
Scriptures finds fulfilled, that God does not dwell in Temples made with hands.

So to you who desire to do the Lords will, consult not with flesh and blood,
but do what is in your hearts, for the Lord, and in the Lords counsel stand his
will to know, even to that turn to, which discovers unto you the secrets of
your hearts when you are alone, and shows unto you them things to be evil
which no man can accuse you of, and shows you such a good way as you never yet
walked in, there is some thing in you, shall find if you do but hearken, and
lend your ear unto it, which will not flatter you in any thing, in that
principle stay your minds, and from that principle do not go, and then you
will know a true voice in your selves, and by it you will know the true voice
without. But if from this principle you go, then from the true voice you go in
your selves, and so will yield to the wrong voice without, which will lead you
to set up that which the Lord is throwing down, which is all falls ways and
false worships and false worshipers, which God is against, and the Scriptures
of truth does declare against: So of the beastly power take you heed, for if
you go about to uphold the false prophets who teaches for hire, and runs when
the Lord never sent them, and so does not profit the people at all, and such as
are persecutors, and are found in the steps of Scribes and Pharisees, your
power will be no other but the beastly power, which makes war against the Lamb;
But if you should do so, the Lamb will have the victory: But as you act from
the spirit of God which is pure, you will love all men without respect of
persons, and seek the peace and safty of all, as to their persons, and the
overthrow of that which is evil in all; And as for Ministers and Teachers for
the Nation, you need take no thought, for the Lord of the harvest Christ must
send forth, and he will fit them for his own work without Schools of great
learning, or made by the will of man, and no other can profit the people, but
such as he sends forth.

B. W.

THE END.

