BLOODY NEVVES FROM THE Lord Byron, IN WALES;

Declaring The proceedings of the Royal Pa^ty, against the Parliaments Forces,
and the rising of the Welch-men with long hooks, and the bloody execution done
thereby.

Also, a great Fight near the Isle of Angl^sea, between the Forces commanded by
the Lord Byron, and Col. Horton, with the particulars thereof, and the number
killed and taken. And a dangerous Fight at Scarbrough Castle in Yorkes, between
a Party of the Princes Forces, and Col. Bethels.

Likewise, The Resolution of the Levellers of England. And the Remonstrance and
Declaration of Lieut. Genesis C^omwell, concerning the Enemies of Religion, King,
and Kingdom. Commanded to be printed and pub^^sh^d.

O. CRUMWELL.

September. 14. Imprinted at London, for G H. 1648.

A bloody fight in Wales. betwixt the L. Byron, and Col. Horton, and the L.
Byrons Resolution and proceedings, touching the Parliaments forces, and his
vowing to take reveng for the death of Sir Charles Lucas, his brother in Law
Honored Sir.
THe Kings Majesty's forces in these parts (being pleased to honor themselves
with that gracious Title) under the command of the Lord Byron, (brother in law
to the late Royal Hero Sir Charles Lucas) are in a marching posture, beating
upon the Confines of Carnarvan, and other parts adjacent, leveling of forces,
and summoning in the Country, but former experience, (touching their obedience
to Sommons,) bids the Inhabitants beware of a second Engageme^, which (indeed)
they observe as the forerunner and messenger to desolation and destruction; And
in stead of obeying any such summons, apprehends the Officers, who are to
ex^cute them; which proceed^ngs, evidently demonstrates the realty and
Resolution of the well affected in these parts; But the dis^ffected, on the
other side, are of a contrary disposi^ion, and instead of preserving the peace
of the Country, foments the distractions and differences, as appears by their
present complying with the adverse party against our forces, diverse of them
aiming themselves, some with long hooks, others with Swords and Halberts,
insomuch that the tyranny and oppression of the most based of men has been
lately put in execution by them, who not long si^ce, fell upon some of our men
in their quarters, killed a Gentleman belonging to Colonel Hortons Regiment,
and most barborously murdered another, cutting of his throat at one Mr. Morgan
Herberts house, in the County of Cardigan.

The said Mr. Herbert and his three Sons, being the chief Actors therein, who
buried him in the Dunghill on the back side of their yard, but by divine
providence in a short time brought it to light, and diverse of the bloody Actors
were apprehended and taken, and committed to safe Custo^y.

The Lord Byron is very active in raising of forces, giving our many threatening
speeches against the Parliament, saying,

That in a short time, they will pole and clip them, and leave not a man alive
of 'em, at Westminster.

Such threatenings is no novelty, we have had plenty of them in these parts, and
in the height of them, had brought the chief Abettors thereof, to severe and
condign punishment.

The aforesaid Lord Byron, exceeds far more tyrannous, and barbarous then
ever. He gives our, that he is resolved, to be revenged of the Lord Gen
Fairfax, for the death of Sir Charles Lucas (his brother in Law) and we hear,
that he has done something already (in relation thereunto) to some of the
Parlaiments friends.

Col: Horton, and Col: Mitten, are marching toward Anglesea, with agallant
party of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, to fight the said Byron, or to force him
into the Isle; And upon Saturday last, as our Intelligence says, the Horse
faced each other, and after ashort time, both parties advanced and prepared for
an engagement, and after five of the clock in the evening, the forlornes were
drawn out, charged each other, and after some dispute, the Byronians retreated,
Colonel Hortons men persued, in which persuit, diverse were forced to leave
their horses.

Byrons Body of horse perceiving this, wheeled about, and without one shot,
force their way toward Anglesea, where some prisoners were taken, some killed,
and wounded, the total of is said to be about sixty, most of the said forces
are got into Anglesea, where (at present) they remain.

Colonel Mitten, and Col. Horton, are in pursuit of them, and its hoped, will
stop their passage, and prevent their coming out, for the future, which is all
at present, from,

Carnarvan the 12. of September. 1648. Your most obliged, and affectionate
friend, Thomas Wilkinson.

The Remonstrance and Resolution of the Right Honorable, and truly valiant,
Lieut. Genesis CROMWELL, in behalf of all His Majesty's loyal, and free born
people of ENGLAND, concerning the Scottish Nation, and their engaging against
Religion, King, and Kingdom.
WHereas, the Scottish Army, under the Command of lames Duke of Hambleton,
which la^ely invaded this Nation of England, is by the blessing of God upon the
Parliaments Forces) defeated and overthrown, and some Thousands of their
Soldiers and Officers are now prisoners in our hands, so that by reason of
their great number, and want of sufficient Guards and Watches to keep them so
carefully as need requires the Army being employed upon other Duty and Service
of the Kingdom) diverse may escape away, and many (both since and upon the
pursuit) lie in private places in the Country: I thought it very just and
necessary to give notice to all, and accordingly to declare, That if any
Scottishmen, Officers or Soldiers, lately Members of the said Scottish Army,
and taken or escaped in, or since the late fight and pursu^t, shall be found
straggling in the Countries, or running away from the places assigned them to
remain in, till the pleasure of the Parl. or his Excellency the Lord Genesis be
known, it will be accounted a very good and acceptable Service to the Country
and Kingdom of England, for any person or persons to take and apprehend all
such Scottishmen, and to carry them to any Officer having the charge of such
prisoners; or (for want of such Officer) to the Committee or Governor of the
next Garrison for the Parl. within the County where they shall be so taken, to
be secured and kept in prison, as they shall find most convenient. And the said
Committee, Officer, or Governor respectively are desired to secure such of the
said prisoners as shall be so apprehended and brought unto them acco^dingly.
And if any of the said Scottish Officers or Soldiers, shall make any
resistance, and refuse to be taken or render themselves, all such persons well
aff^cted to the service of the Parl. and Kingdom of England, may, and are
desired to fall upon, fight with, and sl^y such re^users. But if the said
prisoners shall continue and remain within the places and Guards assigned for
the keeping of them, that then no violence, wrong, nor injury be offered to
them by any means. Provided also, and special care is to be taken, that no
Scottishman, residing within this Kingdom, and not having been a Member of the
said Army, or such of the said Scottish prisoners, as shall have liberty given
them, and sufficient passes to go to any place appointed, may not be
interrupted or troubled hereby.

This Declaration and Remonstrance being assented to by the Lieutenant
General, and the rest of the Officers of the Army, were commanded to be
forthwith printed and published.

OLIVER CROMWELL

The Resolution of the Levellers of England, under the Command of Col. Martin,
and their present proceedings in Yorkshire, and a bloody Fight near Scarborough
Castle, between the Princes Forces, and the Parliaments.
SIR,
IN my last. I gave you a Breviate of the last Occurrences, which happened in
these parts; Since which time, we have received further Intelligence, that Col.
Martin and Col. Airs, with a party of Horse (called Levellers) are come as far
as Mansfield, their D^sign is not known as yet, but their deportm^nt and
carriage is very civil.

By a Gentleman from Col. Bethells Regiment, we have likewise received
Intelligence, that the Prince of Wales has sent 2. or 300. Walloons into
Scarborough Castle, to assist Col. Bointon, against the Parliament, and as it
is said, on Saturday morning last, sallyed our upon Col. Bethels men, charged
with great fury; but after some dispute being galled by our Musketeers, they
retreated, 5, of them were killed, and 2. or 3. taken prisoners.

Colonel Lossell is joined with Col. Bethell, for the strengthening of the
siege, and they intend to storm very suddenly.

Beverley the 11. of September. 1648.
FINIS.

