royal blazon or coat of arms W R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MONDROITBy the King, A PROCLAMATION.
WILLIAM R.

WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Remedying
the ill State of the Coin of the Kingdom, It was amongst other things Enacted,
That the several Receivers General, and their several Deputies, and the
particular Receivers, Collectors, and other Officers, who should have, or be
Entrusted with the Receipt or Collection of Our Revenues, or any Impositions,
Duties, Taxes, Aids or Supplies which were then Granted, or in Being, or should
be Granted to Us, should, and by the said Act they are severally Required and
Enjoined to Accept and Take in Payment for Our Use, for or upon Account of any
of Our said Revenues, Duties, Taxes, Aids or Supplies respectively, all Clipped
Moneys, being Sterling Silver, or being Silver Money of a Courser Allay than
the Standard, from such Person or Persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, as
should Tender the same, in or for such Payments respectively, at any time or
times before the Fourth Day of May, which should be in the Year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred ninety six, at the same Rate or Value, as if such
Moneys were Vnclipt or Undiminished, and should not Refuse any Piece or Pieces
of Silver Moneys, so Tendered, by Reason or Pretense of their being worse, or
holding more Allay than Standard Silver, so as such Piece or Pieces do not
evidently Appear to be made of Copper, or Base Metal Plated over or Washed with
Silver only. And whereas by another Act of this present Parliament, Entitled,
An Act for Granting to His Majesty an Aid of Four Shillings in the Pound for
One Year, for Carrying on the War against France, It was amongst other things
Provided and Enacted, That it should and might be Lawful for any Person or
Persons who should be Assessed by Virtue of the said Act, for or in respect of
their Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Offices, Personal Estates, or other
Matters or Things by the said Act intended to be Charged at any time before the
Fourth day of May, One thousand six hundred ninety six, to Satisfy and Pay to
the Respective Collectors, who in pursuance of the said Act, should be
Empowered to Receive the First Quarterly Payment in Clipped Moneys, being
Sterling Silver, or Silver of a worse Allay than the Standard, Twice, Thrice or
Four times as much as should be Assessed or Payable for the said First (...)
Payment, for, or in respect of any such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Offices, Personal Estates, or other Matters or Things respectively, which said
Collectors were thereby enjoined and required, upon every such Payment so made
at once, to give the Party or Parties paying the same an Acquittance expressing
the Sum received for such Quarterly Payments, for the respective Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Rents, Offices, Personal Estates, or other Matters or Things for
which such Payment should be so made; And every such Acquittance should be a
good Discharge against Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as if the Sums Chargeable
by the said Act on such Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Offices, Personal
Estates, or other Matters or Things were Assessed or Answered, at the several
and respective Quarterly Payments in the said Act mentioned: We therefore being
desirous that all and every Our Collectors, Receivers and other Officers
concerned in the Receipt of Our Taxes or Revenues should Punctually Observe the
said several Provisions and Directions in the said Acts contained, and that Our
Loving Subjects should have the full Benefit and Advantage thereby intended
them, and the better to Enable them to pay Our Taxes and Revenues, have thought
fit to Declare and Command, and by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council, We
do by this Our Royal Proclamation Declare and Command all and every the
Collectors and Receivers of Our Revenues and Taxes, That they shall Receive in
Payment all such Clipped Silver Moneys, according to the Directions of the said
Recited Acts, from all or any of Our Loving Subjects, who shall Offer or Tender
the same for any of Our Taxes or Revenues, at any time before the Fourth day of
May next ensuing; and particularly, That all and every the Collectors of the
said Aid of Four Shillings in the Pound Granted to Us by the said last
mentioned Act, do Accept and Receive Two, Three or Four Quarterly Payments of
the said Aid from such of Our Loving Subjects as shall Offer or Tender the same
in such Clipped Money, as aforesaid, at any time before the said Fourth day of
May next, according to the Directions of the said last mentioned Act. And We do
hereby strictly Require and Command all and every the Receivers General, Head
Collectors and other Receivers of Our Revenues and Taxes, and their respectives
Deputies, to Receive such Clipped Moneys from the Collectors, according to the
Directions of the said first-mentioned Act, or any other Act of Parliament in
that behalf; And that when they shall Receive any such Clipped Moneys from the
particular Collectors, they do Seal the same up in a Bag, and keep it distinct
and apart from other Moneys, in such manner that they may be able, when they
bring any such Money to be paid into our Exchequer, to make Oath that it is the
very same Money which they Received from the Collectors of our Taxes or
Revenues. And We do strictly Require and Command all and every the
Commissioners, Receivers General, and Collectors, to use the utmost Speed and
Diligence in the Raising, Collecting and Paying all such Cl^pped Moneys into
Our Exchequer. And We do hereby strictly Charge and Command all the Receivers
and Collectors of Our Revenues and Taxes, That they do accept in Payment such
Clipped Moneys, and the several Quarterly Payments of the said Four Shillings
Aid, according to the Directions of the said several Acts of Parliament, and
that they do yield entire Obedience to the said Acts in every other Matter and
Thing therein contained, relating to the Receipt of such Clipped Money, or
otherwise, as they tender Our High Displeasure, and upon Pain of such
Punishments as may by Law be Inflicted upon all such as shall Refuse or Neglect
to observe and perform what by the said Acts, or either of them, they are
Required and Enjoined to do.

Given at Our Court at Kensington, the Seventeenth Day of April, 1696. In the
Eighth Year of Our Reign.
God save the King.

