Good Advice before it be too Late: Being a BREVIATE for the CONVENTION: Humbly
Represented to the Lords and Commons of England.
WHereas we cannot but be made very apprehensive by those several efficacious
Papers, such as Dr. B's, Mr. F's, A Word to the Wise; and another as close,
Four Questions Debated, and the like; which go about, lest the swaying part of
the Nation should be so much intent upon One Thlng, as that Others be
neglected; or lest they be so taken up with putting the Crown upon an Head most
deserving it, as that they forget what is to be done first; which is, The
Consideration of the Constitution of the Realm, and the declaring that
Constitution, before any Person be admitted into actual Regiment; it being
common for those that look but on one Thing, to be too sudden. We therefore
judge it meet, That this ensuing Paper, which was in a few Copies given to some
Members of the Houses, for preventing that Evil, should also be made public,
to go abroad with such Papers as those of the former Nature. For, as it is wise
in a People when they make any Compact, whether with their Rulers, or others,
that though they believe the Party they deal with to be the best in the World,
to treat with him for all that, and be as punctual upon the Terms to make all
secure, as if they were dealing with the worst: So it is also honest for them,
in seeking the Good of their Country, to deny Self-interest, and to prefer the
benefiting a Nation, before the magnifying any single Person whatsoever.

The BREVIATE.
THE People of this Nation are by Birth a Free People, who are born to a
Liberty of Person and Propriety in their Goods and Lands; and therefore England
is rightly called a Free State.

To understand the Government, we must know that these two Things are always to
be distinguished, the Constitution, and the Administration.

The Constitution of a Government does lie in the Original. Agreement of the
People, which they make between themselves, or with their intended Governor,
or Governors, before the Government be set up, whether there be none before,
or the Former at an end.

When the People are in such a State, while there is no Order of Superiority,
or Inferiority introduced, it is called a Community: When a Ruler is chose, so
that there is a Ruling and Ruled Part, it is a Society, or called a
Commonwealth.

Let us suppose a Company of Families, that having no dependence on one
another, nor any one having Power over the other, yet living near each other,
do find it convenient to join together in a Society, for mutual Defense against
some Foreign Enemy, or for the reaping several Advantages which they shall
receive by it. The Heads or Representatives of these Families assembled, are to
consider what is to be done in order to these Ends.

Three Things more especially they must cons^lt upon; 1. What Government (as to
the Sort or Kind) is best for them? 2. Who shall be Governor or Governors? 3.
And by what Laws or Rules they shall govern, who are entrusted with the Supreme
Power?


And more particularly, in relation to what Measure of it they will allow them
to have over their Persons and Estates, to use them as they have Occasion, for
the Public Good. For when they are yet free in both, the Governor can have
Power so far, but no farther than they at first consent. Whatsoever
Reservations of Liberty the People make in their Agreement, these are to be
looked upon as their Rights by the Laws of the Constitution, and essential
thereunto, and consequently inviolable by any of these Governors whom they set
up for the Administration; the very Laws of the Administration being void, so
far as they interfere with any of these of the Constitution.

The Constitution and Laws thereof being agreed upon, and it being impossible
for Humane Prudence to foresee all Accidents, which must be provided for;
therefore as they arise, the Administration necessarily must lie in these two
Things: The making farther Laws (subordinate still to those forepriz'd) as
occasion requires, and seeing them executed, that is, in Legislation and
Judgment. The One is the Business of the Supreme Authority; the Other of the
Inferior Magistrates or Officers, and Executioners of the same, according to
that Fundamental Agreement made by the People.

Our Government now, as constituted in order to this Administration, is, we
know, a mixed Government. A Government is known to be pure or mixed, by the
placing the Supreme Authority. If the People place it singly in the King, or
singly in the Nobles, or singly in the People, then it is a pure Monarchy,
Aristocracy, or Democracy: But when it is placed in all Three, it is a mixed
Government, as Ours is, where there are no Laws in the Administration made but
by King, Lords, and Commons.

These Things I pursue only so far as is necessary, to the reaching my main
Purpose; and the leading me to a right discernment of the present Condition
into which we are now brought in regard to this said Government.

The Supreme Power of the Nation being placed in a Parliament, which is a
Corporation of King, Lords, and Commons, that is, the Supreme Authority
residing in King, Lords and Commons, as One Corporation, there does appear, at
this Conjuncture, a Dissolution of the Government; A Dissolution manifestly, as
to the Exercise of it. This Appearance does arise from the opening of the last
Scene. For the King being now gone, gone from his People, and departing from
his Government, that One Corporation (we speak of) is broke; so that there
remains now no subject for that supreme Authority; It being evident, that a
Parliament, wherein an Essential point of our Constitution does consist, cannot
now be Assembled: And the Providence of God it self has extraordinarily
determined our Case. If a King dies, he has a Successor, and the Right
devolves upon Him; but whilst the King lives, he has no Successor, and the
Right remaining in Him and no Other; and he being divided from his Lords and
Commons, the Subject of the Supreme Power, or this One Corporation (whereof the
King is a Chief, Essential, and Constituent Part) does perfectly cease, and
must necessarily cause a Dissolution.

I choose not to found this upon what does more convince Others, which comes to
this Account: The King, by his frequent Malversation in the Government, and
rooted Design of subverting our Religious and Civil Rights, for the
Introduction of Arbitrary Power and Popery, which being aggravated by such an
Endeavor, as the destroying that Share in the Government, which every Commoner
has, that has Right to choose his Representative in Parliament, by his
Garbling Corporations, and so evacuating this Liberty in effect; and by such an
endeavor also, as the exterminating his Protestant Subjects; seeing that
Religion which he would have introduced, is such, as by the Principles of it,
if it comes into Domination, must do so to all Heretics; and thereupon may he
be looked on no longer as Rex, but Hostis, and Hostis Publicus: Besides, the
subjecting us to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and the very changing the Government,
by that indefinite Dispensing Power over the Laws, as was carved to him by his
Judges, from Regal to Despotical: It is judged by them, that he is fallen
thereupon from his Royal Dignity; and that the Universality thereby have
Warrant not only to defend themselves against him, but by Virtue of that
Sanction, which is tacitly employed in the Laws of the Constitution, to proceed
on to take the Forfeiture He has made of his Government, and Depose Him: For
it is a fond thing, (think they) to imagine any Laws without a Sanction; and
impossible there should be any other Sanction in Treaties between Free Nations,
or between a Free People, and the Governor they set over Themselves, than
Force to be used by the Parties concerned; there being no Third Party on Earth
to appeal to, in such Cases.

However this be, it being taken for granted, That the Government is dissolved,
and I suppose upon that preceding Account, of the One Corporation (I say) being
broke, the Supreme Authority that lay before in the Three as united in One,
does escheat, or fall to the Community; who must therefore choose a new Subject
for that Power; and it lies at their Discretion to place it in what Subject
they please: They may lodge it in the Lords and Commons alone, without a King,
if they think that Government best; the matter lies altogether upon their
Agreement, and Consent. I suppose it most likely, that they will agree to place
it again in a Monarch, Lords and Commons (the Person only left at Choice, and
Care had to prevent all Danger of Law in the Case) according to the Ancient
Constitution; Though what Man can know the Mind of a Nation, when once come
together, if he knows his own Mind?

There is one thing we have now Opportunity to obtain, which we can never
recover again, if it be lost; and that is, what His Highness the Prince of
Orange has made one of his two Designs, The Delivery of the People from
Slavery; which can never be done effectually, and radically, but upon this
Advantage. The delivering us from Popery, is contained in the settling our
Religion; and that being a Work of great length, is the business more properly
of a Parliament; but this is a thing must be done by the Community, and
consequently by those that are the Representatives of it, a Convention, so
called (in regard to a higher Capacity hereunto) and not a Parliament; for that
represents the People, not as in a Community, but as in a Commonwealth, where
there is pars imperans, as well as subdita, which now is not. A Parliament
makes Laws for the Administration, but the People as in a Community make Laws
for the Constitution.

I would therefore humbly offer it to the Consideration of those, who shall
meet as Members of this Convention, That, in order to the Effect premised, they
do but agree and pitch upon this one certain Point of good Polity, that where
they place the Supreme Authority, they lay also the Rights or Properties of it;
that is, the Jura Majestatis (Majestas being Maxima Potestas) all together.

The Rights of Majesty, or the Supreme Power, are mainly these: The first is
Legislation, or making Laws; and this undoubtedly lies in a Parliament. The
next, is the Power of raising Arms, or Armies, or the Militia, the Power of
making Peace and War, or the Power of the Sword, which is necessary to maintain
those Laws. The third is a Power over our Estates, or the Purse, or raising
Money, which must maintain the Sword. A fourth, is the Power of choosing
Magistrates to rule Us according to these Laws; such as Judges and Sheriffs, to
name no other. A fifth, is the last Appeal. Now let but the Power of the
Militia and choosing Magistrates, be laid where Legislation is, and we shall be
fundamentally delivered from all Slavery for ever in the Nation.

If we be enslaved or oppressed by any Prince for the time to come, it must be
either by Force or by Injustice. We cannot be oppressed by Force, because no
Forces then can be raised by Him, but by a Parliament. He cannot rule by an
Army, or by Violence; for the Militia is in the Lords and Commons, as well as
in Him, and they will not let him do so: We cannot be oppressed with Injustice;
for the Judges and Officers entrusted with the Execution of Justice, shall be
chosen also by them, and they will look to that.

It is true, while no Parliament sits, the King by Virtue of the Executive
Power lying in him, may raise Arms, and put in Officers and Magistrates as
there is need; but both these are to be done under the Control of the next
Parliament (which are therefore to fit often by ancient Statutes) there being
no War to be levied, nor Magistrates confirmed, without their Approbation.

Let us remember the State we are in, a State that puts the Supreme Power in
the Hands of the People, to place it as they will: and therefore to bound and
limit it as they see fit for the public Utility; and if they do it not now,
the Ages to come will have occasion to blame them for ever. When the Supreme
Power is upon the disposing, if they do not take this Item, as part of their
proper Work, To bind the Descent of it to a Protestant, I shall blame them: But
I shall do so much more, if after the Danger we have been in, of Arbitrary
Domination and Popery, by the King's raising Arms, and putting Judges in and
out at his Pleasure, they do not take more care of the Supreme Power, to lay it
and its Rights better together: Especially, seeing nothing can indeed be that
in Nature, which it is, without its Properties. This is uniform (I must
persist) to the Nature of Government; that where the Supreme Authority is,
there must be its Prerogatives; and where the chief or principal Rights of it
is, there should all the rest which depend upon, and belong to it, be placed
also: Where Legislation is lodged, there should the Militia, there should the
Power of making Judges, to name nothing more than serves my turn, be lodged
also. It is this has been the great Declension, Fault, or Defect of our
English Commonwealth, that the People have suffered these Rights of
Sovereignty, to come to be divided, arising (we must conceive) from the
Administration, that is, Maladministration; as appears, for Example, in the
Militia, which upon the fresh coming in of the late King, was in two or three
hot Acts, declared now and ever to have been in the King; when both the
Assertion was gross Flattery, and such Acts void, as fundamentally repugnant to
the Constitution.

There is one Difficulty to be thought on, and that is, the Negative Voice of
the Prince in his Parliament. The Lords and Commons may agree upon some Law for
the public Benefit, and the King alone may refuse to pass it. If he be
obstinate, this is a great Evil, and might really make one think, it would be
better therefore (for the preventing this Inconvenience) to place the Supreme
Power in Lords and Commons only, without a Controler. Unto which may be added,
the Power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments at pleasure; by virtue whereof,
our Kings hitherto have pretended a Power predominant over them. But forasmuch
as these Prerogatives may be disputed, and the Negative Voice has been denied
by many Judicious Men, who have pleaded the Obligation of former Princes to
confirm those Laws, quas vulgus elegerit; it is to be hoped that the Wisdom of
the Nation will be able to find out some Expedient or Salve for this
Difficulty, and for more than that also; so long as they have the Golden
Opportunity, to bring a Crown in one Hand, with their Terms or Conditions in
the other.

As for the several Grievances that need Redress, and many good Things that are
wanting to complete the Happiness of our Kingdom; there may be some Foundation
laid happily, or Preparations made in order thereunto by this Convention; but
as belonging to the Administration, and being Matters of long Debate, they are
the Work more properly of an ensuing Parliament. Only let not the Members of
this present Great Assembly forget, that they having so unlimited a Power, and
the Nation such an Opportunity, which, as the Secular Games, they are never
like to see but once, they are more strictly therefore bound in Conscience, and
in Duty to their Country, to neglect no kind of thing, which they judge
absolutely necessary to the public Good. I care not if I commend three or four
such Particulars against the time to Consultation, which shall be these: A
Regulation of Westminster Hall: A Provision against buying or selling of
Offices: A Register of Estates: A Freedom from Persecution (by a Bill for
Comprehension and Indulgence) in the business of Religion: A Redemption of the
Chimny Money, which bringing the King to be Lord of every Man's House, is
against Property; and an Overbalance in the Revenue, is against the Interest
of the Nation.

THE Breviate bing ended, we cannot but reflect upon the King; there being so
much Concern in the Minds of many, about their Allegiance to Him, though He be
gone: But such Persons as these should look a little more to the Bottom, That a
People is not made for the King, but the King for the Peole: And though He be
greater than them in some Respects; yet, quoad finem, the People are always
greater than Him: That is, If the Good of the one, and the other, stand in
Competition, there is no Comparison, but a Nation is to be preferred before one
Man. (As appears by the Opinion of King James the First, hereto annexed.) If
the Being of them be inconsistent one with another, there is no doubt, but it
is better that a King cease, than that a whole Nation should perish. And upon
such a Supposition as this, all Obligation as to Duty must cease likewise.
There are some tacit Conditions in all Oaths, as the best Casuists tell us
(such as Rebus sic stantibus, for one) that we must steer our Consciences by in
these Cases; He is the Minister of God for our Good, says the Scripture: And if
any Prince therefore be under those Circumstances, as that it cannot be for the
Peoples Good that he should rule over them; we do look upon such a Ruler to be
bound in Conscience to give up his Government, as being no Minister of God upon
that Account: And so, having no Authority from God for that Office, the Peoples
Obligation to be subject to Him, is at an end with it. If they obey him longer,
it is for Wrath, not for Conscience sake. If his Majesty now of Great Britain,
out of some deep Sense, that he, being a Roman Catholic, cannot rule, and be
true to his Religion, (which he may suppose does oblige him to an Establishment
thereof by all the ways and means of his Church, though never so destructive to
ours (but it will be to the Hurt, not Good of us who are Protestants) has been
pleased to withdraw himself from his Government, to make us more quiet and
happy; We are in all Gratitude to acknowledge his Piety, Goodness, and
Condescension to be so much, as very few of his Subjects could ever have
suspected: But if it be out of another Mind he has done it, We have still more
Reason to bless Almighty God, who does often serve his Providence by Men's
Improvidence; and cutting off Men's Ends from their Means, he uses their Means
to his own Ends, when he is pleased to work Deliverance for a People; as he
has at this Season, so graciously and wonderfully done for Us, that there is
nothing more needful, even to the most scrupulous Conscience, than an humble
and awful Acquiescence in the Divine Counsel, to give Satisfaction in this
Matter.


