GOD SAVE THE KING: OR PIOUS AND LOYAL JOY, The subjects Duty, for their
SOVEREIGN'S SAFETY.

Opened in a Sermon at Aldermanbury, upon the 30 of May, being the day after
his Majesty's most happy, joyful and Triumphant Entrance into LONDON.

By Anthony Walker, Minister of the Gospel at Fyfield in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Parkhurst, at the three Crowns against the
lower Conduit in Cheapside, 1660.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES, Earl of Warwick, Baron of Leez.
My Lord,
IF the Analogy be true betwixt natural and moral streams, that as in waters,
so in affections, the flowings will equalize the elevation and site of the
springhead, from whence they are derived, and joy in fruition of desired good
will be proportionate to that desire which did preceed fruition: I am well
assured the subject of these leaves will find a full agreement in your Noble
breast, that I shall need make no Apology for venturing to adorn them with your
Honorable Name. For as I had the honor to be a witness of your most ardent
longings to see these productions of deep and astonishing Providence, which we
then wanted faith to believe; and which have since filled all honest Loyal
bosoms with such Ecstasies of delight and thankfulness, so am I more then
confident, no heart resounds and echoes to this Joyful, Pious, Loyal shout,
God save the King, more cheerfully, more loudly, more faithfully then yours;
these papers therefore must be your Lord-ships, by a double due, both as I am
yours, and inclusively all that is mine, as all the issue of the servant was his
Lords, Exodus 21.4. and as they are the transcript and copy of your very heart.
Let me only beg the favor to give account in an inverted order of the
preaching, and publishing of them. What is storyed of the dumb son of Craesus,
that seeing a hand stretched out to slay his father, he brakt the very bars of
nature, wherewith his lips till then were closed up, and all amazed, cried out,
Kill not the King, is in a measure exemplified in this publication; the like
paths has overruled me, and what fear did in him f^r the death of a living
King, that joy in me for the life of a dead King, dead in his enemies strong
desires, proud hopes, and cruel resolutions, dead in his peoples fears,
dispondencies, and disappointments of all means of restoration, till Gods time
came, and the mighty were taken away without hands, Job 34.20. whom we have
received as Abraham did Isaac, from the dead in a figure, who has been with S^
Paul, in deaths often, and escaped the snares of treachery and violence more
narrowly then he did at Damascus. My admirations and rejoycings I say at these
great salvations of God, have broke my hitherto obstinate silence, as to this
manner of public speaking, for the preaching of it, I must confess I scarce
ever preached any Sermon with less preparation then I first preached this, and
after once preaching it, had shaped and moulden my thoughts into this method, I
found it hard to alter it, So that it is, as to the main, the same I suddenly
delivered at Burntwood Lecture, May the 10th, upon the joyful News of his
Majestyes Proclaiming, that I have preached it several times since, both in
City and Country in eminent auditoryes, is so well known I cannot hide it,
especially at Aldermanbury, when the City did yet ring and echo with those
repeated acclamations, and I hope it needs no farther excuse then the obvious
intimation, that it teaches a duty almost obsolete and out of fashion, very
seasonable and necessary to be learnt, and that, though plainly, yet I hope
pertinently, seriously, and piously. But this I must submit to the censure of
others, which I shall scantly, and with less solicitousness do, if it may
obtain your Honors favorable acceptance, and be owned as a Religious
testification of conscientious Loyalty to my Sovereign, and a pledge of his
self Dedication to your Lordships soul-interests and service, who is

My most Noble and very good Lord Your Honors most devoted Orator, and most
humble Servant, ANTHONY WALKER.
June 15. 1660.
The Contents.
THe seasonableness of the Text, the occasion of the words, they are to be
handled entirely, opened in the fourfold notion of them; 1. As a joyful
Acclamation; 2. As a Pious Apprecation; 3. As a due attestation of their
Allegiance; 4. As a seasonable recordation of humane weakness, and need of Gods
salvation. page 1, 2. From the first notion of them arises the first
Observation, That it is lawful and of good report to manifest our rejoycings at
the setting up of rightful Kings. Six Spring-Heads of their joy, they rejoice
1. for the blessing of Civil Magistracy, 2. For the best form of it,
Monarchical. 3. For a King of Royal extraction. 4. Not only a King but the
King, one of the right Line, and the true Heir. 5. One of the true Religion.
6. All this brought to pass so suddenly with little blood shed, and the great
quiet and satisfaction of the people, in all which our cause equalizeth or
exceeds theirs. page 2. to p. 11. From the second notion of the words arises
this second Obser: That as it is lawful to rejoice at the setting up of Kings,
so it is necessary to pray for them when set up. Here what we pray. 1. For long
life for the King, or that God would save him from those natural evils which
are evil to him as a man, enforced with 4 reasons. p. 13, 14. 2. a prosperous
life, or that God would save him from civil, public evils evils to him as a
King. p. 15. wherein that prosperity consists, and what those evils are, this
enforced from the inseparable connection of the happiness or misery of Prince
and people p. 16, 17, 18. 3. for a gracious holy life, or that God would save
him from those spiritual evils, which are evil to him as a Christian, this
enforced by 6 weighty and cogent motives, p. 19, 20, 21. 4. for an everlasting
life, or that God would save him from eternal evils, which are evil to him as a
man, a King, a Christian, this enforced 1. from the truth of our love to him,
no love being true or considerable which intends not the eternal welfare of the
parry beloved; 2. from Christian generosity in our composition, moved by the
sad supposal, of the aggravated misery of a miscarrying King. p. 22. Secondly,
why we must thus pray for Kings, enforced by 4 virtues; p. 23, 24. From the 3d
notion of them, arises the 3. Observation, As it is lawful to rejoice,
necessary to pray, so it is our bounden duty, to attest Allegiance freely and
willingly, how to do this, enforced by reasons, 1. in respect of the King, 2.
to the public, 3. to each private Subject. p. 25, 26. From these put together
they rejoice, they testify Allegiance, yet they pray piously, results the 4.
Observe: We need not borrow of profaneness to pay our debt of thankfulness to
God, or Allegiance to our Sovereign. Rejoicing threefold; Civil, Religious,
Profane; the two first allowed and required, the last condemned, and with just
indignation detested. p. 27, 28. the abuse offered to his Majestyes sacred name
in forcing men to drink, by pretending it a character of disloyalty to refuse
to drink his health, a free conjecture at the first original of drinking
healths upon the knees, p. 29. From the 4 aspect of the words arises the 5
Obser. That it is very seasonable in the midst of triumphant rejoycings, to mind
both King and People of humane weakness and need of Divine salvation, enforced
with respect both to King and People. Conclusion by way of recapitulation
commending the King to Gods salvation in all the forenamed respects.
Pious and Loyal Joy, The Subjects duty for their Sovereigns safety.
2 Chronicles 23. verse. 11. -- God save the King.
THe Text is so very seasonable, that I cannot wish the Sermon to be more
profitable. I have chosen it to raise and rectify our present just rejoycings,
and to help you do that knowingly, which you do so heartily; That what you pray
with your spirits, you may pray with your understandings also, as St. Paul
directs; 1 Cor. 14.15.

The occasion of the words lies open and obvious in the close of the 22. chapter
and the beginning of this 23. take but this brief account of it, because they
are so full, that they command all our time to veiw and make improvement of
them.

Atthaliah that wicked woman, as she is called, 2 Chronicles. 24.7. Having boldly
usurped the Royal dignity of the Crown of Judah, after she had barbarously
murdered all the seed royal of the house of David, except Joash only, the
youngest son of Ahaziah who by that pious loyalty, and compassionate duty of
Jehoehebeath, wife to Jehojodah and daughter to King Jehoram, had been stolen
from amongst his brethren which were slain, and was preserved by her prudent
care, hid in a chamber of the Temple. He being now grown into some capacity of
swaying the Scepter, and being presented to the people, and taking upon him the
Regal Government. Jehojedah the chief Priest by his wise and zealous
interposing with the Captains and Commanders of the Army, brought them to a
sense of their duty, and withal of their happiness; and by the forwardness of
the honest Levites, and chief Fathers in Israel, the King is brought forth; and
set up, and solemnly invested in his Princely power; and while the other just
Ceremonies are performed by select hands, the whole multitude do with freeness
and alacrity discharge that part of the service they were fitted for, by
approving of, and by rejoicing at what passed, and with a joyful, pious, loyal
acclamation, cry God save the King.

I shall not trouble you with any division of the words, no! let the King and
Gods salvation never be divided, the method in which I shall handle them, is
only to consider their several aspects, as they look upon the people, God and
the King, as expressions of their gladness in themselves, their devotion
toward God, and loyalty unto the King, and what arises thence.

1. And thus they are Laeta acclamatio Gaudii, An exulting acclamation of their
joy.

2. Pia apprecatio boni, A Pious apprecation of good in the Kings behalf.

3. Debita attestatio Fidelitatis, a due and bounden attestation of their
Allegiance.

4. Tempestiva recordatio humanae fragilitatis, A seasonable reminding both of
the King and themselves of humane frailty and impotence, and their need of
divine salvation and protection both for King and People. And in this order I
shall speak to them, beginning with the first, as they are laeta acclamatio
gaudii, an exulting and triumphant resounding out of their rejoycings in God,
and blessing him, for giving them a King to bless him for.

And thus the first observation from their practice will be this,

That it is Licitum et honestum, A thing lawful, Observe: 1.
honest, and of good report, to testify our gladness and rejoicing at the
setting up of rightful Kings.

Prayer and Praise are of such affinity that it is not less proper, then much
frequent to express one in the form of the other, and what is prayer for the
matter, is praise for the manner of it, frequently in Scripture. This very
phrase has been customary to signify their rejoycings and thanksgivings by on
like occasions. When Saul was invested in his Kingdom, the people upon the
sight of him, cried out, God save the King; And it was not only a custom, but
a solemn institution and appointment, given in charge by David at the
Inauguration of his son Solomon, 1 Kings 1.33. Cause Solomon my son to ride
upon my own Mule, and bring him down to Gihon. And let Zadock the Priest, and
Nathan the Prophet anoint him King over Israel, and say God save King Solomon.

Now the streams of their joy, which flowing together into one channel, make
such a springtide of gladness, arise from these six Heads; and our case and
theirs do run so parallel, that theirs will illustrate ours, without any further
Application.

1. Head.
The first Head is;

The setting up of civil Magistracy this is just matter of great joy.

It Is no small blessing to humane society, to obtain this Ordinance of God,
without which, Homo homini lupus, Each man would be a Wolf or Tiger to his
neighbor, and therefore Kings are called (...) quasi (...), The foundations of
their people, the Shields of the earth, the Shepherds of the flock, the Scept
and Hedge of Religion, Peace and Property, the Fathers of their Country, and
Nurses of the Church. If notwithstanding the severe discipline which God has
appointed to keep the world in awe and order, yet men's lusts force them; Upon
the very point and edge of the Magistrates sword, what bounds or measure would
they know, if that restraint were taken off. Certainly he said not amiss, who
said, It Is better living where nothing is lawful, then where all things are
lawful, Sine imperio nec domus ulla, nec civitas, nec gens, noc hominu^
universu^ genus stare nec verum natura omnis, nec ipse mundas durare potest.
Cicero de legib.

Cum dicitur non fuisse Regem in Israel, innuntur miranda^ non esse turbidam
fuisse tunc religionem ^trempublicam. Hinc nata est idolatria bonorum alienorum
direptio: quia rex non erat, neque Magistratus, qui male ista cohiberet.
Agnoscamus hinc, quanti sit faciendus Magistratus: qui si bonus fuerit, et
Rempublicam et cultu^ Dei continet custos: etc. Et ut ut malus sit ad tuendam
co^munem hominem societatem, Reipub. multis modis prodest. Pet. Mart. in Locum.


and the hazard is less, in all respects of being restrained from, or punished
for the doing something well, then to be left at liberty to do, or suffer what
our own or others lusts may force upon us. It Was the top and (...) of the bad
condition of the people of Laish. Judge. 18.7. That there was no Magistrate in
the Land to put any man to shame in any thing.

But the great instance is, Judges 17.6.18.1.19.1. in all which places it is
said, In those days there was no King in Israel, every man did what was right
in his own eyes. Then it was, that that prodigious lewdnes was acted in Gibeah
upon the Levites Concubine, and the whole Tribe of Benjamin made accessory,
post factum, by abetting and patronizing so flagitious a wickedness, then was
that minor idolatry set up in Micahs house, and that increast into a more
spreading and accumulated mischief in the Apostasy and vile defection of an
whole Tribe; which thereby became the accursed Tribe, of which none are
mentioned to be sealed, in the 8th of the Revelation, where twelve thousand are
sealed of every Tribe besides, and Dan which should have judged his people, for
want of a King to judge them, ran upon eternal Judgment.

And indeed civil Magistracy is so great a mercy that it cost no less then the
blood of Jesus Christ to purchase it: Propter peccatum protoplastorum non solum
spiritualibus and aeternis futurae vitae bonis, sed etiam et corporalibus hujus
vita commodis, genus humanu^ excidit sed Deus ex miranda et nunqua^ satis
p^^edi cauda beniguita te propter filij intercessionem, non illa solum sed
etiam haec restituit ac reparavit, ac media illis conservandis ordinavit inter
quae eminotpoliticus Magistratus. Gerard. de mag. Polit.
for man by his apostasy from God and rebellion against him, forfeited the
benefit and blessing of order, and deserved to be let loose to Ataxy and
Anarchy and all most sad confusions, but Jesus Christ interposed and by his
mediation prevailed with his Father in behalf of humane society, to avert the
vengeance and procure this blessing, b Pro. 8.15. By me Kings reign, and
Princes decree justice, by me Princes rule even all the Judges of the earth,
says Wisdom, that is, Jesus Christ, that is, not only by me are the persons
appointed, but by me is the institution procured, and continued. It Is a
disputed case whether Magistrates be immediately under God the Creator, or
God-man the Redeemer, but the arguments are many and cogent on this latter
side, and the Authorityes many, grave and learned, but I must wave all at
present. And this should as it strongly ingageth, earnestly excite and quicken
Magistrates, to be most careful of Christ's concernments, and to rule for him,
by whom they rule. And thus for the first Head, and wel-spring of their joy,
the enjoyment of the blessing of civil Magistracy.

2. The second source of their rejoicing was that they had not only civil
Magistrates, but the best form of civil Magistracy, Monarchy or Kingly
Government, which that it is so, So: the Arguments are obvious and copious, Ipso
dei filius
if time would admit the bringing them to view. As the Antiquity, Monarchicus
status est omniam antiquisimus. impiorum constitutionem et conservationem sibi
tribuit quia per Christum mediatorem non solum spiritulia et aeterna, sed etiam
crporalia et temporalia beneficia generi hum. suntcredita intro qua eminet
constitutio Magistratus.
Agust. The first the world was ever acquainted with. Most agreeable to nature,
natures light suggesting, that (...); and all Nations of the earth when guided
by its light did know no other. Assirians, Medes, Persians, etc. It Is the
lively Image of Paternal Government, as the Father has authority and power
over his children. The oeconomick Government of every Family, in which one Lord
or Master, and therefore Bias smartly answered him, who moved for a
Commonwealth: Sir, Make experiment of it in your own family, before you
commend it to the public, and nature gives emblems of it in the Bees, the
Cranes, etc. Farther

Most comprehensive of the advantages of other Governments, and least subject
to their inconveniences or dangers, and proved the best by great experience of
the continuance and flourishing of it beyond any other, and that to which
others who most despised and decryed it, were often glad to be beholding in
streights and difficulties. As by the Romans setting up Dictators so frequently
appears. But there is one so glorious no foggs of Ignorance can Eclipse it is
evidence, the one Sun to rule the day, and in a different sense, both to
obscure, and enlighten all the common people of the skies, and another so
superlative that no Impiety dares to deny or question it, one God to rule the
higher house of Angels, and the lower house of men, and all things with and
under them.

But one Text of Scripture is sufficient, Deuteronomy. 33.5. Genesis 17.6.
where to wave what flows from Moses being King in Jesurun, and Gods promise
to Abraham that Kings should come of him. We know Gods own decision and
suffrage, advancing a Kingdom above all other puny forms of Optimacy or
Democracy. Ezekiel. 16.13. -- Thou did prosper into a Kingdom. The whole scope
of the place is to enumerate the mercies and favors heaped by the Lord upon
this sinful people of Israel, and to upbraid their non-improvement, yea their
vile and base return made to so good a God for all his mercies Now if it were
not a blessing and advantage to a people to be raised and prospered out of a
meaner and a baser condition into a Kingdom, it were no aggravation of their
fault, that it was against him who had done such things for them, and so exalted
them.

3. The Third spring of their stream of joy was, 3. Head.
that they had the kingly government managed by a kingly hand, the Son of
ancient Kings to sit upon the Throne. It Is a reproach to a people to be ruled by
vile and mean men, when God sets up the basest of men, and lets servants have
dominion, he does not only exercise his own supremacy, but debaseth, and
reproacheth a nation whom he deals so with. But it is the great advantage both
in point of honor and safety, when honorable and princely persons rule, and
the Majesty of the governor, is not only an ornament but Munament, unto the
Government it self; that the Nation is neither despicable for his obscurity,
nor subject to mutinies by the multitude of Competitors to the Throne, upon
which many will esteem themselves, and be esteemed by others, as fit to fit,
as such an one, therefore Eccl. 10.17. Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is
the Son of Nobles: by high entraction and suitable education shaped to the
honorable and difficult work of government.

4. The Fourth Head of joy was, that they had not only A King, but The King,
the just and righteous Heir, one of the blood Royal of the house of David,
upon whom the Lord himself had entailed the Kingdom of the house of Judah. And
surely this is great and just matter of rejoicing, to see that pinching
hateful snare broken, which has always been so sore a rack to tender
consciences, I mean the yielding of obedience to undue, and to usurped powers.
The honest men in Judah were in great straights, and none can express their
case, but such as taste and feel it, when they were relieved in it. It Is an
heavy and affrighting Text, Romans 13.2. They that resist, receive to themselves
damnation; and we had need to fear the very shadow of it passing over us. It Is
a very great refreshment to be set at freedom from that snare and danger, and
to have nothing else to inquire, but the lawfulness, and goodness of things
commanded, that either they may be obeyed with alacrity and freeness, or we may
suffer with cheerfullnesse, and peace of conscience, which will be an Antidote
and Cordial in such trials, and I assuredly believe, that many good men find
it as irksome and pressing a trouble to be commanded lawful things by
unlawful powers, as unlawful things by powers which are lawful.

5. The Fifth Head of this joyful stream was, that the Lord had given them a
King of the true Religion, to be a nursing father to his Church; the true
Religion was under great oppression; Atthaliah though a woman, was a masculine
Idolatresse, superstition was very rampant, Jeroboam's Calves were not only
grown Bulls, and strong enough to push with the horn of persecution all that
would not fall down and worship them, but were multiplied into an Heard, so
that all the consecrated ground in Israel was too scant a pasture for them, 2 Chronicles. 24.7. and truth had but a lean and necessitated tolleration. And it must
needs be matter of triumphant refreshment to recover freedom for Gods
Ordinances and Worship after so black and dark suspension and suppression of
them.

The sixth Head which filld this stream, was the manner of it, the sudden
surprise of mercy, an unexpected deliverance beyond their faith and hope, when
most concluded sadly that all the royal seed were dead, and no strong rod left
to be a Scepter to rule, as Ezekiel. 19.14. and all accomplished with so much peace
and safety, so little blood, and all the people of the land rejoiced, and the
City was quiet, 2 Chronicles. 23. ult. And doubtless beloved our rejoycings run
parallel with theirs in all the springs and streams, and if in any thing they
are unlike, it is by being over-measure; God has blessed us with a Kingly
Magistrate, a King, the King, not only the son of ancient Kings, but the
rightful heir and undoubted Lord of the Imperial Crown and dignity of this
British world. A King of the true Religion, most graciously preserved so,
notwithstanding all the temptations spread before him by those of contrary
persuasion and profession, with all imaginable advantages on the perswaders
parts, and all the unkind and scandalizing disobligements from them of the same
Faith and way of worship. Blessed be the Lord for restoring to a Protestant
people, a Protestant King, after so many eminent hazards both to the Protestant
and to the King. The God of Heaven who has kept him in the storm of affliction
from being broken, keep him in the Sunshine of Prosperity from being warpt in
any kind, I speak it not as doubting, but imploring that establishing grace,
which may confirm him and enlarge his heart in the purest, and most zealous
practice of it, more and more, that no damp may be upon the zealous rejoycings
of those to whom Gods glory, his honor is most truly dear; And to satisfy not
your curiosity so much, as your serious rejoycings; I shall acquaint you with
some passages which proceeded from his Princely lips, at the presentment of the
Bible to him by the Reverend London-Ministers in his going through the City. I
thank you for your prayers, and I desire the continuance of them, and I assure
you I shall make it my first care to set up Gods worship and service, this is
the book must guide us all, and I will make it the rule of my life and my
Reign.

Certainly we have very solid cause to rejoice that Religion is freed from so
many dangers as did beset it, over drop it, and suck at its sap and vigor, and
we humbly hope the dangers are not changed only, but removed wholly. It Is a
mercy the very Text is not treason, that there is no Index expurgatorious upon
our Bibles, to expunge such verses, that the whole Chapter is not Appocrypha,
and that our whole Bibles are once more Scripture; And all this so wonderfully
brought to pass, with so unbloody triumphs, with such unexpected suddenness,
with so enlarged a satisfaction to the body of the Nation, and with such signal
discoveries of the Lords right hand in the doing of it, that we must cry out
and say, It Is the Lords own doing and it is marvelous in our eyes, this is the
day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. And this may
suffice for the words in their first acceptance, as they are Laeta acclamatio
gaudii, The triumphant and exulting acclamation of their joy and gladness. I
proceed to the second as they are.

2. Pia apprecatio boni, a Pious and devout apprecation of good to be conferred
and bestowed upon him, in the Original it is (...) Vivat Rex, Let the King live,
the words are short and comprehensive, and a common form of benediction, not
unlike that other frequent and customary amongst the Hebrews, pax tibi, (...)
Life is the basis, the foundation and lower story upon which the superstructure
of all other blessings are erected, the center in which all other lives do
meet; when we pray for life, we compendiously pray for all the benefits
blessings and advantages which do accompany, and may attend it, and make it
life indeed. And the matter will be little different, whether we keep to the
strictness of the Original, or take the liberty of our Translation, which is a
kind of paraphrase upon the words. If the first then they are a direct
apprecation of those good things wherein life with the comforts of it do
consist. If in the latter a deprecation of those evils contrary to it thus, Let
the King live, that is, let him live a long life, 2. a prosperous life; 3. a
gracious life; 4. an eternal life, or God save the King, that is, God save him
from what is naturally evil to him as a man; 2. from what is civilly evil to
him as a King; 3. from what is spiritualy evil to him as a Christian; 4. from
what is eternally evil to him in all respects, as a man, a King, a Christian.

So the observation here is,

That as it is lawful and of good report to rejoice in the setting up of Kings,
so it is honestum et necessarium, honest and a necessary duty to pray for them
when set up to be Gods remembrancers, to preserve and secure them, to bless
them, as Solomon's people did him, 1 Kings 8.66. that is, commend him heartily
to God to be blessed of him.

I shall first explain and then confirm this observation. And I will begin
with the first branch of it. Let the King live a long life, or God save the
King from what is naturally evil to him as a man. You may have the meaning of
it, Psalm. 21.4. He asked life of thee, and thou gave it him, length of days
for ever and ever. A life of long continuance, an Emblem and shadow of a life
which lasts for ever, or a life in his posterity stretched, and eked out in a
Kingly Progeny. So Psalm. 61.6. Thou will prolong the Kings life, and his years
as many generations. We here pray that the Lord would preserve and prolong the
natural life of the King, and that he, who ( Psalm. 144.10.) gives salvation
unto Kings, and preserved David from the hurtful sword, would do so for our
King, preserve him from what may either take away his life, or imbitter it to
him. And we are much concerned thus to pray that his life may be long and
healthful, lively, vigorous to discharge his office of governing his people to
their best advantage. For

First, It Is a token of Gods anger and displeasure when the lives of Kings are
shortened, and thereby their number multiplied, Prove. 28.2. For the
transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof; And great is the evil
which befalls that Land, where the Kings dye young, before their posterity be
grown men of knowledge and Authority: For when, (as he threatens, Isa 3.4.) An
angry God gives to a provoking people, children to be their Princes, and babes
to rule over them. Verse. 5. Then the people shall be oppressed every one by
another, and every one by his neighbor. If therefore you would be free from
this reproach of being frownd on by a righteous God, and bearing the
consequents that issue thence, pray first that the King may live long.

Secondly, Pray for a long life for the King, to prevent the hazards and
commotions which attend the change of Governors; What is the curse of women,
is the doom of Nations, to bring forth with danger, pain and sorrow; we
commonly see in the change of Princes, new designs, new Laws, new Officers, new
Friends, new Enemies, new Habits, and a new form of living: for most commonly
all Princes take a delight to alter all things, that they may be spoken of: the
which does oftentimes cause great inconveniences not only to the subjects in
particular, but also to the whole body of the State. Bodin. lib. 6. chapter 4.
Rarely does the Throne Travel of a new King, but it is in danger to be rent in
pieces: Turbulent spirits watch the advantage of an Inter-regnum, as Jeroboam
did at the death of Solomon, and design such opportunities to ripen mischief:
And it is obvious that for the most part, the longest reigns have been the
happiest times, as David's, Solomon's, Augustus, Queen Elizabeth, etc.
Therefore if you love the ease and safety of the people pray that such hazards
may be rare and few, by the long continuance of them who sit upon the Throne.

Thirdly, Pray for the long life of the King, that continuance of time may give
him more knowledge and experience in the Art of Kingship. Certainly as ruling
is one of the most high and noble employments, so it is one of the most
difficult Arts, and needs not only many and excellent tools and instruments, as
Laws and Counselors, and Officers of State, and the like, but very much
wisdom to manage, guide and use them all, which caused Solomon, (wise even
then, or else he had not asked so wisely) to beg of God (1 Kings 3.9.) an
understanding heart to judge his people, and to discern betwixt good and evil,
and seeing infused habits are acquired, as acquired ones are, though the Lord
do graciously infuse wisdom and an heart fitted for government, as he gave
Saul another heart when he designed him King. 1 Samuel 10.9. yet time and
experience do greatly advantage a Prince, and add to his wisdom and
understanding, and by ruling he best learns to rule. Three things much help a
King to govern well, First, Science or knowledge of the Rules of policy or
government; Secondly, Observation of the errors or advantages of other Princes,
in well, or misapplying those Rules; Thirdly and Chiefly, Practice and
experience, and this is the daughter and product of time; Practice is the great
accomplisher of all professions, this makes the valiant and successful
Soldier, this makes the bold and skillful mariner, this makes the learned and
the useful Physician, this makes the convincing and savoury Minister, and this
makes the truly wise, and excellent and glorious Prince. And it is continuance
of time must help in this, it is that which gives him advantage to know his
peoples temper at home, and their true interest abroad; what amities to
contract, what offers to refuse or choose, what injuries to revenge, or more
safely and cheaply not to resent and take notice of. From this lofty Pinnacle
it is he has the fairest view and prospect of the Counsels and designs of
neighboring Princes, which may make impression on himself and people, and may
see how to divert them, obviate or improve them, and therefore the loss of a
prudent and experienced King, often puts such a stand unto public concernments
of the whole people, it is a damage scarce reparable in an age. Therefore if you
love but the honor and renown of your people pray that the King may live
long, that experience may ripen him for Government, and we long enjoy the
benefit and exercise of that experience.

4. Pray for long life for the King, because long life is in it self a
blessing, a promised blessing which God has often held forth in the Scripture
as a very desirable thing, and is evidently so, not only as it is the bottom
and foundation of all our good things here, for when life is gone, all is gone,
but in respect of eternity our everlasting condition depends upon this; Life is
the day in which alone we can work for Heaven. The night comes wherein no man
can work, (Joh. 9.4.) Life the longer it is, the more advantage it gives to
know more of God, to do more for God, and to be fitted for fuller fruitions and
enjoyments of him to all eternity; Beg of God therefore to give the King this
blessing, and the blessing of it, the best improvement of it to all the
advantages and benefits thereof.

I come to the second, Let the King live a prosperous and happy life, as a
King, or God save the King from those politic or civil evils, which are evil
to him as a King, Prosperetur Rex, So the Targum renders it; this follows in
order in the 21 Psalm, v. 4. Thou gave him length of days; then v: 5. His
glory is great in thy salvation, Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him,
for thou have made him most blessed, etc. And that you may be the more excited
thus to pray for him; consider your own interest ingages you hereto, for the
good and prosperity of King and People are involved and wrapped up in one
another; these are those twins, which must live or die together, it cannot be
well with head or members severally, or distinct from each other, but they
flourish or wither both, or neither; there cannot be a glorious King over a
dispirited and despicable, discontented people, neither can there be a renowned
and a flourishing people under a mean, and an inglorious Head. Now when you
pray that your King may live a prosperous life as a King, you pray for a
confluence of those blessings which may render King and people jointly and
mutually happy in, and with each other.

Now the happiness of Kings as such consists; 1. In the multitude of his
people; Prove: 14.28. In the multitude of people, is the Kings honor, but in
the want of people is the destruction of the Prince; 2. In the peaceable
subjection of his people, one of the most comely sights in Solomon's opinion is,
a King against whom there is no rising up; Prove. 30.31.3. In the prosperity,
wealth, plenty, honor of his people. 4. In the presence of God with his
people, that true Religion be loved and practiced in the midst of them, that
God own them for his people, this was the honor of Solomon, 1 Kings 3.8. To be
King of a people whom God had chosen for his own, a great people to which the
Lord was nigh. Then the happiness of a people in their King consists in this;
First, That he be a wise prudent Prince, knowing how to go in and out before
them and to judge them; This was Solomon's petition, 1 Kings 3.9. and this was
his people happiness and glory to be ruled by such an one. Secondly, That he
be a just and righteous, and a merciful Prince, executing judgment and doing
justice, and relieving the oppressed, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over men must
be just ruling in the fear of God, and he shall be as the light of the morning
when the sun rises, even a morning without clouds, as the tender grass
springing out of the earth, by clear shining after rain; 3. That he be a man
of courage, valiant and public spirited, that dare look danger in the face,
and expose himself to hazards for his peoples safety when great necessity
requires it. Lastly, That he be a lover of good men, one in whose days the
righteous may flourish. Ps. 72.7. See the character of an excellent King in the
beginning of that Psalm, where you find David begging of God to make Solomon
such, in a word, pray that the King may live a wise, a just, a valiant, and
religious King over a numerous, a Loyal, a loving, a wealthy and religious
people, and let him be saved by the Lord from what ever may hinder King or
People from being such. God save him from true enemies, and from false friends;
from real adversaries, and from pretended lovers. God save him from the hurtful
sword of foreign enemies, that either he may have none such, or they may only
be the matter of his victory and triumph. And God save him from domestic and
intestine seditions, rebellions, insurrections, that there be no strife amongst
his Subjects, but to out-vy each other in pious Loyalty and just allegiance,
that the hearts of his people may be his Throne, and the heads of his enemies
may be his footstool. God save him from false friends which should either
betray his good councils, or suggest evil councils to him, from such as Joash
met with in the 2 Chronicles. 24.17. After the death of Jehojedah came the Princes
of Judah and made obeisance to the King, and the King hearkened to them, and
they left the house of the Lord God of their Fathers, and served groves and
idols: It Is not said what the Princes spoke, but it was cursed council which
brought the wrath of God upon them, and engaged the King in a great additionall
sin, even to command him to be stoned who was both the Lords messenger, and the
son of them by whose loving and prudent fidelity his life had been preserved,
and his Kingdom recovered. The Lord preserve our King from all such, and let
the wicked be kept from about him, that his Throne may be established in
righteousness; Prove. 25.5. and let that be his character, Pro: 14. ult. which
will be his perpetual honor, That his favor may be to a wise servant, and his
wrath against them which cause shame. Take the sum of what we are to pray for,
in this second branch, excellently laid down by the Pen of holy David, Psalm.
144.10, 11, etc. where we have the King praying for himself and people, what we
are to pray for our King and selves, having in the 10th verse fitted himself to
pray, and strengthened his faith by putting upon God a suitable Title, He that
gives salvation unto Kings, and by experience of former mercy, it is he that
has already delivered David his servant from the hurtful sword, then he
proceeds to pray to be rid and delivered from the hand of strange children,
whose mouth speaks vanity, that is, who vainly boast and threaten great
things, and them whose right hand is falsehood, that is, who satisfy their
faith, which they have sworn by lifting up their hand, for that was the form
of swearing amongst the Hebrews, Genesis 14.22. I have lifted up my hand unto the
Lord, I have sworn as we swear by laying the hand upon the Book. v. 12. That
our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our daughters may be as
corner stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace: ver: 13. That our
garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our sheep may bring
forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets, that our Oxen may be strong
to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor going out, that there be no
complaining in our streets, happy is the people that is in such a case, yea
happy is that people whose God is the Lord. This is to live like a King indeed,
to live and rule a people compassed about with so sweet a confluence of all
good things, and all those crowned with the presence of God, and the
flourishing condition of true religion, all which Hezekiah epitomizes, not
insignificatively, in two words truth and peace in his days, and this is what
we do pray and ought to pray in the second respect, Let the King live a
prosperous and happy life, as a King. God save the King from those civil,
public evils, which are evil to him as a King.

Thirdly, Let the King live a holy, gracious, Godly life, or God save the King
from those spiritual evils which are evil to him as a Christian, and it is very
requisite that we in this respect cry heartily God save the King. For

1. This is the most hopeful way to obtain the two foregoing petitions, for
long life, and a glorious reign; for Prove: 3.16. of grace and wisdom it is
affirmed, that length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor, and Prove: 22.4. By the fear of the Lord are riches, honor
and life.

2. Because the King needs this as well, as much as other men, what is said of
the great Prophet, I mean Elijah, is true of the greatest of Kings, He is a man
subject to the like passions, Jam. 5.17. a piece of the corrupted mass of
fallen mankind, and a sinner by nature as really as other men, and needs
renewing, sanctifying, converting, quickening, purging, pardoning grace as well
as other men.

3. Because the temptations of a King are more and stronger then of other men:
Partly by reason of his very place and station, the height and fullness of it,
and exemption from those many restraints which other men are awed by, and
especialy from the m^lice and subtilty of Satan who knows how to do his work
compendiously, and therefore will be ready like the Syrians to fight neither
with small nor great, comparatively, but with the King of Israel, that by
drawing a King to commit it, he may bring vice into fashion and repute, and
therefore pray earnestly.

4. God save the King from spiritual evils, because its of great concernment to
the whole Nation, what example the King sets, for his practice is the grand
copy which most write after, and the lives of the people will be in great
measure the counterpart of his actions, Regis ad exemplum, etc. So that all his
good laws will hardly avail to counterpoyse a bad example if the Lord should
leave him to himself to set one; and on the other side, it is a very great
advantage to virtue and Godliness, when it is commended by the Kings practice,
as well as commended by his authority, if Religion and Piety be in credit and
fashion at the Court, 'twill be the mode and fashion of City and Country, the
wisdom of God has frequently made use of the conversion of Kings, to open a
way for the Gospel into their Dominions, yea and their peoples hearts too.

5. Because the employments of a King are great, many and weighty; and indeed
the duties of the meanest of our callings will be too heavy for us, to be well
borne, unless the Lord help us to sustain them, and how much more does a King
whose work is, as the noblest, so the hardest, need much Divine assistance,
much grace, much help from Heaven to perform so great a trust, to the glory of
God, his own comfort, and his peoples good.

6. Because if God should in anger leave the King to injoyne grievous and
unlawful things, which I only innocently suppose, to awaken your zealous
prayers for him (but do not peevishly suggest, or sullenly foreboad he will)
how uncomfortable will your neglect of duty make your sufferings, if you should
be called to suffer in such case? for then will your conscience fly in your
face, and tell you, I may thank my own neglect of duty for all this, if I had
begged earnestly for wisdom, and the guidance of Gods holy Spirit for him,
it is like such things had never been enjoined, and I now reap nothing but the
just desert of mine own folly and neglects, which certainly will be unpleasant
fruit, and one of the bitterest drops in a sorrowful unwelcome cup: In a word,
seeing it is the grace and Spirit of God which sanctifies all relations, and
fits and inables for the resisting the temptations incident to them, and to
perform the duty incumbent on us in them, let us pray heartily that God would
beautify the King abundantly, with those plentiful influences of his Spirit,
which may render him at once the best of Kings and the best of men, and that he
would save him from all the guilt, and power, and filth, and deceitfulness of
sin, and what ever Spiritual evils, are evil to him as a Christian.

4. God save the King from eternal evils, evil to him as man, as King, as
Christian. Let the King live an eternal life in Heaven, after a long and happy
life on earth: Serus in Coelum redeat (Hor:) or in the words of a better Poet,
the sweet Singer of Israel, Psalm. 91. ult. Let God say of him, With long life
will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. And we should with as much
hearty earnestness pray, and cry God save the King in this sense, as in any,
this is to be saved indeed: Alas! all other salvation is a poor low thing,
without that salvation which is emphatically so called, and shall never be
changed or altered. Let me enforce this briefly:

1. If you love the King truly, you must pray thus for him, true love will
constrain you, it is a false and a despicable and but a selfish love, which
does not stretch it self out unto eternity: You love no man truly, whose soul
you do not love, and certainly you love not that soul, concerning which you
are indifferent, and care not what becomes of it, care not though it perish and
be lost and damned for ever: Can you say you love? and not be moved with the
everlasting prayers and sorrows of those whom you pretend to love? now be
solicitous for their prevention or removal.

2. If there be any bowels of Christianity, or but generous humanity in you, it
will provoke you thus to pray for him especially: For if a King miscarry, O how
terrible and sad will his miscarriage be: Potentes potenter, The mighty shall
be mightily tormented, if they go to the place of torment, it may heat the
coldest, and kindle the dampest devotions into flames of zeal to prevent so sad
a change, to consider how horrid it will be to change the dignity, the
splendour, the Authority and Majesty of a Throne and Scepter into eternal bonds
and darkness, hunger, thirst and cold, to extremity beyond imagination, to
Vassalage under the basest and vilest piece of the whole Creation; it would be
a dreadful alteration for the poorest of us, to change our meanest
accommodations for the flames of Hell, and unmixed wrath of the Almighty God;
but what then for a King to fall from so high a standing, graviori lapsu, and
be insulted over as the King of Babylon, Isa. 14.9, 10. Hell from beneath is
moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming: it raises up the dead for thee,
even all the great ones of the earth, it has raised up from their thrones, all
the Kings of the nations. All they shall speak and say unto thee, art thou
also become weak as we? art thou become like unto us. Thy pomp is brought down
--: How art thou fallen from Heaven? The thing it self does speak so movingly
that I shall add no more but as men amazed use to do, with greatest vehemence
cry out, God save the King from those eternal evils, that he may live an
everlasting life.

The Reasons why we must freely and cordially join in this pious Apprecation,
that the King may live or be saved in all those Respects, are

1. The command of God, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort therefore that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men; For Kings, and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, for this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior.

2. The fifth Commandment does lay necessity upon us, and woe be to us if we
be found wanting. He is our public father, Pater patriae, our Countries
father, and it is one chief part of the Tribute of honor we owe to our
superiors, our humblest and our heartiest prayers.

3. The example of the best and choicest of Gods servants always making
conscience of this duty, even to and for bad Kings. Nero was King when St. Paul
wrote his Epistle to Timothy. Jehojedah and his sons very good men and Prophets
of God begat the cry, they cried, God save the King: The Church and people of
God, even when in Babylon prayed for the peace of it, and after their return
did offer sacrifice for the life of the King and of his sons: And the mutes and
discontented persons at Readiness inauguration are branded with a character of
infamy, sons of Belial, who despised him and brought him no present. 1 Samuel
10.27.

4. It is but an equitable retaliation; The King is loaded with the burden of
cares for your safety and preservation: a Throne is not so soft a seat as most
men judge it, a thorn is its lively Anagram, you only see the shining outside
of a Crown, but feel not the harsher lining of its inside, nor the pressing
weightinesse with which it loads as well as adorns; if you did, you would envy
less, and pray and pity more, and indeed if your burden bow him down, there
is all reason you support and stay him up, and by your prayers prop up his
hands as Aaron and Hur did those of Moses that they may be steady in the
management of your concernments.

I come now to the third aspect of the words, as they look upon the King
directly, and fix the accent upon his name and Title: As they are debita
attostatio fidelitatis, a due and bounden attestation, and a vowed
acknowledgement of their allegiance, and subjection to him as their King;
jubilo suo se spontaneus regni sui subditos profitenter. And here we have the
third Observation.

It Is very useful and convenient that upon the setting up of rightful Kings,
the subjects do freely and readily witness and manifest their due and just
allegiance and fidelity.

As other Kingdoms are the shadows of Christ's Kingdom, so his is the great
pattern and best example of other Kingdoms; now of his it is said, that his
people are willing in the day of his power, and so should other subjects be, a
willing people, readily yielding their obedience in all lawful things, as
David's did, Psalm. 18.44. As Soon as they hear of me they shall obey me: the
strangers shall submit themselves unto me. We must be subject not for wrath,
but for conscience sake, not grudgingly, nor of necessity, not because we must,
but because we will, yea, because it is Gods will we should. And indeed that we
thus do is of great concernment to Princes, to the Public, and to each
particular man.

First, To the Prince, It contributes much to his ease and honor, and makes
him a King indeed, when he knows he rules his people not against their wills,
when he needs no guard against his people, but contrariwise Amor civium est pro
satellitio, their love is his security and shield, and they bare him, as he
bears his Crown, not as a load, but Ornament.

Secondly, It Is much for the advantage of the public, as to security and peace,
and for prevention of commotions and confusions in the State. As many women
loose their chastity by forfeiting their modesty, for did they give evidence,
as grave and sober matrons of a pious and resolved purity, the most debaucht
and profligate ruffian would not have impudence enough to attempt them; but
lightness and loose wearing of the veil of modesty, imboldens to that onset
which ends too often in a surrender: And thus it is with people, their
wavering, and unresolved obedience, encourages seditious and turbulent
designers, upon public peace, and gives them but too too pregnant hopes of too
too good success, in those vile and dangerous attempts, from which they would
with utterest despair desist, if people were, as they ought to be, determined,
fixed and established, in resolved and just obedience to their Rightful and
undoubted Princes.

Thirdly, It Is much for the peace and private good of each particular man, both
as all single Interests are involved and bound up in that of the public peace
and safety; and farther, because subjects are rarely made the Butt of their
Princes displeasure, till they give some cause of jealousy, and in a sort
necessitate some frowns for his personal or national security, and prevention
of some teeming mischief.

And for these and the like reasons, it has been, and still is, the prudent
and laudable custom of all nations to testify their willing subjection at the
inauguration of their Kings; the Nobles by some signal act of homage, as by
explicit oath, by bending of the knee, by touching the Crown or Scepter, by
kissing of their Prince, to which the Psalmist alludes, Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son,
lest he be angry, osculo sc. subjectionis, or some such like action, and all
the people to attest their concurrence with them, in such demonstrations of
their duty, by hearty and reiterated acclamations like to this, God save the
King.

I will now put these three together and give the result of them, they rejoice,
they attest their allegiance, and they do both these in a pious and pertinent
religious form of prayer, Whence their arises this fourth Observation,

That the best rejoicing is Religious rejoicing, made sweet and savory with the
name of God, or thus, We need not borrow of profanesse to pay our debt of
thankfulness to God, and allegiance to the King.

That Is good melody, Christ's, which is so in heaven which jarrs not, nor sounds
harsh in the holy ears of God, that harmony which makes no discord with piety;
but it is sad mirth which grieves the holy Spirit, and very treasonable
allegiance which casts off obedience to the King of Kings. There is a threefold
rejoicing, Civil rejoicing, religious rejoicing, and profane rejoicing: the
first is lawful, the second is necessary, but the third is neither lawful nor
necessary, but very abominable and hateful to a blessed God, and burdensome
and grievous to all sober, and honest men. I may say of it, ( Jam. 4.16.) All
such rejoycings are evil. And indeed the mingling so much profaneness with
some men's joy, has put a damp upon the rejoycings of many sober and godly men,
and forced them to withdraw from the expressions of your gladness, not through
unwillingnesse to testify their gladness, for the Lords great and gracious
goodness to the King and Nation, which was as true, as hearty, and enlarged as
any men's; but for fear of partaking with them in the sinful manner of their
rejoycings, and lest they should so ill requite the Lords kindness, as to
provoke and sadden him, for relieving and gladding us. I beseech therefore and
adjure such men not to seek occasions, or take up a reproach against the most
sober and most loyal in the Land, as if they were less glad, because less
madd then some men, as if true joy were inconsistent with sobriety and
seriousness, when the truth is, it is altogethet inconsistent with the want of
them, for res est severa verum gaudium, Seneca. True joy is a very serious and
rational affection as any that adorns man's nature. And for your selves, O that
I could prevail with you, to pray for the King more, and to drink and swear (I
will not call it for him, though too many do, but) for your lusts, less. Oh
how uncomely is it, for the same mouth to cry, God save the King, and then to
bid defiance to heaven, with dreadful God damn themselves, Jam. 3.10. Out of
the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my Brethren these things ought
not so to be. If you pray for him, make not such a dam in the channel of your
own prayers, as must stop the current of them, but so live as your prayers may
be heard, and do him good; You know or should know, if you regard iniquity God
will not regard your prayers, God hears not sinners. First, wilful and
flagitious ones; but if any man be a worshipper of God, and do his will, him he
hears, Joh. 9.31. And indeed such Practices are so far from being expressions
of thankfulness that they are incompetent and inconsistent, the Apostle
opposes them, Ephesians. 5.4. -- But rather giving of thanks. He that gave charge,
that our communication should be always savoury, seasoned with salt, that it
might minister grace to the hearers, never gave an exception to that rule, or a
toleration that at times of public rejoicing it might be rotten or profane.
Certainly he who put those two together, Fear God, and honor the King, 1 Pet.
2.17. well knew that we might honor the King without casting off the fear of
God. I have met with a gloss upon that passage of Solomon, Prove. 24.21. My son
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with those who are given to
change; that is, who do transmutare ordinem, set the King before the Lord.

I should have spoken somewhat here concerning drinking healths, so much urged
and practiced by very many men, and looked upon as if it were the only
character of a Loyal Subject, for my part I confess I think they have made a
very unhappy and a rude choice to express their honor to the King by; I judge
his name too August, too Sacred and Reverend a thing, to be soakt and sopt in
every cup; yea, pardon the expression, for vile practices necessitate to homely
comparisons, to be made use of as a Farriers horn to force down that drink
which neither the man, nor the beast (for so drunkenness leaves them, which it
found men) would swallow, but for fear of being judged disloyal: but the most
offensive posture of this blind zeal, is when it transforms men into more
perfect pictures of the Worshippers of Bacchus, defiles and prostitutes a
consecrated gesture, and brings them on their knees, perhaps a casual
invention, began by some, who had drank themselves off their legs, and when
they could stand no longer, would make a devout virtue of their unhappy
necessity, to which they were forced as a more steady posture. I confess I
want a name bad enough for this custom, and O that I could fairly persuade
men out of it, as a most absurd and very scandalous practice. If it be good, as
I allow it is, to rejoice and to attest and manifest our Allegiance, yet do
both so, as may be of good report, let not then your good be evil spoken of,
and think it not enough to say, it is none but a few such or such precise
fellows are offended; Remember what the Apostles tenderness and caution was,
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God; Give
none offense to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor.
10.31, 32. They who are offended cannot be less considerable then some of those
of whom he here makes mention, and if the matter were less liable to exception,
and it were, their only weakness to take offense who do so, yet it would become
you to remove the occasion, and not to reflect reproach upon our Loyal and
sincere, yet Pious and Religious rejoycings. I shall conclude with one
intimation, that the King will not take this so kindly as you vainly think he
will, for amongst many other gracious words which fell from his gracious lips,
when he received the London Ministers which went to him at the Hague, he had
these memorable and rare expressions;

That he would make it his business to bring virtue and sobriety into fashion
and repute in England, and though there were a profane drinking party which
would be esteemed his best or only friends, he would make the more haste into
England, to let such men know that he was their worst enemy, for they were the
Devils party, and none of his, and which is the true honor of them, they were
free and so continue, not drawn from him or suggested to him. His Majesty's
most excellent Proclamation against profaneness and debauchery, published since
the preaching this, and which has so exceedingly refresht, and afresh indear'd
him, to his loving, Loyal, sober subjects: And thus for the 4. observation
resulting from the conjunction of the manner how they express their joy and
attest their loyalty, in a gracious, savory, and useful prayer, that God would
save him, whom they freely own, and gladly acknowledge as their King.

I come to the last aspect of the words, as they are Tempestiva recordatio
humanae fragilitatis, and look upon both King and People to mind them
seasonably of humane frailty and weakness, and how much even Kings do need
Gods Salvation and Defense, and here we have the fifth and last Observation:

It Is very seasonable and necessary when King and People are in greatest glory
and state, to mind them of their own weakness, and their need of Divine
Protection and Defense.

God save the King: Though we love him, and would lay down our lives for him,
yet we cannot save him, unless the Lord save him, In vain is salvation looked
for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains, truly in the Lord our
God is the salvation of Israel, both of King and People, Jer. 3.23. Psalm.
108.6. That thy beloved may be delivered save with thy right hand: v: 12. Give
us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man: Psalm. 33.16, 17. There is no
King saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by much
strength. An horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall he deliver any by
his great strength, and Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house they labor
in vain that build it, except the Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but
in vain. The Scripture most frequently and abundantly suggesteth this, and it is
never more needful and seasonable to be meditated then at such solemn times,
when the strength, and riches, and splendour of a Kingdom is displayed
together: And first, it is very useful for the King then to remember the
weakness and insufficiency of other helpers, then is the temptation like to be
strongest to carnal confidence in creature strength, when it is set out with
all its bravery and glistering gallantry; then is the heart in most danger to
be stolen away and to forsake the Lord; Gods own caution does evidently
suppose this, Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12. and 8.10. When thou have eaten and art full,
beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God: ver: 12. Lest when thou have
eaten and art full, etc. verse. 14. Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou
forget the Lord thy God, etc. verse. 17. And thou say in thine heart, my power
and the might of my hand, has gotten me this wealth.

When Nebuchadnezzar was beholding the great Babylon which he had built by the
might of his power, and for the house of his Kingdom, and the honor of his
Majesty, then it was that his pride pulled down that heavy doom, a voice fell
down from Heaven, Dan. 4.30, 31. It was when Herod was arrayed with Royal
apparel, and sat upon his Throne, and was applauded with the shout and
acclamation of the people, that he provoked vengeance by the hand of an Angel,
Acts 12.22, 23. But to instance in better men 'twas a temptation too strong for
David, even he in his prosperity waxed over confident, and said, that he should
never be removed, Psalm. 30.6. And too great for good Hezekiah, for when great
honor was done to him, his heart was tickled and taken with it, his heart was
glad, Isaiah 39.2. that is, vainly and proudly: so as to pull an heavy
sentence down from God, which was delivered by the Prophet in the following
verses. So that not only the prosperity of fools destroys them, (Prove. 1.32.)
but the Honor and Glory of the best men will ensnare and endanger them, if
they be not very heedful and mindful of their weakness and insufficiency in
the midst of all their greatness, and therefore wise Princes have used to dash
the wine of their joy with some mortifying water, to correct its intoxicating
and inebriating force. Hence was that solemn right in the instalment of the
Eastern Emperors, a Lapidary presenting variety of stones, and bespeaking him
to this sense, Choose Mighty Sir, under which of these stones your Highness
pleases to inshrine your bones. And Agesilaus had a Deaths head served to his
Table at the greatest feasts, and Philip of Macedon had a boy every morning to
be his remembrancer, crying at his door, (...), and still at the Popes
inauguration, the Cerimony of the Tare, with a Sic transit gloria mundi, is in
use. And Saladine the Sultane of Egypt, had an old Shirt carried on a Pike
before him, with Proclamations made, this is all that Saladine Conqueror of
Asia shall carry out of the world with him; and to the same good purpose may
this expression, God save the King, serve, even to mind him that the love of
his most Loyal people, and the strength of his most valiant Soldiers, and the
wisdom of his most prudent Council, and the riches of his most wealthy
Citizens, are not sufficient to preserve him, but he must do it, who alone it
is, that gives salvation unto Kings, Psalm. 144.10. and he may be helped freely
to give the Lord the glory both of past and future salvations, in the words of
David, Psalm. 44.6, 7. I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save
me: But thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that
hated us; or as his Majesty graciously expressed himself in his short Speech
to the Ministers, in his passage through the City:

The deliverance which God has wrought for me I own as the work of his own
right hand, beyond humane contrivance, and desire that all the glory of them
may be ascribed to him. And it is seasonable and useful to the people also at
such time to be put in mind how much both King and people need of the help of
God to save them, for then is the greatest fear of idolizing earthly deities,
when they shine not only with the rays of their own Majesty, but are made
dazeling and resplendent by that brightness which the flaming zeal, and
blazing love and Loyalty of their faithful people does reflect upon them; It Is
a well timed meditation therefore for the people at such a season to consider
what they say, when they cry out, God save the King, if he with all this help
about him, yet needs God to save him, how much more do we; if he cannot save
himself unless God save him, then neither can he fave us, without his aid, as
that King confessed; 2 King: 6.27. and the words are good, though he were
otherwise, who spoke them, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help
thee, and it may assure us that its better to trust in the Lord, then to put
confidence in Princes, Ps. 118.9. and may teach us, Ps. 146.3. Not to put trust
in Princes, nor in the son of man in whom there is no help. To conclude
therefore, let it be our care and practice, as to love him affectionately, and
rejoice in his prosperity and honor heartily, and testify our Allegiance
freely and cheerfully, so to pray for him most humbly and earnestly, as knowing
that (as he has been pleased to desire prayers, so) he greatly needs them, for
he cannot save himself, he cannot save his people, nor can they save him, but
must be beholding to the Lord to save them all; Therefore (Psalm. 21.) Let the
King joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy salvation let him greatly rejoice:
Give him his hearts desire, and withold not the request of his lips, prevent
him with the blessing of thy goodness, and set a Crown of pure Gold upon his
head, give unto him long life, yea length of days for ever and ever: Let his
glory be great in thy salvation, lay upon him Majesty and Honor; yea satisfy
him with long life here, and show him thy salvation hereafter: God Allmighty
save him from all natural evils, which are evil to him as a man, and God save
him from all civil evils which are evil to him as a King, and God save him
from Spiritual evils, which are evil to him as a Christian, and God save him
from eternal evils, which are evil to him as a man, a King, a Christian: Even
thus

God save the King, And let all Loyal loving Subjects say AMEN.
FINIS.
Errata.
IN the Epistle, p. 1. l. 8. for a, r. so: p. 2. l. 16. r. Pathos, p. 3. l. 9.
r. molded l. for scantly r. more securely; Contents, p. 1. l. 19. r. case; p.
2. l. 6. r. compassion: l. 9. for virtues, r. reasons. Page 6. d. So; p. 10. l.
18. for at, r. out, p. 18. l. 26. for satisfy, r. falsify, p. 22. l. 17. for
prayers, r. pains. l. 18. for now, r. nor. p. 27. l. 8. r. Christians, p. 28.
l. 23. for first, r. that is: p. 30. note, his Majestyes words, end l. 28. none
of his. l. 29. for continue, r. preventive: Ibid. note that the 4 last lines,
from his Majesty to sober Subjects, inclusively, should have been in the
Margin: l. ult after Subjects, add, does abundantly verify these words: p. 33.
l. 20. for Tare, r. Blaze; p. 34. l. 16. after made, add more.


