A few Words in Love to all those Bishops, Priests and Magistrates, And Others,
who have a Hand in Persecuting the INNOCENT, (And yet look to be Excused,
because, as they think, they have Law for what they do) For them to Weigh and
Consider in the Fear of God, and then see How far they will stand Justified in
his Sight.
DO you think it is not hard measure for People to be cast into Prison only for
Conscience Sake, and there to be kept Year after Year, and no notice taken of
us, except it be to continue us Prisoners? Oh consider! there has been care
taken for the Relief of poor Debtors, but some of the People of God called
Quakers have been continued Prisoners several Years, and no care taken for our
Relief, by any of our Persecutors: Is this to visit Prisoners according to the
Mind of Christ? see Mat. 25. If those that will not Feed the Hungry, Cloth the
Naked and Visit such Prisoners, as truly believe in Christ, which he calls
Brethren, must go into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
what will become of those who have a hand in casting into Prison, and in taking
that away from such as truly believe in Christ, which should satisfy their
Hunger, and cloth their Nakedness? Consider this, ye Persecutors of all sorts;
A Dreadful Day of Vengeance from the Lord is near to come upon you, except ye
Repent and amend your Ways! the Cry of the Oppressed is loud in the Ears of
the Lord God of Heaven and Earth! and he will surely visit this Nation of
England for its Inquities! He takes what is done unto his People, as done unto
himself, whether it be good or evil. Christ said to Saul when he was going to
Damascus to bring such as called upon the Name of the Lord bound to Jerusalem,
Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? [Mark, It was Christ Jesus that Saul was
Persecuting, although its like he might think, as some do in these days, That
he was not persecuting Jesus, but a company of stubborn Fellows that would not
obey the Laws, nor satisfy the Wills of the Priests, from whom he had his
Letters to persecute, as perhaps some have now.] But further Jesus said, Its
hard for thee to kick against the Prick: Take notice of this, ye Persecutors,
are ye not sometimes pricked in your Hearts, when ye take our Goods, or cast
our Bodies into Prison? and do you not kick against it, and make merry over
that in your selves, which witnesses against you, and boulster up your selves
with the Law? but certainly the Law will not excuse you. Paul, as touching the
Law, said, He walked Blameless; which is more than many of our Persecutors do
now adays; yet he was a Persecutor (and a Consent or to the Death of that
blessed Martyr Stephen) a Blasphemer and the chief of Sinners! O wretched man
that I am! said he, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death? He
was delivered, but not whilst he followed, and sought to keep favor with the
Priests; It was the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, which made him
Free from the Law of Sin and Death, and then they hated him, and persecuted him
also: But I would not be mis-understood, for the Law which is for the
punishment of Evildoers, and the Praise of them that do well, we dearly own
and obey, and the rest we suffer under, without seeking Revenge; but the
heavenly God is angry with all such who make use of Laws to Spoil their
Neighbors Goods, and cast their Bodies into Prison, which were not made nor
intended against them, as is manifest at this time in England; there is no
People in the Nation more clear in Judgment and Practice against Popery, than
we who are called Quakers; and yet it is known to the Lord and many People, how
greatly many of us have and do Suffer by Laws made only against them, and also
by an Act made in latter Years, by which our Goods are spoiled by wicked
Informers, for our peaceable Meeting together to Worship God; I say, God is
Angry with all such that cause People to suffer for the Exercise of their
tender Consciences to him; and it will not be washing of their hands,
Pilate-like, and saying, It is not them, but the Law, by which we suffer, that
will excuse them; the Jews pleaded Law against Christ, but will any Christian
say, they were Excusable because of that? no such matter: If they had rightly
understood the Law, or had not been wilfully blind, they might have seen that
the Law took no hold of Christ Jesus, being Innocent; but their Envy blinded
their Eyes, so that they chose to have Barabas released, who for certain
Insurrection made in the City, and for Murder was cast into Prison, and the Son
of God they would have crucified, saying, with one accord, Away with him. And
oh that none may be of their minds in England! who made the Innocent to suffer,
and let the Guilty go free.

But some may Object, and say, The Law is plain for the Payment of Tithes, for
Swearing before a Magistrate, and for Going to Church, and you Quakers will do
none of these, which is a great Cause of your Sufferings now.

Well, as to these Particulars there has been so many faithful Testimonies
born, both in Sufferings, Words and Writings, which one would think might have
convinced our Persecutors, if they had not wilfully shut their Eyes and stoped
their Ears; therefore I shall only make a short Reply for the clearing of my
self.

And first, as touching Tithes, Its true, they were commanded in the time of
the Levitical Law; but Christ Jesus was and is the End of that Law, for
Righteousness-sake to every one that believes; and he sent his Ministers to
preach Freely; and the Apostle says in Heb. 7. There is a disanulling of the
Commandment going before, for the Weakness and Vnprofitableness thereof: And
the Priesthood being Changed, says he, there is of Necessity a Change of the
Law. So its plain they were Ended by Christ, and were brought up again in the
Midnight of Darkness and Popery; and since have been a very great Oppression;
and God has required us to bear our Testimonies against them, for which many
of us have suffered great Spoiling of our Goods, and some Imprisonment till
Death, in nasty Holes; and many are Prisoners at this time, as Witnesses
against them.

And as concerning Swearing, I have this to say, and that from the Lord God,
That there is no Safety to any Magistrate or People in Oaths; and the Lord,
whose Command all the Swearers break, will make the Sons of men to know it in
his own time; and if they did not wilfully shut their Eyes, they might have
some sight of it already; for how often have some of the People of England
Sworn too and again, sometimes One Way, and sometimes Another? notwithstanding
our Lord and Master Christ Jesus says, Swear Not at all; and the Apostle James
says, Above all things my Brethren Swear not; and the Prophet says, Because
of Swearing the Land Mourns; and so does this Land, and will more and more, if
this Yoke of Oppression be not taken off the Neck of the Oppressed, who deny
Swearing for no other end, but for Conscience Sake, it being a Breach of the
Command of Christ, and have more regard to their Words, than many have to their
Oaths.

And as concerning Going to Church, as it is called; The Church which is in
God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, we dearly own and join unto; and we do
Worship God in Spirit and Truth, which is the Worship that Christ Jesus set up
above Sixteen Hundred Years ago: And we think it hard Measure, that we should
be made to suffer so deeply by long Imprisonments and Spoiling of our Goods,
for so long warranted a Practice, especially by such who seem to pray for the
same themselves, as may be seen at large in the Book of Common Prayer; but
surely the Law will not excuse our Persecutors before the great God of Heaven
and Earth; therefore, Oh that they would lay it to heart, and cease fighting
against him, for he will be too hard for them! The Day hastens that he will
Avenge the Sufferings of his People; he sees what Snares are laid for the
Innocent, and how Mischief is hatched upon the Beds of the Ungodly, and what
Wickedness is daily acted in the Streets, both of great Towns and Villages, in
Sports and Plays; and he also sees what is done in secret; Oh! therefore,
Repent, Repent in time, you that have any Tenderness or Remorse upon your
Spirits! Turn to the Lord, that he may heal you and gather you into his
heavenly Ark, where the Safety only is; for a Day of Sorrow and Trouble draws
near to come upon all the Ungodly, and many Warnings you have had: Oh! how
large has the Love of God been to this Nation! How often has he discovered
the Wickedness of the Wicked, who have sought its Ruin, and has given you
space to Repent, as well as a sight of your Enemies? Therefore do not make the
Innocent to suffer, but cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well, that the Lord
may show Mercy unto you, and gather you under the Shadow of his Heavenly Wings,
that ye may be Nourished and Sheltered from the Devourer.

Thus far I have cleared my self of that which for some time has lain upon me,
who am a Lover of Truth, and yet continued a Prisoner for it, with Fourteen
more of my Suffering Brethren. John Willsford.
The 22d of the 3d Month, 1680.

