ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT Had, Made, and Concluded, between the Commissioners of
the Right Honorable the Lord WILLOUGHBY of PARHAM, of the one Party; and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of England, of the other PARTY: Being in Order
to the RENDITION Of the ISLAND of BARBADOS:

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1652.

Articles of Agreement, had, made, and concluded, the eleventh day of January,
1651. by and between the Commissioners of the Right Honorable the Lord
Willoughbie of Parham of the one party, and the Commissioners in the behalf of
the Commonwealth of England, of the other Party, being in order to the
Rendition of the Island of Barbados, are as follows:

I. THat a Liberty of Conscience in matters of Religion be allowed to all
excepting to such whose Tenants are inconsistent to a Civil Government, and
that the Laws be put in Execution against Atheism, Blasphemy, and open
scandalous living, seditious Preaching, or unsound Doctrine sufficiently proved
against him. II. That the Courts of Justice shall still continue, and all
Judgments and Orders therein be valid, until they be reverted by due form of
Law. III. That no Taxes, Customs, Impost, Laws, or Excise shall be laid, nor
Levies made to any of the Inhabitants of this Island, without their free
consent in a General Assembly. IIII. That no man shall be Imprisoned, or put
out of his possession of Land and Tenements, which he has by any former
Warrant or title derived from it, or other Goods or Chattels whatever, without
due proceedings according to the known common Laws of England, and Statutes and
Customs of this Island, in the Court of Justice here first had, and Judgment
for the same obtained, and Execution from thence recorded. V. That all suits
between party and party, and Criminal and Common Pleas be determined here,
and none be compelled to go into England, to assert and defend their Titles to
any Estate which they have here, without consent of a General Assembly. VI.
That an Act of Indempnitie be withal convenient speed passed in the Parliament
of England, to save and keep harmless and unquestionable, all and every of the
Inhabitants of this Island, that are comprised within these Articles, for, and
concerning any Act or thing whatsoever, done by them or any of them, at any
time, or in any place, or words spoken by them or any of them before the date
of these Articles, and that they be cleared, acquitted, and discharged thereof
for ever, as well in respect of the public power, as of any particular person
concerning damages, or loss which they have received by reason of the present
defectives, and until the said Act come hither, an Instrument of Indempnitie
to all such comprised in these Articles to the purpose aforesaid be assigned
by Sir George his Assign, and the other Commissioners, and the said Articles,
together with the said Instrument of Indempnitie, may be received into the
Assembly here, and filed among the Records, and that it be presented by the
said George Ascue and the Commissioners to the Parliament of England, or the
Council of State established by authority of Parliament, that an Act made the
third of October, whereby the Inhabitants of this Island have been declared
Traitors, may upon this Accord, be taken off the File from among the Records.
VII. That all and every the Inhabitants of this Island comprised within these
Articles be restored to all their Lands, and possession of Goods, and Money,
which they have right to in England, Scotland, or Ireland. VIII. That no
Oaths, Covenants, or Engagements whatsoever be imposed upon the Inhabitants of
this Island, who receive the benefit of those Articles against their
Consciences. IX. That all Ports, Towns, and Cities, under the Parliaments
power, that be open into the Inhabitants of this Island, in as great a freedom
of Trade as ever, and that no Companies be placed over them; nor the
Commodities of this Island engrossed into private men's hands: And that all
Trade be free with all Nations that do Trade, and are in unity with England.
X. That whereas the Excise upon strong Liquors was laid for the payment of
public Debts; It is therefore agreed, That the Lord Willoughbie of Parham,
and all employed by him, and all other persons whatsoever, shallbe acquitted
and discharged from the payment of any public Debts, and that the same be
discharged by the said Excise, and such other ways as to the General Assembly
shall seem fit, provided that care and respect be therein had to such as have
eminently suffered in their Estates. XI. That all Persons be free at any time
to transport themselves or Estates when they shall think fit, first setting up
their Names according to the Custom of this Island. XII. That all Prisoners on
both sides be discharged and set free, with their full benefit of enjoying all
those Articles, and that all those Horses, Cattle, and Servants, Negroes, and
other Goods whatever, be returned to the right Owners, except such Servants as
had freedom given them, and come aboard before Saturday the third of January.
XIII. That such particular Persons as are in this Island at the time of the
Surrender thereof, who have Estates on Antego, may peaceably return thither,
and there enjoy the benefits of those Articles. XIV. That for certain time all
executions be stopped, sufficient caution being given, that all the expiration
of the payment be made, and that the Commissioners, together with the general
Assembly, be Judges of the time and caution. XV. That all their small Vessels,
or Barques, now on ground before the bridge Town, do repair to their proper
owners, and have liberty to go to any part laden. XVI. That the Lord
Willoughby of Parham have all his Lands, Rents, and all his Estates whatsoever
real and personal in England, without any Fine or Composition paid, restored
to him or his Assigns free from all encumbrances laid on the same by the
Parliament of England, or any by them authorized, since the time of its first
seizure or sequestration; and that what settlements the said Lord Willoughbie
has made at Surrenam, or any other he shall make on any part of the name of
Guinashall, be by him enjoyed, and I hope without any disturbance, either of
himself or those that shall accompany him thither: And that he has free
liberty to bring Servants from any Port in England or Ireland; and that his
Plantation at Antego; according to the bounds already made out, reserved to
him; and what Estate soever of right does belong to the said Lord Willoughbie
of Parham in this Island of Barbodoes, be to him entirely preserved. XVII. That
all such persons of this Island or elsewhere, whose Estates have here been
sequestered or detained from them upon this public defense, be forthwith
restored to their Plantations, Goods, or Estates upon this Island. XVIII. That
the Island of Barbados, with all the Forts, Sconces, Fortifications thereof,
and that all the Artillery, all public Arms and Ammunition, be delivered up,
into the hands of Sir George Ayscue for the use of the States of England,
before Monday twelve of the Clock at noon, being the 11. of this instant
January, and that no Garrison be kept here, but that all forces be disbanded
within four and twenty hours after the sealing of these Articles, and that for
the safety of the Island the Militia shall be disposed of as to the present
Commissioners, and future Governors shall seem fit, the Articles not to be
construed to take away the Arms of any particular person within this Island.
XIX. That the Government of this Island be by a Governor, Council, and
Assembly, according to the ancient and usual Customs; and that the Governors
be appointed by the State of England, and from June to June received and obeyed
here, the Council for the present to be by him chosen, the Assembly to be
chosen by a free voluntary election of the Freeholders of this Island, in the
several Parishes; and that the usual Customs, of the choice of the Council,
be represented by the Commissioners to the Parliament of England, or to the
Council of State, established by Authority of Parliament, with the desires of
the Inhabitants for the confirmation thereof for the future. XX. And whereas it
has been taken into serious consideration, that the main and chief cause of
our troubles and miseries has grown by loose and base uncivil language
tending to sedition, only used among many people: Here it is therefore further
agreed, that at the first general Assembly a strict Law be made against all
such persons, with a heavy penalty to be inflicted upon them that shall be
guilty of any reviling speeches of what nature soever, by remembering or
reviling into former differences, and reproaching any man with the cause he
has formerly defended. XXI. It is agreed, that the Articles may with all
convenient speed be presented to the Parliament of England, to be by them
ratified and confirmed to all intents, contractions, and purposes. XXII. It is
further agreed, That all Laws heretofore made by general Assemblies, that are
not repugnant to the Laws of England, shall be good, excepting such as concern
the present difference. XXIII. That the Right Honorable the Lord Willoughby
have free liberty to go into England, and there to stay or depart at his
pleasure, without having any Oath or Engagement put upon him, he acting or
attempting nothing prejudicial to the Commonwealth of England:
In witness whereof, we the Commissioners appointed by the Lord Willoughby,
have hereunto set our hands and seals this 11th day of January, 1651. Richard
Pearce. Charles Pym. Tho. Ellis. Will. Byam.


By the Governor.
IT is my pleasure, that the above-written Articles be published in several
Parish Churches within this Island:

Given under my Hand this sixteenth of January, 1651. George Ayscue.
Veria Copia.




