The CASE of Mr. WALCOT, Concerning his Making Seawater Fresh, Clear and
Wholesome.
WILLIAM WALCOT of the Middle Temple Esquire the First and True Inventor of making
Salt (and Putrefied) Water, Fresh, Clear, and Wholesome, did, in the Year 1675,
make an Experiment of his said Invention, in the presence of His Sacred
Majesty, King CHARLES the Second, of Glorious Memory, who was pleased Highly to
approve thereof, and to Grant him His Letters Patents for the Sole Benefit for
14 Years, according to the Statute, therein Declaring, That, Our Trusty and
Well beloved William Walcot, Esquire has with long Study, and very Great Expense,
Invented and brought to Perfection, the Art of making Water Corrupted fit for
use, and Seawater Fresh, Clear, and Wholesome, in very Large Quantities, by
such Ways and Means as are very Cheap and Easy, and which may be done and
Practiced with great Speed and Expedition, Some Evident Demonstrations whereof
we have seen to Our Great Satisfaction, and do believe the same may prove very
useful as well to Our Royal Navy, as also to all other Ships and Vessels
belonging to Our Subjects, and likewise highly Advantageous to the Trade of our
Subjects, and may tend to the Advancement of our Customs; and being, as we are
Informed, never before Used or Known in any of Our Dominions, may likewise
bring several other Considerable Advantages to Us and Our Subjects: And the
said William Wilcot has assured Us, that he will make very Considerable and
Useful Improvements for, and in order to the greater Ease and Convenience in
the Premises, etc.

Afterward, by His said Majesty's Leave, a Bill was brought into the Right
Honorable the House of PEERS, for Enlargement of the said Term; which Bill
being once Read, is yet remaining there, till the Water might be Experimented
at Sea.

Much Time was necessarily spent in procuring Instruments and Materials (by
reason that no Artists had been accustomed to form such) fit to put in Practice
(especially at Sea) so great an Invention.

Likewise, Many, Great and Unavoidable Obstructions (by reason of the newness
of the Invention) he met with, as to the Practicing thereof at Sea, of which he
is ready to give a particular Account.

However, He Practiced his said Invention several years on Land, and disposed
of the Water to very many for their Use, and also sent some to Foreign Parts,
which continued Sweet and Good.

Since which time Robert Fitzgerald Esquire and Others, his Partners, have
pretended to the said Invention (and Gained other Letters Patents,
notwithstanding W. Walcot his Letters Patents were in Being) thereby
Obstructing the said W. Walcot. This, at length, occasioned W. Walcot's
repairing to Holland, in the Year 1684. where his Opposers were endeavoring to
Obtain Letters Patents from the States of the United Provinces; and there, by a
Petition delivered, on his behalf, to their Lordships, he Requested, that their
Lordships would order both Parties to Appear before them to make public
Demonstrations of their said Arts; And, that upon the Judgments of their
Lordships which of them both made the best Trial with the least Charge, might
full* Enjoy their Lordships Free Patent; which Request being Granted, the said
W. Walcot, and Mr. William Fitzgerald, deputed by the said R. Fitzgerald and
his Partners, did appear; and each made three several Experiments, One in
presence of the Lords of the States General, and Two before the Members of the
States of Holland, and of the several Provinces; at All which, the said W.
Walcot gained such a Reputation, that he has Obtained Letters Patents from the
States General, To Him alone, with Exclusion of all Others. And in like manner,
Other Letters Patents from each of the several Provinces of Holland, Zeeland,
Vriesland, etc.

These Transactions in Holland were not unknown so Their Majesty's.

By All which it Manifestly Appears, That the said W. Walcot was the First
Inventor (which has been also Acknowledged by the said R. Fitzgerald and his
Partners) and is the only Person that ever truly attained to the Art of Making
Seawater Fresh, Clear and Wholesome, in full perfection, which would have been
in danger to be lost, if the said R. Fitzgerald and his Partners, should have
gained an Act of Parliament, according as they were endeavoring in the Year,
1685. and so to have Excluded the said W. Walcot, both from the Reputation and
Advantage of the said Art, who had the Sole Right therein. To defend which he
was forced to Return abruptly out of Holland, and to give his Attendance here
since.

This likewise manifestly Appears, both to Seamen and others, by what the said
R. Fitzgerald and his Partners have done since, both at Sea and Land,
throughout His Majesty's Dominions, in their making many Trials of their Skill,
both in Ships and at Land, and in their several years Attempts of bringing
their Work into a Constant and public Practice, where none did Obstruct them.

SO that (as it is well known) the said W. Walcot has employed a great part of
his Life in the Inventing of this Art, and bringing it to so high a perfection,
as to a practical use, and gaining it so public a Reputation; All by his own
Constant and Excessive Charges; much suffering also under the Interruption of
such powerful Interests and Adversaries (whose chief Design was to force the
said W. Walcot himself to make a Discovery to them of the Secrets of his Art;
and sailing thereof, to Entice his Workmen or Servants from his, to their
Service; In vain endeavoring thereby to take the whole Advantages of his
Charges and Labors to Themselves) whose Obstruction (they urging withal to
have his Patent made void, that theirs might take place) has and does occasion
this most grievous loss of time, in so Important an Undertaking. And makes him
suffer likewise under the Censure of their Errors, and Miscarriages, through
their want of Skill; Who thereby have, perhaps, brought a shrewd Undervaluing,
and unjust Disparagement on the True ART; which, by reason of that Invincible
Evidence, and so many public Demonstrations that have been shown, and such
Testimonies and Attestations thereof, both at home and abroad, has given such
sufficient Assurance of its Reality and Worth, that it is hoped now it cannot
reasonably be Questioned.

Therefore the said W. Walcot does most humbly Desire there may be Provision
made by an Act in Parliament, that he may be Restored to his Ancient Right, and
have his Term (which has been thus unhappily interrrupted) Renewed and
Enlarged in such manner, That he may be encouraged and enabled to proceed to
Exercise and Advance so Transcendent an ART at Sea as well as at Land, for the
Universal Benefit.

The Lord Chandos his Testimonial concerning his long Experience of W. W. his
Seawater.
THese are to certify All whom it does or may Concern, That before I was
Honored with the Character of Ambassador from His Late Majesty of Blessed
Memory to the Grand Seignior of the Turks, I had the Satisfaction of several
Tastes of my Worthy Friend William Walcot Esquire his Seawater made Fresh, and
Sweet, and to all Intents and Purposes equally made useful with the best
Spring Water that e're I drank of in England for Land or Sea Service, as, upon
above seven years Experience thereof at home and in foreign Parts, I am verily
persuaded. For of the said Water I took with me some Quantity to
Constantinople, and there upon Trial thereof in the Presence of several Persons
of Credit found it exceeding Sweet and Good, Insomuch that I had the Curiosity
to try how long it would so preserve it self in that hot Climate: And in that
Experiment also It so well answered my Expectation, that after near seven years
keeping of it abroad, I brought of it home again with me: And now at this very
Time have of it (viz. The Water I took out with me from the said Mr. Walcot)
Right, Sweet and Good. In Witness whereof I here Subscribe my Name this 25th.
of May 1688.

Chandos.
This agrees with the original of his Lordships own Handwriting.
The Testimonial of Mr. John Shish, Chief Master Builder of His Majesty's Yard
at Deptford, concerning the working of W. W. his Instruments in Ships.
WHereas William Walcot Esquire has often discoursed with me about his setting up
of his Furnaces and Instruments in Ships for his Invention of making Good Fresh
Water, and has let me see his Furnaces, Instruments and Materials, and one
Furnace in particular built upon Boards in a Room, which I see has been much
used with security from Danger of Fire: I do Certify, that it does appear to
me, That he has taken great Care, made many Industrious Contrivances, and Good
Provision, for Safety and Convenience of Working in Ships, and that he has
brought his Furnaces, Instruments, and other Materials (accommodating them to
Ship-Service) and Manner of Placing them to a great Perfection. I do Certify
likewise that they may be set up in a Ship, without Damage or Injury to the
Ship, with Security from danger of Fire, and able to endure the Motion and
Tossing of a Ship at Sea. And that, in my Opinion, it will be of great Use to
Navigation, as well to His Majesty's Ships, as to others.

May the 13th. 1681. This agrees with the Original.

John Shish.



He being sent for to give his Personal Attendance, Declared before the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, That he would undertake to set them up in this
manner in any of His Majesty's Ships, if they pleased to assign him a Ship for
that Purpose.

The Exercise of this ART may be Beneficial to All, and will be Injurious to
None.
THE Purity of the Water is Such, that the Spirit is preserved; In more than
twice Seven years It has not Putrefied, nor shown any sign of Decay since. It
neither does Taste New or Harsh when first Completed, nor Stale or Flat when
long kept; but Smooth, and at all times alike.


