THE Pathway to Eternal Life: BEING The Last SERMON of that Eminent Divine Mr.
T. WILLIAMS. B. D. lately deceased

depiction of Mr. T. Williams, B. D. giving a sermon to the congregation

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for A. Bettesworth at the Red Lion on London Bridge

Heb. chap. 9. ver. 27. And it is appointed unto Men once to die, bu^ after
this the Judgment.


MY Beloved, feeling my own decay I have chos^n this serious and seasonable
Text, which perhaps man be my last, to mind you of your latte^ Ends, that you
may reflect on the shortnes^ of Life, and the uncertainty thereof, as to its
continuance; and to prove it short and momentary, we find it in many respect^
compared to things of the least duration things that as it were only appear,
and then suddenly fade away and vanish from our sight. Holy David says, Thou
has^ made my lise as it were a span long, and min^ Age is nothing, in
comparison of thee. In other Places it is compared to Smoke that vanishes
away; to the Flower that fades; and to Grass that is cut down, and withers;
and St. James, who spoke by an excellent Spirit, says, Our Life is but a
vapor; and yet this short momentar^ Life, is, by the Creator of all things in
h^^ Eternal Wisdom, given us as a Talent to improve on this side the Grave;
that in doing well we may purchase Crowns o^ Glory and Immortality, and a Life
that never shall have end, in which we sha^^ enjoy ^leasures, pure, and unmixed
with ^or^ows; Joys that fade not away, but abide ^or ever; though here we are
Strangers and Pilgrims, and have no tarrying City, out travel through a
Wilderness and Vale of Tears; yet beyond the Grave, when Time shall be with us
no more, we shall have fixed and durable Habitations, Mansions not made with
hands, in the highest Heavens, shining with Honor and sparking Glory, which
Christ, who laid down his precious Life, and shed his rich Redeeming Blood for
mankind, is gone before to prepare for all those that love his Name, and obey
his Gospel.

That Death is the certain Lot of all Mankind, daily Experience shows us, by
the dropping off of our Friends and nearest Relations, one where or other, unto
the Grave, adding a new Cause of Sorrow to mournat their Funeral, and spread
doleful Cyprus over their Herses, till it comes to our own ^urns, when matured
by time to follow them, lie down within the Chambers of Dust, there to remain
till the Morning of the Resurrection, when the loud Arch-Angel's Trumpet shall
rouse us from our long silent Re^o^e, to meet the Lord of Glory coming in the
Clouds of Heaven to judge us, and accordingly pronounce the Sentance of Reward
or Punishments, as we have done Good or Evil in the Flesh.

Death is intailed on us for the Sin and Disobedience of our first Parents, and
there is no Pledge nor Reprieve from it, nor do we know any certain limit of
time when it will snatch us hence. The tender Blossoms as often fall, as the
ripe mellowed Fruit; the Lamb as soon as the aged Sheep, goes to the Slaughter,
and however it falls out, we must at one time or other all pass through the
Valley of the Shadow of Death.

Now some who have heard of the unspeakable Joys of Heaven, may say I am
desirous to depart, and be with Christ; but yet the grim King of Terrors,
standing between, startles and amazes them into this farther Consideration, how
to come to the blessed Shore, where there is so great a Gulf between them and
it, as to be lead Captive unto his gloomy Chambers, and in their fright, say
with the Psalmist, My Heart is sore pained within me, and the pains ^f Death
are fallen upon me; fearfulness and ^^embling are come upon me, and horror,
Psalm. (...) 4,5. I see the Shore where I willingly would be out of the
Troubles, Sorrows, Cares, and Vexations of this tempestuous World which is at
enmity with me; but Oh! here is a great Gulf between me and that ^lessed
Elysium; I must be tossed on a boi^terous Sea, and be wrecked by dreadful Waves
and Tempests: Is there no way to Canaan, but through the desolate Wilderness?
Must I go through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, to the Land that flows
with Milk and Honey; the new and heavenly Jerusalem, which is above? These are
things contrary to Flesh and Blood, and such as will make the stoutest Courage
faint and tremble.

Yet certain it is, say what they will, the way to true Life lies through the
Gates of Death; it is irrevocably appointed unto Man once to die; and
therefore, to antidote our selves against the Fears and Horrors of Death, and
the Confusion and Perplexity of a Dying State, is so to live always, as if we
were knocking at the Gates of the Grave; and then the Grave shall never have
power to prevail against us to our hurt; always considering, when we come to
die, it is the determinate Order and Appointment of God, in whom we live, and
move, and have our Being; he places our Souls in these earthly Tabernacles of
Clay and we are only here Tenants at Will, liable to be dispossesed at
Pleasure; it is appointed for all Men once to die, and that it is an
irrevocable Decree of Heaven, that we must all walk through the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, Why should we, like Men without Hope, fear any Evil? For the
Lord is with the Righteous, and will guide them safely through the Terrors and
Affrightments that they are naturally attended with: Then shall they rest from
their Labors, and their Works shall follow them, to crown them with
everlasting Joys, and a peaceable Serenity to all Eternity; then shall they
look back on the Dangers they have past. with Joy, and sing Praises and
Hallelujahs to him that lives for ever and ever.

Let us not then look upon Death, as some strange unexpected Accident befell us;
for may we not hereupon say with the Apostle St. Paul, That no man should be
moved with th^se Afflictions; for your selves know that we are appointed
hereunto, 1 These. 3.3.

It is an undoubted Mitigation of any Sorrow or Affliction, to know that God
has appointed it as an unavoidable Lot and Portion of all Man Living; so that
on this Account we may say with the Psalmist, I ^ill fear no Evil, for thou art
with me; for ^ertain it is, all the Evil in Death proceeds only from an evil
Life: For a good Life ^akes away the Sting of Death, and makes his cold
Embraces easy and tolerable; but (...) bad Life gives him double Arms against
us; Power over us here and hereafter, in a more terrible and fearful second
Death, a Death to all Eternity, though living to bear the unspeakable Terrors
of it; excluded for ever from all that is God, except his Anger and fiery
Indignation; the Consideration of which made the Prophet cry out, Who can dwell
with the everlasting Burnings? and such must do it, who taste of the second
Death, by falling into God's Displeasure by sinning, and heaping up wrath
against the Day of Wrath; for our God, when he is angry, is a consuming Fire;
nay, if his Anger be but a little kindled in his Breast, blessed are all they
that trust in him; and if Sin makes the first Death so uneasy, it must
necessarily render the second infinitely more intolerable.

For indeed, the Sting of Death is Sin, and no Terror is in this State like
that which does redound to us from a guilty Conscience, which has got us under
hold, and will chastise us; for though in our Health an^ Jollitry we may pass
it over lightly, yet o^ our Sick-Beds, when Death stares us ghastly in the
Face, then the pains of Hell, as i^ were, gets hold on us, we are in Troubl^
and Heaviness, our Souls are as restless and uneasy as our Bodies; then, as
the Prophet Isaiah says, We are like a troubled Sea, that cannot rest, whose
waters cast up dirt and mire; and again, there is no peace, says my God, to
the wicked; for in such a State, when we come to die, the greatest Melancholy
that shall then seize our Spirits, will be from the heavy Load and Burden of
our Sins, that will be ready to oppress and sink our Souls.

Then we shall find that Threatening verified in us, Psalm. 50.21. I will reprove
th^e, and set them in order before thine Eyes; and what Grief or Anguish can be
comparable to that which redounds from this, when we are going hence? and when
God, by visiting Sickness, as his Messenger, gives us warning to remove, Must
it not concern and afflict us, beyond all Thought and Expression, to consider,
in such a Case, what Danger our Sins have brought us to? They hide God's Face
and Mercy from us, and in our greatest need of Comfort and Support, threaten us
with utter Ruin and Destruction, and nothing now can be so sharp and
intolerable, as the Thoughts of a displeased and angry God; and well may that
be so to us, which was the greatest of our Savior's Troubles; for at his Dying
Hour, the Guilt of all our Sins, pressing heavy upon his Soul, occasioned a
bitter Agony, and that bitter Exclamation, viz. My God! My God! Why have thou
forsaken me? And most certainly, at the Dying Hour of all wicked Men and Women,
the Sense of Guilt will be the bitterest Potion, and the very Dregs of the Cup
of trembling; their Hearts will faint, and their Souls will sink within them;
it will be with them, as with Felix, when Baul preached of Judgment to come;
his Guilt through the fear of it, made him tremble. They shall shake and fear,
and cry mightily, and have on them such passionate Concernment as is
inexpressible, from the dismal Apprehensions of the Divine Wrath and
Indignation which their Sins have kindled and provoked against them, even to
cry out with Cain, Their Punishment is greater than they can bear.

Then whilst it is to day, Let us hear God's Voice, Calling to us to repent;
Let us be up and doing his Will, least the night of Death suddenly overtake us,
in which no Man can work; for in the Grave there is no Repentance; as the Tree
falls, so it lies; as Death leaves us, so will Judgment find us: Which is the
next and last thing pursuing my Text I propose to treat on, viz.

After this, the Judgment: We have a sure word for it, that after Death there
is a Judgment.

I am, says the Lord, the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes in me,
though he were d^ad, yet shall he live: And whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall never die, St. John 11.25, 26. And Holy Job says, I know that my
Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth; And
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God;
Whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another, Job
19.25, 26, 27.

This plainly proves, that after Death the Soul shall descend and unite again
with the Body, and both at the sound of the last Trump shall arise together, to
receive their Rewards for the works done in the Flesh, whether it be Good, or
whether it be Evil; for St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. The trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed; for
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality.

The Earth, Sea, and Hell shall be compelled to give up the Dead that are in
them, and they shall be gathered from the Four Winds under Heaven, and be
caught up to meet the Lord, Coming in the Air, accompanied with Ten Thousand
Angels, to judge the Inhabitants of the Earth, at whose Presence its
Foundations shall tremble, and ^t shall be dissolved; the Elements shall melt
with fervent heat; the Stars shall fall; ^he Sun be darkened, the Moon turned
into Blood; and the Heavens rolled up togegether like a scrole, in that great
and terri^le Day, when the Book shall be opened, wherein all our Actions shall
be written, and we shall be judged out of it, according ^o the things that are
written therein; then ^appy is it for him who has well improved ^is Talent in
this Life, he shall enter into ^he Joy of his Lord with Praises, and clad ^n
shining Robes, crowned with Glory and Honor, in everlasting Life, where all
Tears shall be wiped away from his Eyes, and he ^h^ll see the abundant
Recompense of his ^^bour in his Spiritual Warfare; for he ^^at is faithful has
promised it.

But those that have been s^oathful and unprofitable Servants, shall call in
vain to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them to hide them from the Face of
the Lamb, and from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, but no hiding
Place shall shield them from his Wrath and fiery Indignation, which shall
pursue them to Eternal Torments, upon pronouncing, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, where shall be woes
and lamentations, anguish and gnashing of teeth where the worm never dies, and
the fire i^ not quenched.

From which Torments God of his infinite Mercy deliver us all, by giving us
Hearts for a timely Repentance, before we go hence; for the sake of his
well-beloved Son Jesus Christ, who shed his precious Blood, that redeemed us
from Sin and eternal Death, that we might live and reign with him evermore.
Amen.

His last Speech, or pious Exhortations to his Parishioners on his Deathbed,
Exhorting them to a Godly Life.
AT the Close of this Sermon, a faintness seized this good Divine, and as he
had predicted, it proved his last, and served as a Comfortable Mourning-Dress
for his Funeral; for being led home, he found his Illness increase, and in a
Day or two, perceiving his Dissolution drew nigh, he sent for the chief of his
Parishioners, who standing about his Bed, he made the following Speech, or
Farewell Exhortation to them.

My Beloved Parishioners, Finding by my Age, and more by a sensible decay of
Nature, I have not long to stay with you, but must follow, as I hope, those
blessed Souls that are gone to the Bosom of Bliss before me. In the first place,
to do all the Good I can whilst I live, I commend the perusal of my Last Sermon
to you, to which end I have given order it shall be printed for the general
Benefit; and particularly of you that have heard it delivered from my Mouth;
and being so suitable to the Occasion, I may well term it my Funeral Sermon. In
the next place, I desire you earnestly to repent you of your Sins, and bring up
your Children in the fear of the Lord. In the third place, Let your dying
Pastor prevail with you to live in Love and Unity with one another, and be
charitable to the Poor, comfort the Afflicted, and so you will bring down a
Blessing on your selves, and your Posterity. Fourthly, Put not Death far away
from your Thoughts as a thing at a distance, but strive to be always prepared
for it, for we know not the Hour of its Coming; seeing when w^ think it
farthest off, it often is nearest a hand, and too sadly surprises many, like a
Thief in the Night. And now what else remains, I hope a good Man succeeding me
in this Cure, will not fail to instruct everyone of you, as occasion shall
require.

And now the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit,
Three Persons, and One God, be with you, and remain with you, to your Lives
ends, Amen.

This he expressed so affectionately, as made them weep over so good a dying
Man. After these Exhortations he proceeded to repeat the following Prayer.

His Prayer.
O Eternal God! Father of Spirits, Everlasting King of Glory, look down with
the Eyes of thy infinite Goodness and Mercy, to me thy poor and unworthy
Servant, lying on my Bed of Sickness, preparing to come unto thee; strengthen
me against the Faars and Terrors of Death, and give me a steadfast Faith and
Hope to overcome all the subtle Temptations of Satan, that in this last
Encounter he suggests to stagger my Confidence in ^hee. O let me remain sure
grounded, and suffer me to place it no where else but in thee; that living I
may be thine, or dying I may be ^hine; and ever praise and magnify thy Holy
Name, for all thy Mercies; through the Me^its and Mediation of Jesus Christ, my
ever ^lessed Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

After this, fetching some Sighs, with ^^fted up hands, he put up the following
^jaculations.

His last pious Ejaculations.
O Lord! thou have been my Refuge from my Youth, and under thy everlast^ng Arm
is my Covering and my Salvation. As the Heart pants after the Water-brook,
(...) my Soul thirsts for the Living God.

I am in a straight between two, but my ^esire is to be dissolved and be with
Christ.

O how amiable are thy Tabernacles; ^^ou Lord of Hosts! and how blessed are ^^l
they that dwell therein.

Why art thou so heavy, O my Soul! ^^d why art thou so disquieted within me!
(...) put thy Trust in God, and he shall deliver ^^ee from the Power of the
Enemy.

Death is swallowed up in Victory. O ^eath! Where is thy Sting? O Grave! ^here
is thy Victory? Thanks be to God, who gives me the Victory, through ou^ Lord
Jesus Christ.

I have fought the Fight, I have finishe^ my Course, I have kept the Faith, and
from this Day is laid up for me a Crown of Glory*

These last words he brought forth with a pleasing smile, and then fainting, he
said Lord Jesus into thy hands I commend my Spirit, and so sweetly died; at the
Departure of whose Soul, there was such a harmonious Sound heard, as made those
pr^sent fall on their Knees and give Praise (...) God for all his Mercies.

As for the Sermon before set down, the Parishioners were earnest to have it
preached from his Notes at his Funeral, before it came abroad, and prevailed
with his Relations accordingly, the Auditors being very numerous: and thus
passed this painful Pious Divine, from this troublesome Life, to an endless one
in Glory,

FINIS.
Christian Reader,
If that these weighty Considerations should be reckoned not worth laying out
one Penny, be pleased to read it Gratis, keep it clean, and return it in two
Hours.


