The same Author has also published,
THE Virtuous Woman found, her Loss bewailed, and Character exemplified. In a
Sermon preached at the Funeral of that most Exellent and Religious Lady, the
Right Honorable MARY Countess Dowager of VVARVVICK, the most Illustrious
Pattern of sincere Piety and solid Goodness this Age has produced; to which is
annexed some of her Ladiship's pious and useful Meditations.

The great Evil of Procrastination; or the Sinfulness and Danger of deferring
Repentance. In several Discourses.

A Sermon preached before the Company of Apothecaries on Eccles. 10.1.
published at the Request of the said Company.

Say on: Or, a seasonable Plea for a full hearing betwixt Man and Man; and a
serious Plea for the like hearing betwixt God and Man: in a Sermon preached at
the Assizes at Chelmsford in Essex.

All four sold by Nathaniel Ranew, at the King's-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Fax Font Accensa, Fire out of Water: OR, An Endeavor to kindle Devotion,
from the Consideration of the FOUNTAINS God has made.

Designed for the Benefit of those who use the Waters of TUNBRIDGWELLS, the
Bath, Epsom, Scarborough, Chigwell, Astrop, Northall, etc.

Two SERMONS preached at New Chapel by Tunbridg-Wells.

With Devout Meditations of Cardinal Bellarmin upon Fountains of Waters.

Also some Forms of Meditations, Prayers, and Thanksgivings, suited to the
occasion.

By ANTHONY WALKER, D.D.

O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever. Song of
the three Children. London, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew at the King's-Arms in
St. Paul'^ Churchyard. MDCLXXXV.

THE Epistle Dedicatory TO Mr. NATHANIEL HAWS, Citizen of London, and Treasurer
of Christ-Church Hospital.
Honored Friend;
THO the mutual Intercourse of kind and good Offices, which has some Years
past betwixt us, and especially at Tunbridg-Wells, might excuse, yea oblige me
to so open an Acknowledgment of the Sense I have of your Civilities and
Friendship, and the inscribing your Name upon these Papers without further
prospect of you, than in your single and personal Capacity, would be too small
a return for those Kindnesses, by which I am become your Debtor.

Yet give me leave to tell you, I herein consider you under that more public
Character, wherewith your Zeal, your Cost, your Pains about the erecting of
that commodious, beautiful and Elegant Structure of the Chapel, we all here
enjoy the benefit of, justly invests you.

And if I could represent your Effigies in the Front of these few Sheets, it
should be with your green Book in your Hand; gratefully receiving, modestly
soliciting, and faithfully recording, the royal, noble, generous Contributions
to this pious useful Work, which have amounted to about Eleven hundred Pounds,
by your prudent Care and Industry, faithfully expended in the erecting and
adoining of it.

And I hereby, as much as in me lies, constitute you, who was for the greater
part, receiver of their Money; Receiver-general in their Name, of all the
Honor I can do them, and the best Gratitude I can return them, for their so
large and pious Liberality.

And in this Inscription which I make to you, as their Trustee and
Representative, I dedicate these Papers to them all, with deepest Submission,
begging both their Pardon and Acceptance of so faint and disproportionable a
return from the meanest of those Divines who willingly bestow our Pains amongst
them, till some of those excellent Persons, of greater Ability, Name and Merit,
be pleased to do it, with actual Performances, which may equal my Wishes and
Desires to do them Honor, and edify and inflame their Devotion.

The late fresh Accession of Princely Bounty, set as a Crown upon the Head of
the preceding Charity, will not only be the lasting Ornament and Glory of the
public Table, you have exposed in the Chapel to every Man's view, of all
Moneys received and expended, (to prevent Obloquy and Suspicion in them who
know you not, for those who know you, do not need it;) But I hope is a good
Omen, that in due time, it may be as conveniently endowed as it is commodiously
built, that there may be Wells of Salvation for the poor Neighborhood all the
Year; and if I may without imputation of Lightness, allude to St. Paul's
Expression, The Word may be preached in season, and out of (Water) season. Let
not this unexpected Address, be as unwelcome as unlooked for; neither let the
Meanness of it cool the Reciprocation of that Esteem and Friendship, which has
hitherto been so obligingly allowed to, Honored Sir,

Your cordial Friend, and willing Servant, ANTHONY WALKER.
From my Lodgings near Tunbridg-Wells, July 24. 1684.
THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader, Especially Such as use the Mineral Waters.
Good Reader;
AS it is unquestionably the Duty and Interest of every Christian, both to
acquire and retain a deep and most serious sense of God upon his own Heart; and
as much as possibly he can, to impress the like upon his fellow Christians.

So this Care is in a greater and more eminent degree incumbent upon Christ's
Ministers, whom he has singled out and appointed to attend upon this most
important Affair, and Business. And as no means are to be esteemed improper or
superfluous which God has afforded or designed to this end; we ought our
selves to learn, and teach others, from both the Books which God has written
for our Institution and Instruction. Now these Books are that of the Creatures,
and that of the Scriptures; of his Works, and of his Word; of his Providence,
and of his Ordinances; of Nature and of Grace. Holy David joins both these
together in the 19th Psalm. He begins with the first, The Heavens declare the
Glory of God, the Firmament shows his handiwork; to Verse the 7th, where he
proceeds to the second, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul:
the Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the Statutes of the
Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart, etc.

And as it cannot be denied, that both these great Volumes are full of the
glorious Discoveries of God; so it must be confessed, that the Waters are one of
the fairest and most legible Characters in which God's Name is written in the
Book of Nature.

The Rains, the Seas, the Rivers and the Fountains are as authentic witnesses
of the the Being, and of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, as any of those
other visibles, which reflect the invisible Perfections of the great Creator,
Preserver and Governor of all things. The Water^ are a natural Looking-glass,
or Mirror; in them, Face answers to Face as the Wiseman tells us, Prove. 27 19.
And the Face of God may b^ seen reflected in them, as clearly and distinctly as
in any of his providentia^ Manifestations. And if the ordinary Properties of
common Waters in their cleansing, fructifying, softning, moistning,
thirst-quenching, and uniting Qualities, perform this so well; how much more do
the Minera^ Springs, by their extraordinary Virtues of healing, opening,
purging, dulcifying, mollifying, strengthening, etc. and being most signally
beneficial, loudly proclaim it? That it must argue great Stupidness not to
observe it, and greater Ingratitude, yea Impiety, not to admire, love and
praise him for them, who has endued them with these Virtues, especially in
those who use them, and have found them beneficial, and reaped Advantage by the
use of them.

These things considered, and seeing so many hundreds, yea thousands in this
and other Nations, yearly use such Waters, both by Bathing and Potation; I
cannot but wonder that nothing has hitherto been published, (that I could ever
hear of) to provoke, promote, or assist their Devotion from this particular
Topic.

Certainly if the Scale or Ladder of the Creatures be excellently fitted, to
help the Minds ascent to God; there is no round or step, in all that Ladder
more steady and firm (how unstable soever Water be of it self) than this of the
Waters.

Cardinal Bellarmin in the Treatise which he wrote (De ascensione mentis in
Deum, per scalas rerum creaturum) not as an engaged Disputant, and peevish
angry Controvertist, but as becomes a serious pious Christian, in his
September, the Month he reserved for Contemplation and Devotion; with a calm
and sedate Spirit, relishing of no Heats, but those decent and commendable ones
of Zeal Devotion, Admiration, Love and Thankfulness, has one of the most
considerable Chapters [Gradus Quartus] upon this Subject; the sum of which, for
the sake of English Readers, I have subjoyned amongst the Meditations and
Prayers.

I have therefore, (like Elihu in the Book of Job) provoked by the silence of
those who were fitter for it, adventured to adapt a Discourse, and add some
Forms of Meditation, Prayers and Thanksgivings, for the use of those who attend
the Mineral Waters. I heartily wish it had come a few days, or weeks, sooner
into my mind; that I might have had a little more time to have rendered it less
incomplete.

But I was loath wholly to slip this Water-season, and therefore must adventure
it abroad, so unpolisht as it is: It may provoke some abler Hand: or, if it
find but tolerable Acceptance, put me upon the trial, what I can do to its
melioration, with some more leisure and intention of thoughts. Much of it was
written at the Wells (since my coming down this Season, and all transcribed and
sent up sheet by sheet;) where, it is true, I had my Text daily before mine
Eyes, but wanted my Books to comment on it.

But tho 'twas partly writ at Tunbridg-Wells, and chiefly calculated for those
who use them; yet I had a Prospect of their Benefit, who use other Mineral
Waters, whether for inward or outward Distempers, by drinking, or by bathing.

Amongst many other strange Fountains, St. Augustine writes of two: One which is
always full of Fish. De Genesi ad lit. lib. 3. cap. 8. Another, that will light
or kindle Torches, tho its Water of it self be cold. De Civ. Dei, lib. 21. cap.
5.

And there is in Lancashire the like Fountain, (as I was lately here informed
by a Person of Reputation, whose Testimony I do not in the least question, he
being an Eyewitness of it) that being stirred at the bottom, the steam of it
will kindle Paper into a flame.

If I can at these Fountains catch any Fish, in his sense who said, henceforth
you shall become Fishers of Men, I shall sacrifice my Praises, not to my Net,
but unto Him at whose Word I let it down. For to fish for any thing else in
such an Undertaking, I look upon as so unmanly, so unpriestly, so unchristian;
that I should greatly despise my self, should I not despise so low, so muddy
motives.

And if I can bring Fire out of this Water, and kindle a Torch of Religion, and
inflame my own, and other Men's Devotion; the most ascending of those flames
shall mount up to Him in humble Acknowledgments, who put the price into my
hand, and gave me a heart in any measure to improve it. I will trouble you with
no Apologies for my publishing these Papers, they seldom are free from Blame,
never from sinister Suspicion; and such Gildings oftener make them keck, for
whom they are prepared, than the Pills themselves they were designed to cover.

I thank God, I can sincerely and with comfort say, I meant well, and aimed at
the Glory of God, and the Edification of those into whose hands they may come,
how weakly soever I have performed: and this will yield me inward satisfaction,
tho it should render me in some Men's eyes, as David's dancing before the Ark
rendered him in the eyes of Michal.

I shall conclude with these few Requests: and the first thing I ask of thee,
good Reader, is, That thou would be like to God, in accepting of a willing
mind.

Secondly; If thou meetest here and there with an expression out of the road of
common phrase, thou would not impute it to a vain affectation of hard words,
but consider, that the nature of the Subject constrained me to the use of them.
For tho I am a very incompetent Judge of Oratory; yet I know that the most
masculine Eloquence is made up of plain expressive words (provided they be not
slovenly and rude) which suitably cloth the Notions of the Speaker, and aptly
convey them to the Understandings of the Hearers. My Age allows me not to be a
florid Speaker, had I ability to be so. I remember it was the reproach of
Hortensius, to be at once both green and gray, a verdant Orator in his fading,
withered years. In a word, who-ever knows the Auditory to which I spoke, cannot
deny, that speaking as I did, and excusing of my self that I could speak no
better, needs no excuse.

Thirdly; That if thou will not be so humble and so pious, as to be made better
by it thy self, yet be not so unjust and unkind as to reproach it, and thereby
hinder others from being benefited by it.

Lastly; If but one or two shall employ some of those vacant hours this time
and place affords them, and shall thereby be helped to pray to God, or to praise
him; I entreat them to beg a Blessing on this Work, and him who is their
Christian Brother and Servant, for Jesus sake,

A. W.

Reader, Whereas the Title over the Pages are, A Sermon preached at Tunbridg,
it should have been, Two Sermons preached at Tunbridg-Wells.

Jo. Hen. Alstedius Encyclop lib. 18. cap. 6. de Fontibus praecipuis. Peroratio
Hydrographiae. HAEC est Hydrographia Marium, Lacuum, Fluminum and Fontium: Qu^^
quatuor praecones Potentiae Sapientiae and Clementiae Divinae: Surda qui
praetervehitur a^re, ne ille plusquam ingratus: Nam siv^ quantitatem
consideres, illa est stupenda; siv^ qualitates illae sunt utilissimae, sive
motum ille est admirandus. Quae omnia nos manu ducunt ad Dei Opt. Max.
admirationem and adorationem, cui soli sit laus in solidum.

The Seas, the Lakes, the Rivers, and the Fountains, are four loud Proclaimer^
of the Divine Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, to which who ever turns a deaf Ear,
he is worse than ungrateful: For whether you consider the Quantity, it is
stupendous; or the Qualities, they are most beneficial; or their Motion, it is
wonderful. All which do lead us by the Hand to the Admiration and Adoration of
that God, who is superlatively Great and Good; to whom alone be everlasting
Praises.

A SERMON ON REV. 14.7. -- And worship him that made the Fountains of Waters.


THE Words I have read, and the Place where we are, have so agreeable an Aspect
upon each other, that it needs no farther Intimation, to show what I design, or
aim at, in the choice of them.

Nor will an Apology for my fixing on them be more necessary, to any who will
allow (and who is not ashamed to disallow it?) that the Wisdom and Example of
our Master CHRIST, who is the essential Wisdom of the only wise God, is the
best and most Authentic Copy for all his Servants to write after.

For nothing is more notorious, than that most of his Sermons were occasional,
preached upon visible Texts; Improvements of earthly Objects, to heavenly
Purposes. A Method which insensibly prepares the Auditors, and innocently
charms them to Attention, without bespeaking it. Such was that in the 4th of
St. John to the Woman of Samaria, who came to draw Water at Jacob's Well, to
stir up her desire after that living Water which he gives, and of which whoever
drinks, shall thirst no more: but it becomes in him a Well of Water, springing
up unto Everlasting Life. And such was that in the sixth of the same
Evangelist, of the Bread of Life, the true Bread which comes down from Heaven,
which he exhorts them to labor for, from his observing how they followed him,
because he had fed them with the multiplied Loaves.

I shall supercede more Instances, lest I seem indecently to suspect your
observing that, which is so obvious and remarkable, that he who runs may read
it.

But it may possibly more need excuse, that I have pitched upon a Passage in
that Book, which partly by its enigmatical, prophetical Style, and partly by
the Misadventures of those who have adventured to unriddle it, seems like that
little Book in the Angel's Hand, Chap. 5.1, 2, 3. of which none on Earth have
been found worthy to unloose the Seals, and bless the World with a clear
Interpretation of it. But I hope this modest short Reply, may suffice to remove
that Prejudice: What St. Augustine observed of the whole Scripture is applicable
to this part of it, the Apocalypse; Tho there be depths in which the Elephant
may swim, there are also Shallows, in which the Lamb may wade. And tho its
Prophecies are so profound, we want a Line to sound and fathom them; and must
wait till Events and Completions, (their best and only infallible Interpreters)
render them intelligible and plain; and which might be written, not to gratify
our Curiosity with the fore-Knowledg of what is future, but to confirm their
Faith who shall live to see them fulfilled, that they who see them come to pass
may believe, as our Savior speaks on the like account, St. John 14.29. Yet are
there many doctrinal Truths, and moral practical Duties, in this very Book,
most easy, plain and clear, and no where to be found more intelligibly expressed,
or more positively asserted: Such as are the Divinity of Christ: The truth and
efficacy of his Death and Resurrection: that there are Eternal Rewards and
Punishments for good and bad Men: That the true God is only to be worshipped;
that he is to be adored and celebrated for his wonderful Works, and for that
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, which shines forth in them* I might give many more
Instances of the like kind, and say of them all, as St. Augustine does expressly
of many Passages in this Book; Tanta luce dicta sunt, ut nulla debeamus in
literis sacris quaerere vel legere manifesta, si haec putaverimus obscura. See
De Civitate Dei lib. 20. cap. 17. They are spoken with so much Light and
Clearness, that nothing in sacred Writ is to be esteemed plain and easy, if
these Truths be reckoned obscure and unintelligible.

But I need no other, no clearer Instance than this Verse, which contains the
Sum of the everlasting Gospel, which the Angel, whom St. John saw in the
preceding Verse, flying in the midst of Heaven, had to preach to all Nations,
Kindreds, Tongues, and People; and he executes and discharges his Trust with
great Faithfulness and Boldness, with a loud Voice, that all might hear, in
Isaiah's Phrase, a Voice lift up like a Trumpet. The main design and scope of
his preaching is, to call the World from their Idolatry, to the Worship and
Service of the true God only; and to show, that in this consists the Life, the
Soul, the Spirit of true Religion, the Sum and Substance of the Gospel, to
admit no Competitors with God in the matter of his Worship.

The whole Sermon is reduceable to two Points; The Duty exhorted to, and the
Motive by which that Duty is pressed. Both which, are in their kind, of the
highest Importance; no Duty can be more necessary and indispensible, no Motive
can be more cogent and irresistible. The hour of his Judgment is come; it is
spoken of in the present Tense, to show the immutable certainty; shall as
surely come, as if it were come already. And he that considers this, and is not
awakened by it, is not restrained from worshipping what is not God, and
provoked effectually to serve and worship him, has an Heart harder than an
Anvil, or an Adamant.

The Duty is one for Substance, but has three Parts or Degrees, preparatory or
subservient to one another.

1. Fear God. 2. Give him Glory. 3. Worship him.
To which last is added a most august Periphasis to describe him, viz. Who made
the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea and the Fountains. The first prepares for the
other two.

1. The Fear of God is the Foundation and Cornerstone of all Religion. Both
David and Solomon assure us, that it is the Beginning, the Head, the Top of
Wisdom, even of that by which Men become wise unto Salvation.

It Is the Character of the worst of Men, to have no fear of God before their
Eyes. An awful Dread of the Divine Majesty is the greatest and best Restraint
and Barrier against all Impiety. Where this is removed or broken down, the
boldest Wickedness flows in as a Flood, as a Torrent, and bears down all before
it. When carnal Security has erased the Notions of a Divine Being, there is no
Impiety so bad, and boundless, into which Men will not run and rush. And little
hope remains, that instituted and revealed Religion should avail, where the
very Seeds and Roots of all natural Religion are choked and plucked up. They
will never give God Glory, who do not acknowledge his Being and Providence, and
retain not a deep Awe, and profound Veneration for him.

2. The second step or degree in the enjoined Duty is, Give Glory to him. This
is the Superstructure, to be next erected, and built upon it, when and where
the Foundation of it, his Fear, is laid and well settled.

Glory is Excellency manifested. And to give God Glory, is to acknowledge the
excellent Perfections of his Nature, with Affections and Actions suitable to
those acknowledged Perfections, and to praise him for them.

Now both because this is expressly called the everlasting Gospel, which is the
glad Tidings of Salvation to lost Mankind by Jesus Christ, which the Angel
(that is the Ministers of the Gospel) was to preach: and also because the Light
of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, shines in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor.
4.6. that is, the Gospel, and is therein most clearly manifested. We give Glory
to God most eminently, most acceptably, by believing and obeying the Gospel.

That Is the true Tabernacle in which his Glory dwells in the World. He has
made all his Glory pass before him, in the Accomplishment of Man's Salvation by
his Son's Mediation, which he strives with us by his Spirit to persuade and
draw us to accept and improve: Herein he has gloriously displayed his
unsearchable Wisdom, his infinite Power, the inexhaustible Treasuries of his
Grace and Mercy, and the Immutability of his Truth and Faithfulness, which
cannot shrink or shake, but stands faster than the ancient Hills. And we then
give him the Glory he expects, when by obeying the Gospel we openly profess,
that we esteem him to be such, as the Gospel has declared him to be; so wise,
so great, so good, so true, as he is worthy to be acknowledged, for what he
has done for us in and by the Gospel of his Son.

3. The third degree or step in the enjoined Duty is -- And worship him which
made the Heavens, and the Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Water. In
this third Branch he calls the World from their Superstitions to the Worship of
the only true God, of whom he gives a most August Description by his
incommunicable Works, and excludes and shuts out all Competitors from being
worshipped, who cannot show their Title to it, by such stupendous Works as
these. And as in the first he laid the Foundation, and in the second raised the
Superstructure, so in this third he secures its standing; Nothing so much
threatening the overthrow and ruin of God's Glory as giving religious Worship
to any thing that by nature is not God.

But our present Concern and Business permits me not to grasp at the whole of
this Angelick Sermon; nor allows me to enquire into the scope, and give the
Explication of the whole Prophetic Scene, but confines me to the third Branch,
and even in that, excludes a great part of the Periphrasis, by which he who
may, and must be worshipped, is described; that is, He that made the Heaven,
Earth and Sea: which is a Character of the true God, so proper, so peculiar, so
exclusive of all Competitors, so intelligible, so awful and affecting, that we
meet with it every where most frequently in holy Writ, in the Law, the
Prophets, the Psalms, and the New Testament.

But my own choice and design, and I suppose your Expectation, limits me to the
last Syllable of this glorious Name -- The Fountains of Waters, which when I
have joined to the preceptive Words in the beginning, by an innocent omission
of the intermediate, comes to this, -- Worship him that made the Fountains of
Waters.

In which Words we have three Particulars to be observed.

1. A Description of the Object of Religious Adoration, which may and which
must be worshipped, Him that made the Fountains of Waters.

2. An implied Reason of the requiring us to give such Worship to him: Because
he made the Fountains of Waters.

3. An actual injoyning the Payment of this Homage to him, under that Notion,
and upon that account: Worship him who made the Fountains, and do it for that
reason, because he made them.

Now for the clearer understanding, and more useful improvement of these
Particulars, and to demonstrate the argumentative force of this Reason, that he
who made the Fountains must therefore be worshipped, I shall reduce all I have
to speak to them to this easy method.

I. To enquire what is the sole Object, adequate Reason, and right Notion of
Religious Worship. II. Who made, and in a short Digression, how he made the
Fountains. III. Why the Angel propounds him to be worshipped under this Notion,
Maker of the Fountains; and how it may appear that this is a good and
sufficient Reason to oblige us to it. IV. Draw practical Inferences from the
whole, proper to us at this Place and Time.
I begin with the first Inquiry, concerning the Object, Reason and right Notion
of Religious Worship.

The true God is the sole Object of Religious Worship. Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And the adequate reason of his
Worship, is, because he is God, that is, a Being absolutely perfect, which is
the best Notion of God. A Being which has infinite Wisdom, Power, Goodness,
and full Authority and Dominion over us; Alsufficient Ability, and most
gracious Willingness to help us. And there are as many Reasons for his Worship,
as there are Proofs and Manifestations of these his adorable Perfections,
either in the Works of Creation and Providence, as he is God of Nature; or in
the Work of Redemption, by the Renovation and Salvation of Sinners, as he is
the God of all Grace. Now, tho I do not equallize these Reasons, and affirm all
of them to be of the same Evidence and Cogency: Yet I say, whatever Works of
Nature or of Grace, manifest these and the like adorable Perfections to be in
him, render him, for that reason, a suitable Object of Adoration, and bind us
to perform it to him.

Now the Worship we owe, and must pay him, is sometimes taken largely for the
whole of true Religion, by which we expect Salvation. In colendo recte Deo una
salus est. St. Augustine. Our whole Salvation depends upon our right worshipping
of God. And again, To love God with all our Heart, and Soul, and Strength, and
to commend God as much as possibly we can to the Love of our Neighbor. Hic est
Dei cultus, haec vera Religio, haec recta Pietas, haec tantum Deo debita
Servitus. De Civ. Dei, lib. 5. c. 4. This is God's Worship, this is true
Religion, this is right Godliness, this is the only Service due to God. So that
to worship God, is to be truly godly, and sincerely religious, good in good
earnest, and to pay him all the Service our holy Religion exacts from us
toward him.

But secondly; The Notion of Worship is more confined and restrained, and is
either internal or external.

1. Internal, again, is either the Act of the Mind, Reason and Judgment: Or of
the Heart, Soul, Will and Affections.

In the first respect, as it is an Act of our Reason, Mind and Understanding,
it implies our knowing and acknowledging his Superiority and full Dominion over
us, and esteeming him a Being so fully and absolutely perfect, that in fruition
of him, we may be completely and absolutely happy and blessed. Solus ille
colendus est, quo solo fruens beatus est cultor ejus: and quo solo non fruens
omnis men's misera est, qualibet re alia perfruatur. Aug. lib. 20. contra
Faustum Manich. cap. 5.

He only is to be worshipped, by enjoying whom alone his Worshipper is made
blessed, and by the want of whom alone every Soul is miserable what ever else
he does enjoy.

In the second respect, as it is an Act of our Will and Affections, it implies
our choice of him, and adherence to him, by loving, fearing, trusting and
delighting in him, submitting to him, obeying and imitating of him, as a Being,
which is the chiefest Good, Great, True, Just, Holy, and the perfect Idea of
all most amiable and desirable Excellencies. Optimus cultus quem colis imitari,
says Lactantius, that is the most acceptable Worship, to imitate and endeavor
to be like him whom we worship. Pietas cultus Dei est, nec colitur ille nisi
amando, Aug. Epist. 120. No Worship is accepted but what proceeds from Love.

2. External Worship is that which expresses the inward Frame and Disposition
of our Minds and Souls, by apt and suitable signs of bodily Gestures, as bowing
our Knees, uncovering our Heads, Prostration of our Bodies, confessing of him,
praying to him, giving him Thanks with our Mouths, and performing all the parts
of his instituted Worship according to his Will and Word: for not only the
second Commandment requires this, but the Light of Nature; for Socrates, a
heathen Philosopher, could say, Vnumquemque Deum sic coli oportet quomodo se
ipse colendum praeceperit, Every God ought to be worshipped, as he commands
himself to be worshipped.

So that the Worship of God reaches to, and is to be performed by, the whole
inward and outward Man, and we must thereby glorify him in our Bodies and our
Spirits, which are both his, 1 Cor. 6.20. first with our Spirits and Minds,
knowing, acknowledging and esteeming him as a Being absolutely perfect and
all-sufficient, most able and willing to help and make us happy.

Secondly; Loving him, fearing him, trusting in him, as most good, and great,
and true, etc.

Thirdly; With our Bodies, by all those reverential Gestures, which are proper
Signs and Indications of the right Frame and Disposition of our Hearts toward
him; and this last seems to be implied in the very Notation of the Greek Word
here used proskunsate, which is (as some say) derived from the Verb ko,
osculor, to kiss, because it was the Custom of the Eastern Nations to worship
by kissing the Hand, the Knee, etc. Psalm. 2. Kiss the Son, etc. Hos. 13.2. Let
the Men that sacrifice, kiss the Calves. Or else from kun Canis, a Dog, from
the humble Posture of a Spaniel lying at and licking of his Masters Feet. For
things in their own Nature low and mean, may afford Allusions to, and be
Illustrations of, matters of the highest and greatest moment and importance. It
implies a willing Acknowledgment of his Height, and our Lowness; his Dominion,
and our Subjection; his All Sufficiency, and our Indigency.

Thus much for the first Particular propounded, the Sum of which is this, That
the true God must be worshipped with our Spirit, Soul, and Body; and whatever
proves him to be such, is a good and sufficient Reason to engage us to perform
such Worship to him, whether it proceed from him as the God of Nature, or of
Grace.

II. The second thing propounded to be inquired into was, Who made the
Fountains of Waters, and how he made them? that we may both try and prove his
Title to Religious Adoration upon that account.

The Solution of the first Branch of this Enquiry, is easy by the Principles of
Divinity; but the second is more difficult by the Principles of Philosophy.

To the first therefore I may answer briefly, The true God made them: which the
holy Scriptures both assert and prove.

1. They assert it. Prove. 8. seems both to be very express, and very
emphatical: for there Solomon brings in Wisdom, that is, Christ, the essential
Wisdom of God, asserting and proving his own eternal Being, and everlasting
Subsistence. And he proves it by a double Medium, or two Arguments; first,
because he was before God's oldest Works.

Secondly, because he was present at the making of them.

The first he does in five Verses, from the 22d to 26, inclusively. Verse. 22.
The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his Ways, before his Works of old.
Then he enumerates and gives Instances of those Works: as the Earth, Verse. 23.
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the Earth was. Next
in the Depth and Fountains, Verse. 24. When there were no Depths was I brought
forth, when there were no Fountains abounding with Water. Where the Earth, the
Depths, and the Fountains of Waters, are expressly called his Works, yea the
most ancient, the earliest, the firstborn of his Works, which he glories in
being known by, as the Father and Maker of them.

The second Argument by which he proves the Eternity of his Subsistence is,
That he was present with God when he prepared the Heavens, stablished the
Clouds above, and strengthened the Fountains of the deep: where the making the
Fountains is as directly ascribed to him, as the making of the Heavens. This
place is so full and clear, it might suffice alone, with the Text, without
adding more.

The Spirit of Christ, speaking by the Mouth of Solomon, gives us assurance,
that his Father made the Fountains.

And David says no less: for, speaking of God, he says, Psalm. 104.10. He
sends forth his Springs into the Valleys, which run among the Hills; they are
his Springs, and he sends them forth.

Psalm. 107.33, and 35. He turns the Rivers into a Wilderness, and the
Water-Springs into dry Ground. Then again, He turns the Wilderness into a
standing-water, and dry Ground into Water-Springs.

Isa. 35.6, 7. In the Wilderness shall Waters break out, and Streams in the
Desert; and the parched Land shall become a Pool, and the thirsty Land Springs
of Water. And let it be supposed and granted, that these Expressions are
figurative, and signify the pouring out of his Spirit in the Graces and
Comforts of it, upon desolate and weary Souls: yet the thing must be first true
in the literal and natural Sense, that God can and does perform such things in
the course of Nature, and Providence, and can and will do what is like them, in
the Operations of his Grace. Again,

Isa. 41.18. I will open Rivers in high places, and Fountains in the midst of
the Valleys; I will make the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land
Springs of Water.

And in the Canticle, Benedicite omnia opera, commonly called the Song of the
three Children, which in our Liturgy is appointed to be said or sung after the
first Lesson at Morning Prayer, Te Deum, or that, and is taken out of the
Additions to Dan^el; Where all the Magnalia, the signal Works of God are
reckoned up, and excited to bless the Lord, which is to provoke Men to bless
God for them. There we find Fountains or Wells, in the List or Catalogue of
those famous Works of God. O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and
magnify him for ever. And I wish that in this place at least that Canticle were
sometimes read, as the Liturgy appoints; for not only that Versicle is very
proper, but the whole very warming and enflaming.

I stay not to descant upon every Scripture I have cited, nor to show wherein
their Strength lay, to prove what I produced them for, because I suppose such
Evidence to accompany them, that it is needless, and would be superfluous. I may
subjoin Arguments to prove that God made the Fountains, though very transiently.

1. Our Text supposes it, and takes it for granted. And both this Text and the
8th of Proverbs, and many other Scriptures, rank them in the same Order and
Series with the Heaven, the Earth, and the Sea, to signify that God is as
undoubtedly the Maker of those, as of these.

2. The true God made the Waters above the Heavens; He is the Father of the
Rain, and he begets the drops of Dew. Job 38.28. And by parity of Reason, He
makes the Waters under the Earth, and the Mists, the Vapors, and the Springs
that rise from thence.

3. He makes the miraculous extraordinary Fountains, and Streams that flow from
them: as that, Exodus 17.6. Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the
Rock, and thou shall smite the Rock, and there shall come forth Waters out of
it. Which the Psalmist ascribes to God, Psa. 78.15. He clave the Rock in the
Wilderness, and gave them Drink as out of the great Depths. And Psalm. 105.41.
He opened the Rock, and the Waters gushed out: they ran in dry places like a
River. And the other Fountains are the effects of the same Power, and are
accounted less miraculous, only because they are more common.

4. God is the great Artificer and Maker of Universal Nature. He that made all
things is God. And whatever second causes he has appointed and constituted, as
instrumental to produce the Fountains, he is as truly the Maker of them still,
as he is the Maker of every one of us, tho we had Fathers who begat us, and
Mothers in whose Wombs we were all formed. Job 31.15. Did not he that made me
in the Womb, make him, and did not one fashion us in the Womb? Causa causae est
causa causati. He is as truly to be entitled to what he produces mediately, as
to his most immediate Productions.

5. Lastly; The Scripture, which is exceeding jealous of the Glory of God in
point of Worship, and can endure Competitors and Copartners, less than a King
in his Throne, or an Husband in his Bed, ( My Glory will I not give to another,
Isa. 42.8.) yet allows and requires the Glory of Religious Worship to be given
to him that made the Fountains; which is an infallible Inference, that by the
Scriptures Testimony, he that made them, is the true God.

This may suffice to prove that God made the Fountains. But to demonstrate how
he made them, is more difficult.

It Is a noble and delightful, but withal a busy and perplexed Inquiry, both
amongst Divines and Philosophers, concerning the Origin of Fountains, their
various useful Qualities, and how they became enriched with them; their
Perennity, and constant flowing for so many Ages; their vast depth in the
lowest Bowels of the Earth, where they are often found; and again, their
strange ascent and height, and breaking out, as they sometimes do, in the
highest Tops and Summities of Mountains, and many more of no less difficult
Solution.

But tho the search into these things be exceeding pleasant to inquisitive
Minds, and it might not be unwelcome to many of you to discuss them; Yet it is
not so proper for the Pulpit, as the Schools; and would not well become a
Discourse, which designs to minister to Devotion, rather than to gratify your
Curiosity, and delight your Fancies.

Yet that I may not tantalize your Minds by a mere starting of Questions, nor
disoblige you by a vexing Disappointment, I will first refer you to those
Authors, who by what they say themselves, and by directing you to near an
hundred more, may, if not satisfy the curious, yet weary the most inquisitive
and industrious: and having done that, tho I wade not through, shall dip a
little into these Questions.

In that Age, which was Ingeniorum ferax, about our Savior's Birth, when it
seemed good to God to raise up in, and adorn the World with Wits of the first
Magnitude, to usher in and attend upon the Incarnation of his eternal Wisdom,
such as Virgil, Tully, Ovid, Horace; lived L. Annaeus, Seneca, that excellent,
and I may say, Divine Moralist, and learned natural Philosopher, who has fine
Discourses on this Subject, lib. 3. of his natural Questions. And few have gone
beyond him, notwithstanding the advantage of coming so long in time behind him.

The laborious and diligent Polonian, Johan. Jonstonus, Thaumatographia
naturalis. Clasis secundae Capit. 4. de origin Fontium, where you may meet
with the Epitome of what our own Countryman, Tho. Lydiat, has written most
accutely on this Subject.

Voetius in his select Disputations, both discusses the Questions relating to
this matter, and gives copious References. Corn. a Lapide, on Ecclesiastes 1.7.
is large in both disputing it himself, and in referring to the Greek and Latin
Fathers and Philosophers. What Alstedius says is in no wise despicable,
Encyclop. lib. 13. Physicorum, part 2. cap. 8. Regula 3. and part 4. c. 2. and
lib. 18. Hydrograph. cap. 6.

I forbear to name Aristotle, and those who follow the Tract of the old
Philosophy, or Cartesius and his Sectators in the new; because they are well
known to those, who can, or will puruse them, and are referred to (the first
epecially) in those I have named already; and tho it may seem an ignorant or
culpable Omission to take no notice of the ingenious Mr. Thomas Burnet's new
Theory of the Earth, both in Latin and English, I shall have occasion to
mention him hereafter.

But not to tire my self and you with naming more, the English Reader may meet
with more Satisfaction, than he could expect in so few Pages from any other
Pen, in the acurately learned, and truly great Man, the Author of Origines
Sacrae, lib. 3. cap. 4.. 6. whose great Happiness it is to speak much in a
little, and be short without Obscurity, at once concise and perspicuous, brief
and clear.

And having before, I hope, satisfyingly, proved that God made the Fountains:
Let me briefly touch the Way, the Manner, the Art by which that great and wise
Artificer performed this Work, produced and made them. And to dismiss and wave
the rest, there are three Opinions, which almost all that write on this
Subject, chiefly insist upon.

1. First; Some ascribe the Origin of Fountains, to the Transmutation of the
Elements; Air and Vapors, say they, getting into the Caverns and hollow
Recesses of the Earth, are by the Coldness of the Rocks and Stones condensed
and turned into Waters, as we see in Vaults and Cellers; the Stone Walls will
stand with Drops, especially when the Air is thick and moist. This Opinion
glories in no less Author, than him who was the great Secretary of Nature,
Aristotle.

This, I confess, may do something, produce some little Rills and fainter
Springs; but the Objection against it seems rationally strong, and
unanswerable; as to more noble Fountains, which flow ubere vena, from the vast
quantities of Waters they send forth, which we cannot conceive, how this means
alone can possibly supply and furnish.

2. Others suppose them to arise from the falling of Rain, and dissolution of
Snow, soaking into the Bowels of the Earth, and when it sinks into the hollow
Caverns of it, glides through them, till it finds some vent, and makes a Spring
at its Eruption, or place of breaking forth. And tho there may be some color
for this in some Times and Places, as near the Alps, yet this is beset with
greater Difficulties than the former: from the exceeding depth of many
subterraneous Waters, and the Times and Places, where the Rains and Snows, are
none, or few and small, and yet afford both plenteous and constant Fountains.

3. Therefore the third and best Opinion, and which is beset with easiest
Objections, is, That Fountains arise from the Sea, and from vast Stores and
Treasuries of Water, made by God, and reserved under ground, in vast capacious
Cisterns and Cellars, for this end and use.

And this Opinion fairly claims and pleads both the patronage of Scripture, and
the suffrage of Reason.

First, of Scripture, which often mentions the great Abyss, the Deep, the
Depths, (the same with Plato's Barathron) as the Womb and Mother of Springs.
Genesis 7.11. The Fountains of the great Deep were broken up, to make the Flood.
And again, chap. 8.2. The Fountains of the Deep were stopped. And Job 38.16.
they are called the Springs of the Sea. Psalm. 33.7. He lays up the Depth in
Storehouses, to be thus broached and issued forth. Eccles. 1.7. All the Rivers
run into the Sea, and yet the Sea is not full: unto the place from whence the
Rivers come, thither they return again. They come from the Sea through the
Bowels of the Earth; and return unto it, through the Channels in the Surface of
it. Fountains are the Mouths by which the Sea and great Abyss vomit, and cast
forth those mighty Streams, the Rivers.

And with the Scripture-Testimony concur Plato and Seneca, and other
Naturalists. And the Sum of this Opinion is, That there are vast prodigious
Quantities of Water reserved under ground, in huge Caverns and hollow
Receptacles: and that the Sea has also in the sides and bottom of it, either
loose spungy Earth, which the Waters easily penetrate, and soak through: Or
else large Ostia, wide Clefts and gaping Orifices, and Whirlpits; by which it
empties out, and disburdens it self of its superfluous Waters: without which
Evacuations, and discharging of it self of that vast mass of Waters, which flow
continually into it by so many Rivers, it must necessarily and unavoidably
overflow the Earth, which is most obviously manifest in the Caspian Sea, which
has no visible Intercourse with, or outlet into the main Ocean, and yet the
Waters which run into it from the might Volga in one Year, were sufficient to
drown that part of the World, should it not have secret conveyances and ways of
Evacuations to prevent its overflowing.

Some have ingeniously compared this Terraqueous Globe, to a great Animal: the
vast Abyss is as the Heart or Liver (or the Blood-bowl in the rustic Phrase);
these Waters are the Blood; the hollow Caverns under Ground, and the Channels of
the Rivers in the Surface, are as the Arteries and Veins, by which this Blood
circulates, and where its Apertures, and places of breaking forth are, there
are the Springs and Fountains, which resemble the Orifices upon the pricking or
opening of a Vein by Phleboromy.

And whereas the Sea is salt, and many Fountains fresh; this account is given,
That God at first made all the Waters sweet and fresh, and those vast stores
treasured up in the Bowels of the Earth retain those their primitive Qualities;
tho in great Wisdom, he after made the Sea salt, to prevent its Putrefaction by
Stagnation; and to make it fitter for the Nourishment of living Creatures in
it, and more commodious for Navigation, the strength of the salt Water bearing
those Vessels of Burden, which were it fresh, would sink to the bottom with
their own weight: an Egg will swim in strong Brine.

And for the Seawater, which passes out, as aforesaid, the fixed Salt is
strained off by Percollation: and the volatile Salt, partly by Evaporation by
the subterraneous Fires, and partly by mixing with the sweet Waters in the
bowels of the Earth, as also of those made of transmuted Air and Vapors; and
farther by Accession of Rain which soaks in, and dissolved Snows which mingle
with it, it becomes lympid, sweet, and wholesome.

And by passing through different Soils or Minerals, as Gold, Silver, Antimony,
Copper, Lead, Tin, and Iron, Vitriol, Nitre, Sulphur, Allom, and God only knows
how many more, it is impregnated by them, imbibes their Properties and Virtues;
besides what useful Qualities God may in his kind Providence infuse into them
and communicate immediately, to render them useful and beneficial to Mankind:
of which no account can be given, but the goodness of him, who does what ever
he pleases in Heaven, in Earth, and all deep places, and works all things
according to his own good Pleasure.

But to sum up and reduce to order, this more lax Discourse, I will lay down
these following Propositions.

1. It Is demonstrable by Scripture, that God made the Fountains.

2. He made them not as a necessary, but a voluntary Agent: they are not the
product of his Nature, but his Will.

3. The Knowledge we have of the Origin of them as to their second and
immediate causes, is not certain and demonstrative, but only probable and
conjectural.

4. It Is probable some are made, and others are increased by Transmutation, or
change of grosser and moister Air and Vapors into Water.

5. It Is very probable, that the wise Builder of Universal Nature has so
disposed and fashioned the whole System of this Terraqueous Globe, that there
are in it, as it were Furnaces of subterraneous Fires: and vast hollow Caves
and winding Meanders, not unlike to natural Stills, and Alymbecks, and Retorts,
which turn salt Waters into Vapors, and then change both those Vapors, and
others sucked into the Chinks and Caverns of the Earth, from the ambient Air and
Mists, into sweet and wholesome Waters.

6. It Is possible that some Springs arise, or at least may be augmented (such
as are vulgarly called Land-springs) from Rains and dissolved Snows, soaking
into, and reserved in the prepared void Places or Caverns of the Earth, which
fail and dry up the times of Drought.

7. It Is of all Opinions most probable, that the principal Fountains have their
Origin from the Sea, and great Abyss, or huge store and treasury of Waters,
made and reserved in the deep Cellars of the Earth, for that very end and
purpose.

8. It Is very likely that the Fountain-Waters receive their several useful
Qualities from the various Soils and Minerals through which they glide and
imbibe, and are impregnated by their different Properties, while they are
percollated and strained through them; and become beneficial for Bathing or
Potation, outward or inward Application.

9. It Is probable that besides the second Causes, God makes use of (at least so
far as any Philosophy hitherto has, or can give a full and satisfactory
account) God does impress upon them and communicate to them immediately, many
of those useful Qualities, by which they become so beneneficial to Mankind.

10. Lastly; whatever second Causes they proceed from, or are rendered fit to be
helpful and healthful by, that is no prejudice to the main Truth, that God
makes them; nor derogates ought from the Glory that is due to him for the
making of them, whether we consider them as ordinary Fountains for common use,
or extraordinary for Health and Cure of Distempers.

SERMON II.
REV. 14.7. -- Worship him that made the Fountains of Waters.


LED by the Authority of our Lord's Example, whose Sermons mostly were
occasional, preached upon visible Texts, I singled out these Words, as not
unsuitable to this Assembly, the Center of which are the adjoining Wells.

In the handling of them I reduced all I designed to speak, unto this easy
Method. To inquire,

1. What is the sole Object, adequate Reason, and right Notion of Religious
Worship?

2. Who made the Fountains, and in a short Digression how he made them.

3. Why the Angel propounds him to be worshipped under that Notion, Maker of the
Fountains; and how it may appear that this is a good and sufficient Reason to
oblige us to it.

4. To draw practical Inferences from the whole, proper to us at this Time and
Place.

The two former I have finished, and sum'd up the philosophic part of my
Discourse, of the Origin of Fountains, in ten Propositions: To which Discouse
my Subject almost necessitated me. For as it had been a fault to have affected
it, and pressed and dragged it in reluctantly, so had it been blameworthy to have
refused the Service it so freely and so fairly offered us, to assist us in our
main Hypothesis.

'Twas an Observation worthy that great Man's Wisdom who first made it, I mean
the wise Lord Verulam. That a smattering in Philosophy disposes to Atheism, but
a deeper search into it, and knowledge of it, makes a good Divine, and a better
Christian.

We have a common saying; Vbi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Theologus: what
Philosophy begins, Divinity finisheth. I shall therefore now proceed to
entertain you as becomes a Divine and Preacher, in answering the third inquiry,
begging only those Allowances which are but equal to be given to one, the
obscurity of whose Station can hardly avoid contracting an habit of flat
Expression, and lower Notion.

I haste to the third and last Enquiry, Why the Angel propounds him to be
worshipped under this Notion, Maker of the Fountains? And how it may appear,
that this is a good and sufficient Reason, to oblige us to it?

We may conceive a double Reason of it.

1. To obviate the Superstition and Idolatry of the World, which was used to
worship the Fountains themselves.

All parts of the Creation were abused to Idolatry, especially what appeared
most glorious, and was found most beneficial: As the Heavens and their Host,
the Sun, Moon, and Stars for their Beauty and Influences, under the Names of
Jupiter, Apollo, Juno, Diana, etc. by the Romans; and of Baal, and Astaroth,
etc. by the Eastern Nations: so the Earth for its Fruitfulness, by the Name of
Ceres and Tellus: And the Waters almost as much as any part of the World. The
Sea for its vastness by the Name of Neptune, and the Rivers and Fountains, for
the many benefits they yielded, for the perennity and constancy of their
flowing, which seemed to resemble an eternal being, and for the cool and shady
places, in which they mostly were, which struck an aw, and represented some
kind of Sacredness. Thus they had their Aquatick Goddess and Nymphs, their
Naiades, which they supposed to dwell in them, or preside over them.

Now as 'twas usual to obviate the worship of the Host of Heaven, by directing
to worship him that made the Heavens, and debasing the Gods that made them not:
The Gods which did not make the Heavens, shall be destroyed from under the
Heavens, Jer. 10.11. Which Verse was written in the Chaldee Tongue, that the
Babylonians might understand it, tho all the rest of the Book be written in the
Hebrew Language: So to convince them of the evil of worshipping the Fountains,
and divert them from it, he calls them to worship him that made them.

And we may see the more evident need of it, if we consider of how large a
spread, this Superstition was, and how deep root it had taken: for there being
so many Miranda, and so great Beneficia; so many stupendous and unaccountable
natural Wonders, and so many Advantages accruing to Men from Fountains of so
various kinds: we need not be surprised at it, that they who worshipped every
thing, that was either very extraordinary, or very beneficial to their Life or
Health, should idolize them. And this continued so long, and the World was so
pertinacious in it, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church, were forced to
preach and write most instantly and severely against it. To name but one. St.
Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 241. de Auguriis. Nec ad Arbores debent Christiani vota
reddere, nec ad Fontem orare, si se volunt per gratiam Dei de aeterno supplicio
liberari; Christians ought neither to pay Vows to Trees, nor pray at or to the
Wells, if by the Grace of God they would be freed from Eternal Punishment. And
a little after, Contestor vos coram Deo and Angelis ejus ac de Nuncio, ut nec
ad illa diabolica Convivia, quae aut ad fanum, ad Fontesque aut ad aliquas
Arbores fiant, veniatis; I adjure ye before God and his Angels, that ye come
not to those Diabolical Feasts which are made at Fountains and certain Trees.

And how many Superstitions have been used almost, if not wholly to this very
day, about Fountains, and the supposed tutelar Guardians of them, is not
unknown to many, as might be instanced in the imaginary St. Richard at the salt
Wells in Worcestershire, and many others elsewhere.

Now to obviate these evil Practices, says this preaching Angel, worship not
the Wells or Fountains, or any supposed tutelary Deities, or Demons residing
in them, or presiding over them; but him that made them, and alone can bless
them. Idolize not the likeness of any thing that is in the Waters under the
Earth, nor the Virtues of those Waters, nor the faint Resemblance there seems
to be of an eternal Being in their Perennity, nor any thing in them, or in any
other Being which is made, but him that is the Maker of them, and the great
Creator and Preserver of all things else; for nil factum adorandum, God made
nothing to be worshipt'd, and nothing must be worshipped that is made.

2. But the second, and more positive Reason why he directs us to worship him
that made the Fountains, is, because the making of them is a signal proof that
he is the true God, and witness those Perfections to be in him, for which he is
truly adorable, and a meet Object, capable and worthy of Religious Adoration.

I before suggested, that whatever Work of Nature or of Grace, manifests the
Author of it to be endued with infinite Perfections, or that he is a Being
absolutely and infinitely perfect, is a good and sufficient Reason for the
worshipping of him.

Now not to enquire into all, or more than the signal Trinity of Attributes,
infinite Power, infinite Wisdom, infinite Goodness; if the making of the
Fountains be a valid and convincing Argument, that he who made them has all
these, is infinitely powerful, wise and good, nay has but any of them,
(supposing that they might be parted) is perfect in Power only, or in Wisdom,
or in Goodness; that alone were a good Argument, both that he might and ought
to be worshipped.

Not that the making of the Fountains proves no more: for I think it is easy to
evince, that their Maker is an Eternal Being, from Prove. 8. and Eternal is
truly an incommunicable Attribute, and a most adorable Perfection. And more
might be named, but we may safely confine our selves to the three before
specified; and if the making of them proves him to be all, or any of these, he
must be worshipped that is such, because he is such. I will touch them in order.

First; The making the Fountains proves him infinitely powerful, which we may
consider in several respects.

1. It Is a Work, and a Demonstration of Almighty Power, to produce out of
nothing that which was not, to give that a Being which had none before. Now
there was a time when, or rather before time it self was, there were no
Fountains abounding with Water; Prove. 8.24. And his Almighty Fiat gave them
Being, who spoke the Word, and they were made; who commanded and they were
brought forth. By the Word of the Lord were the Waters made, and all the kinds
and regions of them by the breath of his Mouth; and the first of Genesis makes
at least as signal, and more repeated mention of the Waters, the Deep, the
Seas, then of Heaven and Earth.

Some think that the first matter, the Platonists le, the Scriptures Tohu and
Bohu, which we call the Chaos, was a watery fluid Mass. Mr. Burnet's Theory of
the Earth is chiefly built upon this Hypothesis. And the great Abyss, or
Barathron, was the first or oldest of God's Works of Power; and the Issues and
Outlets thereof, are the Effects of the same Power, and they are those we call
the Fountains of the great Deep: so that the making them, evidences him to be
an Almighty Creator.

2. Having made and shut up those vast Stores and Treasuries of Water, it is a
proof of his Power to unlock and unbar those mighty Rocks and Mountains which
imprisoned and shut them in, and give them vent and passage, and open the very
Womb of the Earth and Nature, that they may issue out. The Jews have a saying,
that God keeps three Keys in his own Hand, the Key of the Womb, the Key of the
Grave, and the Key of the Barn: sinifying thereby, that Fruitfulness or
Barrenness, Life and Death, Plenty and Scarcity, depend immediately on him, and
are great Evidences of his Power; and certainly it is no less to have the Key
of the great Abyss. It Is one of the most majestic Proofs of the Divine Power,
which God himself insists upon, Job 38.8, 11. To shut up the Sea with doors,
and to say to it, Hither shall thou go and no further, and here shall thy proud
Wave stop themselves. And it is no less Power which cleaves the mighty Rocks to
let it out, than to bridle its swelling Surges, by the smallest Sand.

3. He makes new, sudden extraordinary Fountains when he pleases, without and
beyond any natural apparent Causes strikes the flinty Rock, and Waters gush
forth more readily than Sparks or Fire would by strikeing it with Steel. He
must certainly be the Almighty Lord of Nature who can unhinge it, and change
its Laws when ever he pleases, turning the dry Ground into Water-springs.

4. As the making Heaven and Earth prove his Omnipotence, for it is upon that
account we profess in our Creed to believe him Almighty, I believe in God the
Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, etc. No less does the making of the
Sea and Fountains prove the same; for they are ranked in the same Series in
this very Text.

5. It Is a mighty proof of his Power to continue them, to supply and feed them
for so many Ages, that they die not, but are justly styled living Waters.
Preservation is a continued Creation.

Secondly; The making of the Fountains is a proof of his Wisdom: as may appear,

1. In his contriving and building the whole System of universal Nature so
admirably, so commodiously, every piece thereof agreeing so excellently with
all the others, that they are mutually subservient. This harmonious Fabric,
this exact Composition of the whole, is a Work of that deep, that infinite and
adorable Wisdom: that it is an unanswerable Argument for an intelligent
Providence. And may put to shame and to silence all the Atheists, and
Semi-Atheists in the World. And tho I confess it is more usual to instance in
the Heavens, as being more visible, and to argue from the Situation, Motion
and Position of the Sun, Moon and Stars toward the Earth, to render their
Influences more propitious, that the whole may be fruitful, and a commodious
Habitation, that all may in good degree enjoy their Comfort and their Blessing,
and none be wholly deprived or destitute, nor scorched or spoiled by them. Yet
with the like advantage might we argue from the Sea and Fountains; the
spreading and diffusing of which through so many hidden Veins within the Earth,
and dislodging themselves in so many commodious places, and flowing in so many
crystal, cooling, healthful Streams, both greatly beautifies and garnisheth
the Earth, and renders it fertile and delightful for benefit of Man and Beasts.

2. As they are so contrived, that all the Phenomenon about them, are
unaccountable, and the wisest and most inquisitive Indigaters, are at a loss,
and cannot solve them, and find out the Reasons of them: but must cry out in
admiration of their Maker, his Wisdom is unsearchable, and (in this, as much as
in any Works of Nature) past finding out. They must confess themselves posed,
and say with David, Such Knowledge is too wonderful for me, it is high, it is
deep, I cannot attain to it. Psalm. 139.6. And with the indefatigable Alstedius,
not be ashamed to say, the best answer to the Enquiries about them, is by that
word of Modesty, Nescio, I cannot tell; and with the great Philosopher, dying,
to Euripus, Non capio te, I cannot comprehend thee.

3. There appears great Wisdom in cutting out their Channels, spreading their
Veins, proportioning their Depth, and Breadth, and Length, that they be not too
rapid or too slow, that by a longer Tract they may be duly percolated, refined,
concocted, imbued, and impregnated sufficiently, and not excessively, with the
virtues of the Mineral Soils, that make them useful. How wise is he who
proportions all these, and an hundred more, in Number, Weight, and Measure?

4. In the admirable and almost infinite variety, and sorts, and kinds of them.
A Poet would call them, Lusus naturae lascivientis, and tell you that wanton
Nature never sported it self more gaily, then in the various sorts and shapes
of Springs and Fountains; and in their strange and stupendous Properties; some
ebbing and flowing as the Sea; some hot to seething, others as cold to
freezing: some both, in every twenty four hours, hot in the Night, cold in the
Day; some petrifying all that is put into them, others changing white the Hairs
scattered on them, and of them who drink them: Some diutetick, some purging;
some molifying, other consolidating; some salt, some sweet; some acid, some
insipid; some limpid, others thick; some harsh, others soft, smooth, oily, etc.
In a word, the Sea has not so many kinds of Fish, nor the Earth so many sorts
of Beasts, or Fruits, nor the Air such diversity of Fowls and Birds, as there
are variety of Springs and Fountains. O Lord, how manifold are these Works of
thine! in Wisdom have thou made them all; the Earth is full of thy Goodness.

Thirdly; This, his Goodness, is the last of God's adorable Perfections, which
bubbles up, yea flows exuberantly upon us, in the Fountains which he makes. And
if any be so senceless as to ask me, how the making of the Fountains prove him
to be good? It might be sufficient to answer such a Question, by asking of
another, viz. Art thou not ashamed to ask it? or can thou move it without
blushing?

But to clear it; I mean by his Goodness, his Beneficence, or doing Good. Thou
art good, and do good, says David unto God, Psalm. 119.68. He therefore does
good because he is good: But he is thereby known to be good, because he does
good; and every Benefit he bestows upon his Creatures, witness him to be a good
God. Acts 14.17. how do the Wells and Fountains proclaim him to be so, as
David, Psalm. 93.3. of the Floods, we may say, The Springs, O Lord, have lifted
up their Voice, the Springs lift up their Voice to shout forth the Goodness of
their Maker, yea, they clap their Hands, (Psalm. 98.8.) applaudingly, to
celebrate his Praises.

When grateful David had said, Psalm. 33.5. The Earth is full of the Goodness of
the Lord, he proves it, verse. 7. because he lays up the Depth in
Storehouses, thereby to feed the Fountains. When Moses, speaking of the
promised Land, says to the Israelites, The Lord thy God brings thee into a
good Land. The Character he gives of that Goodness, is, that 'twas a Land of
Brooks of Water, of Fountains and Depths, that spring out of the Valleys and
Hills.

And God is said to open his good Treasure, the Treasures of his Goodness,
Deuteronomy. 28.12. When he gives Rain from above, and so when he gives Fountains from
beneath.

Water is a great Mercy in the common use of it, the World could not continue
or subsist without it; and unspeakably sweet and kind is that Clemency of God
that makes and gives it. It is impossible to reckon up how many Benefits it
yields us, or to declare how great that Godness is by which we do enjoy it;
it is a Work fitter for our Admiration, then our Reckoning; for Rhetoric than
Arithmetic. And Spring Water is the best of Waters, the Life, the Spirits, the
Quintessence of that beneficial Element, the most pure, pleasant, wholesome,
lasting, and every way most excellent and valuable.

And because ungrateful, we are more prone to make a right Judgment of the
worth of our Mercies, by their Wants, than their Enjoyments, consider how
deplorable and sad the want of Water is, and we shall soon know how good it is
to have it; and thence learn to acknowledge how good he is that gives it. But if
common Waters be so great a Blessing, then extraordinary Springs are no common
Mercies. And God is to be confessed very good for making such mollifying Baths,
God's own Bethesdahs and Siloam-pools; which seem attended constantly with some
good Angel, and not only visited at rare and seldom Seasons. Purging-Springs,
abstirging Wells, opening Obstructions, sweetning the Blood, thinning tough
viscous Humors, preventing some, and grapling with and conquering other most
obstinate and chronical Distempers, which were opprobria Medicorrm, bafled the
best experienced, the eldest, the firstborn Sons of Apollo and Aesculapius:
which Leviathan-like, esteemed the choicest Recipes, the keenest Shafts of
Galen or Hippocrates, Paracelsus or Vanhelmont, but as Straw or rotten Wood.
Such are these Wells, God has enriched this barren Country with, which we come
hither to make use of, and to wait upon his Providence in the using of them.
How exuberantly does God's Goodness flow in these? O that with becoming
Gratitude, and Love we could with a spiritual Gust relish and taste it in every
Glass we drink! These are his Laboratories, who styles himself Jehova Rophi,
Exodus 15.26. I am the Lord that heals thee; and whom David (Psalm. 103.3.)
exhorts us to bless for healing all our Diseases. These are Alimbecks, where
Almighty Goodness draws the Tinctures and the Extracts, prepares the Spirits,
makes the Infusion, mixes the healthful Potions. And how unseemly is it to open
our Lips to drink them in, and not to open them again, to confess his Goodness,
and give out due Praises unto him that made them!

3. His Goodness appears in discovering the Virtues of such Waters. How many
useful things are lost for want of being known? Divine Clemency is seldom
single, content with one Act; 'twas one Mercy to make them what they are; a
second to let us know what he had made them; and thirdly, to vouchsafe us
Liberty and Opportunity to use them.

4. It Is great Goodness in God to make them useful and beneficial, either the
common or the mineral Springs. Man lives not by Bread only, but by the Word
which proceeds out of God's Mouth. Dead things cannot minister to our Lives,
but by the blessing of the living God; neither can Physic prepared by Nature
or by Art, heal or help us without the concurrent Influence of him, who
immediately makes one, and must as immediately bless both.

5. Lastly; Let me add one further Manifestation of his Goodness in making the
Fountains, which may sensibly affect those who are concerned, how little soever
it may signify to others. David justly ascribes it to the Goodness of God to
provide for the Poor; Thou, Lord, have of thy Goodness provided for the Poor.
How many poor Families does God provide for by the Wells! They are truly Silver
Streams, they feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked, enrich the Country, yield
a plentiful Crop, and large Harvest to them who neither plow nor sow. O that
Men would praise the Lord for this Goodness, and for his wonderful Works to the
Children of Men!

Thus have I showed you why we are most justly called upon to worship him that
made the Fountains of Waters: Because in his making of them, there is a
glorious discovery of many adorable Perfections, and amongst the rest, his
Almighty Power, his unsearchable Wisdom, and his inexhaustible Goodness. All
which not only allow and give leave, but oblige and give good reason, why we
should worship him with all the Zeal and Love and Fervor that we can.

Which Consideration leads me to the fourth and last thing propounded in the
beginning of this Discourse, that is, To draw practical Inferences from the
whole, and make Improvement of it, proper to us at this Place and Time.

If we must worship him that made the Fountains, that is, honor, love, fear,
serve him, pray to him, and give him Thanks, because he made them, and
discovers so many adorable Perfections to be in him by his making of them: Then
let us briefly inquire, 1. What Prohibitions. 2. What positive Duties flow from
hence.


God's Word is a two-edged Sword, utrinque acutus, it cuts on both sides. When
it injoyns a Duty, it prohibits what is contrary; and when it prohibits Sin, it
injoyns the Good, which is contrary to the Evil it forbids.

If therefore we must worship him that made the Fountains: Then, 1. We must not
neglect him. 2. Not do any thing that is contrary to his Worship.


1. Let us not neglect, forget, or leave out him that made them, gave them
their Virtues, and must bless them, if they do us good. Let us not drink as the
Beasts of the Earth, which all the while they drink, look only down upon the
Waters they are drinking of; but as the Birds of Heaven, which sip and look
upward. When we drink we lift up our Heads, it is a necessary Posture: make a
virtue of this necessity; and when you lift up your Heads in drinking, lift up
your Eyes, your Hearts to God, in some devout Ejaculations, in some spiritual
Hallelujahs.

Good Lord vouchsafe to bless these Waters both to me, and to all that drink
them; O thou that made the Fountains, give me cause, and give me an Heart to
praise thee for the making of them. O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord, praise him,
and magnify him for ever! who forgiveth all thy Sins, and heals all thy
Diseases. Glory be to thee, O God, whose Power, Wisdom, Goodness these Wells
proclaim; thou gave them their Virtues, thou continuest their flowing, thou
have made them helpful to me and many others; O continue forth thy Loving
kindness to us, and grant us all thy Grace to spend the Health we wait upon
thee for, in the Service of the Giver.

2. Secondly; If we must worship him that made these Fountains, then let us do
nothing that is contrary to it, or misbecoming those that worship him.

1. In general: Provoke him not in any kind to Jealousy, lest they become as
the Waters of Jealousy to the the guilty Woman, Numb. 5.27. a Curse, and cause
the Belly to swell, and Thigh to rot. God has us here at our Good-behaviour.
'Twas no small Aggravation of the Israelites Sin, that they provoked God at the
Sea, even at the red Sea, Psalm. 106.7. where he signalized his Mercy, by the
Waters covering their Enemies, that there was not any of them left, verse. 11.
Your Distempers are your Enemies; if you expect to have them drowned, or washed
away, provoke him not at the Wells, even at Tunbridg-Wells, where you expect
his Help for your Cure; render them not as the Waters of Meribah.

I am neither of so stoical a Temper, morose Humor, or affected Conversation,
as to censure other Men's Liberties, or to refuse to take my part in innocent
Divertisements, and healthful Recreations. Take your Pleasures in God's Name.
But love not your Pleasures more than God: neither let your Pleasures be
ungodly, nor the pursuit of your Bodies Health run you into Souls Sickness. Be
merry, but withal be wise. Divert your selves, but turn not out of God's way:
use your Liberties, but abuse them not, use them not unlawfully: Provide for
your Satisfaction; always provided, you make not Provision for the Flesh to
fulfill its Lusts.

In a word, so walk, so bowl, so dance, so play, that you stake not your Souls,
nor by any of these, or other Pastimes, rob your selves of time to pray to, or
to praise that God, who made those Wells, which are the Center of this great
Confluence: or may render you ashamed, afraid, or otherwise unfit, to bow your
Knees, or lift up your Faces, Hands or Hearts unto his holy Habitation; and
that neither the Foams of impure Lusts, nor the Froth of less criminal
Vanities, may pollute or damp the Altar, nor render unsavory the Incense of
your Evening Sacrifice. Tertullian has left a brave and noble Character of the
Primitive Christians, worthy our Imitation, yea our Ambition. That they so ate,
so drank, so traded, so conversed in the day, as became those who remembered
that they were to pray ere they slept at Night. O that I could always do so.
And I can wish you nothing better, tho I love you as my self.

2. Secondly, and more particularly. Look upon these Wells as consecrated and
made sacred by an extraordinary Presence of the God of Nature, in and with
them; and by the helpful Virtues, and healing Qualities, that he that makes the
Fountains, has endu'd them with. And so procul procul esto prophani.

After the Command which injoyns God's Worship, follows that which so severely
forbids the taking of his Name in vain. What does this signify less, then that
in vain we worship him, if we cease not to take his Name in vain?

I beseech you therefore give me leave, with that Zeal which becomes my
Sacerdotal Character, and yet with that Modesty, which knows my own meaness in
that Sacred Order, to beseech you to be tender of the Honor of the Name of God.

I hope I understand the difference betwixt reproving and reproaching; and tho
we are allowed and commanded to reprove some Sinners sharply, cuttingly, as the
Greek Word signifies, yet to add reproachful Reflections to needful Reproofs,
would be as if a Surgeon should invenom the point of his Lancet, or Edge of
his Incision-knife; and thereby add a throbbing Anguish, a vexing Torment, and
deadly Inflammation, to the unavoidable, but safe and beneficial smart, to
which the Patient would be persuaded to submit with Willingness, in hope of
Cure.

I can sincerely say, I honor your Persons, and love your Souls, and would not
displease you, lest I thereby hinder your profiting by my Entreaties or Advice.

I beseech you therefore, yea I again and again beseech you, let not the most
guilty, the most criminal Offender think himself reproached, while I reprove
the Sin of common Swearing, the too frequent noise of which, greatly abates the
innocent Pleasures of this Place and Season. It Is the direct Antithesis to the
Worship we are required to give Him that made the Fountains; it is a casting off
his Fear, it is a trampling his Glory under foot; it is a rendering his great, his
holy, his adorable Name, vile and contemptible, cheap and base, a low, a common
thing.

I hope I may without Offense profess, that I cannot but pity the Errors of
their Education, who esteem it a piece of good Breeding to blaspheme the Name
of God, and account it the most ornamental and graceful Accomplishment of their
Language, with a graceless Fool-hardiness to dare him to his Face to damn them.
If you believe there is a God, (and who has the Patience to be esteemed an
Atheist?) and that he is a God indeed, a Being absolutely perfect, infinitely
great and good, omniscient, holy, just and true, you may take his word, He will
not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. And I assure you it is much
wiser and safer to believe in time, then to find to Eternity, how fearful a
thing it is to fall into the Hands of the everlasting God.

As for my self, (and I am confident in this, I speak the joint Sense of my
Brethren in the same sacred Order) I speak it freely: He desecrates his
Sacerdotal Character, and is unworthy to be a Priest in our holy Church, who is
so unfaithful and unkind, as not to mind them of their Failings, who in this
kind sin through Inadvertency and Weakness, or so cowardly, as through want of
Zeal for God, and love to his Brother, dares not admonish them, who thus sin in
an affected Contempt of God and Religion. It was the custom of the Jews, to
rend their Garments when they heard the Name of the holy blessed God
blasphemed. And for us of the Clergy, we deserve no pity, if it rend not our
Hearts to hear the sacred Name of God so vilely rent in pieces, tho our Gowns
were rent from off our Backs.

But I hasten to the positive Inferences.

1. If we must worship Him that made the Fountains: Then by parity of Reason,
let us learn to enforce upon our selves, a due, an awful Sense of God: from
every Creature, in the making of which he has manifested forth his glorious,
his adorable Perfections; God's Name is written on them all; Praesentemque Deum
quaelibet herba refert.

This Universe is a great Volume, and every Creature is a Letter in it; as in
their orderly Conjunction, you may spell and read his adorable Excellencies
completely and at large, so every single Letter has its Signification and
Sound. But as in the Alphabet, some are Vowels, sound singly, and give a sound
to others: so in the Book of Nature, some of God's Works are Vowels, very
vocal; such as the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea and the Fountains; worship him,
love and admire him in the least: for God is Magnus in minimis, great in the
least that he has made: Digitus Dei may be seen in them. But,

2. Worship him more signally for making the Fountains. Psalm. 104.1. David
stirs up himself, Bless the Lord O my Soul: and then he gives the Reasons why,
and a principal one is laid down Verse. 10. Because he sends the Springs into
the Valleys, Psalm. 95. which the Church has wisely chosen as a Preface to our
Public Worship every Morning, Verse. 1. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let
us heartily rejoice in the Strength of our Salvation; Verse. 4. Because in his
Hands are the deep places of the Earth; Verse. 5. The Sea is his, and he made
it, and the Fountains of it. Verse. 6. O come, let us therefore worship and fall
down before his Footstool.

3. Then him that made the extraordinary Fountains for Medicine, for Health:
shall so much Power, Wisdom, Goodness shine forth in them, and we be blind and
not observe them? or dumb, and not express a deep and grateful sense of them? O
that a blessed God would superadd one healing Virtue more unto them, a Power to
cure the Indevotion of our too little thankful Hearts! Shall they be counted
worthy so great Expense, of Travel, Time and Money, and not be worthy our
thankful Praises, Love and Service? O thou that made these Wells, and have
opened the flinty Rocks, so that Streams have issued out, open our stony
Hearts, that sweetest Streams of Love, of Praise and Adoration, may flow from
thence, and never be dried up!

4. If he must be worshipped that made the Fountains in the Fields and Deserts,
how much more he that made those in the Garden, in the Paradise of God, I mean
his Church. We call that sacred Vessel, where the Covenant of Christianity was
sealed 'twixt God and us, the Font. He makes the other as the God of Nature;
but the Fountain of our Baptism is signally made by him, as the God of Grace.
'Twas he that sent St. John Baptist to baptize with Water, John 1.33.

And his blessed Son, the holy Jesus, after he was risen from the Dead, and
entered into his state of Exaltation, gave Commission and Command to his
Disciples to baptize all Nations in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Our Baptism is a most solemn Primitive Act of Worship, and Primitive Acts are
engaging Acts. It Is as the boaring of our Ear at the doorpost of God's House,
to show that we must serve him for ever. We therein receive the mark of the
Lamb of God on our Foreheads, and on our Right-hands; it is the very Badg and
Cognizance of the Worshippers of the true God, through Jesus Christ, by the
Holy Ghost, in all whose Names we receive it, and to whose Service we are
consecrated by it: we thereby oblige our selves to his Worship both in the
largest and strictest Notions, to his entire Service in universal unreserved
Obedience, and all inward and external Acts of Adoration, both in Soul and
Body. And by how much the Privileges of Baptism are more and greater, and the
Obligations of it stronger and more indispensable; so much more zealously
should we worship him that made it for us, and has admitted us unto it.

Few Aggravations inhance and heighten the guilt and provocation of our Sins so
much, as that they are the Sins of baptized ones: this dies them of a deeper
Purple than those of Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah.

These mineral Waters may, by many things put to them, lose both their Taste
and Virtue, in the Chemist Phrase be precipitated, that tho they are drunk,
they neither heal nor help. Every deliberate and wilful Sin desecrates the
Waters, which were consecrated to the mystical washing away of Sin:
Precipitates baptismal Waters, that their Virtue subsides and sinks, to the
bottom of the Font, that tho they still may wet, they will not wash; though
they may be sprinkled, they will not cleanse.

How unpardonable an Affront would it be to this honorable Company, if any
should be so impudently rude or wicked, as to pollute or poison these Wells we
come to drink of? What is it then to abuse that Blood of sprinkling, by which
we were sanctified, and to do despite to that Spirit of Grace which
over-shadows these sacred Waters?

An involuntary innocent staining of the Font, has branded an imperial Name in
all succeeding Ages, Leo Coproninus. The casting of a dead Dog into a Well,
which was the only supply for the Garrison which kept it, lost one of the
strongest and most impregnable Forts, Stetguard. Our voluntary sinning after
and against our Baptism, poisons the very Font, casts a dead Dog into the Well
of Grace, nay, is an actual surrender into his Hands whom we have renounced,
and should stand in defiance of for ever.

I beseech you, I adjure you therefore, worship that God which made the Font of
your Baptism, by a sound believing of the good Promises he made to you, and
making good the Promises you there made to him: for as there is no greater
cause of the decay of Christian Piety, than the not understanding or forgetting
our Baptismal Covenant, and the indispensable Obligation it brings us under, to
Faith, Repentance, and unreserved new Obedience; so there is no Remedy more
likely to retrieve its Honor, and to restore the power of it in the World,
than a daily serious remembering of it, and hearty desire and study to live up
to it.

5. If we must worship him, love, serve, adore him that made the Fountains, and
made the Font; how much more him that made the Source and Spring of that very
Fountain, that Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. the
Blood, the Spirit of Christ?

When Longinus, as Tradition names him, with that accursed Spear pierced the
Side and Heart of our most blessed Lord, yet hanging on that more accursed
Tree, forthwith there came out Blood and Water; John 19.34. The Church has
always reckoned these the vital Springs of the Health-giving Sacraments. Christ
calls himself the living Water, John 4. and he calls the Spirit by the same
Name, John 7.38, 39. He that believes in me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Water; this spoke he of the Spirit.

And it is agreeable to his Father's Language, Psalm. 44.3. I will pour Water
upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the dry Ground. I will pour my Spirit
upon thy Seed, Isa. 44.3.

If the love of God in giving his Son be set forth so emphatically with an to,
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, so freely, so fully,
so inconceivably, as no Tongue can express, as no Heart can conceive; with what
Fervours of Love and Thankfulness should we receive it and return it?

6. Worship him that is not only the Maker of the Fountains, but the very
Fountain of all things; n, the Fountain of living Waters: Jer. 2.13. The
Fountain of our Being, in whom we live, and move, and have our Being; and for
whom, as well as by whom, we were all made. God made us all to worship himself:
for he made the World to manifest his Glory, that he might be known to be, and
to be such as indeed he is, and have the Glory of being such; and to give him
that Glory (which is peculiar to intelligent Natures) is properly to worship
him.

And the Fountain of all our Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal Mercies present,
future, all we have, and all we hope for.

Nay, the Fountain of the very Deity, as the Schools call God the Father,
Fontem Dietatis, who communicates the Divine Nature to the Son and Holy Ghost,
as Light and Heat flow from the Body of the Sun, tho they abide in it, and be
one with it.

Lastly; If all must worship him that made the Fountains; Then they especially
who have built him an House for his Worship at these famous Fountains: And it
will be little better then a mocking of him, to erect him an House for his
Worship, and to neglect that Worship for which it was erected.

And tho I am very far from imposing Laws, or prescribing Rules to this
Honorable Assembly; yet give me leave with that modest freedom which becomes
my Office, to remind you of somewhat at least very unseemly; and which I
charitably hope, proceeds solely or chiefly from want of Consideration.

You exactly understand all the Punctilio's of Honor, all the Measures of what
is Decent, Just and Fit. Let me therefore appeal to you what Respect, what
Deference is due to God, who is, and calls himself a Great King. How comely it
would be, (or rather how uncomely it is to do the contrary) not to continue your
Gaming upon the very spot, in time of Public Prayer. I beseech you, if you
will not join with us in our solemn Worship, yet modestly forbear to affront
it, and Him to whom we pay it.

Give me leave to conclude with one more humble Motion. It Is an express Branch
of Divine Worship to build God an House, 'twill be no less to indow it now it is
built. An easy Liberality from New comers, who find a Chapel ready prepared by
our Charge and Care, (not excluding the pious Charity of those who have already
given to its building) may settle a decent Maintenance for an Able Minister,
constantly to offioiate in it, and preach to the Neighboring Inhabitants all
the Year.

It Is a certainly desolate place in the depth of Winter, still, notwithstanding
the many fair Houses which are lately built. And the badness of the Ways, and
distance of the Churches, I fear, occasions in many, too great a neglect of
God's Worship, and their own Souls. Had they an Able Minister to reside
constantly among them, the Woe of dwelling in this Mesech would be much abated,
and these Deserts would become a Mount Sion, and these Tents of Kedar like the
Curtains of Solomon, an Emblem of Jerusalem.

We of the Clergy, who come hither for preservation, or recovery of Health,
give you our Labors freely, tho we have no cause to be ashamed of what we gave
to the Erection of the Place we labor in. And you may the better bear with us,
while in the behalf of them that serve us here, we plead with you to leave a
Blessing behind you, That as God has endowed these Wells with lasting Streams
and Virtues, you would endow this House built to his Name so near them, that
the Waters of the Sanctuary may flow from hence, with a constant Perennity,
like to the Waters of these Wells, and with an Healthfulness to the Souls of
those that dwell here, which may equal, or exceed the Usefulness of the Waters
to the Bodies of us Strangers, who come hither to drink them.

And now, Oh thou most glorious Lord, who have made the Fountains of Waters,
and thereby manifested forth thy Almighty Power, thy unsearchable Wisdom, and
inexhaustible Goodness, which render thee a most suitable Object of all possible
Adoration, Love and Service; Accept we beseech thee, the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving and Praise, which we offer to thee from the Altar of an humble
Heart, for making of these Fountains, and making known and continuing their
useful Virtues, and for blessing them to any of us. And we further bless thy
glorious Name, who art the Fountain of Living Waters, and in whom are all our
Springs, for all the Streams of Mercy that flow from thee, especially for thy
Son, and thy Spirit, thy Word, and thy Sacraments, and that suitable Portion of
it we have now been made partakers of: Beseeching thee so to write in our
Hearts by the Finger of thy Spirit, what we have heard with our outward Ears,
that it may bring forth in us the Fruit of good Living, to the Glory of thy
holy Name, the good Example of our fellow Christians, the present Comfort, and
the eternal Salvation of our precious Souls, through Jesus Christ our dearest
Lord: To whom with thy Majesty, and eternal Spirit, be rendered, as is most due,
all Honor, Love, Thanksgiving, Praise and Adoration, now and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.
Devout Meditations of Cardinal Bellarmine, made English. Of the Consideration
of the Waters, and chiefly of Fountains,
CHAP. I.
THE Water holds the second place amongst the Elements of this World: and if
that be rightly looked upon, a step may be made of it to assist the Heart's
Ascent to God. And if we will premise a general Consideration of Water, then
draw out of the Fountains a special Ascent to God.

Water is moist and cold, and from hence it has these five Properties: For, 1.
It washes and cleanses away Spots and Defilements. 2. It quenches Fire. 3.
It cools and slakes the heat of Thirst. 4. It joins into one many and different
things. Lastly; So low as it descends, so high it will ascend again: All which
are manifest Symbols and Footsteps of that God who is the maker of all things.

1. Water washes off bodily Stains: God washes off those that are spiritual.
Thou shall wash me, says David, and I shall be whiter than Snow; Psalm. 51.7.
For although Contrition, Sacraments, Priests, Alms-deeds, do wash away Sins, which
are the Stains of the Heart: All these are but Instruments and Dispositions. He
that is the Author of this washing, is God alone. I even I am he that blotteth
out thy Transgressions, for mine own sake, says God by Isaiah, Chap. 43.25.
And therefore the Pharisees murmuring against Christ, said, Who can forgive
Sins but God only? Luke 7. 49. And they were not mistaken in ascribing unto God
only, the supreme Power of forgiving Sins: But in that that they believed not
Christ to be (...) God, and so blasphemed, and spoke Truth in the same breath.

Neither does God only, like Water, wash away Spots, but will also be called by
the Name of Water; John 7.38. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. But this spoke he of
the Spirit which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy Ghost
was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. Therefore the holy
Spirit, which is very God, is living Water. And of this Water speaks Ezekiel,
Chap. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean from
all your Filthiness, and from your Idols will I cleanse you. And because this
celestial and uncreated Water far excels the Virtues of this terrestrial and
created Water, we will take notice of three Differences betwixt the washing of
created and uncreated Water.

First; That which is created, washes the Bodies Spots, but not all, for many
it cannot get out unless it be helped by Soap and other Instruments: but
uncreated Water washes out thoroughly all kind of Spots: for in the forecited
place it is said, You shall be clean from all your Filthiness.

Secondly; Created Water rarely washes Spots so clean away, as to leave no
Marks or Shadows of them: But uncreated Water washes so, that what is washed
with it, is whiter and fairer then it was before it was defiled. Thou shall
wash me, says David, and I shall be whiter than Snow. And the Lord himself
says by Isaiah, Chap. 1.18. Tho your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow: tho they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.

Lastly; Created Water washes away natural Spots, which resist not him that
washes them: But uncreated Water washes away voluntary Spots, which cannot be
rinsed off, unless the Soul be willing, and spontaneously consent to him that
rinseth it. But so great and admirable is the Virtue of this Water, that it
sweetly penetrates hearts of Stone, and is resisted by no hard Heart, because
it makes it not to resist, as St. Augustine rightly observes, Lib. de Praed. SS.
cap. 8.

Who can understand, O Lord, with how admirable Methods thou breathest Faith
into the Hearts of the Unbelievers, and pourest Humility in-the Heats of the
proud, and instillest Love into the Hearts of thy Enemies, that he who a little
before breathing Threatenings and Slaughter, did persecute thee in thy
Disciples, being suddenly changed, did willingly bear the Threats and Violences
of the Persecutors for thee, and for thy Church! It is too much for me to
search into thy Secrets, and I had rather know the efficacy of thy Grace by
sweet Experience, than by search: and because I know this Water of thine, to be
a voluntary Shower, designed for thine own Heritage, as thy Prophet singS,
therefore I most humbly and submissly beg, that I may be found in thine
Inheritance, and it may please thy Grace to descend into the Earth of my Heart,
that it continue not toward thee like Earth without Water, dry and barren, as
it is of it self, being not sufficient so much as to think the least that is
good. But let us us proceed.

CHAP. II.
Water quenches Fire, and that heavenly Water, viz. the Grace of the holy
Spirit, in an admirable way and manner, quenches the Fire of carnal Lusts.
It Is true, Fastings and corporal Mortifications do much avail to quench this
Burning, but provided they be used as Instruments of the Grace of the Holy
Ghost, otherwise of themselves alone they signify but very little: For Love is
the principal of the Affections and Passions of the Mind, that governs them
all, and all obey it; Love will not be forced, and if it be stopped of one side,
it will find Passage in another; Love fears nothing, dares all things,
conquereth all things, thinks nothing hard or impossible to it self. Lastly; a
lesser Love will yield to none, but to that Love that is greater and more
mighty: so carnal Love, whether it pursue the Riches or Delights of the World,
will only yield unto the Love of God. As soon as the Water of the holy Spirit
begins to drop into the Heart of any Man, forthwith carnal Love begins to wax
cold. Blessed Augustine may be our Witness, who being accustomed to indulge his
Lust, and held it impossible for him to live without a Female Consort, yet when
he began to taste the Grace of the holy Spirit, cried out in the ninth Book of
his Confessions, How sweet did it presently become to me, to want the Suavities
of Trifles, and the loss of those that were my greatest Fear, now was my Joy to
be rid off: for thou did cast them out, who art thy self the true and highest
Sweetness; thou did cast them out, and did thy self enter in their stead,
who art sweeter than all Pleasure, but not to Flesh and Blood; brighter than
all Light, but more inward than any Secret; higher than all Honor, but not to
the high-minded.

CHAP. III.
FUrther; Water slakes the Thirst, and nothing but this heavenly Water can put
an end to the various, most troublesome, and almost infinite desires of the
Hearts of Men. So Truth it self, speaking to the Samaritan Woman, has taught
us, John 4.13. Whosoever drinks of this Water, shall thirst again; but
whosoever shall drink of the Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst.
And the case is plainly this, The Eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear
filled with hearing. Eccles. 1.8. What ever can be offered to a Man, cannot
satiate his desire, seeing he is capable of infinite Good, and all created
things are finite: but he that begins to drink of celestial Water, in which are
comprehended all things, desires nothing, seeks for nothing more.

CHAP. IV.
WAter conjoyns and brings into one the things that seem impossible to be
united: So many Grains of Bread-Corn, by mixture of Water, are made one Loaf;
and of many Particles of Earth, by adding Water to them, Bricks are made: but
much more easily and indissolubly the Water of the holy Spirit causes many Men
to become one Heart and one Soul; as is spoken in the Acts of the Apostles,
Chap. 4.22. of the first Christians, on whom the Holy Ghost had immediately
before descended. And our Lord, when going to his Father, both commended and
foretold this Unity, which the Water of the holy Spirit makes, when he says,
John 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also that shall
believe on me through their Word, that they all may be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. And a little after, that
they may be one, even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be
made perfect in one. To which Unity also the Apostle exhorts in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, Chap. 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the
Bond of Peace. There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your Calling. O happy Union! which makes many Men to be one Body of
Christ, which is governed by one Head, and eats of one Bread, and drinks of one
Cup, and lives of one Spirit, and cleaving to God, is made one Spirit with him.
What can a Servant more desire, than that he should not only be made partaker
of all his Lord's Goods, but also by the indissoluble Bond of Love, be made one
with him, his almighty and most wise, and most beautiful Lord? But all this
does the Grace of the holy Spirit effect, as living and enlivening Water, when
it is devoutly received in the Heart, and preserved with all Diligence, and
sollicitous Care.

CHAP. V.
LAstly; Water ascends so high as it descends from above; and because the holy
Spirit comes down from the highest Heaven, upon Earth, therefore in that Man in
whose Heart he is received, he becomes a Fountain of Water springing up into
Eternal Life, as our Lord speaks to the Woman of Samaria; that is to say, a Man
born again of Water and the holy Spirit, and has the same Spirit dwelling in
his Heart, lifts up thither the Fruits of his Grace from whence that Grace
descended: therefore, O my Soul, being taught and excited by these Words of
Scripture, say to thy Father, again and again, with groanings that cannot be
uttered, Give me this Water which may scour off all my Spots, which may quench
the heat of Concupiscence, which may satisfy all Thirst, and all Desires; which
may make thee one Spirit with thy God, which may become in thee a Well of Water
springing up to eternal Life, that thou may send thy Services thither
before, where thou hopest thy self to abide to endless Ages.

Not without cause did the Son of God say, You being evil, know how to give
good Gifts to your Children; how much more shall your Father in Heaven give his
good Spirit to them that ask it? And he said not, will give Bread, or Raiment,
or Wisdom, or Charity, or the Kingdom of Heaven, or eternal Life, but he said,
will give his good Spirit; because in that all things are contained. Thou
therefore cease not daily to mind the Father of his Son's Promise, and to say
with mighty Affection, and an undoubted hope of obtaining, O holy Father, not
in confidence of mine own Righteousness, but trusting in the Promise of thine
only begotten Son, do I pour out my Prayers to thee. 'Twas he that said to us,
How much more shall your Father give his good Spirit to them that ask him?
assuredly thy Son which is Truth it self, cannot deceive: therefore fulfill the
Promise of thy Son, who glorified thee upon Earth, being every where obedient
unto Death, even the Death of the Cross; give thy holy Spirit to me who ask it,
give me the Spirit of thy Fear and Love, that thy Servant may fear nothing but
to offend thee, and may love nothing besides thee, and his Neighbor in thee:
Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Cast me
not away from thy Presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore unto
me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Psalm. 51.10,
11, 12.

CHAP. VI.
I Come now to the Similitude the Fountains of Water have with God; for from
hence the Mind may be raised up to the Contemplation of the truly wonderful and
excellent Perfections of him that made them. For not without just cause is God
in holy Scripture called, The Fountain of Life, and the Fountain of Wisdom, and
Fountain of living Water; Psalm. 35. Eccles. 1. Jer. 2.13. And that he is the
very Fountain of being, may be gathered from the Words of God to Moses, Exodus
3. I am that I am: he that is has sent me to you. The Apostle seems to
comprehend all these together when he says, in him we live, and move, and have
our Being; for in him we are, as in the Fountain of being, in him we live as in
the Fountain of Life, in him we move as in the Fountain of Wisdom: for more
moveable is Wisdom than all things moveable, and by its Purity reaches every
where, as is said in the Book of Wisdom, Chap. 7.

A Fountain of Water has with us this proper to it self, that from it the
Rivers arise; and if the Fountains cease to feed them, they presently dry up;
but the Fountain depends not on the Streams, for it receives not its Waters
from them, but has them in it self, and communicate them to them. This is the
true Symbol and Resemblance of the Divinity, for God is the truest Fountain of
being; seeing he receives being from no other thing, and all receive from him.
God receives from nothing, to be, because it is the Essence of God to be, and
Essence it self is his Existence, that it can neither be, nor be conceived in
our Thoughts, that God should not have always existed, or not always to exist;
other things may be a while, and a while after cease to be, because to be, does
not necessarily belong to their Essence: as for example; it is of the Essence
of a Man to be a reasonable Creature, and therefore he cannot be a Man, and not
be a reasonable Creature; and if Existence were of the Essence of a Man, it
were impossible he should not always exist; but because it is not of his
Essence to exist, therefore he may be, or cease to be. God is therefore the
Fountain of being, because actual Existence is included in his very Essence and
this do those words signify, I am that I am, that is, I am Being it self, and
receive it not from others, but have it in my self; to me alone it belongs,
that my very Essence is to be. And hence it is that Eternity and Immortality
are peculiarly proper unto God, as says the Apostle, To the King eternal,
immortal, the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17. Who only has Immortality; 1 Timothy
6.16.

But all things so receive their Being from God, that unless they always depend
on him, and be preserved by his Concourse, they forthwith would cease to be.
Hence the same Apostle says, upholding all things by the Word of his Power;
because, unless God should sustain the Creatures, they could not subsist.

Therefore, O my Soul, adore and wonder at the infinite Goodness of thy Maker,
who so lovingly bears up and preserves all things, tho he need them not; and
do not less admire and imitate the Patience of the same thy Creator, who is so
kind to the unthankful and the evil, that he sustains them that blaspheme him,
and upholds them that deserve to be reduced to nothing; neither let it seem
grievous unto thee, that thou art sometime required to bear with the
Infirmities of thy Brethren, and to do good to them that hate thee.

Neither is this the only Pre-eminence of him that is the Fountain of Being,
that he receives his Being from no other Fountain, and communicates to all
other things their Being. For with us the Waters of the Fountains, and the
Waters of the Rivers, are of the same kind: and although the Waters of the
Fountains receive not their Waters from other Fountains, yet have they some
other causes of their Being, to wit, the Vapors; and they again have other
causes, till we arrive at the first Cause, which is God.

But O my Soul, God that is thy Creator, is not of the same kind with created
things, but stands at an infinite distance of Dignity and Nobleness, and
Excellency from them; and truly and properly is the Fountain of Being, because
he not only receives not his Being from any other Fountain, or Being, but is
wholly without any cause.

A Fountain of created Water, as it was said, is not from other Water, yet is
derived from another cause; the uncreated Fountain of Being, has nothing
before him, depends on nothing, needs nothing, nothing can hurt him, but all
depend on him, and he can extinguish all created things with one wink of his
Eye, as says the most valiant Maccabeus.

Admire, O my Soul, this Eminence, this Beginning without Beginning, this Cause
without a Cause, this infinite, illimited, immense, and absolutely necessary
Being, in comparison of whom all other Beings are mere Contingencies; and it
may be Truth it self spoke of him when he said, But one thing is necessary:
therefore cleave to this One, and serve him only, and delight thy self in the
love and desire of him alone, and in comparison of him despise all other
things, at least be little sollicitous about many things, seeing but one thing
is necessary, and that alone may be sufficient both for thy self and all
others. But let this be thy only care, that thou may never fall from his
Grace, and study always and everywhere to please him.

CHAP. VII.
MOreover, God is most rightly called the Fountain of Life, because he lives
and has Life in himself, yea, is himself Eternal Life; This is the true God,
and eternal Life, says St. John, Epist. 1. Chap. 5.20. And all things which
live, receive Life from this Fountain: and if he cease to communicate Life to
them, they perish, and return unto their Dust, as sings the holy Prophet David.
It is the Property of all things which have Life, to beget what is like unto
themselves: thus God begets his Son most like himself, God God, and Living
Living, Deus Deum, and vivens viventem; for as the Father has Life in himself,
so has he given to the Son to have Life in himself, John 5.26. Now the Father
has life in himself, because he is the Fountain of Life, and receives not Life
from any other; and has given to the Son to have Life in himself, because he
has given him the same Life which he himself has; and for this reason the Son
also is a Fountain of Life, but a Fountain of Life from the Fountain of Life,
as he is God of God, and Light of Light. Who can explain, yea who can conceive
what kind of Life the Life of God is, and what kind of Fountain of Life that
is, from whence all things that live either in the Earth, or the Heavens, do
draw all their drops? That Life which we in this state of Exile know, is
nothing else but an internal Principle of Motion: for those things are said by
us to live which some way move themselves. Hence by way of Similitude they are
called Living Waters, which flow in Rivers, and dead, which stagnate in Ponds;
beeause those seem to be moved of themselves, these cannot move, unless they be
driven by the Winds, or some other external force.

Thy God, O my Soul, most truly lives, and is the Author and Spring of Life;
for himself in holy Scripture often intimates so much, I live, says the Lord;
and the Prophets often repeat, The Lord lives, The Lord lives; and in Jeremy
God complains of his People, saying, They have forsaken me the Fountain of
Living Water; and yet he is moved neither of himself, nor of any other. I the
Lord change not, Mal. 3. and elsewhere, God is not a Man that he should lie,
nor the Son of Man that he should repent, or be changed. And there is a Hymn
sung daily in the Latin Church to this effect.

God who strongly all maintainest,
In thy self unmoved remainest,
Bounding the times of each days light,
With the succession of the Night.
And although God begets his Son, he begets him without change; although he sees,
hears, speaks, loves, pities, judges, he does all without Mutation; although he
creates and preserves things, or on the contrary destroys and scatters them,
and again renews and changes them, yet he works resting, and changes other
things without being moved; how therefore does he live if he move not himself?
And how lives he not, if he be the Fountain and Author of Life? This knot is
easily untied; this is absolutely sufficient to Life, if the thing that lives
act of it self, and be not moved by another. But Life for the most part in
created things, is a Principle of inward Motion, because created things are
imperfect, and want many things to perform the Functions of Life: but God is
infinite Perfection, and needs nothing out of himself; wherefore he indeeds
acts of himself, and not moved by another, but has no need of Motion or Change,
needs not Motion or Mutation. Created things need Change, that they may
generate and be generated, because they beget out of themselves; and the thing
that is begotten must be changed from not being into being; but God begets his
Son within himself, and within himself proceeds his holy Spirit, and neither
the Son or Holy Ghost ought to be changed from not being unto being, because
they receive that Being that always was; and that they receive not in time, but
in Eternity. Created things want motion of Increase, because they were born
imperfect; but God the Son is born most perfect; and God the Holy Ghost is
breathed forth also, and produced most perfect. Created things need the motion
of Alteration, that they may obtain the various Qualities they want: but God
wants nothing, seeing his Essence is of infinite Perfection. Created things
want local motion, because they are not everywhere; but God is everywhere
wholly.

Further; Created things that they may see, that they may hear, that they may
speak, that they may work, want many things; because tho indeed they have Life,
yet it is imperfect and very poor: but God wants nothing out of himself, that
he may see all things, hear all, speak to all, and work all in all, because he
not only has Life, but the Life he has is most opulent and happy, and he
himself is Life, and the Fountain of Life. And that we may give an Example in
the act of seeing: a Man that he may see, must have a visive Power, which is
distinct from the Soul, which properly lives; he must have an Object, some
colored Body placed without himself; he must have the Light of the Sun, or
some other luminous Body; he must have a Medium, some diaphanous Body; he must
have a sensible Species, which may be carried from the Object to the Eye; he
must have a corporal Organ, that is, an Eye sitly made of various Humors and
fleshy Tunicles; he must have sensitive Spirits, and optic Nerves, through
which those Spirits may pass; he must have a duly proportioned distance; and
after all, must apply his Power to the act of Seeing. Behold how many helps
both Men and other Creatures want, that they may perform one vital Action: but
God who truly has Life wholly in himself, wants nothing at all. His infinite
Essence is to him Power, Object, Species, Light and all things else of himself,
and by himself, and in himself; God sees and clearly discovers all things which
are, which have been, which shall be, and which can be; and before the World
was made God saw all things, neither did any thing new accrue unto his Sight or
Knowledge by the Creation of all things. What therefore shall thou be, O my
Soul, when thou shall be partaker of his Life? what great matter does God
command thee, when he requires thee to lay down this corporal, this animal
Life, which is so imperfect and full of wants, for thy Brethren, and for God
himself, that thou may be made partaker of Eternal Life, which is most rich
and blessed? And if it be a small matter he requires, when he requires thee to
despise Life, how very light and little should it seem, when he bids thee to
distribute thy dead Riches liberally to the Poor, to abstain from carnal Lusts,
truly to renounce the Devil and his Pomps; and with thy whole Heart to breath
after that Life, which alone is Life indeed, and Truth?

CHAP. VIII.
BUT now it is time, that as well as we can, we ascend unto the Fountain of
Wisdom. The Fountain of Wisdom is the Word of God in the highest, says
Ecclesiasticus; and well he said in the Highest, because the Fountain of Wisdom
abundantly and copiously flows forth upon the holy Angels, and the Souls of the
Blessed, whose Habitations are the highest Heavens. To us who are conversant in
this Pilgrimage and Desert, not so much Wisdom it self, as a slight scent and
shadow of it is attainable. Wherefore, O my Soul, affect not things too much
above thee; search not the Majesty lest thou be oppressed of the Glory. Admire
his Wisdom of whom the Apostle speaks; To God only wise, Romans 16. and gratulate
those blessed Souls that drink out of the Fountain of Wisdom: and tho they
cannot comprehend God, which is proper to the Fountain of Wisdom it self, yet
they see the Face of God, that is, of the first cause without any interposed
Vail, and being irradiated by the Beams of his Brightness, can judge rightly of
all things; and in that noonday Light of Wisdom, fear neither the Darkness of
Errors, nor Obscurity of Ignorance, nor the Dimness of Opinions. Aspire, O my
Soul, unto that Happiness. And that thou may safely attain it, love with all
thy Heart, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom are hidden all the Treasures of the
Knowledge and Wisdom of God, Col. 2.3. for he has said in his Gospel, He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my
self to him, John 14.21. And what else does this signify, I will manifest my
self to him, but I will manifest all the Treasures of the Knowledge and Wisdom
of God, which lie hid in me? Assuredly every Man naturally desires to know; and
tho carnal Lusts do in many lull these desires asleep, yet when we have put off
this Body that corrupts and presses down our Soul, then will the Fire of this
Desire blaze forth above all Desires. How great will then thy Happiness, O my
Soul, be, when thy Beloved and thy Lover CHRIST, will show thee all the
Treasures of the Knowledge and Wisdom of God? But that such hopes may not be
frustrate, strive to keep Christ's Precepts, for he has said, If any Man loves
me, he will keep my Words; and he that loves me not, keeps not my Words. Mean
while, let thy Wisdom be such as holy Job describes, The Fear of the Lord is
Wisdom; and to depart from evil, is Understanding. And what good soever thou
beholdest in the Creatures, know that it flows from God, the Fountain of all
Goodness, and so with blessed Francis, learn to to taste the Goodness of the
Fountain in every Creature, as in Rivolets that are derived from it.

Devotions for Water-drinkers: OR, Meditations, Prayers, and Thanksgiving
fitted to that occasion.
MEDITATION I. Upon the many kinds of Diseases cured by these Waters.
HOW great is that Evil which Fools make a Mock of? The Cause may be seen in
the Effects. Had there been no Sin, there had been no Sorrow, nor Sickness, no
Diseases, Pain, or Death. The great number of Distempers is no small evidence
of the great Evil of Sin. It Is a prolifick Root which bears such variety, such
multitude of Fruit. The great Physician Fernelius cries out, Totus Homo, totus
Morbus, which we may english by the Prophet Isaiah's Words, From the sole of
the Foot even to the Head there is no Soundness: and not only from top to
bottom, but from outside to within, the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart
is faint. And the Prince of Physicians, Galen, sums up the Diseases to which
the Eye alone is subject, to amount to no less than three hundred: how many
then of the whole Head? how many are there of the whole Body? And yet the most
of what we know, is the least of what we know not. How many hidden Distempers,
and which yet know no Name, are we subject to? And Art is posed to keep pace
with Nature, and fit new Names to new Diseases. And almost every Year, some
comes upon the Stage known by no other dress, called by no other title but the
New Fever, or New Disease.

And yet, O Lord, the number of our Sins, which exceed the number of our
Diseases, is more exceeded by the multitude of thy Mercies, than the Stars
outshine the Gloworms, or thy Throne in Heaven is higher than thy Footstool on
Earth.

He Is blind which does not see, he deserves to be struck dumb who will not
confess this Truth, which every day, which every place proclaims; but few more
loudly or significantly than this Place or Season. How many Miracles of Mercy
does thy Power and Goodness daily work here? How many Patients wait upon thee
the Great Physician? How many chronical and stubborn Distempers, which had
baffled all the Sons of Art, yield to the God of Nature? Should the vast
number, which daily drink of this Fountain of thy Pleasure, strictly confer
Notes, their Distempers would be found as different as their Faces, not two
exactly alike, yet all expect, and most obtain Relief? O Lord, by the multitude
of thy unknown Mercies, heal all the known, and unknown Diseases of our Bodies,
and Sins of our Souls.

MEDITAT. II. With Allusion to John 5.3.
In them lay a multitude of Impotent Folk, waiting for the moving of the Water.
THE mighty Confluence, of which these Wells are the Center, is a very
humbling, a very mortifying Consideration. For tho the Gallantry and Rich
Attire of the Company, may emulate the Courts of greatest Princes, and make
this Desert forget its Solitude; and we may in this Wilderness find such
Softness and Delicacy, as uses to be in King's Houses: Yet in very truth this
place is but a great Hospital, and the splendid Buildings which rise so fast,
at South-borough, Rust-Hall and about Mount-Ephraim, are but so many Apartments
in this great Infirmatory. And the Guests who fill them are but so many
Impotent Lazars, under the Vests of Dives. Every Glass we drink for cure is a
tacit Confession of our hidden Infirmities and inward Distempers; and that tho
arrayed as the Lillies of the Field, as very Grass as they. Gay Beggars which
wait at these Wells, which are the Celler of the great Housekeeper for a dole
of Mercy. Nothing is more insufferable than an insolent Beggar: Nothing more
despicable than to be poor and proud; to need Relief, and provoke him from whom
we expect it. The first Prescription every wise Physician gives his Patient is,
that he must be regular: take what he orders, and as he orders. Thou, Lord, art
our Physician, we are thy Patients; these Wells are thy Shop, their Waters are
thy Medicines; thy Word the Prescription how we must use them (and all thy
other Gifts) with Prayer and Thanksgiving. O that we all may humbly and
sincerely do so! Amen.

MEDITAT. III. Upon an Hearse passing by toward the Wells, July 22.
BEing returned to my Lodgings from the Wells, and sitting in the pleasant Tent
of my honored Friend, I saw an Hearse pass toward the Wells. And tho I had not
heard of the Death of any Person of Quality hereabouts, yet it put me in mind
of a Passage of the wise Moralist Seneca, which I think (for I dare not affirm
it at this distance from my Books) is in 101 Epist. wrote on the sudden Death
of Senecio. Because thou know not when Death will expect thee, do thou
expect it in every time: and because thou know not where it will meet thee,
do thou look for it in every place. It Is in hope of Health and Life that Men
come hither; yet some who come down in a Coach, have changed it for an Hearse to
be carried up in; and when they were knocking at the Doors of Health, had the
the Gates of the Grave unlocked to receive them, and found what was ordained
for Life to be unto Death. O how good, how wise is it, to be always prepared to
die, and every day to strike Tallies with Life! O Lord Jesus, who wilt
certainly be my Judge when I die, give me Wisdom, give me thy Grace to take thy
Counsel while I live, while I am in Health to be always ready, as a wise
Virgin, for the coming of the Bridegroom. Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord
when he comes shall find watching. Good Lord vouchsafe to make me of that happy
number. Amen.

MEDITAT. IV. Upon the plentiful Supply with which God has furnished the World
both for Food and Physic.
It Is a great Aggravation of our Sins that we commit them all against our
Benefactor, and abuse all the Creatures of God to his Dishonor. To take, as
the Prophet Hoseah speaks, his Silver, his Gold, his Wool and his Flax, his
Bread and his Flesh, his Wine, and his Water, his Time and his Talents, and to
turn them against himself, and as with Weapons of Unrighteousness to fight
against him.

Yet, O Lord, so inconquerable is thy Goodness, that thy Patience seconds thy
Bounty, in continuing to us what our ill Deserts have forfeited, as thou gav'st
it freely without any good Desert of ours. And not only in supplying our bare
Necessities, but furnishing of us for Convenience, for Pleasure and Delight;
yea for recovery of those Distempers which we possibly have brought upon our
selves by the abuse of thy own Blessings: for the whole World is thy
well-stor'd Shop, and every Element is furnished with Supply: The Air with
Fowls, the Water with Fish, the Earth with small and great Cattle, and with a
numberless variety of Plants and Minerals; and the Fire is the common Servant
to them all, to concoct their Crudities, to dress and make them fit for Use and
Nourishment: Neither are they less apt for Physic than for Food, for Medicine
than for Meat.

To pass the rest in a grateful, tho silent Admiration; The Fountains are not
only thy Cellars to quench our Thirst; but thy Baths and thy Alimbecks, where
Almighty Goodness is the Operator, and the God of Nature prevents the Trouble
and Charge of Art.

O let this thy Goodness at length conquer the Obstinacy of our Rebellions,
that our Ingratitude and Provocations may never overcome thy Clemency and
Patience; that we may be so weary and ashamed of sinning against thee, that
thou may never be weary, nor repent the doing of us good. Amen.

MEDITAT. V. Upon the Water of Jealousy, Numbers the 5th.
THere are many righteous Laws, and severe Threatenings in holy Scripture, of
the Execution of which we meet with no recorded Instance or Example. Such is
that of the rebellious Son being stoned to death upon his Parents Complaint of
him, and testifying against him for his Disobedience; Deuteronomy. 21.18. And that of
the bitter Water to be drunk by the Wife of the jealous Husband, (which Water
was to be mixed with the Dust of the Floor of the Tabernacle, probably to make
the Punishment, Sins Anagram; and to signify it should not fail of its dire
Effects on them who trampled under foot the Authority of him who dwelt in it)
which caused her Belly to swell, and Thigh to rot, who was defiled: Numb. 5.

There is a great Affinity and Likeness between God's Books of his Word, and of
his Works: the Laws of both have righteous Sanctions either expressed or
implied; and tho we read not Examples of the Punishments of those who brake the
first, nor have observed instances of their Misery who have transgrest the
latter, yet assuredly wilful Offenders. shall not escape the smart and burden
of vindictive Justice.

O my Soul, thy Maker is thy Husband, provoke him not to Jealousy; let not the
Impunity of others imbolden thee: they may feel that (those surda verbera)
which thou can take no notice of, or he who sees their day is coming, may
reserve severer Wrath against that day. What ever others do, do thou thy Duty.
Love flows in these Waters; make suitable returns of Love: Provoke not him whose
Help thou always need, and here most signally expectest, not only lest thy
Hopes abuse thee with a Disappointment, but the expected Blessing be turned
into a Curse; and instead of opening Obstructions, and yielding Help and
Health, they make thy Belly swell, and occasion Sorrow, Pain and Death.

MEDITAT. VI.
WHen I observe the great Quantities of Water drunk every Morning at these
Wells, it calls to my mind that Expression of David, of some who drink Iniquity
like Water. Lust is a very thirsty and insatiable thing, it never says it is
enough; it is an hydropick Sickness of the Soul: the more it drinks the more it
thirsts. The Fountain of Corruption cannot be stopped, it is impatient of a Damm.
If one Outlet be shut, it will find or make another. But O how poisonous, how
deadly are those draughts it swallows down with so greedy a delight? We here
drink innocent Healths. But such Men drink much worse than Circean Cups, their
own Damnation. How can any Sinner hope for impunity, when every Sin carries its
own Hell, a bottomless desire after more? And O most Righteous Lord, it is just
and equal that they who have forsaken Thee the satisfying Fountain of Living
Waters, should weary themselves in their laboring after Disappointment, in
hewing out such broken Cisterns as can hold no Water. O Thou who have given me
a Soul capable of thy Self, and incapable of rest till it rest in thy self, who
art the Center of its Being and Desires, draw me to thy Self, fit me for thy
Self, fill me with thy Self; give me to drink of those Waters of Paradise,
every drop of which is bigger than the Ocean. Give me to hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, and I have the Security of his Word, who cannot lie, that
I shall be satisfied; that having a Well of Water in my self, derived from thee
the living Fountain, I may thirst no more with an uneasy, vexing, deadly Thirst.

MEDITAT. VII.
Ezekiel. 47.9. -- And every thing shall live whither the River comes.


THe latter part of this Prophet is so dark, that all Interpreters are ready to
cry out, as I remember Carthusianus does, when he comes to it, I now enter into
the thick darkness. It Is no wonder therefore that the heads of that River,
which brake out in those Regions of Obscurity, should be more hidden than those
of Nile; yet undoubtedly this is that River which David says makes glad the
City of God; and which he elsewhere calls the River of his Pleasure. What can
this be but those Waters of the Sanctuary which flow from the Throne of God and
the Lamb, the Graces and Comforts of thy Spirit? O let that Blessed Spirit,
which proceeds from the Father and the Son, and whom the Nicene Creed
teaches us to call the Lord and Giver of Life, come down upon us, and effect
more in and for our Souls, than we expect or look for to our Bodies, from the
Waters of these Wells; that by the coming of this River to us, we may live the
life of Grace here, and may be fitted for the Life of Everlasting Glory
hereafter.

MEDITAT. VIII. Upon 2 Kings 5.12.
Are not Abana and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus, better than all the Waters of
Israel? May I not wash in them, and be clean? and he went away in a rage. With
verse. 17. -- Thy Servant will henceforth offer neither Burnt-Offering nor
Sacrifice unto other Gods, but unto the LORD.


There Is not a greater difference betwixt the Waters in which he washed, and
the Fire by which he offered burnt Sacrifice, than between the Sentiments and
Language of the Syrian Leper, and the cleansed Proselyte. How did the Rage of
his insolent Mind flame out at his disdainful Lips? But when that Jordan which
washed his Body, had baptized his Soul, healing both, with how sedate a
Calmness, and humble and resolved Firmness does he devote himself to Israel's
God, and to the Rights of his before despised Worship?

Tho right Reason be the Handmaid of Devotion, and the best Stock on which to
graft Religion, (for nothing is more reasonable, than that God should
communicate his Grace in his own Methods, and receive our Homage according to
his own Appointments,) yet carnal Reason, truly so called, corrupt and blinded
with the malignant Influence, and selfish Interest of Flesh and Blood, dares
rival God's Wisdom, and more than mate his Authority, deride it.

It would perhaps sound harsh if some of us should ask, Are not other Waters
better than these of Tunbridg-Wells? How uncomely is it then to depress the
Wells of Sion below the Cisterns of Sins and Creatures? yet how many Abana's
and Pharphar's do most prefer before God's Jordan? not only desecrating the
Waters consecrated to the mystical washing away of Sin, (and all his other holy
Institutions) by disbeliving God's good Promises, and neglecting to make good
their own, but the very Fountain from which they were derived, that opened for
Sin and for Uncleanness in the side of Christ?

Not only the stagnant Pool of our Unrighteousness, and the broken Cisterns of
Creature Comforts; but the cleanest Streams of our best Righteousnesses, are
Waters of Damascus, compared to the Blood and Spirit of Christ.

O my Soul, take heed thou equal none of them with Him in thy Esteem and Love.
And O my God, give me such a sense of my worthless Emptiness as may make me
profoundly humble! And that Humility will make me thankful, and that
Thankfulness will inflame my Love, and that Love will constrain my Obedience to
a willing observance of all thy Institutions, because they bear the Image and
Inscription of thy Authority, of thy Wisdom and thy Goodness; who art thy self
the Fountain of every Stream that is desirable and good. Amen.

MEDITAT. IX. Upon Psalm. 87.7.
All my Springs are in thee.


GOD is often called a Rock by Moses, and the Prophets; but especially by
David; and there is good reason for that Appellation: for there is no Creature,
that has not Life, that has more, and more lively Resemblances of his Nature,
and Properties. He is a strong Refuge, a firm Foundation, a refreshing Shade, a
secure Hiding Place. But most eminently, all Springs of Goodness are in Him,
and issue from him, as Waters from a Rock. All our Springs are in him, of Life,
and Being, of Food and Raiment, of Meat and Medicine, of preservation in
Health, and recovery out of Sickness. These nether-Springs, O Lord, gush out
upon us by the unlocking of thy Treasuries.

But more especially those upper Springs of Grace and Comfort, Pardon and
Peace: And above all, the Blessing of these Blessings to us, and rendering of
them, what we pray they may be, Blessings indeed.

O Lord my God, thy Goodness is the rich Mineral, through which our Springs do
glide! it is this which gives them, both their Tincture and their Taste, renders
them wholesome, makes them healthful. O that this may impregnate all the Streams
which flow so freely to us, may rectify, may sanctify, may bless them to us,
that we may bless and glorify thy holy Name in that behalf for ever! Amen.

MEDITAT. X. Upon Rev. 22.17.
The Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and whosoever will, let him take the
Waters of Life freely.


Whatever is beneficial, insinuates it self to prove Instructive, and thereby
acquires a Right to be so; and by doing of us good, obliges us to be good.

These Waters have a Voice, and join the Chorus, which ecchoing the call of the
Spirit, and the Bride, (the Church on Earth, and God from Heaven) invite us to
come and take of the Waters of Life freely. The Perennity of their Streams, the
free access that, from the Prince to the Peasant, all have to them; their equal
Helpfulness to rich and poor, to bad and good; and many more like Properties,
are all instructive. They heal no bodily Infirmity, which has not some
Distemper of our Souls, to be relieved by those living Waters.

They teach us Perseverance and Constancy in doing well, that our Goodness be
not as the Morning-Dew, but, like their lasting Streams, to yield a free
approach to those who need our Help; to be ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, to be forward to do good to all.

O my Soul, exemplify their Virtues, and improve the advantages thy Body has
obtained by their use to the like helping of the inward Man. Have they washed
out the Slime, the Sand, the Gravel, and healed or eased thee of the Stone? Let
it melt thy stony Heart into an Heart of flesh: and be encouraged hence to
believe, and sue out into Performances, the Promises of the Covenant of Grace
(which are the Springs of Salvation) from the Experience of God's fulfilling
what his Providence does tacitly promise, by these natural Fountains;
Experience breeds Hope. Have they begot an Appetite? Hunger and thirst thou
after Righteousness. Have they sweetened the Blood, thin'd it, and made it
circulate, opened and removed Obstructions? put thou away all Superfluity of
Naughtiness, all Rancor, Malice and Revenge: fill up the circle of universal
Obedience, and let nothing hinder the Grace of God from having a free course
through all thy Faculties. Have these cut the tough, the viscous Humors? let
those better Waters cut the Iron Sinew, till thy Neck willingly bow to the
sweet, to the easy Yoke of Christ. Have they rendered any fruitful? let the
barren Soul endeavor to have Christ formed in it, that it may bring forth
Fruit to God. Have they cooled those Heats you call Heart-burnings? Apply these
Waters of Life to the cauteriz'd Conscience, seared as with an hot Iron; that
these may quench the Burning, mollify the Tumor, cicatrize the Wound, till
your Hearts be cured of an evil Conscience, to serve the living God with Purity
and Peace. O my Soul hear thou these kind, these gracious Invitations. And O my
God, circumcise my Heart, that I may close with them; and what thou offerest so
freely, give effectually, and help me to receive thankfully, and improve
savingly, that they may be indeed the Waters of Life in Grace and Glory, that I
may thirst no more. Amen.

The end of the Meditations.
Some Forms of PRAYER and THANKSGIVING to assist the Devotion of those who
drink the Waters of Tunbridg-Wells, or wait upon God's Providence in the use of
other Mineral Fountains.
PRAYER I.
O Almighty God, and our most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, who by the Mouth
of him thy dearest Son have taught us, that Man lives not by Bread only, but by
the Word which proceeds out of thy Mouth. We know that dead things cannot
give us Life without the Influence and Blessing of Thee, who art the living
God; nor any preparations of Art or Nature heal us, without thy Healing
Concurrence, who stilest thy Self, The Lord that heals. We therefore most
humbly beseech thee, to accompany with thy Blessing, and to crown with a
desided and merciful Success, the use we make of these Medicinal Waters; that
they may occasion neither Sin nor Sickness, nor any Inconvenience to us: but
prove useful and beneficial to us, for the continuance, restoration, and
confirmation of Health to our frail Bodies. And as we beg thy leave to use, thy
Grace to use aright, and thy Blessing upon the use of, these Waters of the
nether Springs: So with humble earnestness we beg, that the Waters of the
Sanctuary, which flow from the Throne of the Lamb of God, the promised Floods
of thy holy Spirit, may be plentifully poured forth upon us, to refresh, to
satisfy, to cleanse, to heal our parched, weary, and polluted Souls: that so
both with our Bodies and our Spirits, which thou have made by thy Power, and
bought with the price of thy Son's Blood, we may glorify Thee our great
Creator, and gracious Redeemer for ever. Amen.

II.
O most holy Lord God, who tho Thou art most merciful, in providing relieving
Remedies for thy Creatures, yet art most jealous of thy Glory, and expectest to
be owned and acknowledged in all the Works of thy Power and Goodness to the
Sons of Men. We pray thee raise up our Hearts by these Waters, and beyond the
Virtues of them, to thy Self, whose Providence has made them what they are.
And as we abhor that gross Idolatry, of worshipping the likeness of any thing
that is in the Waters under the Earth: So we pray thee preserve us from a more
refined, but not less criminal Idolatry, of placing our Confidence in their
Qualities and Virtues, and forgetting Thee the Maker of them: lest we provoke
Thee to withdraw the Blessing we expect, and inflict the Curse we have cause to
fear; and to make them the Instruments of thy Vengeance, because we made them
the Objects of our Trust, and Occasions of thy Jealousy. Grant this, O Lord,
for Christ his sake. Amen.

III.
O most gracious God, who delightest in Mercy, and pardonest Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin: We thy poor sinful Creatures humbly cast down our selves
before thee; begging the Forgiveness of our Offenses, which may justly cause
thee to withold good things from us, yea to turn our Blessings into Curses;
that what is made for the good of others, might become to us a Snare and
occasion of falling But we beseech thee deal not with us according to our
deserts: but bless to us the use of these Waters, that we may receive those
Benefits by them, for which we may have great cause to honor, love and serve
thee for ever. And we pray thee give us good Hearts to do accordingly, for thy
Mercy sake. Amen.

IV.
O Lord, who art the Fountain of living Waters, we confess with shame, we have
forsaken Thee, and have hewn out to our selves empty and broken Cisterns,
which can hold no Water: for which it might be just with thee, to forsake and
cast us off for ever. But good Lord, convince us of this Folly; pardon, and
turn us from it. Do us good by these Wells we daily see and taste of, and open
our Eyes, as thou did the Eyes of Hagar, to see those Wells of Salvation
which are hid from all but those to whom thou art pleased to show them: and
help us with joy to draw from thence, what may so suffice and satisfy us, that
we may thirst no more. Amen.

V.
Almighty God, the Fountain of all Goodness; we read that thy Manna relisht
agreeably, and pleased the various Palats of all that ate it. O that these
Waters may profit every person that drinks of them, how different so ever the
Distempers are for which they drink them: That thy Wisdom and Power may more
signally appear, by thy producing such various Effects from one and the same
single Cause. And help us all who drink of one Well, to be knit together in the
Bond of true Christian Charity; and to praise thee for the Mercies thou
bestowest on our selves, and for the Mercies thou vouchsafest unto others, as
heartily as for our own; for Christ his sake who is our common Head. Amen.

VI.
O most blessed Lord God, who give thy Blessings, and alone can bless thy
Gifts: We beseech thee remove thy Curse which our Sins have deserved, from us,
from all our Enjoyments, and particularly from these Waters we are gathered
hither to make use of: and let thy Blessing so accompany and follow our
drinking of them, that we may be both obliged and enabled to praise thy Name,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII.
O most gracious God, who have made a gracious Promise, that all things shall
work for the good of them that love thee: ingraft in our Hearts such love to
thy Name, as may entitle us to this good Promise. And although we have forfeited
our present Comforts, and future Expectations of Good; yet take not the
Forfeitures we have made, but crown with continual Patience, thy former Bounty;
and add new Favors, and suffer none of us where and while we seek for help,
and Ease, and Health, and Life, to meet with Pain, or Sorrow, Sickness, Death
and Judgment: But by by these Waters heal our Diseases, and by a better
Fountain purge away, and pardon all our Sins, through Jesus Christ our Lord and
only Mediator. Amen.

VIII.
O Lord our God, who art the inexhaustible Fountain of all both spiritual and
temporal good things, for our Souls, and for our Bodies: we lift up our Hearts
and Hands to Thee in Heaven, for a merciful Supply of all our inward and
outward Wants, and that Thou would sanctify and bless to us all those
Supplies thy Goodness does vouchsafe us, both for our Souls and Bodies, whether
for Meat or Medicine; and particularly these Waters, that they may do us much
good, and no hurt; and for all the benefits we receive from Thee, we pray thee
enable us to render to Thee such returns of Service, Love, and Thankfulness as
Thou may expect, and wilt accept, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IX.
O most mighty God, who make the Fountains of Waters, those in the Fields and
Deserts, as Thou art the God of Nature; and that in thy Church (the Fountain of
our Baptism) as Thou art the God of Grace: We most humbly beseech Thee baptize
us with the Holy Ghost, and let it be the constant study of our lives, to keep
the Covenant we made with Thee in our Baptism; and to exemplify it by such a
Conversation as becomes the Gospel, receiving by Faith the good Promises thou
have made to us, and making good with faithfulness the Promises we then made to
Thee, to thy Glory, the good example of all our Fellow Christians, and the
Comfort and Salvation of our Souls by Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

X.
O most merciful Lord God, who have opened a Fountain for Sin and for
Uncleanness in the Side, in the Heart of thy own dear Son; whom Thou sentest
into this World to save his People from their Sins, from all their Sins, and
all that is in Sin. O let nothing be in vain to our Souls of all that he has
done or suffered, instituted or ordained for his Peoples good. Justify us
freely in his Blood, sanctify us thoroughly by his Spirit; and let him be made
of God to us, Wisdom, to preserve us from the deceitfulness of Sin;
Sanctification, to deliver us from the filthiness of Sin; Redemption, to free
us from the bondage and dominion of Sin; and Righteousness, to save us from the
guilt and damnation of Sin; that we may never perish, but have Everlasting
Life. All which we beg for his sake, who is thy Christ, and our Jesus: to whom
with thy Self, and thy eternal Spirit, be ascribed everlasting Praise and Glory
for evermore. Amen.

The end of the Prayers.
Forms of Thanksgiving.
I.
O LORD most Mighty, the great Creator of all things in Heaven and Earth: whose
Works are the Witnesses of Thy Being; and of the adorable Perfections of thy
Nature: We bless and magnify thy glorious Name for all thy wondrous Works; for
making the Heavens and their Host, the Earth, and its Store; the Sea, and all
the Waters in it, and that spring from it: and in particular for making these
Healing Fountains; for making known their Virtues; for giving us liberty to use
them; and for any Blessing formerly, or at this season vouchsafed to us by the
use of them. And we pray Thee to crown these Mercies with one better than the
rest, even so thankful an Heart as may improve all to thy Glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
O Lord, who art good, and do good: We bless thy glorious Name for what thou
art, and what thou do; for the Healing Fountain of thy free Grace, and for
the free Fountain of these Healing Waters; for the Blessings of thy Throne, and
of thy Footstool; for our Life, and for our Livelihood; for our Food, and for
our Physic; for the Waters of the upper and the nether Springs; for all thy
Fountains, and for all their Streams. Good Lord, create one Fountain more, even
a Fountain of Love and Thankfulness in all our Hearts, and cause it to flow
with constant streams of Obedience and Praise, which may be acceptable in thy
sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III.
O Lord, who art pleased to declare, That who-so offers Thee Thanks and
Praise, honors Thee; Accept our unfeigned desires to honor Thee, by giving
thee Thanks and Praise with our whole Hearts, and our whole Souls, for thy
manifold and inestimable Mercies vouchsafed unto us. Not unto us, Lord, not
unto us, but to thy holy Name be given Glory. We are less than the least of thy
Mercies: We deserved none before we had them: we have forfeited all since we
had them; yet art thou pleased of thy Astonishing Goodness, to give us new
Instances of Mercy every day; Lord, give us a renewed sense of them all, and an
holy Zeal, with humble Hearts to honor Thee for them all; through Him by whom
they are conveyed to us, that is, thy Son, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
Amen.

IV.
O Almighty and infinitely gracious Lord God, we desire to fear Thee, to give
Thee Glory, and to worship Thee that made the Heaven and the Earth, and the
Sea and the Fountains of Water; and for making these in particular, of which we
drink daily with so much satisfaction, and expectation of relief: We beseech
Thee let not our Provocations disappoint our Hopes, but pardon those, and
nourish these, and crown them with a blessed success; that we may ever give
Thee Thanks, and live thy Praises, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

V.
What shall we render to the Lord for all his Benefits? Let us take the Cup of
Salvation and call upon the Name of the Lord most high. But who can show forth
all his Praises, who can reckon up the Mercies of one Water-season, Our safe
Arrival under his Protection from our Habitations, needful Conveniences in this
place for Soul and for Body, for daily Worship and for daily Bread. O Lord we
bless thee that we have so many Mercies to bless thee for, that we have an
House, a Chapel built to bless thee in. O let us not want Hearts to bless thee
with, for Christ his sake. Amen.

VI.
O Lord our God, whose Power, Wisdom and Goodness are signally manifested in
making the Fountains of Waters: We praise thee for these and all other
Manifestations of thy Almighty Power, unsearchable Wisdom, and inexhaustible
Goodness. And we beseech thee help us to walk before thee, as become those who
do indeed believe Thee to be such, by fearing thee for thy Power, following the
conduct of thy Wisdom, and loving thee for thy Goodness, and all the
Manifestations of it, both by thy Providence and Grace. Grant this, O most
merciful Father, for the sake of thy dearest Son, and our dearest Lord and
Savior, to whom with thy self and thy most blessed Spirit be ascribed
everlasting Honor, Praise and Glory. Amen.

VII.
Almighty Lord God, who by thy Power and Wisdom have made the Fountains of the
great Deep, and out of the depth of thy Mercy, that Fountain of Baptism, the
Waters of which thou have consecrated to the mystical washing away of Sin; We
most heartily bless thee for creating us after thy Image, for our being born in
the bosom of thy Church, of Christian Parents, in whose right and by whose care
we were dedicated to thee in holy Baptism, and after brought up in the true
Religion. We beseech thee baptize us by the Holy Ghost: Wash us from the guilt
and filth of all our Sins: Justify us freely: Sanctify us thoroughly: Create in
us, O Lord, a clean Heart, and renew in us a right Spirit. In our Baptismal
Waters enable us to quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil, and to wash off
all the Defilements of our sinful Flesh, and to dissolve all the Snares of the
Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World; all which we have solemnly renounced.
And let the same Waters so moisten our Hearts, that they may be fruitful in
Faith, Repentance and new Obedience, that we may walk before thee in
Righteousness and true Holiness all our days. To the Glory of God the Father
who created us, and God the Son who redeemed us, and God the Holy Ghost, who,
we hope, has sanctified us, to whose Name we were consecrated, and to promote
whose Glory is not less our Interest than it is our Duty, to which undivided
Trinity, and eternal Unity be everlasting Praise and Adoration. Amen.

Short Meditations and Ejaculations to be used whilst the Waters are drinking.
HOW early do we rise to drink these Waters? In the Morning shall my Prayer
prevent thee, O thou whose Compassions are new every morning.

No Man can tell the Date of these Fountains, nor can any Man foretell their
Period: Yet are they but as yesterday to Him, who is yesterday, to day, and the
same for ever: Who was, who is, and is to come.

How many Glasses have been drunk from these Wells? how much more Water has
run waste? how many yet remain in their pregnant Womb? and how many Millions of
Drops would these amount to? yet all those Drops, with all the Sands of these
sandy Deserts, would not equal the Years of that Eternity, to which O my Soul,
thou hastenest so fast.

These rich Wells are in a low Valley, surrounded with high, sandy, dry and
barren Hills: The meek and lowly God will enrich with his Grace. He resists the
Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.

The method of our Water-drinking is instructive: We begin with fewer Glasses,
and rise gradually till we arrive at a due Proportion: this we should imitate.

We must grow in Grace, go from Strength to Strength. The way of the Just is as
the Morning-Light, which shines more and more unto the perfect Day.

A Christian should know no Period, but Perfection. He that thinks he has
Grace enough, may thereby be convinced he has too little.

When we are going off, we then decrease our Number, this we must avoid; it is
bad to stand at a stay; for not to go forward is to go backward in the things
of God. But to decline, sadly forebodes our final going off.

That Question of our Lord, Where are the nine? was a cutting and upbraiding
one. Ten were healed, and but one among them was found thankful. How mean and
despicable soever I am, Lord, make me truly humble and thankful. It Is better to
be a grateful Samaritan, than a graceless Israelite.

Lord, bless these Waters to us.

Lord give us leave to use them. And Lord, give us both Cause and Hearts to be
thankful for them.

O thou maker of the Fountains, make these useful to us all who drink of them.

Lord give us to drink plenteously of the Wells of Salvation.

O Lord who give these Waters without our asking, We humbly ask thy Blessing
upon the use of them.

O thou Fountain of Living Waters, evermore give us of those Streams which flow
from thee.

Give us this day our daily Bread; whatever is needful for Health or Strength,
whether Food or Physic.

Impregnate these Waters, O Lord, with thine own Goodness.

Lord let us have the use of these Waters by thy Leave; and a Blessing upon
them by thy Love.

Lord suffer us not to provoke thee to Anger, where we come to seek Relief from
thee.

O Lamb of God, from under whose Throne flow Living Waters, wash away our Sins
by those Waters.

O thou Son of God, who wast with thy Father when as yet there were no created
Fountains abounding with Water, Manifest that Love to me which flows from the
eternal Fountain of free Grace, and that Love wherewith thou lovedst thine
before the World was.

Lord remove that Curse our Sins have deserved these Waters should be
imbittered by, and sweeten them with Blessings we neither have nor can deserve
from thee.

Good Lord help us to improve for thee all the Mercies we here or elsewhere
receive, or hope for from thee.

Ejaculatory Praises.
BLessed be the Maker of these Fountains, for all that Power, Wisdom, Goodness
manifested in the making of them. Blessed be God for any Blessing, now or
formerly received by them.

O thou Fountain of Goodness, who art Good, and do Good, we praise thee for
all the Good thou ever did for any by these Good Fountains.

O that we could praise thee as thankfully, as thou give these Waters freely.

Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Benefits; who forgiveth all
thy Sins, and heals all thy Diseases.

O all ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Tunbridg-Wells, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O let all who ever received Benefit by the Waters of these Wells, bless the
Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O my Soul, bless thou the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

Blessed be God for all the natural and supernatural Fountains he has made, as
the God of Nature, as the God of Grace.

Blessed be God for making us, and blessed be God for making all things for us:
blessed be God for Springs of Common Water, and of Mineral Waters, for the
Fountain of free Grace, and for the Covenant of Grace, for his Son and for his
Spirit, for his Word and for his Sacraments, for all the means of Grace, and
hopes of Glory. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Nathaniel Ranew at the King's-Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Works of Josephus, with great Diligence revised and amended according to
the excellent French Translation of Monsieur D'ANDILLY. Also the Embassy of
Philo Judaeus to the Emperor Caligula, with the References of Scripture, a Map
of the Holy Land, and diverse other Copper Plates.

The Principles of Christian Religion, with a large Body of Divinity
methodically and familiarly handled by way of Question and Answer, for the use
of Families; together with Immanuel, or the mystery of the Incarnation of the
Son of God: By the most Reverend James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh; to
which is now added in this seventh Edition, twenty Sermons preached at Oxford
before the King, and elsewhere, with the Life of the Author, and an
Alphabetical Table never before extant.

Redemption of Time, the Duty and Wisdom of Christians in evil Days: Or, A
Practical Discourse, showing what special Opportunities ought to be redeemed,
what Mispences of Time are to be avoided, with convincing Reasons, quickening
Motives, and proper Directions for the right Improvement of precious Time. By
John Wade Minister of Hammersmith.


