AN APPEAL To the House of COMMONS, Desiring their ANSWER: Whether the
Common People shall have the quiet enjoyment of the Commons and Waste Land; Or
whether they shall be under the will of Lords of Manors still.

Occasioned by an Arrest, made by Thomas Lord Wenman* Ralph Verny Knight, and
Richard Winwood Esquire; upon the Author hereof, for a Trespass, in Digging upon
the Common-Land at Georges Hill in Surrey.

By Gerrard Winstanly, John Barker, and Thomas Star, In the Name of all the
poor oppressed in the Land of ENGLAND.

Unrighteous Oppression kindles a flame; but Love, Righteousness, and
Tenderness of heart* quenches it again.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

AN Appeal to the House of Commons, Desiring their ANSWER; Whether the
Common People shall have the quiet enjoyment of the Commons and Waste Lands: Or
whether they shall be under the will of Lords of Manors still.
SIRS,
THe cause of this our Presentment before you, is, An Appeal to you, desiring
you to demonstrate to us, and the whole Land, the equity, or not equity of our
cause; And that you would either cast us by just reason under the feet of those
we call Taskmasters, or Lords of Manors, or else to deliver us out of their
Tyrannical hands: In whose hands, by way of Arrest, we are for the present, for
a Trespass to them, as they say, In digging upon the Common-Land. The settling
whereof, according to Equity and Reason, will quiet the minds of the oppressed
people; it will be a keeping of our National Covenant; it will be peace to
your selves, and make England the most flourishing, and strongest Land in the
(...) and the first of Nations that shall begin to give up their Crown and
Scepter, their Dominion and Government into the hands of Jesus Christ.

The cause is this, we, amongst others of the common peopl^^ that have been
ever friends to the Parliament, as we are (...) red our enemies will witness to
it, have plowed and dig'd upon Georges Hill in Surrey, to sow corn for the
succor of man, offering no offense to any, but do carry our selves in love and
peace toward all having no intent to meddle with any man's enclosures, or
propriety, til it be freely given to us by themselves, but only to improve the
Commons and waste Lands to our best advantage, for the relief of our selves and
others, being moved thereunto by the Reason hereafter following, not expecting
any to be much offended, in regard the cause is so just and upright.

Yet notwithstanding, there be three men (called by the people Lords of Manors)
viz. Thomas Lord Wenman, Ralph Ve^ny Knight, and Richard Winwood Esquire, have
arrested (...) for a trespass in digging upon the Commons, and upon the Arrest
we made our appearance in Kingstone Court, where we understood we were arrested
for meddling with other men's Rights; and secondly, they were encouraged to
arrest us upon your Act of Parliament (as they tell us) to maintain the old
Laws; we desired to plead our own cause, the Court denied us* and to fee a
Lawyer we cannot, for diverse reasons, as we may show hereafter.

Now Sirs, our case is this, for we appeal to you, for you are the only men
that we are to deal withal in this business* Whether the common people, after
all their taxes, freequarter, and loss of blood to recover England from under
the Norman yoke shall have the freedom to improve the Comon^, and waste Lands
free to themselves, as freely their own, as the Enclosures are the propriety of
the elder brothers? Or whether the Lords of Manors shall have them, according
to their old Custom from the Kings Will and Grant, and so remain Taskmasters
still over us which (...) the peoples slavery (...) Conquest.

We have made our appeal (...), to settle this matter in the Equity and Reason
of it, and to pass the sentence of freedom to us you being the men with whom we
have to do in this business, in whose hands there is power to settle it, for no
Court can end this controversy* but your Court of Parliament, as the case of
this Nation now stands.

Therefore we (...) you to read over this following Declaration, wherein we
have declared our Reason, that the Commons and waste lands is the common
peoples, and that in equity you ought to let them quietly enjoy them, as the
elder brothers quietly enjoy their enclosures. The profit of this business to
the Nation, the quitting of the hearts of the poor oppressed that are groaning
under burdens and streights and the peace of your own hearts, to see the pear
of the Nation settled in his platform, will much countervail the spending of so
much time.

Sirs, you know, that the Land of England in the land of our Nativity, both
yours and ours, and all of us by the righteous Law of our Creation, ought to
have food and raiment freely by our righteous laboring of the earth, without
working for hire, or paying rent one to another.

But since the fall of man from that righteous Law. The Nations of the world
have rise up in variance one against another, and sought against murdered, and
stolen the land of their Nativity one from another, and by their power of their
conquests, have (...) set up some to rule in tyranny over others, and thereby
have enslaved the conquered, which is a burden the whole Creation has, and yet
does groan under. The teeth of all Nations has been set on edge by this four
grape, the covetous murdering sword.

England, you know, has been conquered and enslaved diverse times, and the best
Laws that England has, (viz. Magna Charta) were got by our Forefathers
importunate petitioning unto the Kings, that still were their Taskmasters; and
yet these best laws are yoaks and manicles, tying one sort of people to be
slaves to another; Clergy and Gentry have (...) their freedom, but the common
people still are, and have been left servants to work for (...) like the
Israilites under the Egyptian Task masters.

The last enslaving yoke that England groaned under, (and yet is not freed
from) was the Norman, as you know; and since William the Conqueror came in,
about six hundred years ago, all the Kings that still succeeded, did confirm the
old laws* or else make new ones, to uphold that Norman conquest over us; and
the most favoring laws that we have, does still bind the hands of the enslaved
English from enjoying the freedom of their creation.

You of the Gentry, as well as we of the Comonalty, all groaned under the burden
of the bad Government, and burdening laws under the late King Charles, who was
the last successor of William the Conqueror: you and we cried for a Parliament,
and a Parliament was called, and wars, you know, presently begun, between the
King, that represented William the Conqueror, and the body of the English
people that were enslaved.

We looked upon you to be our chief Council, to agitate business for us, though
you were summoned by the Kings Writ, and chosen by the Freeholders, that are
the successors of William the Conquerors soldiers; you saw the danger so
great, that without a war England was like to be more enslaved, therefore you
called upon us to assist you with plate, (...), freequarter, and our persons;
and you promised us, in the name of the Almighty, to make us a free people;
(...) on you and we took the National Covenant with joint consent, to endeavor
the freedom, peace and safety of the people of England.

And you and we joined purse and person together in this common cause; and Will
the Conquerors successor, which was Charles, was cast out; and thereby we have
recovered our selves from under that Norman yoke; and now unless you and we be
merely besotted with covetousness, pride, and slavish fear of men, it is, and
will be our wisdom to cast out all those enslaving laws, which was the
Tyrannical power that the (...) ^rest as down by: O shut not your eyes against
the light, darken nor knowledge, by dispute about (...) men's privileges, when
universal freedom is brought to be tried before you, dispute no further when
truth appears, but be silent, and practice it.

Stop not your ears against the secret mourning of the oppressed, under these
expressions, lest the Lord see it, and be offended, and shut his ears against
your cries, and work a deliverance for his waiting people some other way then
by you.

The maine thing that you should look upon is the Land, which calls upon her
children to be freed from the entanglement of the Norman Taskmasters, for one
third part lies waste and barren, and her children starve for want, in regard
the Lords of Manors will not suffer the poor to manure it.

When William the Conqueror came in, he took the land from the English, both
the Enclosures from the Gentry, and the Commons and waste lands from the common
people, and gave our land to his Norman soldiers.

Therefore seeing we have with joint consent of purse and person conquered his
successor, Charles, and the power now is in your hand, the Nations
Representative; O let the first thing you do, be this, to set the land free.
Let the Gentry have their enclosures free from all Norman enslaving
intanglements whatsoever, and let the common people have their Commons and
waste lands set free to them, from all Norman enslaving Lords of Manors, that
so both elder and younger brother, as we spring successively one from another,
may live free and quiet one by, and with another, not burthening one another in
this land of our Nativity.

And this thing you are bound to see done, or at least to endevor it, before
another Representative succeed you; otherwise you cannot discharge your trust
to God and man, for these Reasons,

First, if you free not the Land from entanglement of all Norman yoaks, or
^^ther bondages, so that the people (...) well as another may enjoy the benefit
of their (...) to have the land free to work upon, that they may eat their
bread in righteousness; that is to say, let the Freeholders have there freedom
to work quietly in their Enclosures, and let the common people have their
Commons and waste lands (...) to themselves. If you establish not this seeing
power now is in your hand, you will be the first that break Covenant with
Almighty God.

For you swore in your National Covenant to endeavor a Reformation according
to the Word of God, which Reformation is to restore us to that Primative
freedom in the earth, in which the earth was first made and given to the sons
of men, and that is to be a common treasury of livelihood to all, without
working for hire, or paying rent to any, for this is the Reformation according
to the Word of God before the fall of man, in which there is no respect of
persons.

And seeing in particular you swore to endeavor the freedom, peace and safety
of this people of England, shutting out no sort from freedom; therefore you
cannot say that the Gentry and Clergy were only comprehended, but without
exception, all sorts of people in the land are to have freedom, seeing all
sorts have assisted you in person and purse, and the common people more
especially, seeing their estates were weakest, and their misery in the wars the
greatest.

Therefore let the Gentry and Freeholders have their enclosures freed from all
entanglements of Fines, Heriots and other burdens, and let the common people
have their Commons and waste lands freed from entanglements of the Norman Lords
of Manors, and pluck up all Norman Tyranny by the roots, and so keep your
Covenant that you, and all (...) of people may live in peace one among another.

Secondly, if this freedom be not granted quietly, you will pull the blood and
cries of the poor oppressed upon heads; First, because you have taken their
money in taxes, and freequarter from them, whereby they are made worse able to
live then before the wars. Secondly, because in your low estate, when you
called upon us to come and help a bleeding dying Nation, and we did come with
purse and person, and under-went great hardship, and you still promised us
freedom in the end, if in case you and we prevailed over the Norman successor,
and we have prevailed.

And if now, while the price is in your hand, you should still leave us under
the Norman Lords of Manors, and will not quietly suffer us to plant our selves
upon the Commons, and waste land, which is ours by the law of our Creation, and
which is ours now by conquest from under our oppressor, for which we have paid
taxes, given free quarter, and adventured our lives; the Common-land now is as
freely the common peoples, as you can say the Enclosures are your propriety.

If you deny this freedom, then you justly pull the blood and cries of the poor
oppressed upon you, and are Covenantbreakers, and will be proved double
hypocrites: First, to Almighty God, in breaking Covenant with him, for in his
Name you made the Covenant. Secondly, to men, in breaking Covenant with them,
for the matter of the Covenant was the freedom, peace, and safety of the people
of England, taking in all sorts of people.

Thirdly, if you do not set us free from the Norman yoke, now after you have
taken our Taxes and Free Quarter from us, whereby we have dearly bought our
Freedom, and you thereupon promised freedom, and you have power now to give it,
for if you speak the word the Norman yoaks will be broke, and all sorts will
rejoice in freedom and righteousness; but if you will not, you give a just
occasion to the common people of England, never to trust the fair words of a
Parliament any more, as you were always very slow in trusting the King, when
he swore by the word of a King, because you found that subtilty and Self lay
under, and no reality.

And truly the hearts of people are much falling from you, for your breach of
Promises when you have power to keep them, and for your neglect of giving them
their freedom, and removing burdens; and what danger may ensue by that to your
selves, and the Nations, you know how to judge; and for our parts we are sorry
to hear the muttering of the people against you.

O that there were a heart in you to consider of these things, and act
righteousness, how sweetly might you and the people live together: If you
grant this freedom we speak of, you gain the hearts of the Nation; if you
neglect this, you will fall as fast in their affections as ever you rise: I
speak what I see, and do you observe; slight not that love that speaks
feelingly, from the sense of the Nations burdens.

Fourthly, if still you should establish the old Norman laws, and confirm Lords
of Manors in their ancient Custom, and oppressing power over the Common People,
you would now at length, after the wars with King Charles are over, take part
with such (as is known very well) as have been either flat enemies, or
ambidexters all along the wars, and will cast such as have been your true
friends at the feet of the Nations enemies, to be still oppressed by their
cruelty. Surely if these Lords and Freeholders have their Enclosures
established to them in peace, is not that freedom enough? Must they needs have
the Common land likewise? As Ahab, that was restless till he had Naboths
Vineyard, and so in the midst of their abundance, yet will eat the bread out of
the poores mouths. O, the land mourns in her children, under the hard hearted
covetousness of these men.

Fifthly, If you establish the old Norman laws, That Lords of Manors shall
still have the Commons and waste lands, then you are the maintainers of the old
Norman Murder and Theft still; for Lords of Manors came to be Tyrants over the
poor enslaved English, by the Murder and Theft of William the Conqu^rour, and
downwards to this day they have held title to their Royalties therefrom, and
from the will of the King; for when he had conquered, he turned the English
out, and gave their land to his Norman soldiers.

Sixthly, If you establish the old Norman laws, and this especially* That the
Lords of Manors shall still be Lords of the Common land and the Common people
be still enslaved to them, then you pull the guilt of King Charles his blood
upon your own heads; for then it will appear to the view of all men, That you
cut off the Kings head, that you might establish your selves in his Chair of
Government, and that your aim was not to throw down Tyranny, but the Tyrant.
But alas, the Kings blood was not our burden, it was those oppressing Norman
laws, whereby he enslaved us, that we groaded under.

Let it not be said in the ears of posterity, That the Gentry of England
assembled in Parliament, proved Covenant-breakers, Oaths, Protestations, and
promise brekkers to God, and the Common people, after their own turn was
served; and killed the King for his power and government, as a thief kills a
true man for his money. I do not say you have done so, but for shame dally no
longer, but cut off the bad laws, with the Kings head, and let the poor
oppressed go free, as well as the Gentry and Clergy, and you will find more
peace. Let the Common land be set free, break the Norman yoke of Lords of
Manors; and pull not the cries and blood of the poor oppressed upon you

Seventhly, Know this, That if ever you, or any Parliament of England, do
England good, you must make all your laws in the light of equity and reason,
respecting the freedom of all sorts of people; but if you respect some sort of
people, to wit, the Gentry, and Clergy, and give freedom to them; for they, by
virtue of your Act of Parliament, establishing the old Norman laws, do arrest
and trouble me and others, for digging upon the Commons, whereas by virtue of
the Victory over the King, in regard I have to my estate given free quarter and
taxes for Englands liberty, as they have done, I have as much right to the
Common land as they; therefore I say, if the Gentry and Clergy must have their
Norman power established to them, and the Common people, that are more
considerable for number and necessities, be left still under the yoke, you will
be proved the foolish builders.

Surely if you found out the Court of Wards to be a burden, and freed Lords of
Manors, and Gentry from paying Fines to the King; and freed their children
from the slavery of falling Ward; Let the common People be set free too from
paying homage to Lords of Manors; and let all sorts have freedom by virtue of
this Conquest over the Norman successor^ And seeing you took away the will of
the King from enslaving Lords of Manors, Take away the will of Lords of
Manors from enslaving the Common People.

Thus sirs, we have made our Appeal to you, as the only men that must and can
give sentence of freedom in this controversy, and that you will not leave us
in the cruel hands of Lords of Manors, the successors of the Norman
Taskmasters; For there are but three ways that Lords of Man^^^ can lay claim
to the Common land, and yet all three are too weak to build a just title upon:

First, if they can prove, that the Earth was made by Almighty God peculiarly
for them, and not for others equal with them, then we have trespassed in
digging upon their rights; but the Earth was made as free for us as for them;
therefore they have trespassed against us their fellow creatures, in troubling
us by their tyrannical Arrest, and hindering us from our righteous labor.

Secondly, if they say, that others sold or gave them the title to the Commons,
by way of Inheritance; They are to prove by what Authority any other had from
the pure Law of our Creation, to give away or sell the Earth from the use of
any of their fellow creatures, it being the common storehouse of livelihood for
all, without respect of persons.

He that sels the Earth, and he that buys, does remove the landmark from the
third person, because the land that is bought and sold, belongs to the third
man, as well as to the other two that buys and sels; and they two persons that
buys and sels, and leaves the land that is bought for an inheritance to their
children, excluding others, they murder the third man, because they steal away
his livelihood from him; for after a man has bought the land, and paid money
for it to another, he says, this is my land, I have paid for it: But the third
man comes in, and says, the land is mine, equal with you by the law of
Creation; And so he that is the buyer, he begins to draw his sword, and to
fight; and if he conquer, he rejoices, and says, the land is now mine indeed,
I have bought, and I have conquered. But thou coverous person, so long as there
is another man in the world besides thee, and him whom thou have killed, the
Earth belongs to him as well as to thee; And this is the case of the Nations of
the world, and thus propriety came in, and has been left as an Inheritance to
Children; which is the burden the Creation groans under.

Here we see who are thieves and murderers; even the buyers and sellers of
land, with her fruits, these are they that take away another man's right from
him; and that overthrowes righteous propriety, to uphold particular propriety,
which covetousnes the God of this world has set up.

But thirdly, if Lords of Manors say, as it is truth, that they hold title to
the Commons by custom, from the Kings will, as they do, this is as bad as the
other; for we know the King came in by conquest, and gave the land to these
forefathers, to be taskmasters over the conquered English. But if you say,
that these later Kings were chosen by the people, it is possible it might be
so, but surely it was when his greatness overawed them, or else they would
never have chosen him to enslave them, and to set taskmasters over them.

But seeing the Common People have joined person and purse with you, to recover
your selves from under the tyranny of Kings, and have prevailed; the Common
people now have more truer title to the common lands, then the Lords of Manors,
for they held title by Conquest and sword of the King (we now the common people
have recovered the land again by conquest and sword in casting out the King) so
that the title of Lords of Manors is broke.

Therefore now the Common people have more true title to the Common land, then
Lords of Manors have, in regard they have recovered themselves out of slavery
by taxes, free quarter, and conquest, yet we shut them not out, but let them
take part with us as fellow creatures, and we with them, and so honor our
Creator in the work of his own hands.

Thus we have declared our Cause without flattery to you; if you leave us in
the hands of oppression, and under the power of the old tyrannical laws, know
this, that we suffer in pursuit of o^^ National Covenant, endeavoring a
Reformation in our place and calling, according to the word of God, and you
shall be left without excuse.

Set the Land free from Oppression, And righteousness will be the Laws,
Government, and strength of that People.

These are some of the NORMAN Laws which William the Conqueror brought into
ENGLAND.
FIrst, he turned the English out of their Lands, and placed his Norman
Soldiers therein, and made those that had the greatest portion, Lords, and
Barons, and gave them a Royalty to the Commons, to hold from his Will, as a
custom, whereby the common people should not plant themselves any where in the
Land, upon any Common-land, but some Lord of Manor or other should know of it,
and hinder them, as these three that have arrested us, viz. Wonman, Verny, and
Winwood, Lord, Knight, and Esquire, the three Estates of the Norman Gentry,
will not suffer us to dig quietly upon Georges Hill, but seek to drive us off,
having no more claim thereunto but an ancient Custom, which they hold from the
Kings Will, where by they have, and still would tyrannize over the people: And
this is the rise and standing of Lords of Manors.

Secondly, another Norman Law is this* William the Conqueror caused the Laws to
be written in the Norman and French tongue; and then appointed his own Norman
people to expound and interpret those Laws, and appointed the English people to
pay them (...) Fee for their pains, and from hence came in the trade of
Lawyers; he commanded likewise that noman should plead his owncause, but those
Lawyers should do it for them.

Thirdly, William the Conqueror broke that good and quiet course of ending
contro^ versies in a neighborhood, and commanded the people to come up to
Westmin(...)ster to the four Terms every year to have their Causes tried.

Fourthly, William the Conquer or brought in the paying of Tithes to the
Clergy, in thankfulness to the Pope, and Clergies good services in preaching
for him, and so to persuade the people to embrace him.

These are some of the Norman Laws and Burdens, which if removed, it would be
much ease and quiet to this Nation.

FINIS.

