GOD A Christian's Choice, Completed by particular Covenanting with GOD.

Together with an APPENDIX, containing Propositions, tending to clear up the
Lawfulness, and Expediency of transacting with God in that way.

In pursuit of a Design proposed by Mr. R. A. in his Book entitled, The
Vindication of Godliness. And by Mr. Tho. Vincent, in his Book, called Words
whereby we may be saved.

To which is added, A brief Discovery of the nearness of such a People unto
God, on Psalm. 148.14.

By SAMUEL VVINNEY, sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Glaston in
Somersetshire.

London, Printed for Thomas Cockeril at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1675.

To the Worshipful John Lane Esquire, Citizen of London; together with his
Virtuous Yoke fellow, Mris. Elizabeth Lane, S. W. wishes happiness here and
hereafter.
Honored Sir, Madam;
GOD's making, and entering into Covenant with Man, I look upon as the most
Condescending act of Grace, that ever was passed toward the Sons of Men. That
the Almighty God should form a Man out of the Clay, or Dust, and then take him
into Covenant with himself; It was so high a Dignity vouchsafed, and Conferred,
that can hardly enter into our thoughts with sufficient admiration: but that
when the first Covenant was broken, God should make a new Covenant, and not
take the forseiture of the first, to his utter undoing, how much more great is
his kindness! It shows the matchless and unconceiveable love and respect that
God had to the Sons of men. Methinks the hearts of men should not (I bless God
I hope I can say in the simplicity of my heart, that I cannot) but, not only
with joy, but exultation humbly adore this his dispensation toward us. What,
that we should be in such a Covenant? which is established upon better
Promises, laid on a better Foundation, yea the best Promises, and the best
Foundation: not only with man, but with him upon the account of the Mediator, a
Covenant that shall never be broken; For God will never break it on his part,
and he has undertaken that we shall never fin ally fall from it, yea that
he will pardon all the falls that are out of infirmity from it, that do thereby
violate it. Certainly these expressions of taking hold of God's Covenant, and
joining our selves to the Lord in Covenant, are to my Soul, such things as are
better than a thousand Cordials, to any sinking, fainting heart, and through
grace do, and shall Experimentally find more solid Satisfactory Comfort in,
than in all things in the World; That such as we are, should be so highly
favored, and befriended by the Great and Glorious God. Sir, the vindication of
the lawfulness, and expediency of every Christians particular Transacting with
God in this way, is the sum of all the middle part, which occasioned the
prefixing this foregoing, and the addition of the last part of this short
Treatise. To your self and your good Lady do I dedicate this small piece, as
knowing that you have a through experience of the Truth which is contained in
the following sheets: And therefore not only upon the account of the honor, I
ow you for the Multitude of kindnesses, and tokens of faithful love which since
I knew you, I and my whole family have received from your self, your gracious
Lady, yea your whole family; which I shall forbear here to mention further, as
knowing, that you desire not any one should (as you your self do not) blow a
Trumpet before you; But for Religion's sake, and that Covenant Relation, in
which you and yours stand allied to God. I know not how to testify and render
dues of thanks to you, in any other or better way than this; if you shall
continue to favor me, in accepting this small testimony of love, and respects
to your self, and family, as I know you do not only approve of, but also are
persuaded of, and have embraced the Truth, and Privileges herein presented to
the World, I have attained the end in this Dedication. Sir, though they are
devoid of the Embellishments of large and many Marginal quotations, and the
Embroidery of curious and enticing words; yet here are the plain Truths of God
which I do the rather present to you, knowing that true of you which is upon
record of Jacob, as his high Commendation, by the Holy Ghost, who though he was
a great man, yet he was a plain Man; which phrase is no mean Commendation, if
we Consider the Lord himself giving it to Job. chap. 1.1. with Genesis 25.27.
(...) Which I cannot better express than in the Paraphrase of a Reverend
Divine. It is of larger signification than that phrase of ours [a plain man]
for that in Common speech notes one that is simple, and deals squarely and
evenly, without fraud, deceit, guile, or any tricks in his actions, so may one
be and have no great goodness in him; but this word is used to denote an
upright-hearted man, a truly and entirely Godly man, a perfect man that is
good within as well as without, and good in all things, at all times, and in
all places, one as well as another; one that carefully follows all the
Commandments of God, not giving himself leave to swerve from any of Gods ways
at any time. Mr. Wheatlys Prototype Examp. of Jacob. Cap. 26. P. 42.
who was a non-such in his Generation; he was a perfect and upright man, etc.
yea to the accusers face, Job 2.3. in the same words. Sir, desiring God to
reward all your labor of love to my self, and all my brethren, which has not
been small, for quantity or duration, even ever since I knew you, to my self.
In Testimony of my thankfulness to you, being well-assured of this, that your
self, and all yours will very well relish and accept, and do partake of the
things herein treated of and humbly presented to your view, not doubting, but
they will be all your portion, I crave leave to Commend them to you, and your
self and yours to the protection of Almighty God, and shall Continue to be,

Your unfeigned thankful Friend, and Servant in the Gospel. S. W.

To the Courteous Reader, especially the Hearers of the things here presented
to the public.
Christian and courteous Reader,
THe Exposing of these things to the public view, was thus occasioned: Had not
the subjoined Propositions been (though at the first written for the use and
satisfacton of a private friend) desired by many, Ministers some, at well as
others, to be made public; I had not been prevailed with, to put these short
notes before the eyes of the World: but being approved by the Judgment of the
Reverend Author of Vindiciae Pietatis, and another Ancient and able Divine,
whose joint suffrage I looked on as a sufficient encouragement to it; and
indeed without the Consent of Mr. R. A. I should never have yielded to it,
looking upon it as a thing too sancy, and pragmatical without him, to adventure
so to do, the thing vindicated being first exposed and proposed in his
forenamed Book. And since I heard, that that way of transacting with God was
questioned by some others, both before, and since they were exposed to his
judicious Consideration; Some looking on it as a new kind of Covenant between
God and his people, whereas it is but the same Covenant, more particularly
applied and laid hold on; I thought it meet, as I was encouraged to propose
what meditations I had digested for the satisfaction of their judgments, and
preventing those misapprehensions they had about it. Some other things I had in
my thoughts to prefix: but by a providence (something more than ordinary) was
more pressed in my Spirit, to fix my thoughts on this Scripture here insisted on:
which when I observed so suitable thereto, I could no longer forbear but set my
most serious meditations on work to comply at once both with the Providence,
and with the request of my many friends, requesting its Communication. The
transcribing of which, though short, yet would have proved tedious to the many
that requested it, and I hope may bring some profit, and satisfaction to some
into whose hands they may come; that never desired, nor thought of any such
thing: The only thing I have cause to be ashamed of, is, the narrowness of my
own heart, in handling a matter of so excellent, and important a concern. I
have desired to speak pertinently, and briefly, and not to enlarge by
digression, but what may prove most suitable to my main design. In Sermons,
that are preach^, where there is only hearing for the time of Speaking, there
need to be inculcating things again and again, as others of my Brethren know as
well as I: affection's Dull, memorie's treacherous, and after-meditation too
too much neglected. So that repetitions, and rehearsal, if they be not vain
repetitions, and affected, prove beneficial very much to the hearers, from whom
(their understandings being also shallow, for the generality of most auditors,)
the heads, and material passages once named only, the most part of them pass
away, (if the affections be for present a little stirred) without that due
savor and abiding efficacy, that by pressing again and again they might have.
Now this is needless in Printed Books, where reviewing makes up the supply of
that if there be any additions or alterations, as some few there are, which may
be observed by the Reader that heard these things; I hope they will not be
unacceptable, or unprofitable. Accept of this small undertaking as the good
will of the Author, and read not in transitu, or by rote, but with deliberation
and meditation (for I am Confident, that the benefit we might reap by many a
good book, is lost for lack of this) that the sweetness of this work (for it is
both precious and sweet, and I bless God for the experience of it) may be at
last diffused wholly into thy Soul: and then the design is accomplished, for
which the publication was intended, and that this may be the issue, shall be
the prayer of

Thine in the work of the Gospel S. W.

CHAP. I. The Introduction. Connection of the words observed. Text considered;
and the Doctrine drawn.
Joshua 24.22. And Joshua said unto the people, ye are witnesses against your
selves, that ye have chosen you the Lord, to serve him, and they said we are
witnesses.


BEloved, if I should speak to you in the words of Joshua here, as he did to
this people, would you, could you return the answer that this people did return
to Joshua? you that are here in this place. Have you chosen the Lord to you to
serve him, yea or no? how many persons are there that are yet to choose their
Religion? to choose their God! after they have lived many years in the world.
Nay Beloved, are not you yet to choose your God? the Lord help you to consider
it; how many people be there that are either altogether to choose to this day,
or else have chosen others besides the Lord, the true God! how many have chosen
the God of this world for their God! How many have chosen Satan to be their
God! and how many are joined to sin as their God, and these only will they
serve; whereas it is the great duty and privilege of Christians, to join
themselves, and to be joined to the Lord, Isa. 56.3. with (...)
1 Cor. 6.17. not glued to sin, but to the Lord, which denotes the nearest
conjunction, and firmest adhesion, that cannot be parted, or taken asunder.

Now my design in choice of this Scripture is, not to speak to you concerning
scrupulous queries, or of disputable and doubtful things, but to treat with you
about the main thing, of your choosing God to be your God; only a little that
you may take notice of the order, and connection of the words. You may find in
the beginning of the Chapter, that holy Joshua now going the way of all the
Chap. 23.14.
Earth, having brought the Children of Israel into possession of the promised
Land, just at his departure, gathers together the Representatives of the whole
body of the people. v. 1. And Joshua called for the Elders of Israel, and for
their Heads, and for their Judges, and for their Officers, and they presented
themselves before the Lord, etc. and in a general convocation recites the whole
Narative of God's dealing toward them ab crigine, from their very Original,
i.e. not only from the beginning of their being a Nation, but from the choice
of Abraham their Father, (who was by descent, nation, and practice an Idolater
before God called him, v. 2, 3.) to that very day and time that he spoke unto
them. In the 14th ver. he gives them an exhortation, to behave themselves
answerably to all those benefits bestowed upon them, in a suitable practice
toward him. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity, and in
truth, and put away the gods which your Fathers served, etc. and that he might
the more effectually win upon them, he offers it as it were to their choice, v.
15. and if it seem evil to you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you
will serve, whether the gods which your Fathers served that were on the other
side of the Flood or the gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwelt, and
closes up the verse with his own holy resolution, -- but as for me and my
house we will serve the Lord; he proposes to them others, if they thought they
had deserved better of them, than God had, by what he had done for them. The
people seem with indignation (as they had just cause) to answer, and utterly
detest the motion: and therefore give their full assent to the service of God,
on consideration of the mighty wonderful works he had wrought for them. God
forbid that we should forsake the Lord to serve other gods, v. 16. and they
rehearse his Works v. 17, 18. for the Lord our God, he it is that brought us
up, and our Fathers out of the Land of Egypt, etc. thereupon they resolve, that
they will serve the Lord only. Now Joshua again that he might the better fix
them in this their assent and choice, tells them that they could not serve the
Lord, for he is an holy God, v. 19. that is, as they ought if they did not
forsake their sins, or other gods, and cleave to him steadfastly; then says he,
ye cannot serve the Lord, viz. acceptably, and well pleasingly. Their reply,
with full and joint consent is reiterated v. 21. they said nay, but we will
serve the Lord.

The words of the Text do contain the ratification, General scope of the words
and firm conclusion of the Covenant that is made between God and his People,
upon the most solemn deliberation that can be expressed.

In them you may take notice of these two things, Particulars in the words
in particular.

I. There is Joshua's Proposal and Declaration of a double act of this people:

1. Choice of God to be their God, ye have chosen you the Lord to serve him:

2. Their own witness to the act, Ye are winesses against your selves; as if he
should say, your own act and deed this day, shall be proof and evidence against
you, if you decline from following the Lord in time to come, your own
Consciences within you, and your own act and deed without you, shall testify
against you.

II. Here is the Peoples acceptance, and yielding to this proposal, wherein
they do discover their unfeigned assent and consent to what Joshua said in the
last words, and they said we are Witnesses.

Now the matter I shall cull out of these words to treat of, (passing by what
else I might consider in them) is the act of this people, in choosing the Lord
to be their God.



That God is, and God ought to be the choice of every good Christian. O who
will not say Amen to this Truth! Or take it thus; That it is the highest and
greatest duty of Christianity, to choose God unto our selves, to choose the true
God to be our God: ye have chosen you the Lord. The answer of the people
before, and what is here said of them, does suit with the proposal of Joshua in
the very letter, v. 15. choose you this day, whom ye will serve, etc. Here, and
before they have made God their chief and only choice. Ye are witnesses against
your selves, that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him. This is fully expressed
in the Prophet David's words, who seems to have done the very same thing. Psalm.
16.2. Oh my soul, thou have said to the Lord, thou art my Lord, my goodness
extends not to thee. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, etc. the
Prophet seems to entertain a soliloquy with his own soul, he had chosen God to
be his God, and he was able to speak it with the greatest confidence to, and
before God himself, which argues full assurance, thou art my Lord, and to this
choice he had made of God, he was resolved to stick and stand, so far was he
from choosing others, or being taken from God, that he would not make mention of
them, or any thing that concerned them. v. 4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied
that hasten after another God, their drink Offering of Blood will I not offer,
nor take their name into my lips. So Genesis 28.20, 21. Jacob was flying from his
Brother Esau, and he said, if God will give me bread to eat and raiment to put
on, the Lord shall be my God; if Jacob will take God to be his God upon the
account of a little bread and water, and apparel, then surely we have greater
encouragement to take him to be our God. The testimony of these two eminent
Saints of God, are sufficient to prove the truth; besides the peoples act in
the Text specified.

CHAP. II. The first thing evplained. What it is to choose God, opened.
IN the explication of the Doctrine, I shall open these two things following.

First, I shall show you what it is to choose God to be ours.

And Secondly, why we are to choose God to be ours.

First, what it is to chu^^ God to be ours, what is the inte^dment of it, and
what it imports.

Here several things considerable; 1. Some things precedent. 2. Some things
there are wherein the essence of the act consists. 3. And something that is
the issue and product of it.

1. Somethings employed as precedent.

I. The Choice of God does imply a knowledge of God, that is a thing necessarily
antecedent to every choice, that thing cannot be chosen that is not known; so
that the Soul that chooses God to be his, must know, not that God is only, but
something what he is also, according as he has revealed himself in his holy
Word. God has laid himself open before us in the Word, as in a glass, and the
only way to choose him, is by beholding of him by the eye of the understanding,
enlightened by this Spirit of God, in this glass of the Gospel. In all choices
knowledge is prerequired. A man chooses not a person to be his Wife, that he
knows not; no Woman chooses a man to be her Husband, whom she knows not; a
Person chuse^h nothing to be a portion, which he knows not; no more will the
Soul choose God to be his God, that has not acquaintance with him, whosoever
will choose him must have some knowledge of him.

II. There is required to a choice of God Converse with, and some Experience of
him. Therefore Joshua rehearses here all that ever God had done for Israel,
from the beginning to that day, in order to this Transaction between God and
them. They had experience of God all their days, how much God had done for
them. And Joshua here recals them on purpose to draw them on to choose him, and
six them in their choice. Deliberation is required to every choice, and when a
man does deliberate, he does consider of things, and thereby debates within
himself about the object of his choice, and hereby he converseth with, and has
experience of it: so when a man by the view of God in the glass of the Word,
deliberately considers, and apprehends the excellencies of God, above all other
objects whatsoever; he becomes the more firmly fixed, and settled in his choice
of him; rash choices are often repented of, therefore the word (...) Elegit, as
a general does Sol^^ers, for special service, of whose valor and skill he ^ath
had pro^^. Exodus 17.9. P. I. Crit. Sacra.
here used, and rendered to choose does signify to choose upon proof and trial:
So that there must be in every person that chooses God acquaintance with God,
and experience of God; had we a little more Converse with God what experience
should we have of him, and how should we choose him! the more we Converse with
God, the more shall we see, and know, and have experience of him, and
consequently the more deliberately, and the more resolvedly choose him.

III. Choice of God does also imply a desire after, and a love to God; this is
apparent in nature, a man will never choose that against which he has an
enmity, or an Antipathy; a man will not choose that meat, that he has Antipathy
against. Now there is never an one of us, but are naturally enemies to God, and
are haters of God, Romans 5.10. with Romans 1.30. This people cannot endure to hear
of, and will hardly believe, but so it is, Gods Word tells you so God's
ministers tell you so, that you were born enemies in your mind by wicked works:
and this is the great Command of God's Law, to love the Lord our God with all
our heart, etc. Mat. 22; and they that do not, will not choose him to be theirs:
choosing of God, and loving of God go together, Isa. 56.4. with 6. Thus says
the Lord, to the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbaths, and choose the things that
please me, etc. ver. 6. also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to
the Lord -- to love the name of the Lord, etc. what the heart is most of all
set upon with desire and love, that it does choose: Affection always goes
before Election, and Election is the issue of Affection. The heart must be set
upon that which a man takes to himself to be his. Isa. 26.9. with 13. With my
Soul have I desired thee in the night, etc. 13. other Lords have had dominion
over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy name, etc. If there be
the l^ast disgust of the heart against, and loathing of any thing, never do we
make choice of that to be ours: That we are so far from choosing, that we cannot
endure it, the affections are the ground, or beginning of the choice; when the
heart is drawn up in love toward God, and enamoured with desire after him, then
it will choose him. The choice is of the Heart, if that be alienated, their's no
closure with, nor choice of any things so nor of God, if the heart be still
alienated from him: if we love him we choose him.

These three things are antecedaneous to the choice of God, do go before it;
now there be two other things, wherein the very essence of the Act consists,
and they are Election and Appropriation.

IV. The first of these (or the fourth in order to the former) is the Election,
and preference of God above all: so that now all other things are neglected,
and undervalued in Comparison with God; thus David said, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have
I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon the earth that I desire, in
Comparison of thee. David chose God because he had God an Esteem above all the
World; q. d. Take all in heaven and Earth, yea Heaven and Earth themselves,
whosoever will, so as I may have God to be mine. Now does thy Soul say so? so
when Jesus Christ is chosen by a Soul, all things else are but dross and dung
in Comparison of the Excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9.
It is a Christians chief duty, and disposition, eminently to prefer God, and
Christ above all. Remember, that God is a Christian's all, and his all is in
God. And a Soul that is in such a frame chooses God a right.

V. (But the Second thing wherein the Souls actual choice consists), is
Appropriation of God to a man's self, a taking God to be his own, when we lay
claim to God as our peculiar portion; as though there was no one that had
interest in, nor relation to God but our self only. So the Church, Psalm. 67.6.
And God even our own God shall bless us. I do not know any such expression
through the Scripture as here, implying such special Appropriation. When the
Soul takes hold on God, receives him and embraces him as his own peculiar, as
if he was his own, and none's else beside. The Church seems so to speak, as if
it was her peculiar privilege, and here is alone to appropriate, and claim God to
her self. When a man can come to say God is my own God, then he has chosen God
indeed. So David Psalm. 18.1, 2. I will love thee O Lord my strength, the Lord
is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my strength in whom I
will trust, my buckler, and the horn of my Salvation, and my High Tower. How
many My's be there? no less than eight or nine which the Prophet as so many
terms of interest does there use to express propriety: and as the Church says
elsewhere, My beloved is mine, and I am his, Song. 2.6.

VI. ^husing of God consists as the issue of all this, in the rejection o^
all others besides God, when once God is chosen, then all other god's be cast
away: this is according to what God himself does call for and require. Hos.
3.3. And I said unto thee, thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not
play the Harlot, thou shall not be for another, so will I also be for thee: as
God cannot endure the soul should have any god besides him, but does command the
contrary; so neither will the Soul endure it. Just as a Virgin that has many
Suit^rs, when once her affections are set on the person whom she makes choice
of, then away with all the rest, she will not converse with them any more; so
it is here, if there be an indifferency in the affections to diverse things,
it is a sign the choice is not yet made, for the choice being once made, all
other things are overlooked and refused, but there is an indifferency still
remaining where more than one is entertained, Psalm. 81.9, 10. O Israel if thou will hearken unto me, there shall no strange god be in thee, neither shall thou
worship any strange god: I am the Lord thy God. They that have or will have God
for theirs, must have no other to themselves but (...) thus we see, wherein the
choosing of God consists.

CHAP. III. The second thing opened, viz. Why we are to choose God to be ours.
HAving dispatched, and cleared the first thing in the Explication, we go on to
the second. viz. Why it is the highest Duty of Christianity, to choose God to be
ours.

In general this is the only reason; because God is only Good; and this I shall
branch out into these three particulars.

1. God is the chiefest Good. 2. God is a communicative Good. 3. God is the
only satisfying Good. Summum Bonum

First, God is the chiefest, and best Good that can be, an undoubted Maxim, God
is all Good, and all Good is in God; nothing is Good without God, and there
(...) thing Good to be found ou^ (...) he is infinitely good, and no person or
thing is good but God, Luke 18.19. and this we know to be true in nature, that
good is the proper object of the choice. Nothing is chosen but as far as it is
Good, or appears to be so; if a man choose that which is not really good, it is
merely from the misapprehension of the object; for men do not choose that which
is evil, asevil, but as it seems, or as it appears to be good; their
apprehension of it to be good, provokes to a desire and choice of it. And he
that knows God to be the chiefest Good, he it is that will choose him above all
to himself; the same David that said of God thou art Good, Psalm. 119.68. the
sa^^e David said also, thou art my Lord, Psalm. 16.2. Psalm. 4.6. Many will say,
who will show us any Good? that is worldly Good, because they know no better;
but Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance, etc. to this suits the
Etymology, of the Greek word (...) a duc^^d^, quia duc and allicit nos ad sui
expetitionem, Mag. in Arist. ^^vel, (...) i.e. valde currendo, quia ad bonu^
valde currimus i. e. Expetimus. I eigh Crit sac.
(...) for good. Some take it as coming from a word which signifies to draw,
because it does draw effectually to the desire of it, and others derive it from
a word which signifies running, because when once the Soul has the
apprehension of it, it will run swiftly after it; now God being the only real
and chief God, he is the chief desire of every Soul that knows and apprehends
him to be so.

Secondly, God is a Communicative Good, and so he is not chosen only for the
Good that is in himself, (though chiefly therefore); but for the good that is
communicated, and diffused daily from him unto us. The same David that said,
thou art my Lord, said also, in the same Psalm. 16. The Lord is my portion;
further he said too, thou art Good, and thou do Good, Psalm. 119. This seems
to be something of kin to that speech of Jacob expressing his choice of God.
Genesis 28. If the Lord will give me but bread to eat, and raiment to put on, the
Lord shall be my God; and that is the mea^^st of all these good things: and if
Jacob will take God for his upon such low terms, what should we do? what
obligations do lie upon us to choose him, who gives us Life, Breath, Being,
Grace and Glory and all?

Thirdly, He is the only satisfying Good, therefore is he to be chosen; such a
Good that will fill up the whole affection, and all the defires of the Soul,
and nothing will satisfy it but God: the Soul till it come to God is never
satisfied, nor at rest, no more than the Dove that fled from Noah's Ark, till
it returned thither again. All created Goods are not satisfying Goods; though
the Soul be a finite being, yet the desires be infinite, and therefore
whatsoever it chooses and rests in, it will not be satisfied, till it come to
God who is infinite. Psalm. 63.1. My Soul thirsts for thee, yea my flesh
longs for thee, -- 2. to see thy power and thy glory: When it enjoys God,
then it says as he, ver. 5. My Soul is satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness --
ver. 6. when I remember thee on my bed, etc. It is God's mercy and goodness
alone, that can satisfy which way soever it comes, whether he communicates it
mediately by his Ordinances, here on Earth, or immediately from himself in
heaven: Here in his ordinances, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed is the man whom thou
chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts, he
shall be satisfied with the Goodness of thy house, etc. O satisfy us early with
thy mercy. Psalm. 90.14. I will satiate the Soul of the Priests with fatness,
and my people shall be satisfled with Goodness, says the Lord, Jer. 31.14. so
hereafter, when I awake (in the morning of the resurrection) I shall be
satisfied with thy likeness; says David, Psalm. 17.15. other things satisfy
not, riches will not satisfy, the eye is not satisfied with riches. Eccles.
4.8. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that
loves abundance. Eccl. 5.10. The great plea with which the Lord Jesus Christ
Expostulateth with Souls is Isa. 55.2. Why do you spend your money for that
which is not bread? And your labor for that which satisfies not? It is God
and he alone is the Souls only satisfaction, therefore choose him.

Before I pass to the use, I shall for the further evident proof of this that
God is the only Soul-satisfying Good, propose to you the Experience of two
persons, who found such satisfaction in God, even in this life, that it might
be effectual to draw our affections to choose him above all to our selves. And
the one is of Mr. John Welsh, a Scotch Minister, who besides his continued
enjoyment of Communion with God, especially, The fulfilling of the Script. P.
429.
During his Sickness, was so filled, and overcome with the sensible enjoyment
of God, that he was sometime overheard in prayer, to have these words. Lord,
holdthy hand, It is enough, thy servant is a clay-vessel, and can hold no more;
such large manifestations he had of God to his Soul, which gave him full
satisfaction.

And Xaverius clamabat, s^ it is est Domine, satis est; nec enim men's mea in hac
vitat antum gaudiorum pondus capit, A. Lap. in Cant. 2.3.
Another said, It is enough Lord, it is enough: my Soul is not able to receive,
such an exceeding weight of joys in this lise. Do not these words of these
persons evidently declare, the abundant Satisfaction that is to be had in God,
even here? besides that fullness of joy and Satisfaction that there is to be had
in him, and from him, in the lise to come? there is then Satisfaction to be had
in God, and who would not choose such a God as this is?

CHAP. IV. The Application entered on; first Use of Information.
The Truth being cleared and consirmed, the next thing that follows is, the
putting of it to a due use and improvement in our lives and practices.

Use 1. Information.
Use 1. Inform.
This does discover to us, the great and indispensible duty of all men, even of
all people that mean to be happy; Especially of all that profess themselves to
be the people of God, and that is to choose God to be theirs. How hard a matter
it is to be persuaded to it, or convinced of the necessity of it! this is the
great question you are to put to your Souls, have I yet chosen God to be mine?
Reader, what do thou say in this Case? What answer does thine heart give, to
this most important query proposed? Have you yet chosen God to be yours or not?
Oh Christians! if I might be but instrumental in this great Work, in causing
your hearts and affections to embrace and choose God, what a work would this be!
It is a very hard matter to be made to believe any of these truths, that God is
so infinitely good in himself, and Satisfactorily good to the souls of his
people, and therefore eminently to be chosen by them; but believe it every one,
thou art not a Christian indeed, thou art not, caust not be happy, till thou
have chosen God to be thine. What is it to be baptized, and to have an outward
profession, if thou art not, and will not come up to this, to have and choose
God to be thine, to take God to be thine own? Can thou be a godly man that
has not chosen God to be thy God? It Is an impossible thing that a man should
be Godly, that has nothing to do with God. Is not a Godly man named from God?
Here is the essence of Christianity: and there is no real Christianity
(whatsoever the profession be) till this be done. Do not you be so foolish, as
to content your selves with the paint of Religion and seeming to be Christians,
if you have not taken God to be yours, you have nothing to do with him, and you
are not Christians indeed. That man that has not chosen God for his God, has
not yet learned the first Commandment in a practical way. What is that? Why,
Thou shall have no other gods before me, Exodus 20. and so he is no servant of
God: this commands thee to choose God to be thy God, and him only, and art thou
a Christian, that art not practically come up to, much less taken out the very
first rule in the Law of God? I dare say thou dare not say it.

CHAP. V. Exhortation Double: First, To them that have not yet done this, and
showing what we ought to choose God to be to to us.
2. Use Exhort.
THe 2. Use of this truth is by way of Exhortation, Double: 1. To them that have
not chosen God. 2. To them that have done so.


Use of Exhortation.
I. To them that have not chosen God to be their God, that are yet to make
their choice. And alas! how many are there yet so to do! how many! be persuaded
all in the name of God to do what is proposed to you, to choose God to be yours.
Christians, are you in good earnest Christians or are you not? Will you choose
God? are you resolved to have him to be yours?

Here 3 things briefly opened.

1. What we are to choose God to be to u^? 2. How we are to choose God to be
ours. 3. Several motives to provoke hereunto.
1. Under what notion we are to choose God to us, or what we are to choose him to
be unto us.

1. To be in all relations to us. 2. To be in stead of all enjoyments to us.
1. We are to choose God to stand in all relations to us. What relations?

I. Generally; choose him to be our friend, it is Good having God to be a friend,
make in to him therefore, and make suit to him to be your friend, Whosoever
has chosen God to be his, has chosen the best friend in Heaven and Earth. He
is the ablest, faithfullest, freest, richest friend that is in this or in
another World; none so bountiful, and ready to help as he; and did we believe
it, we should easily be persuaded to it: when the Church had chosen Christ to
be her beloved, then he was her friend; this is my beloved, and this is my
friend, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem. Song. 5.16. so Abraham when he had chosen
God to be his, he was his friend, and he became the friend of God. James. 2.
the Church of the Jews called the seed of Abraham my Friend, Isa. 41.8. Be you
therefore persuaded, let me beseech you, to choose God to be your chief friend.

II. More particularly; choose God to be to you a Father: God is the Father of
all by creation; but we east off that relation daily, by our trausgression, and
rebel against him; though sometimes we say, our Father with our mouths, yet how
vain is this! for where is his honor that we give him? Mal. 1.6. just as the
prodigal cast off, and run away from his Father, Luke 4 15. But when we are
regenerate, and born again of God, then we choose God for our Father again, and
he adopts us to be his Children. The new Divine nature lays a new claim to the
old (though formerly lost) relation: As the prodigal did, I will go to my
Father, ver. 18. and bespeaks God; as the Church, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou
art our Father. We are Commanded to cal^ no man Father upon Earth, Mat^ 23.
(understand it in a right sense^ not as though we were to cast off ou^ natural
relations, as some wickedly do); For that we have one to be ou^ Father, which
is in heaven, wh^ has promised that he will be a Father to us, and we shall be
his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6.17. and therefore, well may we, and of Dut^
ought to choose him to be so unt^ us.

III. Choose God to be an Husband to you; this God offers himself most willingly
to be, but we keep him off and will not yield our Consent, as a Virgin does a
Suitor a long time that comes to her; how hard a matter to get the Soul
espoused to God, and Christ! It is not so hard a matter to get the Lord's
Consent to be an Husband, as to get ours to become his Spouse. How long and
painful a work is it for the Ministers of the Gospel to be wooing for Christ,
and to be beseeching in Christ's name, before they can get the consent of one
Soul to he married to him! Jer. 3.14. Turn O back sliding Chilaren, for I am
married unto you. God says, I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will
betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in Judgment, and in loving kindness,
and in mercies. I will betroth thee unto me in faithfulness; three times
together. Hos. 2.19, 20. but we are very loath, we will not be betrothed, we
cannot be won to yield to it. God is our maker, and says further, Thy Maker is
thine husband, the Lord of Hosts is his name, Isa. 54.5. What will you not have
your Maker for your Husband? What better Husband can there be?

IV. Choose God to be your Lord and Master; so much is employed as, our duty in
the Text, ye have chosen you the Lord to serve him: other Lord's do and have
ruled over us, and Oh that we were brought to the resolution of the Church, but
by thee only will we make mention of thy name, Isa. 26.13. which implies a
choice of God, and a rejection of others. Be persuaded to cast off all other
Lords, World, and Flesh, and Devil; take his yoke upon you, enter into
Covenant, every one to be his servant, as the Eunuch did, Isa. 56.6. say as
David Psalm. 116.16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant: I am thy servant: our duty
is to choose God, and Christ to rule, govern, and have dominion over us, to be
our leader, and Commander, Isa. 55.4. let him be our only Lord, to serve him,
and worship him according as we are bound, Psalm. 45.11. Obey no Commands, but
what are agreeable to his Commands, he is our principal, and chief Master,
whose Word we are to conform unto.

2. As we are to choose God to be in all relations to us, so we are to choose him
to be instead of all enjoyments to us.

1. As our portion, so we should choose him: so did the Church, Lam. 3.24. The
Lord is my portion, says my Soul: Then was a fit time to say so, and choose him
to be so, when she had nothing left in her captive estate. So says David,
Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance: (...) pars partis,
sive portio portiones mea, junguntur hic duo synonyma auxeseos causa, q. d.
omnimoda pars mea.
Word for word, the part of my part, or portion of my portion, to show that God
was his only part or portion. There are two words of like import, to show that
he chose God to be altogether a portion to him; to which purpose we may
observe, that God that is called the God of Israel, is called the portion of
Jacob, Jer. 10.16, etc. 51.19. Quia aliis gentibus alios sibi Deos optantibus,
Deus horum oculos aperuit us se eligerent. M. P. syn. Crit. ex Riv.
Because other nations choosing other gods to themselves, the Lord opened their
eyes that they should choose him only; in which regard he is called the portion
and inheritance of Aaron, Numb. 18.29. who was to have no inheritance amongst
the rest of the Israelites in Canaan. What a rejoicing should this be to every
Christian, who has no portion nor inheritance in the World, in the meanest and
lowest Condition in the world, who yet has, and has chosen the Lord for his
portion! Eliphaz tells Job chap. 22.25. the Almighty shall be thy defense;
Marg. thy Gold: For so it may be rendered, as by (...) vel angustiis tuis, vel
arx roborts tui, vel aurum lectissimum. I. T. i. e. si desit aurum obtinebis
quod pretiosius eo est. n. Deum. M. P. Syn.
some it is; He shall be to thee instead of treasures of Gold and Silver; if
thou shall want Gold, thou shall have what is far more precious than Gold, viz.
God himself. We are apt to choose and so to make Gold our God, whereas God
should be unto us instead of, yea above all the Gold in the World, which
usually men make their chief portion.

2. In sum to shut up all, we should choose God to be unto us, as our All in
All, our only Blessedness in this life, and that to come. It is prophesied of a
people, (and is it not all our duty?) Isa. 65.16. even of the Gentiles, That he
who blesses himself, shall bless himself in the God of truth; viz. in
apprehending, and appropriating to themselves God as theirs, they should look
on themselves as the most blessed people, (as justly they may) in all the
World. There is no condition, that a man can account to himself as a Blessed
condition, but when he has God to be his God; he may sing and rejoice in God
(as though, yea) better than though he had all the World; he is, and he has
all, and whosoever has God to be his has indeed all, and therein is blessed.
It is a kind of Happiness, if our garners be full of all manner of store, if
sheep bring forth thousands, if that our oxen may be strong to labor; Happy is
the people that is in such a case, Psalm. 144.15. with, 13, 14. i. e. they may
in a kind, and in a degree be said to be happy: But then the Prophet adds the
surmounting Happiness; Yea, happy is that people, (and so that person,) that
has the Lord for their God.

CHAP. VI. Showing how we are to choose God to be ours.
THe Second thing we are to open; is, How we are to choose God to our selves, to
be ours.

1. Choose him really, not feignedly, and in outward show only; there be a
great many that lay claim to God, and say God is mine, yet are they most
prosane, and abominable; they seem to own God with their mouths but deny him in
their works and lives, as those mentioned, Tit. 1.16. In works they deny him,
being disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Even as those whom our
savior taxes, Luke 6.46. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and will not do the
things that I say? Just so we read of some that call God Father, and yet do as
evil things as they could, Jer. 3.4, 5. whom the Lord reproves, as he does to
the same purpose the priests, Mal. 1.6. If I am a Father where is my honor? if
I am a Master where is my Fear? They seem to take God to be theirs in some of
the forementioned relations; yet for all that, their deeds and speeches are as
evil as can be, With their lips they show much love, but their hearts are after
their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. With their lips only it is, and no more, not with
their heart; they choose him with their lips, but refuse him and cast his law
behind their backs, in their lives.

2. Choose him wholly to be yours, that is, choose him as he offers himself to
us, and as he is set forth in all the relations the Scripture makes mention of
him to us; not only in those Comfortable Relations which-imply our privilege,
but those honorable ones also, which imply and engage us to our duty; not to
be a Friend, a Father, and an Husband only; but a Master, Lord, and King also.

3. Choose him freely to be your God, not out of Force. Many seem to be willing
to choose God, but it is when they must of necessity leave the World; when they
come to die and they cannot of necessity avoid it, they can be without him no
longer: If they could have the World in health, and strength one day longer
they would let God alone, till such a time as death did indeed come. How great
many of people never desire to acquaint themselves with God, desire him not,
choose him not, or get any interest in Christ, till they come to die, then seem
to look after and choose him for theirs! They neglect, and refuse God in all his
offers of grace vouchsafed to them all their lives; but when they must part
with all the World, whether they will or not, then at the hour of death will be
seemingly forward to choose him. But they that choose him truly, choose him
freely.

4. Choose God chiefly, let God be preferred before all, nothing before him. If
God be preferred as he deserves, so it will be; He will be set before every
thing in heaven or Earth. Let God be your chief desire, your exceeding Joy, as
Psalm. 43.4. word for word, (...).
the gladness or my Joy: Two Synonima's or words of like import (as before) to
signify the fullness of his Joy in God, or the excellency of his Joy in God,
above all other Joys; no Joy in the World that David had like to the Joy that
he had in God. As the Church had chosen Christ to be her beloved, and she
preferred him as the chiefest of ten thousand, Song. 5.30.

5. Choose God only, if we can have nothing else with him, or besides him, yet
let us choose him only; he is God only, Good only, as well as chiefly, and so
let us choose him; let God be chosen, though we let all go to have him, and to
keep our hold fast of him. We do not know what times we may see, when we must
part with all things; and if we be Christians, as we have chosen, so we must
keep close to (bear with the expression) a naked God, or God alone, without any
thing else, as many, of whom the world was not worthy, have done before us.

6. Choose God for himself, have no Sinister end in choosing of him, not for any
external thing he brings with him (as he never comes alone,) but only for his
own Excellencies. What Excellencies are there in him! if we did but view them,
according as they are displaied in the Word, what an attractive virtue might
they have to draw our hearts to choose him! we must not choose God, as men choose
Wives, and Women choose Husbands, for the most part for what they have, not for
themselves; more for their estates, than for their persons: he that chooses God
for any thing besides God himself, chooses not God indeed, but that other thing
in his Stead; he does not choose God chiefly, and he that does not choose him
chiefly, does indeed not choose him at all, but refuse him.

CHAP. VII. Proposing several Motives to provoke us hereunto.
HAving dispatched the two foregoing particulars, I come now to treat of the
third, viz. to propose to you some moving considerations, to stir you up to
this so important a Duty: and give me leave in a few words to expostulate with
you, about this matter of so great Consequence.

I. Motive. Now first consider what offers God has made, and does still make
of himself unto you. If you look on me to speak in Gods name to you, then this
is the work that I have to do now, to offer God to every one of your choice; If
you will be prevailed with to choose him. This is the work of the ministry of
the Gospel to offer God and Christ according to the tenor of the Covenant of
grace: How does he display his glorious excellencies in the Gospel, to prevail
with people to accept of him and embrace him! is not this the sum of every
Sermon? God says in every Sermon choose me: is not this the intent of the
Covenant of Grace which we daily preach, I will be your God, I am thy God, etc?
as much as if God should say, I offer my self to you, choose me to be your God,
and I am yours. This is the sum of the Covenant, and the meaning of those
words: God and the World stand by the Soul, just as two Suitors to a person
whom they are wooing, and are not we ready to join with, and choose the World
rather than God? yea have we not often refused God for the World? Oh Brethren!
I beseech you that we may lay it to heart; has not God stretched out his hand
a long time, and no man regards? how often has he called, and yet has been
refused? Prove. 1.24. and does he not say to us as he did to Israel? Isa. 65.1.
I said, behold me, behold me to a nation (and so to a person or people) that
was not called by my name. And may he not go on to upbraid us as he does there
v. 2. I have spread out my hands all the day-long, unto a rebellious people,
which walks in a way that is not good, after their own thoughts? Surely
methinks God says to every Soul the same words, and yet how hard a matter to
win a Soul to be drawn to choose God, to be espoused and betrothed to Jesus
Christ!

II. Motive. Consider how long God has done this. How long have you lived? and
how many Sermons have you heard? even so long and so often has God offered
himself to you: how long have you been a disobedient and a gainsaying people!
though God has stretched out his hand! Romans 10.21. may not God's messengers
say? yea may not God himself say? they will not be prevailed with, Rev. 3.20.
Behold I stand at the door and knock; if any man will open the door, I will
come in, and Sup with him, and he with me. Though Christ be kept out all
day-long, till Supper time; yet if the door be then opened, he will Come in,
and Sup (converse) with the Soul: yet for all that, though he so far
condescends, how many persons be there that will not open the door, as not all
the day long, so nor yet at night neither! the worse will be their condition
one day: in how many Sermons, and Sabbaths has God offered himself to be your
God, and yet ye have not chosen him to be your God to this day! and will not
this come upon account against you another day, if you still continue to
refuse? Certainly it will.

3. Mot. Consider, they are no hard terms that God stands upon with us, but
that we may choose him and embrace him. And if they be hard he can make them
easy, and enable us to perform them; and to be sure they be all for our best
Good and advantage. What be they? the terms be, that you forsake the World,
Flesh, and Devil, and is not this for thy best advantage? nay but is it not?
Stand, and Pause a little about it; no man is able to gainsay this. It is true,
of himself no man can do this, but God can empower us to renounce them, and to
say to every idol, get thee hence; as it is prophesied, Isa. 30.22. And because
the terms are not impossible, nor unprofitable, but for our advantage;
therefore we should not stick at them, but choose the Lord to us. The advantage
is much every way: the casting off the things to be forsaken for him is
advantageous; and the choosing of God himself to us is much more for our
advantage: the forsaking of them is of great Good, in that it removes from us
that which is of greatest prejudice to us, Damnum cessans; Lucrum emergens.
and the choice of God is the choice of the chief Good: So that here is the
removal of the greatest loss, and also there accrueth the greatest gain. So
then they are not hurtful, nor prejudicial terms that are required of us at
all, nor shall we fail of fulfilling the terms, unless it be through our own
default; God will enable us, that we seek it of him. If a man did offer me a
gift, upon such terms as I was never able to accomplish, I should think that he
did it, but to deceive and befool me; but that person that offers me a
kindness, upon such terms, that he will make me capable of enjoying it, I have
just cause to think he is in good earnest: So it is with God; God can and will
enable the Soul to reject all else, whereby it may be capable of choosing, and
enjoying him. He can give us, and assist us to do whatsoever is requisite in
order to our acceptance of him; and further. I shall add in the close of this,
that it is impossible without these, or upon any other terms to choose him, or
have him to be ours; no having and cleaving to the World, Flesh, and Devil, and
yet having and choosing God to be ours too. You cannot keep the former, odious,
and unclean Trinity, and choose and take to you the blessed and glorious
Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; No man can have, nor serve two Masters,
for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to
the one, and despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Mat. 6.24.

4. Mot. Shall I say to you that you do not know what you choose, when you do
choose God to be yours? I may well say so; for you do not know what you do
choose, as to the benefit and advantage there is by him. You know not your own
privilege thereby; every one must say as Christ of Mary, Luke 10.42. Mary has
chosen the better part: he that has chosen the best, and chiefest Good has
chosen the best part, and therefore I will say again, you do not know what you
choose, when you choose God; for

(1.) He that chooses God to be his chooses Life; God is the living God, and
God is our Life and the length of our days. Remember as you would choose life
for your Souls, choose God to be your portion; there is life, and life to be had
only in him, and will you not be prevailed with, for life's sake to choose him?

(2.) God is light, and, he that chooses God chooses the light; and who that is
wise would not choose the light rather than darkness? He is as he is called, the
light of Israel, Isa. 10.17. The Lord is my light and my Salvation, Psalm, 27.1.
God is Light and in him is no darkness at all, 1. Joh. 1. and God is said to be
the Father of Lights, James. 1.17. Yea God is a Sun, in whom is concentered all
the light, Psalm. 84.11. who would not choose to be in the Sunshine of his Face?
Eccles. 11.7. Truly the light is Sweet, and it is a pleasant thing for the
eyes to behold the Sun; if so pleasant to behold the created Sun, as who would
not choose the Sun to shine, and to give light? who is it that would not behold
the light of the uncreated Sun of Righteousness? whose light would be more
refreshing, than ten thousand Suns shining in their strength.

(3.) God is an exceeding great reward, Genesis 15.1. what a reward do God's
people choose in choosing him to be theirs? God is he that will abundantly
recompense thy affection to him, and all thine obedience to him, all your
rejoicing in him, and estimation of him. Whatsoever of these you have
manifested to him, God will requite you, seven, nay an hundredfold: every duty
that you have performed, God will recompense it; all the pleasure you have
taken in him, and whereinsoever you have denied your selves any thing for him,
God will make it up many-fold in this life, yea here, and hereafter too. And
who would not choose such a God to be his God, who is such a great reward!

In short what may I say more, he that chooses God chooses All at once, and I
think no man will deny this to be the best choice. A man that chooses God, is
like one that labors to grasp All at one gripe. Even as that devout Nobleman
of France said, in return to his Friend, which sent a letter to him, in which
were inserted these Words, Deus meus and Omnia, My God and my all; Monsieure de
Renti.
you invite me thereby to return the same to you, and to all Creatures, my God
and my All, my God and my All, my God and my All: Be it known unto you
therefore, that he is my God and my All; and if you doubt of it, I shall speak
it an hundred times over, I shall add no more; for any thing else is
superfluous, to him that is truly penetrated, possessed with, and assured of
my God and my All, etc. Oh that thousands more had made (and could assure
themselves that they had made) this choice! that they might an hundred times
over say with the same confident assurance; my God and my All.

5. Mot. Consider, how freely God chooses you, and would, had ye hearts to
choose and embrace him; and will you not answer God in his choice? there is no
such hard matter to prevail with him, for his choice and acceptance of us, all
the difficulty is on our side. Shall not we be as ready to choose him, if he be
so free to choose us? he would choose us, if we were not backward and unwilling;
yea though altogether unwilling, how does he draw the heart, and makes us
willing in the day of his power! which shows his superabundant grace, so freely
dispensed to us, in fixing his choice on us, till he has prepared our hearts,
not only to a fixed resolution, but to an actual choice of him.

6. Mot. As an improvement of the former, Consider, if you choose God, this will
evidence to you that God has chosen you unto himself from all eternity; for
your choice of God in time, is but a fruit of his fore-choice of you: therefore
I must say as, 1. Joh. 4.19. We love him, because he first loved us. So we
choose him; because he first chose us: So our Savior says very suitable to
this purpose, Joh. 15.16. Ye have not chosen me (that is first) but I have
chosen you. Observe this, that that person that God has chosen from all
eternity, will, and shall in time choose God to be his God; and he that does in
time choose God to be his God, was from all eternity, before the Foundation of
the World was laid, chosen to be one of God's people. Oh who would not make
sure of this to himself, and manifest this before all the World, that he has
chosen, and that he is chosen of God to be of the number of his peculiar people!

7. Mot. Again, Consider yet further, that whatever there is that may provoke
to a choice, is most eminently to be found in God. If beauty, honor,
greatness, riches, faithfulness, blessedness, love, importunity, may be
sufficient motives to prevail with us to choose God, here is enough of all these;
and how could I wish for the understanding, and tongue, and pen of the highest
Angel, that I may apprehend and express, such deep things of God as these be!
1. If the person be a beauty that is a Suitor, how is he doted upon! Oh the
beauty of holiness that is in the face of God! the glorious beauty of ten
thousand Suns, shining in their noonday Splendor, cannot match the brightness
that shines in his face continually. How earnestly did the Prophet both desire,
and seek after the beauty of the Lord! Psalm. 27.4.2. If an honorable person
makes choice of, and sues to a person of mean extraction, how soon do the
affections seem to comply? David tells us, that he would speak of the glorious
honor of his Majesty, Psalm. 145.5. he is clothed with honor, and majesty,
Psalm. 104.1.3. If Greatness will prevail on us, God's Greatness is
unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. who can praise him according to his excellent
greatness! Psalm. 150.2.4. If riches: Oh the unsearchable riches of his grace!
Ephesians. 3.8.5. If faithfulness will do? how faithful are all his promises! how
many Suitors come with fair pretenses, and promises, with great shows of
riches, greatness, and honor, yet altogether insignificant! but God will never
suffer his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89.6. If wisdom, none will choose (if
possible) a fool to himself; now God is the only wise God, 1 Timothy 1.17.7. If
love, how great is the love wherewith he has loved us! Ephesians. 2.4.8. If patience
will at last prevail, Oh the riches of his goodness, and longsuffering, and
patience! how many refusals, and put-offs has he born at our hands! which yet
shall never be laid to our charge, no nor cast in our teeth, if at last we are
prevailed with to choose, and give our Consent to him. 9. If importunity, who
has used more! how often has he besought us by his ministers, by his word,
Spirit, mercies, menaces, what not? 10. If Blessedness, Oh the infinite
glorious, eternal Blessedness of God! Psalm. 119.12. Is he not God blessod for
ever? Romans 5. he is the blessed, and the blessing of God, the Fountain of all
blessedness: O at last let some, or all these things prevail with you, to choose
him to be your God! And as much as God is before all these things, and these
eminent perfections are more conspicuous in him than in all other besides him,
so much we should be the more effectually prevailed with, speedily, without
debate or delay to choose him, before any of them all.

8. Mot. Consider, moreover, if you choose God to be your God, you shall be sure
here to enjoy your choice, which as it is the best, and most blessed enjoyment
of all in Heaven or Earth; so whatsoever we choose elsewhere, we may miss of,
and go without the enjoyment of it; as well if it be a mean thing, as if it be
the more excellent in and among these low contemptible things of this world;
yea and of the lowest of them we cannot choose and take: But I dare in the name
of God, to make this offer to any person whomsoever, that if he choose really,
and unfeignedly God to be his God, as he ought, choose him and take him; choose
him and he will become thine, thou have him as thine own, and shall enjoy and
possess all the Good that is in him, as thine own peculiar treasure, if thou
choose him and embrace him. We cannot wish and have, choose and possess, in these
matters of this World; if so, who would not be in a far better estate than he
is and can be? if a poor maid would choose the King for her husband, she might
go without him; or if a poor man choose a great man's estate, he might go without
it: but if the poorest, and unworthiest Soul shall choose his maker for his
husband, he shall have him. I will betroth thee unto me, etc. Hos. 2. and
whosoever will choose the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ for his portion,
the Kingdom of God for his, the inheritance of the Saints in light for his
mansion, may enjoy them. Here you may certainly choose and take by choice; you
may get interest in, nay possession of whatsoever you make choice of to your
selves: here is no failure, nor frustration of your affection and Election; and
will not this prevail with you?

9. Mot. Yet once more, Consider, that if you make choice of God for your God,
you make choice of that can never be taken away from you: whatsoever you choose
of the World, either is perishing in it self, or is subject to be made a prey,
and a Spoil unto others, even the worst of persons; all Worldly treasures, if
we could choose and have them, are subject to the moth or rust, Mat. 6.
or else the thief may steal them, and so take them away; either they breed
that will destroy themselves, or else others may destroy us for them, or if not
so, they may at least take them violently away from us; if you choose Gold, that
will be gone, if Silver that may be taken away, if riches they Take themselves
wings, and flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven; and how swist is that! Prove.
23.5. but if you choose God, he can never be taken away, God will never take
himself away. It is true God is pleased sometimes to withdraw himself, and to
hide his face, but yet never takes himself away from any Soul that has chosen
him, and whom he has chosen; and none else can take him away, Devils, nor men,
can never rob us of God, whatsoever they may, or do take from us.

10. Mot. Lastly consider, that if you continue to refuse, and will not make
choice of him to be your God, take heed that he does not reject you, and cast
you off for ever; if we refuse him now, beware that he refuse us not hereafter,
when we would: Is not this the trouble of persons, when they are awakened and
made sensible! come to them and ask them, whether they do not think that God is
willing to receive them? they reply; Ay, but have not I neglected the offers of
his Grace too long; so that God will not now be reconciled, and become mine
though I do choose him? If he stand at the door, and knock, and we will not
open, time may come, that we may stand at his door too, and knock, and he not
open unto us. Prove. 1.24. Because I have called, and ye refused, I stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded, and would none of my reproof: ver. 28. They
shall call upon me, but I will not answer, they shall seek me early and shall
not find me, because they would not choose the fear of the Lord. So Zech. 7.11.
As I called and they would not hear, so they shall call and I will not hear,
says the Lord. Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, but ye would not^, therefore your house is left unto you desolate. God
utterly cast off the Jews, because they would not choose him, nor close with his
tenders; let us take heed, lest if we stand off till too late, he may reject us
for ever.

Now lay all these things together, and see, whether they will not work upon
your Spirits, to choose God to be your God! Oh let nor the tenders of Grace be
always in vain! but let God prevail with you while it is cal^d to day.

CHAP. VIII. Containing reproof to them that do not, will not choose God.
BEfore I pass unto the second branch of the Exhortation: give me leave to
subjoin here a few words of Reproof, to them that will not be prevailed with so
to do.

Use. Use of reproof.
Reproof here is to all (I had almost said, but to all) those persons that are
negligent and careless in this Duty, what shame, and censure, yea indeed
Condemnation are they worthy of, that do not, will not choose God, but refuse
him; and how many are there that may justly be charged with this guilt! this is
the sin of the most in the World at this day, and that God's own people, that
are a professing people should be guilty of it, is a very sad thing. This seems
to be God's charge on his Israel; Psalm. 81.8. Hear O my people, and I will
testify unto thee, O Israel, if thou will harken unto me. 10. I am the Lord
thy God, etc. But my people would not barken to my voice, and Israel (...)
Noluit me. Non assensit (cum (...)) noihi Pi. non accepit suasionem a me. M. P.
Syn. Crit.
would none of me, had none to me, they would not accept of my offer, or my
counsel, they would not yield, nor assent to have me to be their God, they
would not be persuaded to desire such a thing as this, or to obey my voice.
Which is always a concomitant, and evidence of the same, resolve on the
contrary, that they will not have him to rule over them, choose any thing rather
than him. As the Jews, denied the holy one, and the Just, and desired a
murderer to be granted unto them, Acts. 3.14.

Having already reasoned with you, and argued the case about it, to provoke,
and move you to take God to be yours, let us here see, and take notice of what
may be the reason of this great unwillingness.

First, one reason may be, Ignorance of him, they know him not: many times
where persons are put to their choice, they are apt to choose the worst, because
they know not the difference between things, nor the excellency of one thing
above another. Men do not like, nor choose him, because they never 1 John 3.6.
have seen him, nor known him. Oh the Ignorance of God that reigns in the
World! if men had the offer of a worldly estate, a rich, well-situated farm,
here they were in their element, here they knew what to say, and here quickly
would they make a free choice; but because The natural man understands not
the things of God, 1 Cor. 2 14.
being spiritually discerned, and they still carnal, they have not an eye to
see, nor yet an understanding to apprehend his excellencies; but as it was said
of the Jews, to the same Purpose, They saw no beauty nor comeliness in him,
Isa. 53.2.
wherefore they should desire him. The worldlings eyes are holden that they
cannot know him. Luke 24.16. they perceive any thing more precious, and
desirable than the Almighty, and therefore are they ready to say, Who is the
Lord that they should choose him *? Exodus 5.2. Job 21.14.
let him depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of his ways.

Secondly, Others have prejudices against God and Christ, they think there is
but little to be gotten by him; nay, they may think of all things to be parted
with for him, and consulting with flesh and blood, may imagine that the gain
will scarcely quit the cost, if they should embrace and choose him to them; they
may think him an hard master, and having such hard thoughts of him, will never
choose him. What profit said they Job. 21. if they choose to serve him? What can
the Almighty do for them? Job 22.17.

Thirdly, Others have enmity in their hearts against God; so that they can
blaspheme God, and curse God, and deny God, and so vent and breath out their
hatred of him, but they have not one good thought of, nor motion toward God.

To close this, I add a short expostulation and ejaculation.

But why blind Soul, will not thou be prevailed with? Can thou show any just
reason or excuse for thy refusal; were thine eyes opened, surely thou would
run like the Roe, and the Hinds of the Fields after him. Thou look into a
naughty glass, that misrepresents God to thee, stay a little and look into one
glass yet, which it may be thou never hitherto did look into, even the glass
of his Word, and blessed Gospel: could but one ray of his excellency dart it
self into thy heart, thou would with both hands earnestly lay hold on him;
How quickly would thou open thy heart to let him in! and he would become the
desire of thy Soul!

Oh Blessed God, will thou ever suffer such poor Creatures to turn their back
upon thee! still to hold fast their wickedness, and always to let thee go? how
long will thou suffer them to belch out their malice against thee, to thy very
face, who art so infinitely glorious in Holiness? how long shall they be
spitting their Venom thus at thee? When shall they learn to choose thee the
chief Good, and refuse the evil? When will thou incline their hearts to thee?
Oh Lord, pluck off the Scales from their eyes, persuade their obdurate hearts,
that at last they may choose thee the Lord to them, that they may love the name
of the Lord, and be his Servants, and choose the things that please thee, and
take hold of thy Covenant! Lord, let the reading of these few lines prevail
with one heart, if it please thee, to take hold of thee! Oh, that one Soul by
this my weak labor, might be brought to choose and embrace thee, and to say
with Thomas, my Lord, and my God!

CHAP. IX. Coutaining the second Evhortation, to them that have chosen God to
them.
2. Use of Exhortation.
Use 2 Exhort.
HEre follows in the second place, Exhortation to all them that have made choice
of God to themselves, to be their God, as I hope many that heard it, and there
are also many that read this that have done it. Oh your infinite happiness that
have made this choice! all that God is is yours, and all God has is yours. I
stand astonished, in the very Admiration of the portion of that person, that
has chosen God to be his God, and so may every Soul: What has not God? and
what cannot God do? What is his happiness and portion then, that has this God
for his portion!

A few suitable particular Exhortations.

1. Exhortation. As you have chosen God, so cleave to the God you have thus
chosen, hug him, and embrace him, and let him not go again away from you: Do
not cast him off, I pray you; remember that passage, Mal. 2.16. The Lord, the
God of Jacob says, that he hates putting away. The passage is uttered, in
reference to married persons stedfastness one to another; and if so be, that
God hates putting away in reference to these Corporal, and Carnal marriages,
between a Man and his Wife, Does he not much more in this Spiritual marriage,
between the Soul and himself? If God be once married to us, and we are
betrothed unto him, he is as much against putting away on either side, as he is
against the Husbands, or Wives putting away each other; Does He so to us? Isa.
41.9. there is a notable passage, I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.
God does not choose us, and then cast us away, (...) then should we deal thus
(...), God? be persuaded to cleave (...), and not cast him away, stick to God
as David resolved to do, Ps. 16. before. When Barnabas came, and saw the Grace
of God in some whom he visited, Acts 11.23. It Is said, he exhorted them, that
with full purpose of heart they should cleave unto the Lord. It Is God's
Command, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and cleave unto him,
etc. Deuteronomy. 10.20. And this is made the condition of God's driving out the
Canaanites before them, Chap. 11.22. The like Exhortation joined with a
Commendation is given, Josh. 23.8. But cleave unto the Lord your God, as ye
have done unto this day. And this in the text, is put in opposition to denying
God, ver. 27. where we read that Joshua put up a stone, in this place in the
presence of all the people, to be as a witness, between the Lord and them of
this transaction; that stone should be a witness, of what they had done, in
making such a willing choice of God to themselves; lest upon the occasion of
any temptation, they should deny and renounce him. Be entreated, whoever has
heard or does read this to cleave to God, and not deny him, nor put him away:
when you have chosen him, do not change him, as the heathens will not, though
God's people are apt so to do, Jer. 2.10. Has a nation (that is Heathen and
Idolatrous) changed their gods which yet are no gods? but my people have
changed their Glory, for that which profits not; Oh do not so, especially
since God does not deal so with us, and he indeed has cause and provocation so
to do, yet we have none at all: this God hinteth to them, and upbraideth them
with, ver. 5 before. Thus says the Lord, what iniquity have your Fathers found
in me, that they are gone far from me, etc. ver. 6. Neither say they in their
heart, where is the Lord, that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt? etc. The
Lord taxes them, What iniquity have your Fathers found in me? etc. but what
iniquity may not God charge us with, as a just cause of casting us off, and
putting us away for ever! and whosoever will may see it charged home on
Jerusalem, Ezck. 16, 19, 20, 23, etc. if others lie at us for embracements; let
us cast them away, but let us not deal so with God, who is saithful to us,
notwithstanding our demerits from him.

2. Exhortation. Content your selves with him alone, whom you have chosen. So
did the Prophet David and rejoice in his portion, Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance, etc. ver. 6. shows his satisfaction with this, The
lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea I have a Godly heritage; as if
he had said, I am in a very good estate, Significat se diligere Deum super
omnia, and ipso contentum esse. Calvin.

Cum Deum habeame and haeriditate, optima amaena pars agri mihi obtigitt. M. P.
syn.


having God to be my portion, I am in a Condition that does wonderfully Content
me, let others choose riches, honors, etc. Be satisfied therewith, look after
none other but himself; be taken up with him: Yea, there is reason to be
Contented with God only, because God is All, and has All. Therefore continue
for ever with him.

3. Exhortation. Having chosen God, never repent of your choice. You may repent
of choosing the World, because that may be hurtful unto you: but we can never
have cause, justly to repent of choosing God to be ours; are not the things of
the World compared, and that fitly to Briars and Thorns? and has not a Thorn
cost and lost many a man a Limo, yea his very life? how many have ventured
their Souls for the World! though our Savior says, What will it profit a man
to gain the whole World, and lose his Soul? or what shall a man give in
Exchange for his Soul? always there is danger in choosing other things, but
never any danger in choosing God to be ours. It brings desolating judgments on
any people, They chose new Gods, and there was War in their Gates, Judge. 5.8.

4. Exhortation. Be persuaded, to joy in him above all, rest in your love to
him as he in his love to you. Zeph. 3.17. He will rejoice over thee with joy,
he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing: Have we not much
more cause to rejoice in him than he in us? he fills our desire with goodness,
we never fulfill his desire, but grieve and provoke him; say and do as Mary,
Luke 1.46, 47. My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in
God my Savior.

CHAP. X. Closes up all, showing the intendment of the whole,
ANd now in the close of all I beseech and persuade you, to choose and close
with God by heartily accepting, and embracing of the terms of his Covenant of
Grace. God's Covenant runs in the form of an offer on his part, and of a
gracious acceptance, and charge mixed together as to our part, I will be your
God; as who should say, choose me and I am yours (as before Mot. 1.) and ye
shall be my people. I will take you, accept you as mine, and ye shall become my
holy, obedient people, and I could heartily wish, that I might prevail with you
all, for a particular express entering into Covenant with God. To choose and take
God to your selves according to the aforesaid offer, and so solemnly give and
yield up your selves to God, to become his people as he requires. That there
might be a deliberate and open transaction between God and your Souls, and that
you would have a draught by you as a testimony thereof, containing the Sum of
the whole, subscribed with the hand, and sealed with your seal, as we read of
some that did. Neh. 9.38. whether that was done by every particular of that
great multitude, as by reason of the (...) at or over the sealing Annotat.
Hebraism some conceive, that the Princes, Levits, and Priests, were to see the
Covenant sealed by all, or whether they as the Heads and Representatives of the
rest did it, is not now needful to Question, but if the former was done as it
may be rationally supposed, then it speaks fully to our purpose, it may be not
only subscribed with the hand, but sealed also. This would be as effectual a
Monitor of, and Bond upon us, as Joshua's stone that he set up for a testimony,
ver. 27. This way is the Counsel of a Reverend Divine, in a book written by
him, called a Vindication of Godliness (which it may be some of you that hear
and read this, and I hope thousands more have seen) wherein page 173. etc. he
has given suitable direction, very quick and pressing to such a way of dealing
with God; and page 179. he has set down the form of such a Covenant. Such a
thing is directed to also, Mr. Thomas Vincent, Treat. called Words whereby we
may be saved. page 63.64. etc. Also in Mr. Jos. Alleins book of Convers. page,
164. the same as is in Vindictae Pietatis.
in another Reverend Divine's book, named in the margin, and another you may
find subjoyned at the end hereof; you may make use of which you please: But I
think it best, for every judicious Christian to have a draught of his own, as
best suiting his estate; which will much tend to our Spiritual good and
advantage, as the Appendix will discover; and then in life manifest, that you
have chosen him, by choosing all those things that please him. God complaints of
it as a great sin of the Jews, that they did evil before him, and wherein was
that so evident? and did choose that wherein I delighted not, Isa. 65.12. just
as if a women should choose a man for her husband, but not do any thing he
delights in, rather choose to do all that might displease him. Whereas those
that do take hold of God's Covenant, must choose also those things that please
God, Isa. 56.4. It may be she will live with him, for a show and a pretense,
but is so far from pleasing him, as that she is always vexing, and fretting
him; just so Jerusalem fretted God in all these things, Ezekiel. 16.43. Though we
should walk so as to please God, and abound therein more and more. 1 These. 4.1.
The carriages and conversations of most toward God, do discover, that they
choose the things that do displease him, but let us do and choose to do the
things that please him. Particularly. 1. choose the fear of the Lord, Be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long. Prove. 23. that is a brave life, and that
will make a man eschew whatsoever is displeasing unto God. God lays it on a
people as their great sin, that they did not choose the fear of the Lord, Prove.
1.31.

2. Choose the statutes of God; David that chose God for his portion and
inheritance, he also chose Gods statutes. Psalm. 119.111. Thy testimonies have I
taken as an heritage for ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart; and ver.
30. I have chosen the way of thy truth. Men look upon the actions, but God
looks on the choice of persons more than their actions, (though he look to and
observes both): some sin out of infirmity, others out of choice choose the
things wherein God has no pleasure. Folly is joy to him that is destitute of
Wisdom. Prove. 15.21. now God pities the one, and pardons; But if we sin
wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, this is sad indeed!
Heb. 10. I beseech you therefore, choose God, and cleave to him, with all your
Heart and Soul for ever. And frequently reiterate and solemnly view this way of
transacting with God; according to the draught you have lying by you,
especially every fast day, and every Sacrament-day, wherein there is (as I may
so say) a new Seal set to the bond of the Covenant, wherein you are obliged: Oh
that the transaction between God and Israel, might be between every Soul, that
has heard and may read this. Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day
to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to hearken to his voice. ver. 18.
See the Appendix.
and the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as he has
promised, and that thou should keep all his Commandments.

Having directed you to two forms of the Covenant, whereby the Christians
choice of God is completed, by a free and blessed close with him; as also made
mention of another to be subjoyned: I thought good to offer you the use and
view thereof, though I have wished, and still do, that each person that can,
would be his own penman in this case; because though it may be drawn full
enough to any hand, yet it may not so suit and satisfy every ones Condition, or
Experience, as it might if it were drawn out of, (as I may say) and according
to the frame and workings of a Man's own Soul.

OMst Glorious, Gracious and blessed Lord God, the great Creator, Genesis 14.19.
and most high possessor of Heaven and Earth; I thy poor and unworthy Creature,
Psalm. 139.14.
fearfully and wonderfully made by thee at first in my Creation, and as
wonderfully dignified by thee, in being taken into Covenant with thee, in that
blessed estate wherein I was at first made; do desire to come humbly prostrate
before thee in the sense of thy great mercy, and my own vileness and undone
estate by the fall; and the irreparable breach of that first Covenant, by that
transgression of my first parents, and manifold violations of all thy holy and
just, Romans 7.12.
and good Laws, in my sinful practice and Conversation, being touched by thy
blessed Spirit with a serious remorse, therefore, am emboldned by thy gracious
invitations, and frequent call, to come, in the most humble and unfeigned
manner that I can unto thee: beseeching thee that thou would accept of me in
thy dear Son, and mercifully vouchsafe to receive me into Covenant anew with
thy self, even that Covenant of Grace, which thou have revealed in thy holy
Word; wherein thou offerest and assurest, to all that will come unto thee, and
lay hold on thy mercy, Joh. 6.37.
that they shall in no wise be case out; I am, I acknowledge a lost sinner in my
self; and have daily played my part against thee, in thought, and word, and
deed; discovering that enmity, that my heart has been by nature full of
against thee, in my enormous rebellions, and provocations. Thy Promise is, Isa.
55.7.
Though I have been wicked, If I forsake my evil way, and though I have been
unrighteous, if I forsake my evil thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, thou will
have mercy upon me, and abundantly pardon. Having encouragement by thy promise,
and hoping in thy word, Jer. 3.22.
behold I come unto thee, beseeching thee O Lord, that thou would have mercy
upon me, a miserable sinner. Luke 18.13.


Now since it has pleased thee to require, and do expect of him that
expects to be received of thee, that he should not 2 Cor. 6.17.
touch the unclean thing, I do here in thy presence, abhorring my self for all
my past vileness, sinfulness, and unprofitableness; resolve, Covenant and
promise in thy name, and by thy strength to forsake the Devil, World, and
Flesh, 2 Cor. 4.1.
and do renounce all the hidden works of darkness, and dishonesty: and before
the Lord Isa. 30.22.
say to every Idol (in heart and Life) get thee hence; purposing in my heart,
never to Romans 6.13.
yield my body, or Soul, nor the members, and faculties of them, as the members
of unrighteousness to sin, nor suffer for time to come, as heretofore, through
thine assisting grace, v. 12.
sin to reign in my mortal body, nor immortal Soul, that I should obey it in
the lusts thereof; that I will keep constant, strict watch against all the
advantages, snares, and temptations of all mine, and and thine Enemies;
earnestly entreating, and imploring thine 2. Cor. 12.9.
Allsufficient Grace to make me 1 Pet. 5.8, 9.
Sober and Vigilant, that my adversary the Devil, though he goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, may not by any of 2 Cor. 2.11.
his devices, take any advantage against me, but that I may resist him
steadfastly in the faith, thy grace assisting thereto; keeping my Heart, Tongue
and way, from that which is displeasing unto thee. And since I know and am
convinced Isa. 64.6.
that my righteousness is as filthy rags and no possibility of Salvation by it,
I do renounce it, and loath my self for the imperfections of it; being a lost,
perishing and damnable wretch, without thy pardoning and saving Grace!

And Tit. 3.4.
because the kindness and love of God toward man, has so exceedingly
appeared, as that thou have freely offered, and promised, to make an Jer. 32.40.
Everlasting Covenant, that thou will never turn away from them, to do them
good, but wilt ever be their God, that do Isa. 56.6.
lay hold on thy Covenant, I desire heartily to take thee O God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost to be my God; to be my Father, Savior, and Comforter, to be my
portion, and happiness here, and hereafter; beseeching thee, that thou would
1 Cron. 29.18.
keep this purpose in my heart, and continue to communicate this power to my
Soul, that I may ever cleave to the my Lord and God, that I may become wholly,
and only thine for ever and ever sticking unto thy testimonies, and choosing the
way of thy Commandments all my days; for now the Psalm. 56.12.
vows of God are upon me, yea I have Psalm. 119.106.
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.

And forasmuch as there is no Coming to the Father but by Christ, who is the
Joh. 14.6.
way, truth, and life, who is freely offered in the Gospel, Mat. 3.17.
in whom alone thou art well pleased, and I can only be accepted; I heartily
and thankfully desire Col. 2.6.
to receive Jesus Christ, and to walk in him; To take him to be my 1 Cor. 1.30.
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, to espouse my Soul to
him this day, and Isa. 56.6.
join my self to him in a Covenant, that can never be broken off or forgotten.

My dear Savior, who have made Heb. 10.19.
a new and living way to the Father, for me, I do here solemnly and freely
Psalm. 24.7, 9.
open the everlasting doors of my heart to thee, that thou the King of glory
may come in, that so thou may Ephesians. 3.17.
dwell in my heart by faith, that being lost without thee, yet Phil. 3.9.
found in thee, I may be saved; thine I desire to be, though I deserve no such
privilege at all, being a filthy stinking sinner, Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in trespasses and Sins; 2 Timothy 3.6.
Laden with hellish lusts, pressed down even to Hell it self: but it has
pleased thee to Hos. 2.18.
espouse me to thy self, in Righteousness, and Mercy, and Faithfulness; I do
with my whole Soul embrace and lay hold on thee, and do take thee the Rev. 15.4.
King of Saints, to be my only Lord, and Head and Husband, my only King and
Commander, and willingly Mat. 11.29.
taking thy easy yoke upon me, I present my self unto thee resolving to Hos.
3.3.
continue not only many but all my days with thee, Romans 12.1.
yielding up my self, body and Soul, as an holy, living, acceptable sacrifice
to thee, who have offered up thy self as a Ephesians. 5.2.
Sacrifice to the Father, for my poor lost Soul, engaging through thy Grace,
that I will stoop to thy Scepter, fulfill thy will, and Rev. 14.4.
follow thee the Lamb of God whithersoever thou go, to be disposed of by
thee in every condition, that neither poverty, nor riches; nor Romans (...) 38, 3^
life, nor death, shall separate between me and thee.

Moreover, si^h this Ephesians. (...) 12.
access is by one Spirit unto the Father through Christ, I do here most blessed
Spirit, take thee to be my only God also: to be my Guide, and J^^^ 18.9^
Comforter, beseeching thee that thou would Ephesians. (...) 30.
Seal me up unto the day of redemption. That thou would be in me a Jo^^
(...) 38.
Fountain of living Water, springing up to life eternal. That so I may
notwithstanding all difficulties, Job 17.9.
hold on my way and grow stronger and stronger, vowing to be Gal. 5.18.
led by no other Spirit, but thy self, Romans 8.1.
walking after the Spirit, for time to come, and not after the flesh.

Also, because thou requirest every one that expects to Rev. 22.14.
enter by the Gate into the City, to keep thy Commandments: and having now
entered into (and renewed) the bond of the Covenant so to do, as one of thy
people, to which end thou have graciously promised, that thou will Jer. 32.40.
put thy fear into my heart that I shall not depart from thee; I here as thy
Covenant-servant, engage solemnly to become wholly thine: that I will be for no
other; Psalm. 116.15.
O Lord truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, Psalm. 119.38.
devoted to thy Fear, Love, and Service: Praying that thou would keep thy
promise, to enable me to walk in thy statutes, and through the never-failing
influence of thy Heavenly power, Psalm. 119.8.
I will keep thy statutes, v. 48.
my hands also will I lift up to thy Commandments which I love: Oh forsake me
not utterly, yea I will Isa. 30.1.
follow no counsel but of thy Spirit, and Word from henceforth all the days of
my life. Though Satan tempt, the World allures, and the Gal. 5.17.
Flesh lusts against the Spirit; yet being Ephesians. 3.16.
strengthened with might by thy Spirit in the inner man, will Ephesians. 6.12.
wrestle against Sin, Satan, and the World, yea all manner of wickedness
whatsoever, 1 Timothy 6.12.
fighting the good fight of Faith, till I lay hold on the possession of eternal
life, 2 Tim^ 4.8.
having finished my course, and obtained the Crown of righteousness, which thou
have promised.

Yet since there is no man, Eccle^ 7.20.
that lives and sins not, I do in thy holy presence protest against any
contrived, allowed sin, whereby I shall Ps^^ 18.21.
wickedly depart from my God, and that though of force I do, and shall in part
while I am in this body, Romans (...) 25.
with my flesh serve the law of sin, yet with my mind will I serve the law of
God wholly, and for ever.

Now the Josh. 22.22.
Lord God of Gods, the Jer. 17.10.
searcher of the hearts, and tryer of the reins, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
search me, and try me, and if their be any way of wickedness in me, lead me in
the way everlasting: since thou Psalm. 119.4.
command me to keep thy precepts diligently, Psalm. 27.8.
my heart says unto thee, Psalm. 119.5.
Oh that my ways were directed, to keep thy statutes; therefore will I Deuteronomy.
26.16.
keep, and do them with all mine heart, and all my Soul.

Blessed God, I desire to Phil. 4.4.
rejoice in thee, and in the 2 Chronicles. 15.15.
Oath and Covenant made with thee, this I do in the truth, and uprightness of
my heart, as I have chosen so I desire to prize thee above all; Ps. 73.25.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee! and there is none on Earth that I desire
besides thee: Song. 6.3.
I am my beloved's and my beloved is mine. Psalm. 16.6.
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly heritage.
Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has chosen me in
him, before the Foundation of the World, Rev. 5.9, 10.
Blessing, Honor, and Glory be given to the Lamb for ever, who was slain, and
have redeemed me to God, by thy blood, Zech. 9.11.
the blood of the Covenant. Blessed be the eternal Spirit who have Genesis 1.2.
moved my heart to enter, into this solemn relation, and obligation unto God.

Deuteronomy. 7.9. and 29.9.
The Lord my God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant, and Mercy to them
that Love him, and keep his Commandments: keep to me the Covenant, and the
Mercy, and Confirm it to the end, and strengthen me so with thy Grace that I
may keep the words of this Covenant, and do them; and this Covenant made this
day with my God, let not any thing, Sin, Satan, World, Life nor Death,
disannul; but let it be confirmed to all Eternity. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX Containing PROPOSITIONS Evidencing, Not only the warrantableness,
but expediency, of transacting with God in a particular express Covenant-way.

Written at first, for the satisfaction of a private friend; now published at
the request of some others, and for the benefit, and advnatage of any that
shall peruse them.

By SAMUEL VVINNEY, sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Glaston in
Somersetshire.

London, Printed for Thomas Cockeril at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1675.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader.
THere being lately extant a worthy Treatise of a Reverend Divine, called
Vindiciae Pietatis, written by Mr. R. A. pressing to a strict and precise
Conversation, and in it giving advice to persons not yet in Covenant, to come
in and complete all by Solemn Covenanting with God, I most gladly, sweetly and
delightfully viewed the design, and meeting with the doubts of some person (a
precious Servant of God, and my dear and intimate friend) about the
warrantableness of that way, because I my self was so much affected with the
thing, did set my self (upon his request and letter to me) seriously to seek
what warrant Gods word afforded to it, and at some sparehours, in some few days
of vacation from my incumbring and tedious employment, drew up the following
Propositions tending to the evidence thereof; hoping that either the author of
the forenamed treatise or some person else, whose Graces, Abilities and Leisure
are greater than mine, may be stirred up more fully to clear it. The Lord
grant, that whosoever may peruse them may have the same comfort and benefit
thereby, as the Author that composed them, and now through the importunity of
others made them public. Amen.

Certain PROPOSITIONS tending to the clearing of a Question, and Satisfaction
of some doubts, about particular express entering into Covenant with God.
Prop. I.
THat God has of his own good pleasure, from all eternity, elected so me to
everlasting life: 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledg of God. Ephesians.
1.4. According as he has chosen us in him before the Foundation of the World.

Prop. II.
That God did from all eternity ransact the business of the Salvation of these
elected persons, between himself and his Son Jesus Christ. God gave every one
of those whom he would have mercy on, to Jesus Christ, to the intent that he
might deliver them all, and every one of them, out of the estate of sin and
misery, which they should implunge themselves into by the fall of Ad^m, and the
Son he accepts of this work of Salvation and Redemption of them by his own
death, to be accomplished in the fullness of time, and this by Divines is called
the Covenant of Redemption.

Prop. III.
That (besides the Covenant transacted between the Father and the Son, about
the Redemption and Salvation of the elect from all eternity) God he enters into
a Covenant of Grace, with the persons themselves, that are elected, in due
time, which yet is a consequent of the former; For if Christ had never
undertaken, or accepted of the terms in that Covenant of Redemption, before
time, there had been no Covenant of Grace in time, with the Elect themselves.

Prop. IV.
This Covenant between God and his people is mutual, and stipulatory, (that is)
obliges God, (to speak with due reverence of so great a Majesty,) and also
obliges all, and every the persons of his people, taken into it, wherein, as
God graciously does promise to be their God, to be good and kind unto them, yea
to be all to them, and do all for them, which shall be for present, and future,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal good: so are they answerably bound, to become
his people, for their part, and so to live before God, as his people, in Faith,
Repentance, Holiness and Obedience, all their days. So that the preceptive
part, as well as the promissive part of the Covenant, is expressly in Scripture
called, and entitled by the name of a Covenant, because of that tie on persons,
to perform the duty, as God has graciously bound himself to perform the mercy;
so the Moral law is called a Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4.13.2 Chron. 6.11. and the
mandatory part in general, Lev. 26.15. Deuteronomy. 29.1.9.12, 14, 21, 25. and the
Hebrew Phrase, which properly signifies to cut a Covenant, amongst variety of
words by which the LXX. use to translate it, one is (...), to Command. See Heb.
9.10. from Exodus 24.8.

Prop. V.
That this Covenant is made with Believers and their Seed, not only with the
single persons of Believers, but with their Seed also in them, and themselves
the representatives of their Seed.

Prop. VI.
That every particular person of these is bound for himself, to lay hold on the
Covenant: By Faith to apply all the Promises; and in Obedience to perform all
the precepts, and duties required in this Covenant.

Now about our particular entering into, and being in Covenant with God, diverse
things are to be weighed, and considered, for a right understanding thereof.

We may be said, to be in, and to enter into Covenant with God, two ways.

1. Virtually; and this is two ways.

1. Either in our Fathers relation and obligation to God; God enters into
Covenant not with Believers persons only (as before) but with them and their
Seed also. Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my Covenant between me, and thee,
and thy Seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to
be a God unto thee, and thy Seed after thee. And every Believer ought to accept
the Covenant, not for himself only, but for his seed. Now my Father's accepting
the Covenant, not for himself only, but for me, and God's Covenanting with me
as well as with him; does engage me with him to God in the same obligation.
This way of Covenant-transaction has been always in all Gods dealings with the
Sons of men in this kind, even in both Covenants (viz,) that of Works (called a
Covenant of life by our Divines) before the fall, and that of Grace, ever
since. And this way of being in Covenant with God, may be as soon as a man is
conceived, and before while he is in his fathers Loins; thus were all the Sons
of men (all mankind) in Adam's Covenant, and every belivers Seed in their
Fathers.

2. Or else in our being baptized and receiving thereby the outward sign, and
Seal of the Covenant of Grace. Now though hereby an outward application of the
sign of the Covenant was made to us, yet we did but virtually enter then, and
thereby into Covenant with God, because we were altogether passive, and not at
all active in our participation of that Sacrament.

2. Actually, and this is two ways too.

1. Something respects the nature of the thing it self, that there be a
serious, cordial, total Resignation of our selves to God, in a holy dependence,
reliance, and affiance on all his Promises, accepting him to be our Savior,
the Holy Ghost to be our God, and Jesus Christ to be our Sanctifier, and
Comforter, upon his own terms: as he has offered himself to us, in his blessed
Word, with an unfeigned, and univer^^l Obedience to all his Commandments.

2. Something respects the manner of doing of it; and here also something is;

1. Public, when a person grown to years, and understanding, does freely, and
voluntarily, yea and openly too, in the face and presence of the Congregation,
Mr. Hamner of Confirmation.
take upon him to fulfill that Covenant, which his Father in his name, and
behalf at his Baptism, undertook for him.

2. The nature of this particular express Covenanting with God briefly opened.
Private; and that is when a person either at his Conversion, or after does
this upon due, and deliberate Consideration between God and his own Soul, draw
up in writing, a certain form of words, according as his own heart shall (upon
serious search and knowledge of his estate according to the Scriptures) direct
him. Wherein there shall be an humble and hearty accepting, owning, and
acknowledging of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, to be his
God in Covenant upon his own terms, and that for ever; as also a full, and
unfeigned Resignation of himself made to God, and Resolution in the strength of
God's grace, to walk with him in an holy Communion, and Conversation, according
to the duty required by God from him, in this holy Covenant-state into which he
is entered and taken.

Now for our better understanding, in a matter of so great importance, for
further clearing of it, I shall offer these following particulars to serious
Consideration.

1. That I make these two last imdiately forenamed, only as the Circumstance of
this matter, not at all of the substance of our entering into Covenant. We may
truly be in Covenant, partake of the benefits of it, have an interest in God,
Jesus Christ, Remission of Sins, and Salvation, yield our selves to God,
although we do neither of these last things forementioned: that is to say,
though we are never brought into the Congregation, there openly to profess our
taking these obligations upon our selves, which our Father did for us at our
Baptism, or never have such a draught in express writing, between God and our
selves.

2. The Scripture says, One shall say I am the Lord's, as well as, another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob. Isa. 44.5. Now if this particular should be a necessary
Duty, (viz) subscribing with the hand, and the other too: then some would be
bound to one mode or form of transacti^^ with God and others to another (...)
^hereas the Scripture makes one as lawful, good, and valid as another; yea the
Scripture seems to speak more in that expression of saying, than that of
subscribing with the hand, as is easily observable: there being two expressions
of the former, one only of the latter. So that text, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, etc. or as
the Hebrew has it, (...)
thou have made to say, that is, to promise, as worthy Ainsworth on the place;
though others, thou have exalted the Lord to be thy God: and surely they that
take God to be their God, as they should exalt him above all in their
estimation, as the Prophet did, Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25. so
should they make him their Lord Paramount, make him their Sovereign, and
Supreme, should not set up, or suffer any thing higher than he, the (...). IXX.
Greek, thou have chosen the Lord this day to be thy God, but this
interpretation though good is a digression; to return therefore.

3. All cannot do this, taking only one expression in the letter, (that is)
subscribe with the hand; for very many cannot write, therefore cannot subscribe
with the hand to God: And if it should be drawn for them, they may set their
hands to they know not what, and so, if they should subscribe by setting their
mark, (it is possible) they may be deluded therein, they being not capable,
(being not able to read write-hand nor themselves to write) to know what they
do.

4. Yet further, I add this to all that has been said, that it is not only
lawful, and warrantable, but also very expedient, necessary, and advantageous
for Christians personally, particularly, and expressly by word, yea and writing,
if they can, to transact with God in a Covenant-way.

I shall speak a little to each of (...) branches of this Proposition.

First, That it is lawful, and warrantable these things seem to evince.

It is prophesied, Scripture evidence.
that they shall do so. Isa. 4 45. One shall say I am the Lords: another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord. Isa. 45.24. Surely, shall one say, in
the Lord have I righteousness, and strength, Zech. 13.9. They shall say the
Lord is my God. Hos. 2.16. Thou shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no more
Baali.

2. This is practiced by the Saints of God in former time, the Israelites: see
Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to
walk in his ways, etc. A notable enumeration of these, according to a
particular distribution of them, into their several ranks, ages, and sexes.
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. Captains, Elders, Officers, Wives, little ones, that thou
should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 5.27, 28, 29. Three
times did the people thus expressly enter into Covenant with God, Exodus 19.8.
and chap. 20. and Exodus 24.3.7. so David in many and many places. Psalm. 16.2. O
my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my Lord, etc. Psalm. 42.9. I
will say unto God my rock, etc. so Psalm. 89.26. He shall cry unto me, thou art
my Father, my God, etc. Psalm. 91.2. I will say of the Lord he is my refuge, --
my God, etc. Psalm. 142.5. I cried unto thee O Lord, I said thou art my refuge
besides. Psalm. 18.1, 2. with 144.2. so Psalm. 119.94. I am thine save me -- like
that Isa. 44.5. (before) and ver. 106. I have sworn and will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous judgments. Thomas did so, Joh. 20.28. my Lord and my
God; after Jesus Christ had said, I go to my Father and your Father, ver. 17.
Paul said so, Act. 27.23. Whose I am and whom I serves The Churches of
Macedonia, 2 Cor. 8.5. First gave their own selves to the Lord, etc. And the
Apostle Paul says, that all Christians may do it, and that boldly too. Heb.
13.6. so that we (^ach one in particular) may boldly say, the Lord is my
helper, etc.

3. Something also may be observed, much tending to the opening and confirming
of this from that Scripture, Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together, which have
made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. It Is spoken of them as though they had a
part, and each for himself, entered into Covenant with God, who were to be
gathered, that is, to be summoned to appear before God; which makes nothing for
the groundless, independent Saint or Church-gathering so much stickled for; for
the Lord does but here charge, and summon the Church of the Jews, collectively
called Saints, the whole having a denomination from the better part, Caiv. in
loc.
to convince them of, and return them from their gross h^pocrisy; that
Herald-like expression page 1. answering such obtestations of Moses as we read
of in diverse passages, Deuteronomy 30.19. I call Heaven and Earth to witness, and
32.1. give Ear Oh Heavens, etc. with Isa. 1.2. but this is to our purpose that
the Scripture does imply, that they had distinctly, and apart entered into
Covenant with God, each for himself by Sacrifice. Of this Covenanting between
God and his people by Sacrifice, we may see a lively description, Exodus 24.4.8.
And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the morning,
and builded an Altar, under the hill, and 12 pillars according to the 12 tribes
of Israel. 5. And he sent young men of the Children of Israel, which offered
burnt-offerings, and sanctified peace offerings, of Oxen unto the Lord -- 7.
And he took the book of the Covenant and read in the audience of the people,
and they said, all that the Lord has said, will we do and be obedient. 8. And
Moses took the blood, and sprinkled on the people, and said, behold the blood
of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you. Concerning all These words.
By these two sorts of Sacrifices the sanctification of the people was
testified, Ainsw. in loc.
who by the death of Christ, (whom these Sacrifices did figure out) presented
themselves wholly to God, as obedient Servants (according to that of the
Apostle, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God;) and it is to be observed, about both of
them, how particularly, and personally they did transact with God. 1. Of the
burnt-offering Lev. 1.2. If any man bring an offering to the Lord. ver. 3. If
his offering be a burnt-sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a Male without
blemish, -- ver. 4, and he shall put his hand, upon the head of the
burnt-offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make an atonement for him.
2. The like is said of the peace offering. Lev. 3.1, 2, and ver. 6, 7, 8. Now
this particular laying on the hand by every person that brought a Sacrifice to
the Priest to be offered to God, what does it teach us? Amongst many things I
shall not mention, all which might be expressed, these two principally to our
purpose; Bp. Babington's Comfort. Notes on Lev. 1.4.
1. That every one was bound to apply Christ, particularly to himself by the
hand of his own Faith. 2. That he was to make an holy resignation of himself to
God and Christ, that men bringing sacrifices to God should rather sacrifice
themselves -- than that beast; agreeing with the Exhortation of the Apostle
Paul, Romans 12.1. ubi sup.
I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living holy acceptable Sacrifice unto God, which is your reasonable
Service. For many are Content to give their goods to God, but themselves to the
Devil, which God abhors; said that holy Bishop. How plainly does it hence
appear, ibid.
that this Covenanting with God by Sacrifice, proves the truth treated of, in
that Sacrifice, each person laying his hand on his Sacrifice, implying his
particular dependence upon, and applying Jesus Christ to himself, for
Salvation; and giving up himself to God and Christ, in an holy and Universal
Obedience. Something more of this anon.

Some Arguments drawn from Scripture for the proof of its lawfulness which I
shall propose not in way of Syllogism formally, 2 Scrip. Arguments.
but of ordinary reason, for the capacity of any that may desire Satisfaction.

1. It is lawful and warrantable to transact with God, in a particular, and
personal way, because every person is bound, by a particular Faith to apply the
Promises to himself in particular, that are proposed in general to all: yea
some Promises, that are made to some particular persons in reference to some
particular matters, are yet by the Holy Ghost extended to all, and offered to
and to be applied by every Christian: thus Joshua was not to carry away, and
impropriate to himself all the benefit of the Promise made to him, about Gods
being with him, and not failing, nor forsaking him, Josh. 1.5. Compared with
Heb. 13.5. where the Apostle extends it to all, and yet seem thereby to apply
it to every particular Christian^ I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee.
There Is the particular application of that Promise made at first to Joshua to
every particular Christians exigence, ver. 6. Wherefore we may boldly say.
(viz. All Collectively, and each one singlely in his own behalf, and for his
own especial behoof) the Lord is my helper, etc. And if so, why should not
(since the Covenant is mutually and reciprocally obligatory) there be a
particular resignation, made by every Christian of himself to God?

2. If I am bound in particular by every Command, then I ought and may lawfully
give my assent thereto, in word or writing, either or both. That command
reaches every particular Christian. Romans 6.13. yield your selves unto God.

3. Where there was a general, vocal assenting stipulation made to God, and at
any time an answer made to his call, there were also the particulars employed,
or expressed, or both. So before, Exodus 19.20. and 24. Chap. It is said all the
people answered together, and all the people answered with one voice: So Deuteronomy.
5.27, 28. It is not said, their Heads only, or Officers, or Elders, but all the
people with an express mention of their voices. Yea further we shall see the
people expressly mentioned, and distinctly from all these, Josh. 24.1, 2. with
16.17. etc.

4. Because the benefits of the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ (which is called
the Blood of the Covenant, Zech. 9.11.) which are also the benefits of the
Covenant of grace, (for both are one) are applied in particular by Gods Saints,
in Scripture: see Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh,
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
The like the Apostle speaks, Romans 8.2. for the law of the Spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death.

5. David's Prayer may give a little light to this truth, which he makes, and
we may read recorded, Psalm. 35.3. Say unto my Soul I am thy Salvation. Wherein
David desires God to say to him, in this kind in particular: then certainly it
may not be unwarrantable, for Gods people to deal with God in reserence to
their particular Interest in God, and consequently in the Covenant.

6. It Is Considerable, how much Gods transaction with the Sons of men in this
kind, and way is spoken of and uttered, in the terms, and under the notion of
single and particular persons. (1.) They were particularly numbered out to Jesus
Christ, and accordingly returned by tale (as I may say) to the Father by the
Son. John. 17.12, Those thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost,
but the Son of perdition. etc. (2) One shall say, and another shall subscribe,
not some, and others, in the plural number but one and another in the singular
number. (3.) In the precepts of the moral law at mount Sinai, (which all sound
Divines hold, and acknowledge to be a Covenant of grace,) with Israel, Exodus 20.
the Lord speaks particularly, thou shall and thou shall not, not ye but thou.
(4.) The Covenant with Christ (Mystical) mentioned, Gal. 3.16. is expressed in
Terms of particularity. Now to Abraham and his Seed, were the Promises made; he
says not, and to his Seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy Seed, which
is Christ: now though by Christ, here is not meant Christ's single person, but
Christ mystical (a collective term; As 1 Cor. 12.12. So also is Christ that is
Christ's mystical body, of which he is the Head) yet this may show and point
out to us, by Analogy and proportion, that every believer has interest in, and
should accordingly make particular application, of the whole of the Covenant
unto themselves.

7. Because the Holy Ghost warranteth this in his own expression. See 1 Cor.
12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. Our
transacting with God this way is to that end and purpose, that we may make sure
of an interest in him, and our union, and relation to the Lord Jesus Christ, to
our selves in particular: If the Holy Ghost is so particular in this kind,
surely, we may not only be so, but much more ought to be so.

8. If the Devil, in the Covenants he makes with persons, does make every
particular person, subscribe with his hand, yea and some (I have heard, or
read, or both) with their own blood, their resignation of themselves to him, in
that hellish bond they are tied to him in: may we not then, yea how much more,
are we bound to deal particularly with God, to make him sure to us and our
selves sure to him?

9. The expressions and resemblances by which this Covenanting with God is set
forth, do imply and import as much as this is (1.) It is resembled to a
marriage-Covenant, Hos. 2.16. thou shall call me Ishj, that is, my husband; and
ver. 19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me
in righteousness, etc. ver. 20. I will hetroth thee unto me in faithfulness,
etc. Now God is our husband, Isa. 54.5. thy maker is thy husband, etc. And does
the husband in the marriage Covenant, (for that is called a Covenant also) the
wife married is called the wife of thy Covenant, (viz.) by marriage, Mal. 2.14.
the marriage. knot and obligation is called the Covenant of God, Prove. 2.17.)
only promise to be a loving, faithful husband, and no more? Surely this is but
half-marriage, the promise of the one party; or rather does not the wise also
engage by word of mouth, that she will be a loving, faithful, and obedient
wife? and then the marriage is full and complete: In like manner as God, the
husband of his people promises to be their God; so the espoused Soul promises
to be only for God, and Jesus Christ and for none else, and this ought every
particular Soul to do which is the spouse of the Lord Jesus. I have betrothed
you unto one husband, says the Apostle Paul, Conversion is the Soul's Espousal,
2 Cor. 11. Now Conversion is a work wrought upon every particular Soul, and
that Soul and as many Soul's as are converted, do in particular turn to God,
every one for himself, and resolves to be for him only, and none else. (2.)
Another expression of this is by the giving of the hand, Romans 6.13. compared
with 2 Chronicles. 30.8. Now be not stiffnecked as your Fathers were, but yield your
selves to the Lord; (...)
Hebrew; Give the hand to the Lord, as the Margin of some Bibles has it, which
has some resemblance to marriage also forenamed; wherein as there is an
express Promise by word of mouth, so there is at the same time a solemn and
public Giving of the hand each to other. And this action has many times the
virtue of a ratification of Promises, in our civil Commerce and mutual
contracts one with another. The Greek; Give glory to God; (...), LXX.
like that Jer. 13.16. give Glory to God by repentance and humiliation,
pressing to the same duty laid down in the first words, positively, though
there negatively; be not stiffnecked in both places, yield your selves to the
Lord in our translation. (3.) Another expression we shall said, Psalm. 50.5.
Gather my Saints which have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice; Hebrew; Cut a
Covenant, (...)
for at holy Covenants, the Sacrifices were cut asunder, and both the persons
went between the parts, to show that there was a mutual stipulation and
engagement, not one person only was tied, Ainsw.
but both did thus reciprocally transact one with another, and were
interchangeably obliged to and assured of the terms therein contained.

10. Further, this is no more than is already done virtually by us in our
Baptism-Covenant, and there is no person of sound judgment but thinks himself
to be really and fully bound thereby, and woe be to every baptized person, that
lives and dies in the neglect of fulfilling that Covenant. And this kind of
express transacting between God, and our selves by speech or writing is but a
doing of the same thing in another way. So also in the Sacrament of the Supper
wherein every person takes both the Elements, the Bread and the Cup into his
own hand, denoting his receiving Christ to himself in particular, and giving up
himself to him, both receiving, and resigning himself up back again is employed
thereby.

11. Lastly, does not every Christian do the same thing, when he comes to die?
It is the last work that all men that die in Christ, and in the faith do, viz.
resign themselves up particularly, Body and Soul into the hands of God; and as
the Apostle phraseth it, Commit their Souls unto him after all their well-doing
as into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4. ult. How comfortably,
freely, and confidently will they do it then, having done it solemnly before
hand in their lifetime? for this we have our blessed Savior for a pattern: See
Luke 23.46. Cried with a loud voice and said, Father into thy hands I Commend
my Spirit, and gave up the Ghost; the very same words that David the type of
Jesus Christ did use when he was alive (in his lifetime) Psalm. 31.5. Into thy
hands I Commend my Spirit, thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth! in the
doing of this work, when he was in great danger of death by the malice, and
mischief his enemies contrived against him: the same did Steven the Protomartyr
at his dissolution and violent death, Act. 7.59. in effect though not in
express words. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

And thus much for the lawfulness, and warrantableness of it, which is the
first thing.

Secondly, that it is expedient, necessary, and advantageous, appears very
plainly by these things following.

1. The person gets true, and full assurance that the work is once done indeed,
so that the matter will no longer hang in doubt, or if there be any doubts, and
objections arise at any time, this draught will be a testimony of it, which God
will never disown, it being done in sincerity of heart, or if not this way, yet
if there has been a transacting by word of mouth, wherein an interest in God
has been humbly and heartily accepted and embraced, and serious giving up our
selves to God totally and for ever; I say, if it has been done in this manner
the Soul will have some ground of evidence, and some plea with God, when in the
midst of detections and temptations. This puts me in mind of one poor Soul,
that was in a mixture of Soul and bodily distraction together; who though then
as not otherwise, in many things and cases sensible, yet being set to prayer by
some persons that visited her, whereof some were Ministers, and I my self was
one, she made use of this passage in these words or to this effect; Lord,
Expressing here her came.
thou know me poor by name, and thou know that in such a place (naming it
both House and Room) I had Communion with thee, and thou did give me
assurance of interest in thee, and being thine. And soon after through her
bodily distraction taken off from the duty, and diverted: So that this is one
beneficial advantage, that comes by it, that the work is surely and irrevocably
done, and so shall be able with humble boldness to plead with God for our
acceptance with him in any Soul-distresses we are, or may come into; and being
once thus in good earnest done, shall never be undone, for that the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.33. and though we are a people,
that shall while we are in the World, through infirmity break Covenant, yet it
is God's Covenant-promise, to forgive our iniquities; and remember our sins no
more, Jer. 31.3.4. And it is not every infirmity, that shall utterly disannul
this Covenant, and break off this marriage-Covenant, and dissolve this
marriage-knot: see Jer. 3. throughout; If we heartily, and mournfully return to
him, as ver, 22, etc. For God is a God that keeps Covenant, and mercy to a
thousand Generations, to them that love him and (make it their whole bent and
endeavor to) keep all his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 7.9. hence did David fetch
Comfort in his personal, and domestical troubles. 2 Samuel 23.5. Although my
house be not so with God, yet he has made with me an Everlasting Covenant
ordered in all things, and sure, for this is all my Salvation, and all my
desire, although he make it not to grow.

2. This will be a most strongty and bond to keep our hearts close unto God in
dependence and Obedience. The best are used to find their hearts hang loose,
and to stand at a distance through the remainders of unbelief, that makes their
hearts depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. Now what a spur and goad will the
Consideration of this be to us, that we are in Covenant, and have solemnly
listed up our hands to God, and yielded our selves to him? How will this
quicken us when we be sluggish, and backward, and our hearts dull, and slow in
our says and dependence, and in our holy Conversation and Obedience? if any
thing in the World will draw on the Soul that is withdrawing, or drawing back,
this will do much, to consider how we have bound our selves, and that if we
prove not steadfast in this Covenant, both our tongues and our hands will
witness against us; and that this will be, as it were an handwriting, (of our
own act and deed) another day against us.

3. This will be a strong motive to keep the heart off more firmly from, and
against all sin; for this is the first thing that is done in this so solemn a
work, even to renounce all others that have been as the Lords of, and over the
Soul. Say as the Church did Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides
thee have had dominion over us; but by thee only, will we make mention of thy
name. The Consideration of the mischief of which, was the great motive to draw
her to the disclaiming of them, insomuch, that these two things laid together,
will make the person that lays them to heart, resolve, to follow the Apostles
direction. Romans 6.12. That they will not let sin reign in their mortal bodies,
that they may obey it in the lusts thereof. Their Covenant with hell, and death
being broken, and dissolved, they resolve through grace, that they will not be
Servants any more to diverse lusts and pleasures, nor will they be as they have
been any more taken captive by Satan at his will. 2 Timothy 2.26.


4. This will be a means to banish all hard and evil thoughts of God, and to
cherish and foster good thoughts of him. For hereby we shall look on God as at
peace with us; and our selves as friends, and reconciled unto him. So that we
shall not be filled with jealousy about his love, nor slavish fear of his
wrath, and indignation; which we were before under in our estate of nature
being an estate of wrath, for we were by nature children of wrath as well as
others, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.3. So that now the strise, is at an end, and
the Controversy is taken up, that there was between God and us: and so these
thoughts and suspicions, that he is armed with vengeance against us, and that
it may be speedily executed upon us are removed: So that as Jacobs fear of
Laban was taken off, when there was a solemn Covenant entered into by them on
both sides; so the slavish fear in the Soul will be hereby for the present
removed, and by degrees abate, Genesis 31.
and decay in the Christians heart more and more.

5. All our unwillingness to come unto and before God, will be taken away, and
our boldness in coming to him to the throne of grace will be increased: yea it
will breed an earnest longing to be in Communion with him: for though two
cannot walk together except they be agreed; yet they can meet and walk
delightfully together, when they are agreed. All that loathness and shieness
will be taken out from us, and we shall be brought to delight in his presence:
See it in David who could say God was his God, he could also long to come and
appear before God as the heart pants after the Waterbrooks, Psalm. 42.1, 2.

An Answer to some few Objections lying in the way that might seem to be made
against this way of transacting with God, in particular and express Covenant.

Object. 1. There is no precept for this in all the Scripture.

Answ. 1. It is enough that it is warranted by the practice, and example of the
Saints of God, in the Word, (which is proved abundantly in the second
Scripture-evidence, Sup. p. 16. Where it has been sufficiently showed that
God's Saints have particularly owned God, and appropriated him unto themselves,
as their own God: Psalm. 67.6. God even our own God shall bless us; and have
also engaged themselves to God, in a particular manner in duty and obedience,
which is ground enough for such a practice.

Answ. 2. To the real, and serious, and inward doing of this, all are bound
that intend to be saved. Romans 6.13. Yield your selves unto God, with 2 Chronicles.
30.8. and Romans 12.1. I beseech you Brethren by the mercies of God, that ye
present your bodies, a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, etc.

Answ. 3. I grant that we are not bound to this external formal doing of it, in
such a manner, as a matter that is necessary to Salvation, so as that every
Christian must of necessity do it, if he ever means to go to Heaven, or partake
of the benefit of the Covenant (this has been spoken to before also) but as an
excellent expedient, for the comfort of our Souls, in assuring our selves of
the partaking of the benefits of the Covenant, and keeping the heart more firm
and close to God, in an holy Covenant-Conversation, and walking in order to
Salvation.

Answ. 4. This is but doing the same thing in another way, which has been
already done, and that often (it may be) and many ways too, as to the substance
thereof; for I take these things for granted, (1.) That every true Christian
has done this already in his heart. (2.) That every person in the visible
Church has done this virtually in his Baptism, (as before) and in the
primitive times, none were baptized without an express Covenanting, wherein
they renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and engaged themselves to
Christ, and promised to obey him: I shall refer you for more (yet not much) of
this to Mr. Baxters Saints rest, Edit. 8. p. 149. Edit. 9. p. 143. The Question
was proposed. Abrenuncias? that is, do thou renounce? etc. Ans. Abrenuncio, I
do renounce. Q. Credis? do thou believe? Credo, I do believe. Now if it was
done actually by persons aged at their Baptism, afore-time, openly, and before
others, though in few words, Why is it not warrantable to be done by any now,
in a more full and large way either openly, or privately in this express way,
here treated and discoursed of, as God shall incline the hearts of any amongst
us? Further consider, (3.) How often do men do it actually in their own persons
at the Lord's Table? even as often as they come to partake of the same. For
what else is set forth by these Sacramental actions of every Communicant in
their participation, that being also a Sign and Seal of the Covenant, they take
God to? be their God, and Jesus Christ to be their alone Savior, and every one
does this for himself, and by the same reaching forth of the hand, as he does
receive Jesus Christ unto himself, so does he as it were give up the hand to
God, and thereby his whole self to Jesus Christ, (according to the former
observation, Sup. script. Arg. 10
) to become one of his people, and Servants, thereby resigning himself up to
him, to be wholly his, and at his Command. (4.) How often do men do this also
on their sick-beds? their resolution is very earnest and strong, and how often
does it issue forth into express promise? how apt are men to purpose and
promise both, when death and judgment look them in the face? that they will
become the Lords, are grieved that sin has swayd them so much, and that they
have served it so long, and if it ever please the Lord to spare them, recover
them, and continue them longer in the world, they will be only for the Lord,
and for no other, that they will drudg for the World, fulfill the lusts of the
flesh no longer, nor ever any more as they have done, make provision for it to
fulfill them. These things are not only determined in men's breasts, but uttered
by their tongues, and with their mouths too, at such a time: and is not this
the same thing, the lawfulness of which we hereby labor to justify and
establish? (5.) Nay further yet, we find this occasionally done, by Gods
Saints, upon some extraordinary deliverance out of eminent and particular
troubles. See this clear in the Prophet David's practice, Psalm. 116.16. O Lord,
truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thine handmaid, thou
have loosed my bonds. The Psalm was penned as most (and most rationally too)
agree, upon the same occasion as Psalm. 18. (as may be seen by comparing several
verses of that and this together): Now upon occasion of this deliverance (which
was from the hand of all his enemies, and from the hand of Saul, Ps. 18.
Title.) the Prophet breaks out into express acknowledgment of his obligation to
God; and of his own resignation of himself to him accordingly. Now all these
things being considered, and seriously laid together, may we not reasonably
conclude, that a person upon deliberate and weighty consideration, may take any
such form of words, as are drawn up by either of these serious Divines Mr. G.
or Mr. A. or any other, or any that they may draw up themselves from their own
experience, according to the Scripture, and having done the preparatory duties
there directed to, fall down before God, and solemnly undertake the engagement
there proposed, and a verbal profession of his acceptance of God, and his Son,
and Covenant, according to the tenor of that form there drawn up and expressed.

Object. 2. But (says a worthy Divine) God never makes a Covenant with a
single person personally, Mr. Wills's morning Exercise on Romans 5.12.
and individually, that all others are unconcerned in it, but with whomsoever
God enters into Covenant, that person is a representative of others, and is to
be looked upon as a public person; otherwise God should make as many Covenants
as there are persons, which is the greatest absurdity to assert, etc.

Answ. 1. This is true, if it be supposed that God makes different Covenants as
to the matter of them, as the Covenants of Works and Grace were; and this is
the very ground upon which this passage was uttered, and that which it does
purposely drive at, it being spoken about the Covenant with Adam and all
mankind in him, and with Jesus Christ and the elect of God in him: For as Adam
in the first Covenant of Works, stood as the representative of all mankind,
that should descend from him by ordinary Generation; so Christ in the second
Covenant of Grace, did stand as a public undertaker, in the behalf of all
those, whom God had appointed to Salvation.

Answ. 2. But this does not hinder, but that God may enter into Covenant with
many persons, particularly and individually, that Covenant being the same with
all and every one of them: not only with the person of the representative
himself, but also with every particular person of that Collective body included
in him; that is to say, every particular person of that numerous multitude
obliged to God, upon the terms of one an the same Covenant, in that common or
public person, may sue out claim and appropriate, or apply to themselves in
due time the benefits thereof, and also, may particularly transact with God, in
an holy giving up themselves to him, for the performance (through the strength
of his own grace) of that duty, to which they are bound in the participation of
those privileges. So God did with all and every particular of mankind under
the Covenant with Adam. And so with every particular elect person in the
Covenant of Grace through Jesus Christ: these two do not interfere, nor clash
one with or against another, (viz) God taking such a number though never so
numerous, or many, into Covenant in the representative, and yet entering into
Covenant particularly, and with every one of them apart, and in their own
persons, insomuch that every one of them may be concerned to lay hold on it, as
being bound in the same terms with the representative.

Object. 3. But does not this seem too much to savor of separation, and look
too much like that dividing practice of some in the Church, who, many of them,
otherwise good men (as it is to be hoped) do yet gather themselves out of, and
separate themselves from the Communion of the visible Church, and enter into an
express and explicit Covenant one with another? how may these two be said to
differ one from another?

A. For the solution of this Objection several things are to be considered.

1. It will tend much to the clearing of the case, to unfold in brief the
nature of that express Covenant, of these persons mentioned; for by discerning
what this is, we shall be the better able to discern the difference between it,
and that we are now discoursing of.

For the nature of that Covenant (as far as by reading yet I do understand) it
is this: A Combination or joining together of several Christians, by mutual
Consent, and open and express Covenanting (to use their own very words) to walk
together with such a body of Saints; in a participation of all the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ.

2. But to this we may say, as God of the Jews services, who has required this
at their hands? to make such a Covenant as this is? we cannot find any such
thing in all the whole Word of God, either Commanded by Christ, or practiced by
any former primitive Church. It is true, the Scriptures mention a general
implicit Covenant of the Gospel (as some Divines call it in opposition to that
of those Brethren fore-spoken of) or Covenant of Christianity, which all
professing Christians entered into, by their admission unto the Sacrament of
Baptism, and live in the profession, of and hold to, whereby they are bound to
acknowledge God as their only Lord, and Jesus Christ as their only Head, Husband
and Commander, that they will conform to all his Laws and Ordinances appointed
in his Word: but of peoples openly Covenanting so to do with one another, and
only in this or that Society, as it were apart from all the rest of the
particular Congregations of the Catholic Visible Church, we never read of: As
favorable a judgment past on this practice as any I know, Mr. Hudson of the
Catholic vis. Chapter p. 19.
I shall insert of a dissenting Brother from it. [I dare not make a particular
explicit holy Covenant, to be the form (...) particular Church -- because
(...) no mention of any such Covenant, besides the general, imposed on
Churches, nor Example, or Warrant for it in all the Scriptures; and therefore I
cannot account it an Ordinance of God, but a prudential humane device, to keep
the members together, which in some places and cases may happily be of good
use, so it be not urged as an Ordinance of God, and so it be not used, to
enthral any, and abridg them of liberty of removal into other Places, and
Congregations for their convenience, or urged as the form of a Church: I deny
not that mutual Consent of persons within such a vicinity to join together
constantly in the Ordinances of God under the inspection of such and such
officers is requisite to a particular Congregation.] To which join that which
another says; The Covenant of the Gospel or Christianity, Mr. Cawdrey
inconsist. of Indop. with the Script. and it self p. 101.
as it engages them to God, so to one another, to walk in all the ways of God,
and to watch over one another, and that primarily too; their explicit consent
only is a renewing of that Covenant (...) ties the knot faster to a necessary
duty.

3. The consideration and laying together of all these things, will help us to
see wherein the difference of these two do ly, which is very great and manifold.

1. This express Covenanting openly to walk in such a way, etc. is not at all
warranted in Scripture as this is, though not by any express precept, yet by
prophesy, and practice of the Saints of God, as may be (before) seen; to which
add one more of Jacob to all the rest; see Genesis 28.20, 21. And Jacob vowed vow,
saying, if God will be with me, and will keep me in the way that I go, and will
give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers
house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. Which words are not to be looked
upon as an indenting with God, or proposing conditions to God, upon which he
would (or otherwise would not) take or accept God to be his; but a choice, and
ready acceptance of God, upon any (his own) conditions be they never so mean or
low, according as he had promised to be a God to him, as well as to Abraham and
Isaac before him.

2. This open Covenanting (viz.) with this or that Society, is apparently
tending to division, Mr. Cawdrey p. 101. 4 last lines to the end of that parag.
and separation, and thereby the members of one Congregation are parted from
another, as to the participation of all Gospel Ordinances, but this is not so
in this of our particular transacting with God, this being the only fruit to
bring the heart more near to God, and unto a better conformity to his will in
an holy Conversation.

3. In the term to which it drives, the one to a Combination one with another,
and so to this or that particular Society, but the other only to a more firm
union of the whole person, in heart and life, to God and Jesus Christ.

4. They differ in this, in that they make their open Covenanting to be the
formality of a Churchmember, and so this must follow, that a Church cannot be
without it, nor are there any rightly admitted but in this way, which nowhere
has a Probatum est by Christ, or any of the Apostles; but as to this
particular transacting with God (of which we treat) we say, that it neither
gives being to a Churchmember, nor yet to a member of Christ; for this a man
may be, though this be not done as abovesaid (viz.) a true member of Christ,
and his Church too; only this excites to the keeping of the heart and life in
better order toward and before God.

5. The one is privately done, between God and a Christians own heart, in his
Closet, the other is openly done, before the Face of a whole Society.

The sum of all is this: 1. The one has warrant, Gods Word in the other has
no Foundation there. 2. The one tends to separation, the other not so, only for
a man to separate himself from Sin and Satan, to God and his Service, but not
from any part of God's Church. 3. The one is absolute, the other relative. 4.
Without the one (if we believe them) no man can be a true Churchmember, but
without this formal express doing of the other a man may be a true member of
Christ and his Church too. Only let him look to it, that he truly believes in
Christ, repents of sin, and obeys God. 5. The one done privately, the other
publicly and openly. I shall close up all with a serious Wish or two about
this matter.

1. How could I heartily wish, that no person that is virtually in Covenant
with God, were Ignorant of that Covenant, wherein he is bound to him. Ah! how
many be there, that Consider not at all that they are, nor know or understand
what it is so to be. How sad is it as to be Ignorant of all others, so of this
so precious a privilege, and comfortable estate! I wish that all persons would
seriously mind it more, and meditate of it, that they may apprehend, discern,
and perceive those obligations that lie upon them.

2. How could I further wish with all my Soul, that those that cannot but
confess, and acknowledge this, would not so slight and neglect it as they do,
remember often that the vows of God are already upon you in some sense, as to
your Baptismal Covenant and vow, and is this a light matter? is God's
Condescension thus to vouchsase to deal with you nothing? is your resignation
of your selves, and obligation to an holy God nothing to you? however you do
make light of it, it will be requited of you every one another day.

3. How could I again earnestly wish, that every Soul would often seriously
renew their Covenant with the Lord. Renew your Repentance, and Godly Sorrow for
your sins and failings, and for your being unsteadfast in the Covenant, and
renew your actings of Faith, afresh on the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the
Mediator of the Covenant, fuing out the benefits of his blood, the blood of the
Covenant, which are the privileges contained in the Covenant; yea further,
that you would deal in this particular express way, debated here, proved, and
evidenced not only to be warrantable, but also wonderously profit. able, follow
those serious and spiritual directions proposed by Mr. R. A. that so you may.
once in good earnest complete this work.

4. Having dealt thus seriously, I wish you yet still to be careful and
watchful over your selves, that you do not forsake this Covenant, that you
would consider, what a weighty matter is done now by you, how sad to be found a
Covenant-breaker: often think how grievously God complains of such persons,
Psalm. 78.8. And might not be as their Fathers, a stubborn, and rebellious
Generation, a Generation that set not their heart aright, and whose Spirit was
not steadfast with God; and further ver. 37. For their heart was not right with
him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant; and again. ver. 57. But turned
back, and dealt unfaithfully like their Fathers, they were turned aside like a
deceitful bow: And how severe Go Almighty will prove, and show himself against
all those that do thus abominable take his name in vain.

5. Finally, I wish all persons to see to it that they walk worthy of it, and
answerable to it, in that holy, strict, pure, and upright way of Obedience,
which God calls for in that cheerful dependence on God, and Jesus Christ, and
in that pure Conversation which the holy Covenant requires. Suffer not the
remainders of unbelief in your hearts to cause you to depart from the living
God; and let not that hand be lifted up against God, which you have lifted up
to him in this transaction. Beware of your selves, that your practice and
Conversation be no unsuitable, but every way conformable thereunto; that so you
give not God cause to upbraid you, as we read, Psalm. 50.16, 17. What have thou
to do -- to take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction, and
castest my words behind thee? I wish unfeignedly that all those upon whom these
strong and holy obligations lie, might have a Conversation alike to that of
Levi, whom God commends as a pattern unto others, and reproves the Priests for
difformity thereunto: (I know this Covenant spoken in this place, had a
peculiar respect to that Tribe) yet his holy Conversation, is in a most strict
and exact manner possible to be imitated by every true Christian in Govenant
with God; see it recorded Mal. 2.5. My Covenant was with him of Life and Peace,
and I gave them to him, for ohc fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid
before my name. verse. 6. The Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was
not found in his lips, he walked with me in Peace and Equity, and turned
(himself chiefly, as well as) many (others) from iniquity. The Lord keep, and
uphold us by his free Spirit, in an holy Covenant-Conversation, answerable to
our professed, and I hope real Espousals to God, and Jesus Christ here, until
the marriage of the Lamb be come in the Kingdom of Heaven: Amen.

FINIS.
THE NEARNESS OF God's Vovenant People Unto Him.

Being the Sum of two Sermons, preached on Psalm, 148. 14th verse. last part.

Added as a motive to provoke Christians to, and to promote the great design of
particular express-Covenanting with God.

By SAMUEL VVINNEY, sometimes Minister of the Gospel at Glaston in
Somersetshire.

London, Printed for Thomas Cockeril at the Atlas in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange, 1675.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
Appiness is the Vote of all men: But though all desire it, yet most take the
wrong course to the attaining of it; as if one should intend a voyage to the
East and Sail quite Westward, Austin reckons up 288 opinons of the Philosophers
about Happiness, and they have all shot wide of the mark. We must not weigh
happiness populari trutina, in the World's Balance, but in the balance of the
Sanctuary. Doubtless the Psalmist did hit upon the right. Psalm. 144.15. Happy
is the people whose God is the Lord. God is the Summum bonum, or chief Good. In
the chief Good there must be. 1. Suavity, it must be delitious, causing a
jubilation, or ecstasy of Joy. And where can we such those pure, quintessential
Comforts, which do ravish the Soul with sweet delight, but in God? In Deo duad
im dulcedine delectatur anima, immo rapitur, Aug.
Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of Joy. 2. Transcendency; the chief
Good must have an innate, sparkling Beauty, Superior to all other. God is the
spring of Being, who does enrich and bespangle the whole Creation; the Cause is
more noble than the Effect; He must needs infinitely outshine all sublunary
Glory. God is better than the Soul, than the Angels, than Heaven. 3. Duration;
the chief Good must run parallel with Eternity. (...) Chrysostom.
God abides King for ever. Psalm. 29.10. Eternity is a Flower of his Crown; he
is an inexhaustible treasury of Goodness. So that God being the chief Good, the
enjoyment of God is the sole thing which Crowns us with Blessedness. And how
does God come to be our God but by choosing him? It is one thing for the
Judgment to approve of God, and another thing for the Will to choose him. Many
are in their Judgments convinced that God is the most amiable Object, but they
are swayed another away: their Corruptions are stronger than their Convictions.
But we must upon mature deliberation (...) Cleave to the Lord, Acts 11.23. We
must choose him though with Affliction, Heb. 11.25. Religion is not a matter of
chance Nemo fortuito fit bonus.
but of choice, Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the way of truth. This choosing of
God for our God. 1. Presupposes an enlightened mind. We must understand those
illustrious Perfections which are in God, his Wisdom, Holiness, Veracity,
Bounty; as Knowledge ushers in Faith. Psalm. 9.10. so it precedes choice. 2. It
denotes a singling out God from all other Objects to set out heart upon. While
others Court the World, and like Apollo embrace the Lawrel-Tree in stead of
Daphne, the Believer says as Asaph, Ps. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and as Jacob Genesis 28.21. The Lord shall be my God. This Choosing God is that in
which the vital part of Christianity consists: Affections not grounded upon a
judicious Choice die and vanish. That fruit cannot last which wants a root to
grow upon. This choosing God is a blessed sign we love God, and belong to him;
our choosing God is but the result and effect of his choosing us, John 15.19.
And where there is this choosing of God, there will be a davoting (...) selves
to him. Psalm 9.38. and (...) entering into Covenant with him; Jer, 50.5. Come
and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant (...) follows
(...) Bond, and (...) a con^^^^ (...) Vow, (...) so often re^^^^ (...) ratified
in the (...) Supper? These things are the subject matter of the ensuing
Treatise, wherein the Reverend Author has (so far as I have read) taken good
pains, and given the World a taste of that Savoury gracious Spirit which
resides in him: his whole Design in this book, is, to discover the intrinsecal
Excellencies in God, which may hasten our Choice of him for our supreme solace
and (...). As also to make us break off our Covenant with Sin, and engage in
Covenant with the high God: by virtue whereof, we procure that great Dignity to
be matched into the Crown of Heaven. The Lord give an effectual blessing, and
success to this present Discourse; and cause Souls to enter into a more strict
way of Commun^^^ with him: Which is the earnest prayer of him who is,

Thy Friend and well-wisher in Spiritual-Affairs, Thomas Watson.
October. 28. 1674.
THE PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
I Do here ingenuously confess, that taking up a Book in my house, and looking
on the names of some books at the end of it, I there met with a discovery of a
Discourse on this same Subject, both for matter and text, a Discourse I say, of
a very Reverend Divine, Mr. Richard Vines; but I can and must as truly
acquaint thee, that it was after these Meditations of mine were studied,
preached, and intended for the press: and having transiently viewed it (for I
have not had time, for various diversions, to read it over, though I believe
near as short as my own, and indeed one main reason was the fitting my own for,
and hasting it to the press; I find that his and mine differ very much as to
the methed of the handling of this blessed Privilege; and I have read from St.
Austin, that it is very profitable, for diverse to handle the same point, alii
sic, alii autem sic, some in this wise, some otherwise. Whatsoever came from
him must needs be excellent good, yet since that may be out of the press, and
known to very few but in and about London, and scarce to be got; I judge this as
it cannot detract from the worth, so nor prejudice the esteem, and I hope will
never hinder the pausal of that; leaving both that, this and thee to the,
blessing of the Almighty, and not daring, but out of an ingenuous strain
heartedness to give thee this notice, being my self accidentally acquainted
with it;

I remain thine in the Service of the Gospel, S.W.
From my Study, Aug. 28. 1674.
Gods Vovenant People near unto him, Psalm. 148. part of the last verse.
A People near unto him.
THis Psalm is of the number of them, that are called Eucharistical, penned by
way of thanksgiving to God, wherein, the Prophet does exhort all the Creatures
to that Duty, both that are in Heaven, and that are one Earth too; and I cannot
better distribute them, than it is already done in the Contents presixt before
it, with a very little variation. 1. We find all things in Heaven; all things
Celestial exhorted so to do, in the four first verses, Praise the Lord from the
Heavens, ver. 1. Praise him all ye his Angels, verse. 2. All his Hosts praise
him, Sun, Moon, Stars, verse. 3. etc. and there is good Reason subjoined, verse.
5, 6. For he commanded, and they were created, and he has established them for
ever and ever, etc. 2. All things Terrestrial from the 7th verse. to the 13th
verse. wherein we may observe, all things i^a^i^ate, or life-less are exhorted
to bless God, with all things animate or living. 1. Irrational Creatures,
Beasts and all Cattle, cre^ping things. 2. Rational Creatures of all ranks,
Kings of the Earth, and all P^inces, and all Judges of the Earth; of all ages,
young M^n and Maidens, old Men and Children: and here is good reason here
subjoy^'d too. first, from what God is in himself. verse. 13. His Name is
excellent, and his Glory above the Earth and Heavens, 2dly, From what he has
done for his own People, verse. 14, and ult. He has exalted the Horn of his
People, that is, the dignity, prosperity, and plenty of his People. After which
the Prophet goes on to set forth the title, that is given to them; they are
said to be his people, and ^^^led Saints; then specifies who they be (viz.) the
people^ of Israel, the alone people, that were in Covenant with God in all the
world at that time. 3. Then shows their Privilege, what their happiness was, in
the words of the Text, They are a people near unto him, So that in short the
words lay before us, the privilege, happiness and dignity of the Saints and
People of God, that are in Covenant with him; which I shall lay before you in
this Observation.

Doct. That God's Church and People are near unto him: or, God's Saints, and
Vovenant People, are a people near unto him: or, as word for word, it may be
rendered, His near people, ^ssi^^m pronom^n pro Sep^r^to. (...) pro (...) M. P^
syn^ (...).
God's true Israel is his near people. And besides what is spoken in this Text,
I shall confirm it by the consideration of one Text of Scripture more, in which
we may observe one passage, wherein the very Privilege that is here expressly
spoken, is strongly employed. Jer. 6.8. Be thou instructed, O Jerus^lem, lest my
soul depart from thee, according to the Original Language, (...) ^e lu^a^a
r^^^aa^ a^ima (...) abs (...) Buxt. (...).
Lest my soul be disjoynted from thee, a metaphor from a Limb thrust out of his
place, and put out of joint. There is as great a Nearness between God and his
people, (a Nearness of Union, of which afterward) as there is between a man's
Limbs and Joints one to the other, and you know, that they are so near, that it
is an impossible thing to separate them, without great pain and difficulty one
from another Intimating, what a pain and grief it is to God to leave or cast
off a people, Annotat. in Loc.
whom he is once in league with, and with how much difficulty he is drawn
thereunto.

All that I shall open in the Explication of this Truth, I shall draw up into
this

Query; How, and in what regard, are God's Saints, and Vovenant People said to
be a People near unto him, and whence it is. And that through God's assistance,
I shall endeavor to open to you, in five or six particulars.

First, They are said to be near to God, in regard of God's Nearness unto them,
and so this Nearness is a passive Nearness: and some critically observe,
Exponipo test passiv^ q. d. populo cui ille est propinquus. Muis ex. Ab. Ez, M.
P. sy^, Crit.
they must be Near to God if he be Near to them. Nearness comes to pass, by the
approaching motion of one thing to another, now if God be nigh unto his People,
and approaches unto them, certainly then, they must be near unto him also, and
so there is a mutual Nearness between God and his People; this is according to
the direction the holy Ghost gives by the Apostle, James 4.8. Draw nigh to God,
and he will draw nigh to you. Now that God is Near unto his People, the
Scripture is as full of it, as can be desired. Deuteronomy. 47. It is the great
Commendation of the People of Israel: For what nation is there so great who
has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call
upon him for. Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him.
The like passage in Psalm. 34.18. The Lord is nigh to them that are of a broken
heart, and saves such as be of a Contrite Spirit. This then is the first
regard, wherein Gods People are said to be Near to him; (viz.) God's Nearness
unto them.

2. In regard of Affection to them, he is, and is said to be Near to them. Lord
help us to believe it, God's People sometimes cannot hardly believe it; you know
these People whom we by love account dear, we account also to be very Near to
us. Dearness and Nearness are here Convertible. Now God's People are the dearly
beloved of his Soul, Jer. 12.7. in Original but one word, I have given the
dearly beloved of my Soul. [ Heb. the love] into the hands of her enemies. And
that is one of the titles Christ gives his Church, throughout the whole Song of
Solomon; My Love, my Dove, etc. So near to him the Church desires to be, that
Song. 8.6. she prays, Set me as a Seal on thy heart, What is the meaning of
that? in short, love me dearly, and love makes as strong an impression on the
heart as a Seal does upon any thing, to which it is applied; she desires to be
near the heart of Christ, and that his Love toward her may have deep
impressions there, as the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, had on the
breast plate of Judgment, which Aaron did bear on his heart, when he went in
into the Holy-place. Exodus 28.21, 29. Further, she prays there, as a Seal upon
thine arm, for love is as strong as death; in which she desires also his
Compassion, and Affection. The Lord expresses the same thing in a like phrase,
to his Church: saying, Behold I have graven thee on the palms of my hands, Isa.
49.16. I remember the Lord makes use of one expression more, to set it forth
by, the signet on the right hand, and that is near, in place and affection too.
Jer. 22.24. where the Lord speaks of Coniah, one of the Kings of Judah, and
says to this purpose! As I live says the Lord, though Coniah the Son of
Jehojakim, King of Judah, were their Signet on my right hand, yet would I pluck
thee thence, etc. A Man's Signet, that he wears on his right hand, what an
esteem and love has he for that! yet says God, though he was as the Signet on
my right hand, would I pluck thee thence: Sin will make a separation between a
person or people, though near to him. And that is the second thing, God's
People are his dearly beloved, and so they are near upon the account of
Affection.

3. In regard of Relation to God, they are nearly related to God; there is a
Spiritual kin, and alliance between God and his people, you shall find nearness
and kin are Convertible in the Scripture. Lev. 21.2. But for his kin that is
near unto him, that is, for his Mother, and Father, and for his Son, and for
his Daughter, and for his Brother, and ver. 3. and for his Sister, -- That is
nigh unto him, etc. So that Kin and Nearness are joined together, words of the
same import.

Now there is a twofold Relation between God and his People, which makes the Kin
to be so Near.

1. By Regeneration and the newbirth.

2. By the Marriage-Covenant; and blessed are the people, that are in such a
Nearness unto God!

First by Regeneration, and the new birth: that is one way the kin comes in,
(if I may so speak) and therefore you shall find throughout the Scripture, that
they are said to be born of God, and born again; and hence is it that all that
are regenerate are called the Sons and Daughters of the living God, and who are
nearer to us than our Children; these are the Children of God, being born of
him. Joh. 1.12. As many as believed, to them gave he power, to become the Sons
of God, How came they to be the Sons of God? ver. 13. shows, which were born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
So in the Epistle of John throughout, are they said to be born of God: Now how
near is the Father and Son, I need not tell you that are Pa^ents. So near is
the relation between God and his People, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my Sons, and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. What a
Promise is this! he will receive them to be as near unto him, as he will
receive his own Son that serves him. And what a deal of Nearness of Affection
as well as Relation is there in this case, Behold, what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us! that we should be called the Sons of God. 1 John
3.1. You that are parents, think on this; when you see your Children in the
streets, or any where about you, Oh how are your hearts drawn out after them;
learn hence, to be affected with the nearness, both of Relation and Affection,
that is between God and his People; you cannot love your Children though your
hearts run out after them, as God loves his Children; all the affection of all
the parents in the World to their Children, is but the drops of a bucket in
Comparison of God's love to his people and his Children.

2. By Marriage-Covenant are they Near to God. And this is so near a Relation,
that all other kin are to be left for this Relation; they that are married, as
to their Relation in the flesh, are become one flesh, so near they are, Mat.
19.5. Just as Adam said of the woman, when God brought her to him, this is bone
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, Genesis 2.23. Beloved, Gods people are his
married people, and they are his espoused people; full of this is the Scripture
in many places. 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one husband, that I may
present you a chaste Virgin to Christ. Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto
me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me, in righteousness and in judgment
and in loving kindness, and in mercies. I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness, etc. Jer. 3.14. turn Oh backsliding Children, says the Lord, for
I am married unto you, Isa. 54.5. For thy Maker is thine husband, the Lord of
hosts is his name. Oh what an husband is this! Every woman is apt to admire her
own husband, but what an husband is this of Souls! Mark, how the Apostle does
improve this natural marriage to a Spiritual use. 1 Cor. 6.16, 17. What, know
ye not that he that is joined to an Harlot is one body? for he says, ye shall
be one flesh, ver. 17. but he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit. The
Apostles design is, to take off people from Fornication, and the argument is
taken from the design of God in Marriage: God made Marriage that there might be
an union betwixt the Man and the Woman. Now presently after Marriage, for
persons to run away one from another, for a Man to make himself one body with
an Harlot, it subverts the design of God in Marriage; and the Apostle improves
it, in the next words, He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit. A Spiritual
mystical Union there is betwixt God and his People, and I hope many that heard
and now read this, have experience and assurance of it, and the Lord grant that
more may. And here also are both the Nearnesses joined together, not only the
Nearness of Relation, but of Affection: if the Affection be strongly knit
between the husband and the wife, there is no Affection stronger than that, and
no less strong and faithful between God and the Soul. All which shows, that
they are related to God, as near as any Relation in the World.

3. I may yet add another Relation which is not so near as the former, that are
already mentioned, though near also; that sets forth this Nearness between God
and his People: and that is that of Servants, God is the Master, and his People
are the Servants too; and some Masters and Servants are very dear one to
another, a wonderful Nearness of Affection there is of some Masters to their
Servants, and of some Servants to their Masters; though no Relation as to the
flesh by affinity, or Consanguinity, yet they love them tenderly. I shall give
you an instance of this in the Centurion and his Servant, Luke 7.2. A certain
Centurions Servant who was Dear unto him was sick, and he showed that he was
dear to him in his tenderness of him, in that weak Condition he was; and
applying himself to Christ for him. Moses is called the Servant of the Lord,
Moses my Servant is dead, says God, and you know that expression, Moses my
Servant, is a token of the great Affection God had to him, and an high honor
and esteem, that after he was dead the Almighty conferred upon hm.

4. Nay observe, in the last place that God's People are as Near to him, and as
Dear to him, as any of our Household, and Family are to us. And therefore are
they called the household, and family of God. Ephesians. 2.13. But now in Christ
Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ:
Compare this with ver. 19. Now therefore, ye are no more strangers, and
foreigners, but fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God.
Yea to close up this particular, whatsoever Relation may express Nearness and
Dearness, in that Relation stand God and his People each to other; and thus is
the third thing fully proved.

4. They are near to God, in regard of Jesus Christ; and that on two accounts:
1. Of Union to Jesus Christ: 2. Of being purchased by Jesus Christ.


First, in regard of the Near Union there is between Christ and them. Nay and
add to this, the Near Relation that is between Christ and them; and there is
one, that renders these words, to this very sense and purpose: A people Near
unto him. One reads it very critically, Populo propinqui sui. h. ^. e^^s qui
accedit ad ips^^^, ut sacerdos, and s^d^t ad dexteram e^us, ut rex, ^empe
Christi. M. P. syn. ex Gel. and Cocceio.
the people of his Near one, or of him that is near to him, viz. God, of him
that comes near to him as a Priest, and sits at his right hand as a King,
meaning the Lord Jesus Christ; now Christ is near to God, and there is none
Nearer to God than he. So near that he is his only natural Son, the only
begotten Son of God; nay he is God himself, he is of the same substance with
the Father, one that accounts it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.
and therefore called God's fellow, Zech. 13.7. they are as near to him, as the
members are to the body, 1 Cor. 12.27. Now ye are the body of Christ and
members in particular. What a privilege is here! you are the body of Christ,
that is, the mystical body of Christ. Christ has a natural body, and a
mystical body, his natural body is that, which was made up of flesh and blood,
formed by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin: But then his mystical body
are all Christians, who are as really his members, as his Hands, and Arms, and
Feet, and Eyes, and Legs were members of his natural body. Christ is the
mystical Head of his Church and every believer is a mystical member of Jesus
Christ: how fully yet does the Apostle express this, to the same purpose, Ephesians.
5.30. For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone. He speaks
of the Marriage-Union in the neighboring verses, much like that of Adam
concerning Eve his wife, Genesis 2. This is bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh. But says the Apostle, This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning
Christ and his Church, ver. 32. Further, if you observe the Nearness of
relation they have to Jesus Christ, it will also appear how near they are to
God. They are near to him, in regard of their kin and alliance to Christ too;
He counts them in the nearest Relation to himself, and therefore they must be
near to God by virtue thereof: see it in that full Scripture, Mat. 12.46, etc.
One said to him (that is, to Christ) behold thy Mother, and thy Brethren stand
without, desiring to speak with thee. 48. But he answered, who is my Mother? --
etc. 49. And he stretched forth his hands toward his disciples, and said,
behold my Mother and my Brethren. verse. 50. For whosoever shall do the will of
my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother and Sister, and Mother.
Now if they be Near to Christ by virtue of relation, and Union, to him, as we
have seen, they are in both these regards one together, and proved; then
certainly, they must also be Near to God. So that that is the first regard,
they are near to God on the account of Christ, (viz.) their Union and Relation
to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, They are Near to God, with respect to the Lord Jesus Christ, in
regard they are the purchase of his blood. They are his purchased people, and
that makes them Near to God; he has bought them to God by his blood, out of
every kindred and tongue and nation. Rev. 5.9. by the Sufferings of Jesus
Christ, and by no other means, were we brought unto God. 1 Pet. 3.18. For
Christ also has once suffered for sins, the Just for the unjust, that he might
bring us to God. We had never been brought unto God, had it not been for the
blood of Jesus Christ, whereby we that were a-far off were made nigh. Ephesians.
2.14. Time was, when there was a great distance between God and them, and when
they were a great way off, what a sad case was that! but being bought by
Christ's blood, we were thereby brought nig^ unto God also. How so? Why, we
were brought nigh unto God by Christ's reconciliation, which he made for us to
God; by his death and sufferings. And we shall be wholly and fully brought nigh
unto God hereafter, when we shall be brought into the Kingdom of God, where God
and Jesus Christ are, and we shall be with him for ever. Here are we brought
nigh in regard of friendship, but not in regard of that fullness of fellowship
which we shall enjoy in Heaven. And therefore are we said to be absent from the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. while at home in the body. But there had been no enjoyment of
God here, nor of the Kingdom of God hereafter, if Christ had not suffered, but
now there is both: this is the fourth regard, in which we are said to be nigh
unto God.

5. They are said to be a People Near to God, in regard of their liberty of
free access unto God; they have the privilege of approaching nigh to the throne
of grace, and thereby draw nigh to God. And this the Apostle lays down by way
of Encouragement and Counsel in two places of the Hebrews, Heb. 4.16. Let us
therefore come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and
find Grace to help us in the time of need. And all this is still upon the
account of Jesus Christ, because we have such a great High Priest, that is
passed into the Heavens. Hence it is that we may come boldly to the Throne of
Grace. Compare with ver. 14. so Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart,
in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience. This is the great privilege of Christians, that they are made
Kings, and Priests unto God, and his Father. Now you know the Priests under the
law, it was their place, and office to draw nigh unto God; as does appear by
these two places of Scripture, Lev. 10.3. where when fire from Heaven had
devoured Nadab and Abihu, the two Sons of Aaron, for offering strange fire,
Moses uttered these words: This is that the Lord spoke, I will be Sanctified in
them that come nigh me. It was their Office to draw nigh to God, and for them
to draw nigh to God with strange fire, contrary to the very Command of God!
therefore fire from Heaven came down upon them. See likewise, Numb. 16.40.
There, upon the occasion of the destruction of Korab, Dathan and Abiram for
oftering Incense unto the Lord, which thing belonged only unto the Priest, the
Censers were laid aside to be a memorial to the Children of Israel, That no
stranger, that is not of the Seed of Aaron, come near to offer Incense before
the Lord: Now Jesus Christ having made us Kings and Priests to God, this is the
great Privilege, that we have by him, that we may draw nigh unto God, Heb.
7.19. and offer up our Prayers as Incense to God, together with all other our
holy Duties, as so many Spirltual Sacrifiees, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. 1 Pet 2.5. Being built upon him a Spiritual House, and Holy Priesthood,
to that very end. Jesus Christ is the person that does approach nigh to God in
our behalf. Jer. 30.21. I will cause him to draw near and he shall approach to
me, for who is he that engages his heart, to approach unto me! says the Lord.
Who is he that God will choose to draw near unto him? Literally and primarily it
may be understood of the civil Governor, but ultimately and consummately of
Jesus Christ, (who undertook not his Office without Gods call) who in the
behalf of believers, has engaged his heart to approach nigh unto God, and we
by him do draw nigh to God. Heb.10.19. Boldness we have to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, with Ephesians. 2.18. For through him we both have an
access, by one Spirit unto the Father; so Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness,
and access, with Confidence by the faith of him. And what a Privilege is this,
that every one of Gods Saints and People, may have the liberty as often as they
will, to approach nigh to God, to make their requests in every thing by Prayer
and Supplication!

6. They are said to be near unto God in regard of the Lord's choice and
separation of them, from, and and above all the People of the World unto
himself; they are so, both from all eternity, and also in time; and this is
spoken of particular persons, and a whose People jointly. Observe both Elect
according to the foreknowledg of God the Father; 1 Pet. 1.2. they are his
chosen people, Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
Foundation of the World: thus for persons. If you will observe it also, for a
nation, or a people; Psalm. 135.4. For the Lord has chosen Jacob for himself,
and Israel for his peculiar treasure. To which join that place Isa. 41.89. But
thou Israel, art my Servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the Seed of Abraham my
friend; thou whom I have taken from the ends of the Earth, and sard unto thee,
thou art my Servant; I have chosen thee and not cast thee away. Hence are they
said to be a separated People; so shall we be separated I and my People from
all the people that are upon the face of the Earth, (...) Same word as
separated Exodus
Exodus 33.16. so David Psalm. 4.3. The Lord has set apart him that is godly
unto himself, therefore said to be a people of his inheritance, (...) same as
Saints in Text
Deuteronomy 4.20. and the lot of his inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32.9. and his peculiar
treasure, Exodus 19.5. peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2.9. and Christ tells the
Disciples, That he had chosen them out of the World, and therefore the World
hated them, Joh. 15.19. so that not only from eternity but in time, not only
persons but nations, God has chosen to be his own people, above all the World
besides. And how great is the Privilege to be God's chosen and peculiar People!
and so made Near unto him: mind this I beseech you; What a matter of special
observance should this be to us, that God does take here and there, one, or
two, or three above others, specially when God Casts away all the Wicked of the
Earth like dross, as Psalm. 119.119. as a man throws dirt out of doors, then to
be chosen out of them that are cast away, what a special favor is this! not to
be cast out as dross, but made up as Jewels, and preserved in Jesus Christ,
what grace is this!

7. And Lastly, in regard of their daily chose walking with God, are they near
to him. A Christians Conversation is said to be a walking with God; so said of
Enoch, Genesis 22.24. twice together, it was his whole course, throughout all his
life till God took him. Yea more fully a walking together, and they that walk
together are Near each to other: though sin makes a distance that God and a
People cannot twalk together, because then they are not, cannot be agreed; yet
being agreed and the process made, they may and do very many of God's People
walk together: not only in their duties, are they near to him, but in the whole
course of their Conversation; their hearts and Affections are still with him,
and his presence is with them. And thus in their whloe life is there a blessed
Communion, kept up and maintained betwixt God and their Souls. And this is the
last kind of Nearness, (viz.) the Nearness of Converse and Holy Communion with
God.

Thus very briefly, I have opened to you, the Explicatory part of this
Observation. There remains yet the Application of all this, and I shall speak
something to this purpose; By way of Information. By way of Consolation. By way
of Exhortation.


1. Use of Information; this discovers to us the great difference there is
between Gods own Church and People, and others that are Worldly and Wicked men.
God's Saints and People they are near to God, and all others are People far off
from him; this is that difference that God has made, between all the People of
the World, and his own People and Saints. And as wicked men are separated and
far from God, so are they far from the People of God also; they are divided by
God and separated in regard of their estates here, and the work is still doing
till the end of the World shall come; and when he has done this in time, then
shall time have an end: but now they are separated in regard of their estates
only, hereafter they shall be separated not only in regard of their estates but
place also; on Earth there is no such separation, there is no possibility of
being altogether separated from the company of wicked men here; yea in the very
Church it self, whosoever will be so, must needs go out of the World, 1 Cor.
5.9, 10. hereafter the wicked shall be separated to the farthest distance from
God and the Saints too, that possible can be, they are here now far from him;
The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous,
Prove. 15.29. what a Privilege is that! that God is so Near to the Righteous,
that he hears every one of their Prayers in the saddest state, they can be
here in the World! and what a Comfort and Encouragement is that to pray to God!
there, God's hearing Prayer, is put contradistinct from God's being far from
the wicked; and God is far from the wicked in this regard, that he hears none
of their prayers, Psalm. 18.41. They cried, but there was none to save them,
even to the Lord, but he answered them not, according to that Joh. 9.31. God
hears not finners; that is, wilful and impenitent finners; but on the
contrary, The Lord is nigh to all that call upon him, that call upon him in
truth, Psalm. 145.18. the Lord is so near to his People, that he dwells in his
People, Isa. 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is bloy, I dwell in the High and Holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and Humble Spirit, etc. While men abide in their natural
condition, God is far from them, and they are far from God. What a sad
condition is it, to be at a distance from God, did men but believe and
seriously weigh it! on the other hand, this is indeed the high Prerogative of
Gods People to be so Near to him. Even here in this World, what a great
dignity, do people think it to be, to be near to a great personage, whether the
King, or if it be one Inferior! and indeed it is a noble Privilege to be nigh
unto the Kings Person, either in regard of kin or alliance, or to be conversant
about him by way of attendance. And how greatly do they take on them, that are
near the blood Royal in descent, or but near a Nobleman by way of service?
what honor and exaltation is it then to be near the living God in Spiritual
kin and alliance! this is true Nobility, when God is the top of the kin, and
Religion the root, says one, and to be Conversant about the presence of the
Lord in Spiritual services, and performances. It is the periphrasis or
description of Nobles, to be near the Kings Person, Jer. 52.25. in Heb. That
saw the face of the King: to be about great and high persons is a great
dignity; but how much more to compass God about and to be round about him; as
the Saints are said to do, and to be, Psalm. 7.7. So shall the Congregation of
the people Compass thee about, So Psalm. 76.11. let all that be round about him,
bring presents! etc. Gods People are said to be round about him, as the 12.
Tribes pitched round about the Tabernacle, Numb. 2.2. and as the four Beasts,
and four and twenty Elders were found about Gods throne, Rev. 4.4. with 6. so
the Chaldee expounds it; Ye that dwell about the Sanctuary, as the Nobles
dwell round about the Kings Court: Ans. in Psalm. 76.
they see the Face of God, that are round about God and converse with God, and
God and they speak together, as God is said to do to Moses, who could speak to
God, when he would, and was near to God, a great while together, at some times;
and God is said to speak to Moses Face to Face, as a man speaks unto his
Friend, Exodus 33.11. the same he is said to do to Israel his people, (whom the
Text tells us was a people near unto him) on mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 5.4. but now
wicked men are afar off, they have no relation to God, nor affection from God;
so says David, he knows the proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6. and as they are so
they desire to be, for, They say unto God, depart from us, Job 22.17. thus do
we see the first thing discovered to us, even the difference there is between
Wicked and Godly men.

2. Use. By way of Consolation; it is for Comfort to all the Saints and People
of God, that do enjoy this Privilege, that are indeed near unto God; and I
shall tell you (brethren) there are diverse Privileges follow from this.

First of all, God will be sure to suffer none to do them harm that be near to
him, or if he does, he will avenge them. Would you not do so for them that are
near you? If any should come to hurt your Child, would you not save him if you
could? If any body should set on your wife, to do her any wrong or injury, you
would do the utmost you could to avenge their quarrel: just so it is with God,
he suffered no man to do them wrong, Psalm. 105.14^ yea, he rebuked Kings for
their sakes, 15. saying touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; or
if they do, he will avenge them, and shall not God avenge his own Elect? Luke
18.78. which cry unto him day and night, I tell you he will avenge them
speedily, although he bear long with them; where the injury and wrong of Gods
People are set forth by the injury done by a great person to a poor Widow, God
avenging them; by the parable of a Judge, who though he feared not God, nor yet
regarded Man, yet because of the Widows importunity, would avenge her of her
advesrary: now if an unjust Judge will avenge, because of importunity, a person
that is no way allied to him; shall not the most righteous God, take Vengeance
for the wrongs of his own People, that are so near unto him? Now mind that, and
comfort your selves, God will be careful of your safety; no body shall hurt
you, or if they dare, and do endeavor it, the Lord to whom vengeance
belongs, will take your part, and take vengeance for you. It may be, you may
suffer affliction for the Gospels sake, wicked men may be injurious to you, for
Religions sake; remember, there is a God that will take your part, that are
thus nigh to him; and I could wish that all that are under sufferings for
Righteousness sake, might have Faith to live upon this Truth, and if God call
us to more and greater sufferings, we might treasure up this Truth against such
a time comes.

2ly, God will fellow-feel with you too, if you are a People near unto him, and
this Privilege is as great, as the former; there is a famous Scripture for
this, Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of
his presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and bare
them, and carried them all the days of old. The Chapter speaks of the works God
had done formerly for Israel, but principally with respect to the Wilderness,
how pitiful was God to Israel, when they were in the Wilderness! and how did
God show himself to be concerned, in all the Affliction that did light upon
them, by a compassionate Fellowfeeling! If any be sick, or in Affliction, that
be near to us, how ready are we to lay it to heart, how are we affected with
it! so will God be with all our troubles, be they what they will be. And mark
you, the same expression is spoken concerning our inward Affliction, and
remember it against the time that trouble comes; it is spoken of our Lord Jesus
Christ; Heb. 4.14. Seeing then we have a great highPriest, that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. -- For we have not an high Priest, that
cannot be touched with our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we
are, yet without sin. He was tempted to sin, though he was not prevailed over
by the temptation, and therefore Jesus the Son of God, can be touched with the
feeling of our temptations. Sometimes the violence of temptation is so strong,
and so hard to be dealt with, that were it not, that a person could look to
Christ's fellow-feeling, and to God's pity, it were a cause not to be undergon.
I believe I speak to some that understand, and experience what I say now; if we
commiserate those that be Dear and Near to us, (nay and those that be not so,
but in the common bonds of nature with us) so that we take what has befallen
them, as though it had fallen on our own selves, how much more will God! and
blessed be God, that we are nigh to such an one that can fellow-feel with us,
if not, we were an undone people; that is the second.

3. A third Privilege is this, the advantage they have of prevailing with God,
in the requests they do present to him; all their suits and requests shall be
accepted and granted, and free and open access to his presence to ask any thing
of him, and not be denied, still asking according to his Will. And hence it is,
that they are so prevalent with God, because they are a people near to God, and
because they are so near to him, that is, so near to him that is the Lord Jesus
Christ; hence it is, that they can have all their Payers answered, an da l
their petitions fulfilled, because they are a People near to God; the Lord is
near to answer all their Prayers; the Lord increase our Faith, for herein lies
much of the comfort of Christianity. You know if a stranger come to request any
thing of us, or an enemy, we do not so much as look on them, nor grant them
(though it should not be so with us, and we should not do so) but if our
familiar friend requests any thing of us, he will soon prevail; if a wife come,
and desire her Husband to do something for her, or a Child should desire his
Father to do something for him, or give something to him, though another should
not, yet they shall prevail, why? Because they be near to him. So it is with
God, God's People are his Married People, his newborn Children, therefore they
have such prevalence with him in all their addresses unto him. They may sreely,
but humbly Converse with him, and may have Communion with him, 1 John 1.3. God
Commanded, Exodus 25.22. that there should be a Mercy-seat, and over the
Mercy-seat two golden Cherubims, and they shonld look one toward another; and
when God did come and speak to his People, the text tells us God promised,
There will I meet with thee, and there will I Commune with thee, from above the
Mercy-Seat; and hence the Apostle draws his encouraging argument, let us come
boldly to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4.16. that we may obtain mercy etc. the
Mercy-Seat in the Old Testament, is the throne of Grace in the New.

4. Their protection is sure, God will undertake for their defense, which is
much of the same importance with the first; therefore I shall say by way of
addition little of it here; their safeguard is sure, because God undertakes for
them; They are as dear to him as the Apple of his eye, and he that touches
you, touches the Apple of my eye, says God, Zech. 2.8. and their safety is
set forth by their Nearness to God, yea under the shadow of thy wings will I
make my refuge, till these calamities be over-past, Psalm. 57.1. I have covered
thee in the shadow of mine hand. Isa. 51.16. he shall cover thee with his
feathers, Psalm. 91.4. nearer we cannot be, nor yet safer.

5. They being a People nigh to God, God will provide for them too, and take
care for their supply; will not an husband provide for his Wife? and a Father
for his Children? O God be merciful to a great many Husbands and Fathers, that
have no Compassion on their Wives and Children, but spend all they get, and
undo their poor families! but God is not such an Husband, nor such a Father,
God has laid a special charge upon Masters of families, that they should
provide for their own household; and if a man provide not for his own, and
specially them of his own house, he has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
infidel, says God by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8. How many such Masters and
Parents are there in the pale of this visible Church, that have the badg of
Christianity upon them, that consuem all in their lusts, and are in this sense
worse than the Infidels, the Heathens, and Pagans! now will God lay that charge
upon us, and will he not do it himself? does God require us to provide for our
household, and will not God provide for his? are not God's People his household,
and so his own, as near as Wife, Children, and Servants? and will not God then
take care of them? Will God teach us providence, and care for our Relations,
and shall not God do so for his? When you want your bread, you that are poor
remember this, if you be a People near unto God, he will provide for you; and
this should learn you the Apostles lesson, to cast all your care upon him, who
cares for you, 1 Pry. 5.7. And what a mercy it is to be able to beg our daily
bread from God, upon this Relation, that we are a People nigh to him! will not
God provide for his own? Surely he will. God that requires us to do good to all
men, but especially to the household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. he himself is also
good to all, by that general common Goodness which he extends to the whole
Creation, Psalm. 145.9. but specially to his own Israel; truly God is good to
Israel, Psalm. 73.1. the People near unto him, (text). It Is only the household of
Faith that is near to God, for Faith is the bond of our Union unto God and
Jesus Christ.

6. And Lastly, remember and take comfort in this also, as you are now near to
him here, so you shall be more near to him in Heaven hereafter; and this
closes up, and compleateth the Happiness of the People of God, he will bring
them all to be near to him in Heaven: methinks these things should make our
hearts a little burn within us, with affection, to be in a longing after this
great Privilege; remember, you shall be as near to God as Heaven and Glory
shall make you; and how near will that be? God is near to you now and you are
near to God now, but yet notwithstanding in Heaven is the greatest and chiefest
Nearness. Here you have his presence in a measure with many interruptions; here
sin, that makes a separation between God and you; but hereafter, you shall
fully, immediately, and for ever have his presence, you shall never be
excluded, or shut out of it; time will come when there will be nothing that
shall stand and interpose between God and you, all that shall cause a distance
shall be taken out of the way: Oh what a blessed time will that be!

3. Use. By way of Exhortation in two branches.

First, Labor to make sure with the greatest diligence and speed you are
possibly able, that you are a People near unto God. And will not all those
things that I hinted, and proposed to you, prevail with you? may not the
Consideration of all those Privileges, that follow upon this forenamed, that
you are near to God, allure us, and prevail with us? do not be at a distance
from God still, as you have been; may you not say truly It is good for me to
be near, as David said, It is good for me to draw near to God? Psalm. 73.28. run
through in your meditations, every one of the Privileges I have mentioned, be
not hearers or readers only, be persuaded then: methinks this one wellthought
of before-named, of having every request answered, should be a mighty thing. It
is a Privilege beyond all imagination, sufficient to Provoke to the highest
admiration, and greatest desire, and endeavor about this, that possible can
be. But Consider on the other hand, what is the misery of being afar off from
God, how great is the evil of being far off! why, They that are far from thee
shall perish, thou have destroyed all that go a-whoring from thee, says David,
Psalm. 73.27. well, it is a sad case then to be at a distance from him. If we do
seriously lay it to heart, and this is the Condition of every man and Woman, as
they come into the World, till Christ make them nigh; I pray God make you and
me more Considerate of it: How long have you lived, and yet continue far from
God! It would make ones heart to ache to consider, how many years we have lived
afar off, in point of reconciliation. Consider one thing more, what Patience
has God exercised to you all this while, that he has prevented your perishing
in that Condition! what wonderful Patience, and what a World of longsuffering
has God lengthned out toward you! Let me add one thing more, by asking you a
question, Will you live and die at last at a distance from God, and not be made
nigh unto him? What do you say? If I should ask every Man, and woman of you, as
every one of you ought to apply the word of God to your selves, Art thou
willing to live and die and not be made hear to God? what do your hearts say to
this? the Lord God of Heaven by his Spirit awaken every one to a serious
Consideration of it: I dare say there is never a man or woman, if they were
going to die this moment, but would be of this mind, that he might be near unto
God; unless God had given them over unto a reprobate sense, to be so blinded by
the Devil in their wickedness, that they cared not what became of body, or
soul, or any thing for ever. What a sad thing, that many say in their hearts,
with those in Job 22. Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. These do not desire God, or to be nigh unto him: but now weigh this, as
if you were going to die, Would I be set at a distance from God for ever and
for ever? and can I ever expect to be near to God hereafter, if I am afar off
from God now?

Weigh these things abovementioned in these five particulars, for method and
memories sake.

1. You came every one into the World, at a distance from God.

2. How long have you lived at a distance from him?

3. How much patience has God exercised toward you all this while?

4. Whether you intend to live and die in that Condition? or

5. Whether you can expect to be near to God hereafter, if you be not near to
but far off from God here? if you live and die at the same, yea greater
distance, than you came into the World from God at, how far then will you be
removed from God? and that for ever? if you be now so far by nature and
continue all your lives widening the distance and pie without having it made
up, you will never then come so near, as to see the face of God with Comfort. I
beseech you look to it, for these be the great truths, yea the greatest
concernments of your Souls.

Query. What shall I do, what Course would you advise me to take, that I may be
near to God?

Answ. 1. Pray to God for the Spirit of regeneration, that thou may be born
of God, thereby thou will be made partaker of the Divine Nature; if thou art
born of the Spirit, then will thou be near to God; As near and as dear as a
Child is to his Father.

2. Beg of God, to communicate to you the Benefits of Christ's Sufferings. For
it is the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ that makes us nigh to God, Ephesians. 2.14.
For he is our peace, who has made both one, and broken down the middle-Wall of
partition, etc. between God and men, as well as between Jew and Gentile. Oh
that we might by Faith, and Prayer still apply him to our Souls; He suffered
the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us near to God. Now beg of God to
bring you nigh to him by his Sons blood: I wish I could engage every person of
you, not to lie down this night, till you had prayed this Prayer, that you
might be brought nigh to God by the blood of his Son.

3. Lay hold on the Covenant of God, the Covenant between God and his people,
it is a matrimonial Covenant, a Marriage-Covenant: now it is the work of the
Ministers of the Gospel, to be wooers for Christ, and to beseech you in the
name of Christ, to be married to him; and I desire in the name of God to make
this proposal, Will you hearken to it and accept of it? God in his Word does
offer to be married to your Souls, God does call you, you have every one of you
run away from God, and he calls you, as he did to Israel of old, Return you
back sliding Children, for I am (I will be) married unto you, Jer. 3.14. What
do you say? Will you give Consent or no? shall your Maker be your Husband or
shall he not? ask your own hearts this question, Art thou willing, Oh my Soul
to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ, or art thou not? we are ambassadors
for Christ, and he has sent me to invite you to him. And if this day there
might be but one Soul brought in to accept of Jesus Christ, as it would be the
day of the gladness of his heart, Song. 3.11. so would it be the rejoicing of
mine. There is no such match as this, no such Husband as Jesus Christ; how near
if espoused to God and Jesus Christ! none nearer than Husband and Wife, the
Lord therefore prevail with you. You have in the foregoing papers, direction to
and information of a Design of a worthy man, and Minister of God, proposing in
several treatises, advice about particular transacting with God, between God
and your own Souls apart, not in word only, but in writing; and you have also a
few things added to show the warrantableness, and advantage of so doing: and I
could wish that every Christian in the World, might be prevailed with to do it
effectually and speedily, Blessed be God for the comfort of it! never any one
that has tasted of the comfort of it would for any thing have it to do.
Besides the instance of one person, I have given in the foregoing Appendix,
that in sore troubles improved it, I shall here add one more of a person dying,
whom when I came to visit, being near to death, after I asked concerning the
parties state, I said I hope you are able to resign up your whole self, Body
and Soul, into the hands of God: Reply was made, this have I done between God
and my own self many a time in a Corner; and the draught between God and the
Person, was sound after amongst other writings, when deceased. So that there is
no greater preparative, that fits for, nor will there be a greater stay to
comfort, and embolden, when at the point of death: What can be greater
encouragement hereunto, than the experience of the Saints of God, both living
and dead? Up therefore, and delay no longer, but do it, that so you may live,
and die in full assurance, that you are, and shall be fully, and for ever, near
to God.

2. Branch of Exhortation. Let me beseech you in the name of God, that have
made sure that you are a people near to God, that you would walk as a people
near unto him. First, make the matter clear, and then be sure to have suitable
Conversation; and that will be so if the former be done indeed, for the same
Spirit of Grace that draws us to the one, will enable us to the other. Carry it
toward God as becomes so great a Privilege.

Query, But how shall we do that may some say?

Answ. 1. Be sure to have a care of that that will cloud your evidences, and
assurance of Nearness unto God, and put you in your apprehensions at a great
distance again from him. You may get assurance, but then take heed, you do not
meddle with that which will cloud it: time was you rejoiced in God as your God,
and your Father, that your selves were his Children, taken into Covenant with
him, and into his family, in the nearest relation to him. And when you are near
to God, you will be ever near to God: but yet you may lose your assurance by
your sin; for that will set you at a distance again, it being a forsaking God,
and departure from him; and so cloud your apprehension of Gods affection, your
adoption, and regeneration and acceptance, and thereby rob you of the Comfort
of your condition and all your relation to God; therefore have a care of sin,
of all and every sin whatsoever, and specially your own iniquity. Some persons
are addicted to some sins more than others, specially therefore take care of
them, these will crack your peace, and cloud your evidences: walk watchfully
therefore, and labor to have an unspotted Conversation; for the spots and sins
of a man's Conversation will be clouds upon his Soul, and will blur all his
evidences, and so break his Peace.

2. Keep near to God as much as you can, and be as often with God as possibly
you can. Do not carry it strangely toward God: be often in Gods Company, and
frequent in his presence, often see his face, and draw nigh to him: my meaning
is, be often in the use of Ordinances, and the Duties of Gods Worship;
specially in Prayer, which is a duty wherein God and the Soul draw as near one
to another as in any duty whatsoever. Nobles are still about the King, and if
the King stir to any place without their privity, away they go, and post to
follow after him; so should we, if God seems to withdraw himself: so the Church
after her beloved, Song. 3. and 5. Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows hard after
thee, says David.

3. Bless God for his distinguishing Mercy, to you above many others, many
thousands in the World: how many are kept off, and at a distance still, and
what are you that you should be made nigh to God, when many thousands are yet
so far off from him! I cannot tell you why it should be so, only it is Gods
good will toward you; because he will do it, therefore he does it. There are
thousands and ten thousands in the World, that have not this liberty to come
near to God; they are in the same state that ever they were, and enjoy not such
a Privilege as this is; therefore should we seriously consider it. Mark what
the Holy Ghost speaks, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8. Thou art an holy people unto the Lord thy
God, the Lord has chosen thee to be a special people unto himself, above all
people that are upon the Face of the earth. The Lord did not set his love upon
you, or choose you, because ye were more in number than any people, for ye were
the fewest of all people; but because the Lord loved you, and because he would
keep the oath which he had sworn unto our Forefathers, etc. and say within your
hearts, why should God deal so with me to bring me so near to him, and leave
others in the same state wherein they were born? let your heart be mightily
affected with this Love of God, and kindness of God. Methinks I could dwell on
the persuasion of people to this duty, that they would be much more taken with
the Consideration of Gods special and distinguishing Kindness toward them.

4. Lastly be sure to be humble and keep low; and that upon a double reason. 1.
Because that though you are a people nigh to God, of his free Grace, yet there
is a great distance and disproportion between God and you; for though you are
brought so near God, yet you are but Creatures: whereas God is the great
Creator, you are but dust and ashes; God is the infinite, holy Majesty of
Heaven and Earth. Now the distance that is between God and you, should dwell
upon your hearts, and make you keep in a lowly frame still, and should Create
self-abasing thoughts in you so much the more: The Consideration of our
Privileges, and the Consideration of God's great distance from us, should
increase our self. abasement. 2. And then upon the account of our own
sinfulness we should be humble before God. Micah. 6.8. What does the Lord thy
God require of thee? but to do justly and love mercy and walk humbly with thy
God. See to it, that you do walk more lowly, and self-absingly, considering
what you are, on both these accounts, although God has so dignified you. Amen.

FINIS.
Book's Sold by Thomas Cockeril at the Atlas in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange.
THE Morning Exercise at Cripple-gate, or several Cases of Conscience
Practically Resolved, by Sundry Ministers, in Quarto.

The Supplement to the Morning Exercise at Cripple-gate; or several more Cases
of Conscience Practically resolved, by sundry Ministers. in Quarto.

Precious Faith; or a discourse of its Nature, Growth and Effect; by Edward
Polehil of Burwash in Sussex: Esquire in Octavo.

The Nature, Power, Deceit and Prevalency of the Remainder of Indwelling sin,
in believers; Together with the ways of Its working and Means of Prevention; by
John Owen D. D. in Octavo.

An Antidote against Distractions; or An Endeavor to serve the Church, in the
Daily Case of wanderings in the Worship of God, by Richard Steel. M. A. in
Octavo.

The Reuniting Christianity; or the Manner how to rejoyn all Christians under
one Confession of Faith, in Octavo.

God a Christian's Choice Completed, by Particular Covenanting with God etc.
in Pursuit of a Design Proposed by Mr. R. A. in his Book entitled the
Vindication of Godliness; and by Mr. Thomas Vincent in his Book Called, Words
whereby we may be saved. in Twelves.


