THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN By Captain Wingate, now Prisoner in
Ludlow, taken by the Malignant Party, in the late Battle fought at
Worcester; and sent to a Member of the Hoble house of Commons.

Setting forth The inhumane, barbarous and savage Cruelties toward him, and
how he was compelled to ride through the Army naked: with his Resolution to die
in the PARLIAMENTS Cause.

Whereunto is added The Kings Majesty's Speech at Shrewsbury, on Michaelmas Eve
last, to the Gentry and Commons of the County of SALLOP, there assembled.

LONDON, Printed for WILLIAM LEY, at Pauls-Chaine. October, the 7th. MDCXLII.

The true Copy of a Letter, written by Captain WINGATE, now prisoner in Ludlow;
taken by the Malignant party, in the late Battle fought at Worcester, and sent
to a Worthy Member of the Honorable House of Commons: setting forth the
Inhumane, Barbarous, and Savage Cruelties toward him and some other Prisoners,
also taken by the said Malignants, and his resolution to dye in the Parliaments
cause.
SIR:
MY unfortunate estate and sorrowful condition, into which I am now plunged,
makes me almost incapable of writing the true sense thereof. But ever having
found you a constant and faithful friend to me in time of prosperity, and
opportunity now favoring me, by Gods mercy I am encouraged, in what measure I
am able, to acquaint you with my sufferings, hoping you will so far condole
with me my misfortunes, as to present them on my behalf to the Honorable
House of Commons.

When I came from Oxford with that worthy Commander Collonell Sands (whose
unfortunate death I much lament) under Collonell Brown, our Commander in
Chiele, to Worcester, we had a long and doubtful skermish, which I verily
persuade my self is already made known both to the High Court of Parliament,
and most part of the Kingdom. Therefore I forbear to mention any thing
further touching the same, but only to inform you of mine own particular
sufferings since I have been in their barbarous custody.

When I was by them brought into Worcester, I was brought before Prince Robert,
and Lord Maurice his Brother, and some other of their Commanders, and was with
much scornful and opprobrious reproach examined the cause of my resistance
against the Kings Majesty, my Liege Lord and Sovereign; To which I answered;
I never resisted or attempted to do any thing against His Majesty's Person or
lawful commands joined with consent of his great Council, both Houses of
Parliament, whose Edicts and Ordinances I conceived (so long as they tended to
the preservation of His Majesty's Person, Honor and Dignity, and peace of His
Majesty's Kingdoms, and establishment of Religion) ought to be observed and
obeyed. Then was I demanded if the Parliament command one thing, and His
Majesty expressly commands the contrary, whether I ought not to obey the King
before the Parliament. To which I answered, that I conceived the High Court of
Parliament being the representative body of the whole Kingdom, and so the
greatest Council, and elected of the choicest and learned persons in the
Kingdom, and so the wisest; of the most aged and experienced members, and so
the greatest could best judge of the affairs, and of such Laws and ordinances
which might most tend to the safety and tranquillity of this State and
Commonwealth. Therefore I conceived I ought in conscience to obey their
commands; In which opinion I resolve to live and die; and now I am fallen into
your hands, I must submit my self to your mercy or cruelty, either of which
shall be welcome to me for the manifestation of my loyalty to both King and
Parliament conjunctly, but not divided.

The Prince was much enraged at my so peremptory answers, calling me
Parliament-dog, Roundhead, and the like, and if I had the gift of patience to
suffer, I should in short time be made a rare Martyr. To which I answered, Gods
will be done: Then was I commanded out of his presence, and kept in safe
custody, til further order from him, giving command for present preparation for
all his soldiers to leave the Town, and advance toward Ludlow, where Prince
Charles keeps his Court, and to leave behind them Colonel Brown, Colonel
Sands, and Captain Berry, being sore wounded that they could not go along with
them without danger of death.

About three of the clock in the morning they went from the Town, having bound
my hands-behind me, commanding me to be set on horseback, and bound to the
horse, and to ride before them, only one Trooper before, and one on each side
me for my guard, who rode with their Pistols in their hands ready charged,
turning them often toward me, swearing dam them, and perish them (if I would
not turn on the Kings side) they would shoot me to the heart, to which I
answered nothing, but that time should make known my further intention.

Being come about five or six miles from Worcester, beginning to be daylight,
command was gsven by Prince Robert, that unless I would presently renounce the
cause that I endeavored to defend on the behalf of the Parliament, and declare
that I conceived their Proceedings to be against the Laws of the Land, and
dishonorable to the King, I should be presently stripped out of all my
garments, and ride bound naked before them to Ludlow; which I refusing to do,
was most barbarously and inhumanely according to the Princes command effected.
The scornful reproaches of those wicked Miscreants which I in that way
sustained did not trouble nor d^nt my mind so much, as the harm and cold I
caught by the weather being sharp, injured my Body.

Then coming to Ludlow, after they had exercised themselves with reviling and
scorning of me, causing me so to ride through the Town, command was given I
should be taken off my horse and my clothes put on and brought before Prince
Robert, who in a reviling manner asked me if I had learned to bear and
suffer, and if I would not yet recant and turn to them, they would proceed to
judgment against me, with the cruellest torments they could devise to put me
to death, giving me ten days liberty to consider with my self and return
my full Resolution at the time prefixed, commanding me to be again put into
Prison, and to be allowed necessary meat and drink for preservation of my
health, that thereby if I would join with them I might be the better able to
do them service.

Some other Prisoners which here they have also put into a close Prison, using
them in the extremest cruelty that may be devised, allowing them only bread
and warer for their sustentation, and so little, that if they long continue
there, they will be starved to death.

Thus (Sir) having rudely given you to understand my present estate at this
time, having opportunlty, and obtained so much favor of the Keeper of the
Prison, being somewhat well affected to the proceedings of the Parliament, but
constrained to execute that place, who provided me of a trusty friend that I
might confide in to deliver you this Letter, which if I shall be so happy
before my death (which I expect at the day appointed as to hear that you have
received my Letter, I shall be glad; for no tortures, torments or savage
cruelties with Gods assistance shall alter or change my Loyalty to that grand
and grave Senate the High Court of Parliament.

Thus hoping you will present my sufferings accordingly, and praying that God
of his infinite mercy will be graciously pleased to prosper and protect the
Proceedings of the high Court of Parliament, to the preservation of Peace,
establishing of Religion, defending of the Liberties and Privileges of
Parliament, and of the Subject, and inthronizing his Majesty with honor and
dignity, and his Posterity successively, to the joy of all true hearted
Subjects.

From Ludlow Castle, October 1. 1642. Your observant friend, and a most
doleful Prisoner, Capt. WINGATE.

FINIS.
HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH at SHREVVSBVRY on MICHAELMAS Eve last, to the Gentry and
Commons of the County of SALLOP, there assembled.
GENTLEMEN;
IT is some benefit to me from the Insolences, and misfortunes which have
driven me abont, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom,
and to so faithful a part of my people; I hope neither you nor I shall repent
my coming hither; I will do my part that you may not: And of you, I was
confident before I came: the residence of an Army is not usually pleasant to
any place, and mine may carry more fear with it, since it may be thought
(being Robbed and spoiled of all my own, and such terror used to fright and
keep all men from supplying me) I must only live upon the aid and relief of my
people; but be not afraid, I would to God my poor Subjects sufferred no more
by the Insolence and violence of that Army raised against me (though they have
made themselves wanton even with plentis, then you shall do by mine, and yet I
fear I cannot prevent all disorders; I will do my best; and this I Will promise
you, no man shall be a looser by (...) if I can help it; I have sent hither
for a Mint, and will melt down all my own Plate, and expose my Land to sale
or morgage, that if it be possible I may bring the least pressure upon you. In
the mean time I have summoned you hither to invite you to do that for me and
your selves, for the maintenance of your Religion, the law of the Land (by
which you enjoy all that you have) which other men do against Us: Do not
suffer so good a cause to be lost for want of supplying me with that, which
will be taken from you by those who pursue me with this violence, and whilst
these ill men sacrifice their money Plate and utmost industry to destroy the
Common wealth, be you no less liberal to preserve it. And assure your selves
if it please God to bless me with success I shall remember the particular
assistance every man here gives me to his advantage: However, it will
hereafter (how furiously the minds of men are now possessed) be honor and
comfort to you, that with some charge and trouble to your selves, you did your
part to support your King and preserve the Kingdom.

I desire M. Sheriff, and the rest of the Gentlemen, to distribute themselves
in that Method, that they may best receive the expressions which you shall make
of your best affections, the which I will have particularly presented to me.


