To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. The
humble Petition of George Wither Esquire
SHOWS.
THat in consideration of money due to this Petitioner now above eleven years,
without Interest, and formerly made payable by several Orders of Parliament, it
was at last provided in the first Act for sale of estates forfeited for
Treason, that the Trustees therein named should sell to this Petitioner, and
his heirs, lands, tenements, and hereditaments for satisfaction of the said
debt, to the value of 150. li. per an. above all Reprizes out of the estate of
John Denham Esquire, notwithstanding any thing in the said Act, in any wise to
the contrary.

That the said Trustees, sold accordingly to this Petitioner, 150 li. per annum
out of the Manor of Little Horsly in Essex, part of the estate of the said
Denham, and (received their sallery out of this Petitioners own money, which
they ought not to have exacted from him) They by the same Deed sold also unto
him, the rest of the said Manor for 1645 li. 4s. 9 d.. The said purchase was
made without breach of any Rule in the said Act, either by the Sellers or
Buyer, and fully paid for according to Contract; The Deed was sealed, and
enrolled, before any claim upon the Premises was allowed, and after the time
limited for allowance of claims was elapsed: The Petitioner, was by orders from
the Commissioners for removing of Obstructions and allowing of Claims, put into
possession by the Sheriff, and thereupon encouraged to be at great cost in
repairs, in stocking part of the land for setlement of his family upon it; to
demise the remainder to several Tenants with bands reciprocally given for
performance of Covenants; Not doubting after all this, but, that the said
Trustees for the States honor, or for their own credit and indemnity, would
have made good their bargain, or procured him as full recompense, for damages
that should be thereby sustained, without his default, as he might in equity
have recovered from private persons.

That, nevertheless, some of the said Trustees, (when this Petitioner had
expended great sums upon the Premises, beside his purchase money) did, by
their Order stop his rents, and then reconvey that to another which they had
formerly sold to him, as aforesaid, (as if they might arbitrarily, sell,
resume, and sell again at their pleasure the same land). And they have thereby
caused the Petitioners tenants to deny his rents and services of Court;
encouraged them and others to disturb him in his Possession; to abuse his
servants by riotous oppositions producing bloodshed, and to occasion many
vexatious suits and expenses, which have damnified him in above 600 li. more
then he has raised by the premises. And now, lately, for a pretended
encumbrance charged upon the said Manor, and claimed by one Thomas Offly Esquire,
this Petitioner is ejected out of his whole purchase aforesaid, to the loss
therewith, of the last whole years profit of his stock, and much of the
principal after payment of all Taxes; and his family, being on a sudden thrown
out, is left destitute both of an employment, and of a habitation in the winter
among maliciously Malignant strangers, above one hundred miles from his other
possessions; which instead of the benefit intended him, has now damnified him,
with that and other hindrances, above 4000 li. beside much vexation and loss
of time; upon which, the ruin of his estate will inevitably follow, if Gods
mercy, by the Justice of this Parliament, shall not speedily prevent it;
because, the said Ejectment has made him liable to an overthrow in near a
dozen suits, wherein the foundation of his right, is thereby taken away. And,
to further his undoing, there is above 660 li. (made payable to him out of
Haberdashers Hall,) of which he cannot get a penny for his relief; and above
1680 li. more charged by Ordinance of Parliament, upon the Excise in course,
which has been due above eleven years yet unpaid; All which summed up
together, with this Petitioners forbearance and charges, in long prosecution,
has made his sufferings among his friends, four times more mischievous unto
him, then those he sustained by the common enemy, and forty times more
grievous; yet, much is supposed by many, to have been done for him heretofore,
whereas nothing has taken effect.

In consideration of the Premises, and for that it would be dishonorable to
the Nation, that their Orders and Acts of Parliament, should be delusive, or
made snares destructive to them whose good was intended, not only to the
consuming their estates by delays, almost doubling the years reputed
equivalent to a man's life, and at the later end also of his days, who has
acted and suffered for the common Cause, and in all points performed his
bargain; but also, to the exposing of him in his old age, to vexatious suits
and quarrels, infringing peace betwixt man and man, to the making of his life
wearisome, who had no suit for above sixty years together: In regard likewise,
that the said Offlyes debt (if it be not fraudulent) ought to be paid by the
Commonwealth, for that, the lands liable thereto were formerly sold, as
aforesaid, to discharge a public Engagement, and the profits thereof taken up
for the use of the State, so many years before the said sale, that the debt was
thereby doubled, which might else have been discharged thereby, long ago. And
lastly, in respect this Petitioner verily believes he can make it evident that
the said Offlyes claim is forged, to the defrauding the Commonwealth of above
3100 li. which might have been saved, if the Commissioners for allowing of
claims, had been informed of what this Petitioner has now to offer.

It is humbly prayed, that this Petitioner may be restored again to the
possession of that which he has purchased, as aforesaid, without waste made,
and his damages repaired: That, all suits in relation to the said purchase,
commensed against him, may be stayed until his grievance shall be heard: That,
the said Offlyes claim and his qualification, making him capable or incapable
(according to the said Act) of having his claim allowed, may be re-examined in
Parliament. And, that those things which this Petitioner has farther to offer
in relation to the Premises on the Commonwealths behalf; or for his own just
relief, may be taken into speedy consideration, And the said Petitioner shall
continue his prayers for this Parliaments prosperous success.


