THE SVMME Of diverse SERMONS Preached in Dublin, Before the L. Deputy
Fleetwood, and the Commissioners of Parliament for the Affairs of IRELAND.

Wherein the doctrine of Infant Baptism is asserted, and the main Objections of
Mr Tombs, Mr Fisher, Mr Blackwood, and others, Answered.

By SAMUEL WINTER, D. D. Provost of Trinity College near DUBLIN.

Neh. 9 8. Thou foundest his heart faithful before thee, and enteredst into
Covenant with him, to give his seed the land of Canaan. Psalm. 25.14. His secret
is with them that fear him, to make them know the Covenant. Isa. 65. They are
the seed of the blessed of the Lord and their offspring with them. Ez 16.60.
Nevertheless I will remember my Covenant with thee in the days of thy youth,
and I will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. Act. 1.14. -- Cum
Vxoribus and liberis. Tanto magis pro infantibus loqui debemus, quanio minus
ipsi pro se loqui possunt Augustine. Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec concilijs
institutum, sed semper retentum; id non nisi authoritate apostolica traditum
rectissime creditur. Idem. DVBLIN, Printed by William Bladen, Anno Dom. 1656.

EX sanctificato alteto ^exu sanctos procreari ait, ex seminis praerogativa.
Tert. in 1 Cor. 7. Gal. 3.28. Neither male nor Female.) In Judaismo magnum erat
privilegium virilis sexus, is solus foederis signum corpore gerens. Grot. At
etc. Major difficultas in componendis dissidiis animorum, quam in componenda
controversia. Zan. Quoniam non noviliteraturam, introibo in potentias Domini*
Vulgata ve^sio, Psalm. 71.14. (...). Chrysostom. in Heb. 6.6. (...) Act. 16.15.
Baptizata est ipsa, and filii domus ejus. She was baptized, and the children of
her house. (...) Verse. 33. Et eadem hora baptizatus est ipse, and filii domus
ejus omnes. And the same hour he was baptized, and all the children of his
house. To their Excellencies, CHARLES FLEETWOOD, Lord Deputy of Ireland; AND
THE Lord HENRY CROMWELL, Commander in chief of the Forces in Ireland.
My Lords,
IT was a saying of Luther, Let me hear ill as a malefactor, etc. Modo impii
silentii non arguar, so that I be not accused of sinful silence.

The doctrine of Antipaedobaptism was preached in many places in IRELAND, and I
again and again challenged to dispute this point; therefore I resolved to give
place to none such, no not for an hour, (it being urged as a thing so necessary
to salvation by many) that the truth of the Gospel might continue with us, as
Paul speaks of Circumcision, Gal. 2. but did publicly disown that way and
practice, which though watered by the foot of man, as Egypt: yet was never
watered by the dew of heaven, as Canaan) and accordingly I found (blessed be
his glorious grace who delights to breath in such poor worms as I am) more of
Gods presence in the public dispensing of that Ordinance of infant baptism,
(assuring me by his spirit that he would own it and bless it to the babes) than
ever I did in all my days, these eight and twenty years since I entered into
the Ministry; to which I was called from my childhood, and assured I should win
many souls. This I speak in humility of spirit, (as knowing my self to be the
chief of sinners) not to magnify my self, but to magnify mine Office, as Paul
does in the first and second Chapters to the Galatians. Paul knew that if those
teachers could enervate his authority, and make his calling void, his doctrine
would be slighted and made of none effect; therefore he labors to prove by many
Arguments that he was called from heaven to the Ministry; especially by the
good success the Lord gave, I was (says he) sent to the Gentiles, as Peter to
the Jews: for he that w^ought effectually by Peter to the circumcision, was
mighty in me toward the Gentiles. Gal. 2.7.8.

In these lines I look at Christ as standing by, and overlooking what I am
doing, who well knows with how many prayers and tears I have looked upon the
several texts mentioned in this Treatise; (for I often think, what would Christ
say to such a text if he were to preach on such a subject? or will Christ own
this or that truth another day?) begging of the father of lights, from whom
every good giving and perfect gift does come, that he would lead me into all
truth; and not suffer me to build upon his foundation, wood, hay, and stubble,
least the day should discover it, and I suffer loss either of my labor or crown
(making it less massy and weighty, not having so many pearls in it) another
day. And I am assured that those prayers shall not prove abortive: for the
prayers of the saints dyed in the blood of Christ are of eternal efficacy;
there being a necessity and tie lying upon Jehova that they should be fulfilled
in due time, Acts 1.16. However if Christ take pleasure in me, here I am: if
not, let him do with me what seems good in his sight.

I have not affected enameled phrases, and words of man's wisdom, (which perhaps
are expected from one in my capacity) but with as much plainness as I could, I
have held forth the truth as it is in Jesus. The riches of Greece did not
consist in words, said Demosthenes of old. Therefore I had rather say Ossum
than Os, with Austin, least I should not be understood. Cibus simplex est
optimus, the plainest meats nourish most. We say of a diamond, Quicquid
absconditur perditur; for truth is like to Adam, never so glorious as when it is
naked. Therefore, says the Apostle, we use plainness of speech. 2 Cor. 3.12.

If any be offended, I say, Praestat ut scandalum admittatur quam ut veritas
amittatur. And with Seneca, Mallem boni viri famam perdere, quam conscientiam.
For we are set for the defense of the Gospel, and the appertenances thereof, (
Phil. 1.17.) and therefore may not with hold our testimony from the present
truth, (i.) the truth of this age, (though never so much opposed) what ever the
event may be.

I have without gall or bitterness to any, as I hope, managed this
controversy, truthing it in love, (...), Ephesians. 4 (for truth needs not passion)
desirous to weep and bleed over such souls who are contrary minded, (over whom
Christ has bled) as Paul speaks Phil. 3.18. If at any time God will give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth; that they may recover themselves
out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive alive at his will.

However though many will not own this disgraced truth, I am assured that
Christ will own it another day, and then truth will be truth: in the mean time
put it in the open field and let it work out it self, which doubtless it will;
for all truth is from the spirit, which only is able to make way for it in the
hearts of the sons of men, and to batter down those strong holds, even those
royal forts of the imagination and will, that stand out in opposition to the
truths of Jesus.

My dearest Lords! I ow no less than my self to you, for that tender love you
have ever expressed to me; therefore having nothing else to give, worthy of
your acceptance, I give my self to you. Many have given more, but none ever
left less to himself: and as a token of mine endeared affections to your
Honors, I humbly present this plain discourse to your Honors patronage, being
the first fruits of my labors; and leave it in the hand of the spirit to bring
it h^me to the souls of all into whose hands it may come, assuring my self, I
have a friend within them, the spirit I mean, (if they be Christ's) that will
echo to, and close with the spirit that is without. But if I prevale not with
those that are otherwise minded, (as I have little hope, seeing God does not
usually recall such, but suffers them to go on in the error of their way) my
earnest prayer to God shall be, Father forgive them for they know not what they
say, and they do they know not what.

My Lords, Your Honors humble Servant, Samuel Winter.

The Table. Act. 2.38.
OBserve, The former duty, viz. Repent, is in the second person, the later in
the third person, admitting of a greater latitude. Let every one of you, (that
is, you and yours) be baptized.

Doctrine. That the baptizing of infants of believers, is according to the
institution of Jesus Christ.

Baptism is a washing; so the word in greek signifies. Thus the word in the
hebrew, 2 King. 5. Ittibal erchatz, Nonne lavabo in iis? Targ. Thus the word is
used in the Arabic, Ethiopian and Syriac tongue.

First Argument (page 18.) Is taken from the command of Christ, Mat. 18. Go
disciple all Nations. By nations is meant men, women, and children, according
to the manner of the Jews, which was to baptize the children of Jews and
Proselytes, as well as others, page 19. Sed et nunc qui ex gentibus circumcisis
ad Judaismum veniunt, ab ipsis baptizantur; et hujus bapti^mi Judaici meminit
Scholiastes ad Juvenalem. Intellectu facile est ablutionem hanc fuisse inter
vetera instituta; orta, ut arbitror, post magnum diluvium, in memoriam purgati
mundi. Grot. in Mat. 3.

That children are called Disciples, see page 20. Act. 21.21, 25. Mat. 21.15.
compared with Luke 10.37. Where children are called disciples. Mat. 27.57.
(...), he was disciple to him.

Second Arg. Children are incovenanted, therefore are to be sealed with the
initial seal of the Covenant. page 23. Genesis 17.9. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore. Which words extend to us in the new Testament, for annexing the seal
of baptism, as well as to Abraham his posterity for annexing the seal of
Circumcision: for that is mentioned afterward, as in that of the Sabbath, (4
Command.) which though applied to the Jew, yet it is to be extended to us in
the new Testament.

I do not say that the promise or Covenant simply considered, is a ground to us
to annex the seal; but this I say, That a promise laid for the foundation of a
duty, is equivalent with an express command. Thus the Apostle, Act. 2.37. comp.
Genesis 17 9. page 28.

That children are incovenanted see a cloud of witnesses page 34. Esaias 65.23.
They are the seed of the blessed of the Lord and their offspring with them.

The promise made to Abraham (I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed)
belongs to believers and their seed, Act. 13.33. Romans 2.29. Is he not the God
of the Gentiles also? See page 48. 11 Arguments.

That the Covenant made with Abraham was a Covenant of Grace, see 18 Arguments
page 57. 2 Cor. 6. ult. applied to the Corinth^ans.

The old and new Covenant how distinguished, page 77.

Diverse Objections answered, page 62. That children feel not the fruit of this
Covenant, the fault is not in God but in themselves, in that they do not keep
the condition of the Covenant, namely to receive Christ by faith. Perk. Non
evertitur dei fides perfidia hominum. Call. in Romans 3.4.

The Covenant of Grace is conditional, page. 89. whereof baptism is a seal;
therefore Divines say, The external Covenant (or rather the external part
thereof) may be broken, but the internal cannot. And whereas I admit of
conditions in the Covenant of grace, I mean not by conditions such as are (1.)
the foundation of the Covenant; Or (2.) as by some are construed to be, sc. the
impulsive cause inducing and inclining the Lord to enter into this Covenant
with us; Or (3.) such as are to be performed by us of our own power; Or (4.)
such as are meritorious, and do destroy the nature of grace: But such as Christ
has freely undertaken to work in the elect, being generally propounded to all
on the terms of the Gospel; which if accepted, render them and theirs visibly
under the Covenant, of which baptism is the seal. Therefore I say, The
Arminians may take as much advantage from the invitations of God to faith and
repentance, as from the conditions tendered to the sons of men. Fidem poni ut
conditionem salutem quidem antecedentem, sed electionem ipsam consequentem,
nunquam a nostris negatum fuit, summa vero cum religione traditum. Ames. Though
the condition of the Covenant of grace, as to man in himself, is impossible;
yet through the power of Gods grace it is made possible and easy. Deuteronomy. 30.
Hujus promissionis evangelicae antecedens sive annexa conditio, poterat
multorum animos deterrere: ac potius omnium si legis (...), in carne nostra,
(ut necesse est) expendissent cujus (...) inde a principio sermonis hujus
conditionem Moses expresserat, dicens, Nondum dedit vobis Jehovah mentem ad
cognoscendum. Ne igitur impossibilem conditionem propositam sibi a deo fuisse
quererentur, commoditatem istius Moses his verbis explicat, Nam praeceptum quod
ego praecipio tibi, etc. q. d. Hactenus proposui tibi partem priorem foederis,
ut obsequaris deo; sed quia altera quaeque pars foederis est tibi necessaria,
ut deus tuus quasi novo foedere (quod tamen reipsa unum est) suis partibus erga
te defungatur, cum tu ipse non possis; et circumcidens cor tuum, inscribat ei
legem suam and foedus suum, ad obedientiam fidei. Par. lib. 2. p. 16.

No man of Coniah's seed did sit upon the throne of David, as King, for ever,
page 91.

In the old Testament the Priests were to distinguish and separate between the
holy and profane, Ezekiel. 22.^6. So the word (badal) is used, Genesis 1.3. He
separated. page 95.

Our Churches denied by the Anabaptists to be true Churches, and that Christ
has any Church communion with us. page 96.

Children of believers are truly and really under the Covenant, so far as it
goes, (page 99.) though it be not fulfilled to them all in the utmost extent of
it: however they are really covenanted and engaged to fulfill the Covenant made
in their behalf.

Children have many benefits by that Covenant of grace. page 100.

There are promises for grace and to grace. page 104. and 105.

That Covenant made with Abraham was a Covenant of life eternal, for where is
it said, Thomas or Mary, or this or that child shall rise to glory? yet by
virtue of that Covenant all elect children rise to everlasting life, or else
they rise not at all. We have but an inference for it, yet such as Christ
himself approves of. Mat. 22.32. Act. 9.22. (...), Collatis testimoniis
demonstrans. Beza.

How the promises are made to the spiritual seed, and what it is to be born
after the flesh. page 111. Act. 13.33 He has fulfilled to us their children.
Fanatici quidem omnia ad allegorias trahentes, nullam hic generis sed solius
fidei rationem habendam somniant: tali autem commento sacrum dei foedus
exinaniunt; uti dicitur, Ero deus tuus and seminis tui: at sola fides
(inquiunt) est quae efficit Abrahae filios. Ego autem contra excipio, qui
Abrahae filii nascuntur secundum carnem, spirituales quoque censeri dei filios,
nisi profanescant. -- Etsi haereditaria fuit posteris Abrahae vitae promissio,
multos tamen privavit sua incredulitas. Calv. in Act. 13.33.

Children of promise are such as were born to Abraham according to promise,
therefore all Isaac his seed (even Esau) though children of the flesh, were
children of the promise. page 113. Which promises were made conditionally with
Ismael and Isaac's carnal seed, but established upon Isaac and his elect seed
only.

Jer. 31.34. From the least,] it cannot be restrained to the elect seed page
115.

Third Argument is taken from Circumcision. See how far we may argue from
Analogy page 117.

Circumcision a type of baptism in three respects. page 121.

Why Circumcision on the eighth day administered. page 122. And why restrained
to males. p. 123.

Either Circumcision was a seal of the Covenant of grace, or else that Covenant
had no seal at all annexed to it, which is not to be imagined.

Fourth Argument, Children are members of the Church, therefore to be baptized,
Ephesians 5.26. That he might sanctify the Church by the washing of water.

That they are members, see it largely proved from Romans 11. page 127. Where the
Apostle speaks of the visible Church of the Jews cut off with their children,
and so to be reingrafted, Romans 11.15. God cast them away, but he never cast
away real saints, or such as are part of the invisible Church. Romans 11.1. Has
he cast away? etc. Neither can they say, that they are broken off for unbelief,
seeing that (according to the doctrine of the Anabaptists) they are not capable
either of belief or unbelief; Therefore as children are broken off for the
unbelief of their parents: so are they reingrafted by their faith. Vide Calvini
triplicem insitionem, in Romans 11.

They cannot be said to be cut off from the Covenant of works page 131.

Of such children is the kingdom of heaven, therefore enchurched. p. 133. Filii
regni si non filii regis.

Profession of faith not essential to baptism. page 138. as we see in Paul.
Act. 9.

Fifth Argument, Some children are believers, therefore to be baptized. Mat.
18.5. p. 139.

Children have faith in heaven. page 141.

Sixth Argument, As Abrah^ms house was circumcised, so are whole houses under
the new Testament baptized, and that upon the account of the faith of the
parent. By (house) is meant children throughout; therefore we say children were
baptized. Lydia was baptized and all the children of her house. Act. 16.15.
page 143.

The jailor was baptized with all the children of his house, as the Syriac
renders the word. Act. 16.33. He rejoiced with all his house, he having
believed. So the Graek. verse. 34.

Families, as families, are made the precedent for that administration.

Children are included in the parents. page 146. Act. 1.14 with their wives and
children. Vetustissimus meus codex addit (...). Beza,

Seventh Argument, Infants are capable of the grace of baptism, therefore of
baptism it self. Cant. 7. Thy navel, etc. page 151.

Use. A disuasive from Anabaptism.

First, Because it is not the way of God, for it is not of Gods planting. In 10
Argum. page 159.

Secondly, It Is not of Gods watering. It has been watered by the foot of man
as Egypt, but not by the dew of heaven as Canaan. In 12 Arg. page 167.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 28. read, baptizing and dousing or etc. p. 9. l. 5. r for dipping
sake? p. 11. mar. for Ierushalaim r. Jerushalajim. p. 15. l. 11. f. president
r. precedent. p. 21. l. 15. f. but r. being. p. 30. l. 31. r. it at least, till
p. 35. l. 25. dele) and l. 28. r. generations.) p. 38. l. 6. f. elect r. seed
p. 42. l. 2 f. were r. was. p. 44. l. 13. f. brethren r. children. p. 45. l. 26
f it r. that. p. 67. l. 1. marg. r. Genesis 15.18. p. ^0 l. 11. f. into r. in to p
79. l. 22. r. for. p. 83. l. 10 f. those r. these. p. 87. l 24. f. So that ^.
But. p. 102. l. 23. f. athing r. a thing. p. 107 marg. f. nagnor r. ^agnar. p.
113. l. 25. r. these are determined. p. 116. l. 3. r. saints, Joh. 3.26? p.
117. l. 30. marg. r. whitfla^. p. 118. l. 3. f. ceremoni^us r. ceremonial. and
l. 14. f. a r. an. p. ^19. l ^0. f. Mechech r. Meshech. p. 126 l. 10. r.
therefore they a^e so now. p. 134. l. 20. f. invi^^ble members r. visible etc.
and l* 29. dele it. p 140. l. 140. l. 21. dele Arg p. 143. l. 18. r. again and
ag^^n. p. 144. l. 1. marg. f. ut filias r. ut filius. and l. 17. f. lalem r.
lahe^. p. 148. l. 2. f. of the sacrificing of Abel r. of Abel sacrificing. ^.
150. marg. f. Judici^ r. Indicio. p. 151 l. 1. dele some. p. 164 l. 8. f. omns
r. omnes. p. 165. l. 23. f. (...) r. (...). p. 166 l 23. f. discit r. discet.
p. 169. l 7. r. inlet of those. p. 175. l. 19. marg. f. dejectus est r.
dejectus esse. p 176. l. 10. dele they.

THE MEANING OF THE Word, [Baptize.]
ACTS 2. v. 38. Then said Peter unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ, etc.

For the promise is to you and to your Children, and to all that are afar off,
even to as many as the Lord our God shall call.


WHen the day of Pentecost was fully come, ( verse. the 1.) they were all with
one accord in one (...), every word speaks unity.
place, and suddenly there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire,
and it sat (...), Dissecatae linguae sedit, it sat. An hebraism. This notes
Unity: though their tongues were cloven, as noting the variety of their gifts;
yet there was but one and the same Spirit actuating them, for they spoke with
tongues as the Spirit gave them Utterance.

(...). As the Spirit gave them to speak Apothegms, (that is) Sententiously.


upon each of them; this was misconstrued by some of the bystanders, who were
at this time dwelling at Jerusalem, devout Men of every Nation under heaven,
expecting the coming of the Messiah; to whom many Proselytes of the Gentiles,
that had embraced the Jewish Religion, joined themselves. To these jointly both
Jews and Gentiles, Peter, as the mouth of the rest, speaks. ( You men of Judaea,
and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, v. 5.) These both Jews and Gentiles being
pricked in their hearts, Peter exhorts to repent.

In the Text you have an Answer to the Question propounded v. 37. Wherein you
have a double exhortation, first to repentance, secondly to baptism.

1. Repent ye, says the Apostle, ye that are adult, who had an hand in
crucifying the Lord Jesus. As he that has a precious treasure, locks it up,
and turns the key again and again to make all sure: So the Apostle (though they
were pricked in their hearts, yet) he exhorts them to repentance again, that so
there might be a thorough work.

2. Let every one of you. In the Greek it is (...). The former duty enjoined
was in the second person, repent ye: this latter in the third, and let every
one of you (that is, you and yours) be baptized; Grammaticae minutiae non si^it
etiosae. Tarn.
as admitting of a greater latitude than the former, (...) Non est in lege vel
unica littera, a qua non maximi montes pende^nt. Inquint Hebraei.
scil. that of repentance, which Children were not capable of, as they were not
guilty of that heinous act of crucifying the Lord of Life. I wave the former,
and shall only speak to the latter, Let every one of you (that is, you and
yours, young and old) be baptized. Which is the meaning of the Apostle, as
appears by the Argument by which he enforces the exhortation, which is taken
from the Promise or the Covenant (for those terms are equipollent) which, says
the Apostle, is to you and to your Children; to you Jews and Proselytes already
called, and to the Gentiles which are afar off, when called, and to their
Children; for there is the like reason to them, (as Proselytes and their
Children) else to what purpose should he bring this Medium [for the promise is
to you and to your Children] to back the exhortation, [and let every one of you
be baptized] if Children were not included in that command? Which would render
the Apostles Argument altogether inadaequate to his scope and purpose; but if
we include them, the Argumentation is comprehensive of its end, and
correspondent to its scope. So that the Conclusion from hence, is this,

That to baptize the Infants of Believers, is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ.

First, let me show you what this baptizing is, and then give you the grounds
of the Point.

First, It is a washing of a believer, or Child of a believer, with water, by a
Minister of Christ, in or into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

1. I say it is a washing, because the word properly so signifies; whether it
be by dipping into, or pouring on of water; sprinkling or wetting of the body.
Dan. 4.30. (...)
And his body was wet with or from the dew of heaven, which fell upon it, not
that into which he was douzed over head and ears. Thus the cloud dropped on the
Israelites, Psalm. 77.17, 18, 19. For what else is the meaning of that phrase
[he looked through the cloud upon the Egyptians] but that the cloud was poured
upon them? And surely then some drops must needs fall upon the Israelites;
therefore they are said to be bap ized into the cloud. And thus the sea was
sprinkled on them, beating against the banks, Ma^k 7.4. The washing of cups and
pots, tables or beds, (...), etc. Tables or beds are washed by affusion of
pouring on of Water, rather than immersi^n or dipping: for if the cups and
platters had been dipped, then the inside had been clean as well as the
outside. In the 3. v, the Pharisees eat not unless they wash, compared with
Luke 11.38. Vide de ri^u (...), M^nesi. Fund^nda est aqua tribus vicibus su^er
manus. In prima affus^^ne sunt digiti levandi, in posterioribus vero demittendi.

Thus Elisha poured wa^er on his masters hands, 2 Kin. 3.11. (...) dicitur ob
digitorum in manuum elevation contracti mem ac in pugni veluti speciem
conformatione^, ut putat Scalig. vel ob aquae deflu^um per totam illam brachii
partem, quae (...) dicitur, a digitorum radice s^u propagine ad cubitum usque.
Cap.


Its not probable that the Pharis^es as often as they came from market,
(whether it seems they went often, for they were such as loved greetings in the
marketplaces) plunged themselves over head and ears, before they did eat any
meat. Heb. 9.10. Which stood only in meats and drinks and diverse washings,
(...), compared with Lev. 14.18. Number. 19. and 31.23. Now their washings or
baptisms were by sprinkling or casting water upon the party washed, as well as
otherwise; for Heb. 9.13, that sprinkling the Apostle makes a species of the
former washing. Thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will pour clean water upon
you. Yea, what was the baptism of the Holy Ghost, Acts 1.2. but the pouring out
of the Holy Ghost? which is opposed to John's baptizing with water. And
therefore I say, that though we should grant (which they cannot easily prove)
that they went into the water in those hot Countries, sometimes as conveniencie
served: yet its not necessarily concluded from the text that they were dipped,
but that the water was cast upon them, rather than they cast into the water,
according to the custom in some Countries to this day. Thus the water was
poured on the Ark, 1 Pet. 3.21. the like figure or antitype whereunto baptism
does now save us; Had the Ark been dipped in the water, all the world in
probability had been drowned. Yea this pouring of water upon the party baptized
does better resemble the application of the blood of Christ, which is rather
done by applying it to us, through the Spirit, than our applying our selves to
it.

There are two words put for dipping, (...) and (...), John 13.26. (...).
the former signifies a dipping more light and overly, but never signifies to
go to the bottom of the water; the other a plunging or covering the whole body
under water. These are distinguished each from other, Exodus 15.4, 5. (...).
This difference did the Greek writers make between baptizing (...) dousing, and
casting under water; expressing by baptizing to be in the water as a bottle or
ship, that is seldom or never overwhelmed. This appears plainly to be their
meaning, by the ancient Oracle of the Athenians, Beza in Matthaeum.
(...). Baptize or wash him as a bottle in water, but do not drown him. The
primitive word (...) signifies to touch the water gently, Luk 19 24. where the
top of the finger is put upon the water, there is baptism; the finger then may
be said to be baptized when the top of it only is dipped. Therefore it is
remarkable, that when ever the New Testament has occasion to express the act
of dipping, it uses the word (...), never In Verbis non tam spectandum ex quo
quam ad quid sumantur. Aquinas. For the derivatives are often of a larger sense
than the primitives.
(...): But when ever it has occasion to express the sacred action of Baptism,
it uses the word (...).

Psalm. 10.77. They that go down to the Sea in ships, see the wonders of the
Lord. Is the ship plunged all over, or are they under the water in the ship? So
I say, a man may go into the water, though he do but peditare. Eze. 47.3. Add
to these 1 Cor. 15.29. Else wh^t shall they do that are baptized ((...)) for
the dead? Which words cannot imply dipping, whether you interpret them, first,
of washing the bodies of the dead, Acts 9. etc; secondly, of that vicartum
baptisma, as Tertullian calls it, when they were baptized over the Sepulcres or
graves of those that di^d not being baptized; Or, thirdly, as Calvin, [for the
dead] that is, pro ijs qui jam mortui censentur, et qui de vita omnino
desperaverint; sic Catechumeni, in morbum incidentes si imminebat certum mortis
periculum baptismum petebant, ne ante migrarent ex hoc mundo quam nomen Christo
dedissent. Now what probability is there that such sick persons should be
plunged in the Water?

Obj. Christ was baptized into Jordan, when he was thirty years of age.

Ans. 1. I answer, he was baptized or washed at thirty years of age to answer
the type, Exodus 29.4. For at that time the Priests were washed, when installed
in their Office.

2. We say, that this was in the infancy of baptism, though Christ was no
infant, for baptism mas newly instituted.

3. John 9.7. (...). In this they were not doused over head and ears, as
appears by the Word.
In or into in Scripture phrase are confounded. As Luke 11.7. Ioh. 8.26. and
11.9.

4. Though we admit that translation, that Christ came out of the water, yet is
it not said that he came from under the water.

Obj. In your pouring on of water or sprinkling, part only of the body is
washed.

Ans. Mar. 7.3. the Pharisees are said to be baptized, though their hands only
were washed; and the Jews are said to be circumcised, though one part only
were circumcised. Naaman was bidden go wash. Therefore by the word (...) so
rendered in the LXX, I understand he washed in the river Jordan, according to
the (...), which signifies not to dip, but to wash.
command given him by the Prophet.

Obj. Rev. 19.13. Their garments dipped in blood, (...).

An. If you compare it with Isa. 63.2. you will find no difference; the text in
Rev. 19, being but an exegesis of Isa. 63. for Edom is a type of Rome. The
Question propounded in Isa. 63, in v. 2. is, Why art thou red in thine apparel?
The Answer is in v. 3. See the Hebr.

Quo sunt commaculatae vestes, eo sunt aspersae.


I have trodden the VVine-press alone, and of the people there was none with
me. -- And their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments: therefore, I say
the word in Rev. 19, (...), signifies besprinkled, as the Prophet holds it out.
For what probability is there, Obj. John baptized in Bethabara neat Jordan.

Ans. (...), non significat semper ulteriorem ripam, sed simpliciter (...).
Scil. D^mum transitus quod ibi fluvius Jordanis tra^iceretur, atque filij
Israelis transirent Glass. Which was a type of Baptism, through which we pass,
and are solemnly admitted into the Church of God


that those warriors should dip their garments in blood?

Obj. John 3.23. John was baptizing in Aenon, because there was much water
there; therefore it seems they were dipped.

Ans. By the way observe, that they who deny consequences, make use of them
themselves; but blessed is he which condemns not himself in the thing which
he allows. But to let this pass, I answer, That John having multitudes coming
to him, might well seek a place where he and his Disciples might at once be
employed; and the multitude might better hear his Sermons, and see the
Ordinance administered, than if performed under the shading banks of Jordan.
(...) many waters.
The reason assigned from the depth of the water, seems very unreasonable; for
an adjunct equally common to diverse subjects, cannot be the ^ormal reason of
the wills determining it self to one of those subjects. Is it sense (judge ye)
that John should leave Bethabara, where its certain much water was, to baptize
in Aenon, on this sole account and mo^ive, because there was much water (...)
dipping sake. He might have sought for a deep, and needed not seek many waters.
Dr Worth.

2. In some places they were much put to it for want of water.

3. Aenon is found by Travelers to be very shallow.

4. Suppose they went into the waters, it cannot ^^e hence concluded that all
did; for how unfit was it ^or Paul with his sores to go unto the water? Acts
16.33. Mat. 3.16. (...) from the water.


5. Suppose they went into the waters, yet it does ^ot appear that they were
dipped; but rather that the water was cast upon them, according to the custom
of some Churches at this day, as I formerly menti^ned.

6. If they shall say that going into the water was ^ipping, then it follows
that they were dipped before ^^ey were dipped; for Philip baptized the Eunuch
after they went into the water, and so they were twice ^ipped; yea as often as
the Administrator goes into ^he water, so often is he dipped or baptized, and so
be^omes a Sebaptist, if the going into the water be essen^al to baptism.

7. Christ does not appoint the measure of water, ^or manner of washing, more
than the measure of ^^ead or wine in the Lords Supper; it matters no ^or^
quantum quisque abluat, quam quantum quisque comedat; though a refreshment of
the Soul by the fullness of Christ, is very fit to be resembled by the quantity
of the elements.

Obj. Col. 2.12. We are said to be buried with Christ in baptism.

Ans. It appears not (as has been showed) by the use of the word in Scripture,
or the common use among the Graecians, that it signifies to be under the water:
Christ had a baptism, but not such as made him sink under it, The Apostle says
Romans 6. We are implanted into the similitude of his death, which is as much as
our burial, but a plant is not put all over into the stock.
for his head was still above the water; neither is it said he came from under
the water, but he came ou^ of the water.

2. The pouring of water seems to answer the similitude of burying more aptly,
A man drunk in the Sa^on lanis said to be under the water.
which is done by the casting of the mold upon us, rather than by casting of u^
into the mold.

3. We are said to be Mr Pat. in page 8. says that the word signifies to
drown; But did Christ bid them drown all Nations, and promised to be with them
to the end of the world in so doing? Has he not engaged that he will no more
drown the world with water, and does he give his servants charge so to do?
Levit. 1.3.
buried with Christ in baptism, in regard of the spiritual union we have with
him in his death and burial; bu^ if when a comparison is willing to go with us
a mile, w^ compel it to go twain, wh^ should they not continue under the water,
as Christ di^ in the grave, three days together.

4. To conclude, I do not believe that Christ hat^ tied all Nations universally
to that which is, 1. S^ dangerous to health and life, as we see it in many; and
therefore it might admit of a dispensation though ^t were precisely commanded.
2. So inexpedient otherwise, for says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. The women must
have a vail because of the Angels, least they by any uncivil carriage be
offended; and is there not a great respect to be given to modesty and civility
in these cases, least Angels and men be scandalized? Thus many words are used
in Scripture in a double sense, (...) Vox unica Lev. 1.2. ex ovibus sive
capris. 2 Chronicles. 3.6. Gold of Parvajim in the dual number, thence Peru; the
word seems to imply that Solomon fetched his gold from the East and West Indies.
Thus Jerushala^^ in the dual number, because the City had two parts, Neb. 3.9,
12. Luke 1.22, 6^ (...) signifies deaf and dumb, and so in this place; for if
Zachariah had not been deaf, what need had they to make signs to him? So that
we see, one and the same word may admit of diverse significations in the same
place, and so intended by the Holy Ghost,
Therefore I rather judge the word signifies ^overly to dip or wash by way of
affusion; and that either way may be used, especially in hot Countries, but
neither of them necessarily enjoined.

We have now showed you how the word is used in Scripture, and other heathen
authors; and may we not at length retort, That he that knows not what this
word [Baptize] signifies, and consequently what it is to baptize, is no
justifiable Minister of Jesus Christ. But this is Argumentum ad hominem.

Thus much for the word (...).

Secondly, I say baptism is a washing with water, Acts 8.36. here is water,
says the Eunuch, therefore they are much too blame that deny this. Those in
Acts 10 had as much of the spirit as any have, or ever will in this life, and
yet were baptized; yea, Christ himself submits to rhis Ordinance, saying,
Thus it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness, and did experience the fruit
of it; there being such a glorious presence at the celebration of that
Ordinance, as never was vouchsafed to any before or since: Though there was no
defect of any grace in him, required of him in his former state; yet a greater
measure of the spirit was poured forth upon him, upon his baptism in order to
his ministry.

Thirdly, It is the washing with water by a lawful Minister. Oportet nos
baptismum de manu hominis non aliter suscipere, quam si ipse Christus propriis
suis manibus nos baptizaret. Luth.

Christus non baptizavit Joh. 4.1. Haec fuit intentio Domini, ne quispiam ideo
se sanctius baptizatu^ putaret, quod a ministro sanctiore baptizaretur. Aug.


Matt. 28.19. Go Ye and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. Such as are
commissioned to preach, are authorized to baptize; those having a command, have
a promise also annexed, of Christ's special presence to be with them to the end
of the world. But he that has no such Commission cannot challenge any interest
in that promise; therefore the baptism of private men, and such as are not
called to the work of the ministry, is a mere nullity.

Though there was the matter and form of baptism in that of Athanasius, The
efficient cause is essential to the constitution of the effect, in some things.

Quid si verba Psittaeo proferantur? Impurum os: Psittacus non loquitur sed
garrit; non est verbum quod ab illa pronuciatur, (...) enim est (...) tantum.


namely, a child baptizing other children; yet there wanting a lawful
instrument authorized to the work, the baptism is no baptism; and therefore in
that case, such as were baptized by him were to be ^ebaptized. I say then by a
lawful Minister, For ^bilities are not sufficient to authorize any for the
^ublick dispensing of the word ordinarily, unless ^hey be proved and approved
first, and so set apart ^o the work of the Ministry, 2 Timothy 3.10. Let these
also first be proved, and then let them use the Office of (...) Deacon. Mind
the word also, (for there is much divinity in conjunctions as well as pronouns)
which word implies that Ministers are first to be tried, and so set apart to
the work, (as appears by the 1, and 2 verses, where he speaks of a bishop or
Minister) Acts 13.3. before they take that calling upon them.

Christ himself (that was better qualified for the Office of a Mediator, than
all the Angels in heaven and men on earth, yet) du^st not undertake it till he
was called as Aaron, Heb. 5.4. As the Father sent me, says Christ, so I send
you; Christ had his Commission from his father, as the Apostles had their
Commission from him.

No doubt but Butchers and others might have as much skill to kill the
sacrifice as the Priests had, but that was no warrant for them so to do.

Corah with his hundred and fifty Princes, famous ^n the congregation, men of
renown, and (as it seems) well reputed of among the people; rose up against
Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation
is holy; making no distinction between Moses, Aaron, and the Number 26.10. For a
sign, they are for a sign to all to this very day.
rest of the Congregation. Therefore they usurped the Priests office: But upon
this the Lord appears, and makes such a distinction between them and the
Priests, as never was made before; for the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up. Now least any should pre^end th^^ is an Old Testament John 10. All
that came before me are Thieves and Robbers. Observe, he does not say they
were, but they are. God looks at such as Thieves and Robbers in hell to this
very day, that ran before they were sent.
Proof; the Apostle Jude tells you o^ the like in the New Testament, They
perished in the gainsaying of Corah, Iud^ 11. Whence observe,

First, there were in Jude's time such as denied the office of the Ministry.

Secondly, the hand of God was signally on them.

In some cases private men may; 1. In time of necessity, when there is no other
means to be had. Or, 2. In times of Persecution, when the ordinary door of
entrance is shut; as appears in that instance of WALDUS Rev. 14. a Merchant of
Lions.
As private men may not publicly dispense the word, in an ordinary way: so
neither may they administer the Seals. For to whom Christ gave commission to
preach, to them gave he commission to baptize, and to them only, Mat. 28. Go
Ye and teach all nations, baptizing them, etc. And lo I am with you always
to the end of the world. We have (blessed be God) a command, and a promise of
his presence; they have no such command, and therefore I verily believe they
find little of the presence of God in their administrations, either for
conversion or otherwise; I am sure they cannot challenge much at the hand of
God; For had I sent them (says the Lord, Jer. 23.) they should have profited
this people, had they stood in my council, and not ran before they ^vere sent,
(running away, as he said, with the emp^^ cart) they should have turned them
from their ^vil ways.

As for our Paedobaptism, if it have nothing of Gods ^ppointment, neither
administrator, matter, form, ^^ght subject, nor end, surely God would not own
it ^s he has from heaven many a time and often.

Obj. Ananias, Acts 9.10. being a Disciple, ba^tized.

I answer, 1. He had a special command for the bapti^ing of Paul, let them show
the like pre^^dent. Iud. 6.20. ^ffer thou. Thus the command made it lawful,
which without a special command had been unlawful.

Secondly, It appears by the Ecclesiastical Story, ^^e was a Minister of Jesus
Christ, See Corn a Lap in Act 9. First one of 70 Disciples, afterward fixed at
Damascus.
and so indeed this word [Disciple] in hebrew ^s put for a teacher.

Thus much for the third head.

Fourthly, It is the washing with wa^er, in, or unto the name of the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Acts 19. v. When they heard this, they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

I will not deny but that there being an error in the Foundation, there may be
a rebaptization; it is very probable to some, that those Disciples were
baptized of Paul, seeing that they were not baptized into the name of the Holy
Ghost.

1. They being asked whether they had received the Holy Ghost, Though others
take it in another sense, fee Joh 7.30 The Holy Ghost was not yet (given) is
added to the text:

Ambrosius sentit illos adulteri no baptismate sub nomine baptismi Johannis,
non tam iinctos quam sordidatos.

See Mac. Musc. Zanch. Deodat. Erg. Nihil est in verbis, eu^^ n eque esse Lucae
ac Pauli verba existen^mus, nam quod ad particulas illas graecas attinct (...),
saepius in Scrip^^ logitur et (...) sine (...) subsequente, et (...) sine (...)
prae^^^e Rom 3 2. and 10.1. Col 2.17. Luk 11.3^. Act. 11. (...). et tamen (...)
non praec^sserat. Macc. Quere, whether many Administrator in these days, deny
not the second and third persons in Trinity.


that is, the gifts of the Holy Ghost They answered, they knew no whether there
were an Holy Ghost or no; which words imply the existence or subsistence of the
third Person i^ Trinity.

2. Those were Jews, now many of the Jews did not rightly understand the
doctrine of the Trinity.

3. It appears by the question Paul propounds ver. 31. Unto what then were ye
baptized? Now no man is baptized into the gifts of the Holy Ghost, but into the
Holy Ghost himself.

4. If that new interpretation be admitted, there is a tautologie; for who does
not by the words going before (John verily baptized with the baptism of
repentance, v. 4.) understand that they were already baptized by John, v. 3.4.
To what purpose then should he say in the 5 v. When they heard this, they were
baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus? Calvin seeing the force of this
Argument, says, They were baptized with extraordinary gifts of the Holy ghost.
But that is expressed in the words following, when Paul laid his hands on them.

5. That interpretation overthrows the grammatical sense of the words, and
seems to render them void of common sense; for the words spoken by Paul to
them, are in the second person whereas these words [they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus] are spoken in the third person; Therefore cannot be the
words of Paul to them, but of Luke concerning them; else the Apostle would have
said [ when ye heard this] and not as we have them [ when they heard this.]
Besides it is somewhat harsh to make the people whom John baptized, and those
twelve Disciples of Ephesus the same persons: For the pronouns they and they in
the 4 and 5 verses, upon that supposition that both are Paul's words, cannot be
understood but of the same persons, (as is well alleged by some) Therefore
these words [when they heard this] must be taken as the words of Luke, not of
Paul; importing the baptism of these Disciples upon the preaching of Paul, and
not of John.

6. The Apostle, Act. 194, does plainly declare. That John, when he baptized,
did say that they should believe in him that should come after him; which Paul
interprets to be meant of Christ Jesus. But if John had baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus explicitly, In this sense some understand Cyprian, denying the
baptism of such heretics which erred in Fundamentals.
why did not Paul say so, rather than to say that he baptized them, saying unto
them, that they should believe in him that should come after him? Whosoever
therefore shall destroy the foundation, denying the Trinity and depraving the
form of baptism, their baptism is invalid.

Thus much of the Definition.

We pass from the definition to the Arguments for Infant Baptism. The first
Argument is taken from the command of Christ, Go and disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father etc.

1. By nations is meant Men, Women and Children, which are a great part of
nations, and must needs be included in the command; for when David exhorts
all people and nations to praise the Lord, he afterward explains himself,
Young men and maidens, old men and children, let them praise the name of the
Lord. Psalm 148.11, 12, 13.

2. We know when the nation of the Jews were made Disciples and circumcised
their Children also were made Disciples, that is, such as were a^mitted into
Christ's School; for a child is accounted a scholar the first day of his
admission; and such did Christ undertake to teach, non quia docti erant sed ut
docti essent; discipling being not of persons already taught, but that they
might be taught.

3. In the words of the text, all nations are opposed to that restriction of it
to the Jews; the commission of the Apostles being enlarged as to the gentiles;
therefore Children are included in it, as they were formerly.

4. Quicquid de universally aliquo universaliter dicitur, id de omnibus sub isto
universali contentis dicitur. Vel, posito toto generali, pars ejus negari non
debet.
God speaks of nations universally, and gives no restraint, no determination or
limitation unto any sex or age; therefore all are included.

5. It Is a national dispensation, and from a national, dispensation no entire
species ever was exempted.

6. The A stranger that is circumcised (says Maimonides) and not baptized, or
that is baptized and not circumcised, is not a Proselyte till he be both
circumcised and baptized.
manner of the Jews was to baptize the Children of Jews and Proselytes. Ex.
19.8. they were all baptized or washed. Thus Genesis 35.2. Jacob caused the women
and children to be baptized; And in the Talmud (as Mr. Liglnfoot observes) they
baptize little ones by the appointment of the Consistory. The hebrew gloss upon
the place says, If he have not a father, and his mother bring the child to be
Proselyted, they baptize him, because there is no Proselyte without
circumcision and baptism.

Hence it is that a Jewish Proselyte in Arrianus is called (...), a baptized
person.


for baptism or washing among the Jews was a known Rite, solemnly used among
them for the initiating of Jews and Proselytes into the Covenant. Therefore the
manner and form of baptism with the subject thereof, being well known to the
Jews, they enquire not of John concerning those things, John 1.25, but only
question his commission. This Jewish custom Christ turns into an Ordinance,
that he might quietly usher it into the world, not expressly mentioning the
children, but including them in the general; the right of children to the Seal
being granted, and not at all questioned by them.

Thus then I argue, Nations discipled are to be baptized, But the children of
believers are a part of Nations discipled: Therefore they are to be baptized.
See Mat. 10.42. Mar. 9.41. Where these terms are confounded.
That they are called disciples it appears by Acts 15 10, Why tempt ye God to
put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples? All they upon whose neck they would
have laid this yoke are disciples. But they would have put this yoke of
circumcision upon children: Therefore children in the sense of the Holy Ghost
are here called disciples. Mind v. 1. Except ye be circumcised after the manner
of Moses ye cannot be saved; those words, after the manner of Moses, include
all Males whether young or old.

Act. 21.21. with v. 25. and 6.14. Those Myriads or many-ten-thousands were
informed, That Paul taught the Jews among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, See
Act. 21.4, 5. Finding disciples -- they all brought us on our way, with Wives
and children. Where wives and children are included under the notion of
Disciples.
saying that they ought not to circumcise their children; but the Elders tell
him, as touching the Gentiles that believe, we have written and concluded that
they observe no such thing, that is, that their children should be circumcised:
for the relative ((...)) must needs be referred to the 21 verse, where he
mentions the circumcision of Children. Observe then he says, we have written
and concluded, which words refer to Acts 15 23, The Apostles, Elders and
Brethren send greetings to the Brethren which are of the Gentiles. It appears
that the question was concluded as concerning the Gentiles and their children,
(and not the Jews children) called there Disciples. The Apostles and Elders
wave the question as concerning the Jews children, for as yet the Jews were not
able to bear it, Acts 6 14; but they determine that the Gentiles should not
circumcise their children, or observe any of those ceremonial Rites; save only
that they abstain from things strangled, and fornication, from things offered
to idols, and from blood. So that it is as clear as the Sun, that by Disciples,
Acts 15 10, children are meant.

2. Children are such as do belong to Christ, therefore they are Disciples of
Christ; for to belong to Christ, and to be a Disciple of Christ, is all one in
scripture phrase. Mat. 27 57 with Mat. 10 42, Poculum aquae frigidae, quae
nullis expensis eget, sed faci e parabilis: frigidam aquam dixit* ut ne
calefaciendi impendat lab^rem. Chrysostom in Mat. 10. Nam in usu et deliciis fuisse
p^tum aquae calidae apud antiquos, non s lun^ haec Chrysostomi, sed et aliorum
testimonia indicam. Pin. in Job.
Whosoever shall give a cup of cold water to one of these little ones, etc.
These are distinguished from Prophets and righteous men, b^^ called Disciples.

3. They are such as Christ undertakes to teach. Isa. 54 13, all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord. Ier. 31 34, they shall all know me from the lest
to the greatest, that is young and old. This promise is applied ( John 6 45.)
unto the people of God in the new Testament, whom the Lord does engage to teach
and incline their hearts to believe in him.

Obj. It is said, Go teach (Mat. 28) and then baptize, that is, say some, such
as are made Disciples by the teaching of men.

Ans. 1. We deny that its necessary they should be taught of men before they be
baptized; Paul was not taught by man when he was baptized by Ananias; it is
sufficient to us that the Lord engages to teach us and our children.

2. In scripture we say there is no priority or posteriority; therefore from
the priority simply the argument is not conclusive: In Scripturis non datur
prius and posterius.
But if they will argue hence, That they must first be taught by men; we retort
Mark 1 4, John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance; where you see baptism is put before preaching.

3. Matt. 28 19. (...). The antecedent to (...) is (...), per Synthesis. Thus
Romans 9 24 v. (...). Gall. 4.19. (...). Col 2.19. (...). Caput ex quo Mat.
15.4. (...) v. 6. (...). John 16.13. (...) -- (...). Which notes the
personality of the holy Ghost.
If we precisely stick to the words, then women are excluded; for the word
(...) is the masculine gender.

4. For the adult, we say teaching ordinarily goes before the administration of
the Seal; but not so in infants: It was sufficient that Abraham was effectually
taught, though his children were not as ye^ capable of instruction;
notwithstanding as he, so they were all admitted to the seal of circumcision.

5. If the Lord had given a Commission to the Apostles, saying, Go teach all
nations, circumcising them in the name of the Father; had this been
inconsistent with Infant-Circumcision? I say no, but if the Lord say, Go ye,
disciple all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; why should any imagine that Infants are excluded? This word (...)
signifies properly to disciple them, q. d. admit them into the school of
Christ; thus the word is constantly used in the new Testament, as in Mat. 27
57, (...). Heb. 7.11. -- The people received the Law, that is, were legalized,
disciplined after a legal manner, (...).
He was Iesus's disciple, or he was disciple to him. Where we see plainly, That
relative discipleship may be admitted of in scripture. Acts 14 21. (...);
having evangelized that city, (that is, turned them into the mold of the
Gospel) and discipled a competent number, they ordained Elders in every Church,
v. 23.

6. Making disciples being an aorist, has the force of a future tense, (...).
and baptizing is of the present tense; therefore (...) seems to have the
precedencie.

7. Though (make disciples) be first in order of words yet not of things: For
he does not say, Go make disciples and baptize them; but make disciples
^aptizing them: As if he had said, By dedicating them to God in that Ordinance,
they are made dis^iples of Christ.

8. If children be left out in this commission, it is because, 1. They are not
named, and so women are excluded also, for they are not named, (...) being of
the masculine gender. Or, 2. Because they are not capable of being taught, and
so of being Disciples of Christ. But the contrary has been proved, That they
are taught by God, and after they are come out of their infancy, are capable
of being taught of men.

The Second Argument.

Such children as are incovenanted, are to be sealed with the initial seal of
the Covenant: But the children of believing Parents, Si rem concedant que major
est, cur n^n signum qu^d min^s est? In omni enim Sacrament signum i^ quantum
signum incomparabiliter, minus est quam Res ipsa. Luther. de cap. Bap.
are incovenanted: Therefore, They are to be sealed with the initial seal of
the Covenant.

The first Proposition is proved Genesis 17 7, 9, and I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations; for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee. Thou
shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in their
generations. You see the Covenant is made by the Lord himself a ground of
Circumcision. Now where we have a promise laid for the foundation of a duty, it
is equivalent to any express command; seeing the will of God is as well known
by promise or threatening, ( Ier. 10 25) or necessary consequence, as by express
command or example: Yea those words [thou shall keep my Covenant therefore]
extend to us also in the new Testament; but not as to circumcision, therefore
to baptism. I would fain know whether by virtue of this covenant made with
Abraham, the posterity of Abraham shall not be reinstated into that land ( Mic.
7 14, 15 Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead as in the days of old, and
according to the days of thy coming out of Egypt will I show unto him
mavelous things. Ver. 20, Thou will perform thy truth to Jacob and thy mercy
to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our fathers from the days of old.) If
so, (as I shall show hereafter more fully) then these words [thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore] can not be meant of circumcision, (which was long since
abolished) but must needs be meant of baptism, which comes instead thereof;
seeing there is no other initial seal mentioned in the new Testament: Which
seal of the Covenant, not only the natural feed of Abraham, the Jews; but all
his spiritual seed, the Gentiles, are bound to apply to their children by
virtue of this command.

Had not circumcision been ceremonial, and another sign instituted instead
thereof, no doubt it had been in force to this day. (As that of the Sabbath,
what is moral in that command, remains; though that seventh day of rest from
the creation be abolished, yet there is another seventh day instead thereof
appointed, which is the first of the last seven, as the other was the last of
the first.) This then is moral in that of circumcision, That our faith is to be
held forth and professed to the world, by the dedication of our children to
God. Genesis 17 12.

He that is eight days old shall be circumcized. This is no institution of
Circumcision, Erg. Exodus 12, When he speaks of the circumcision of the children
of Proselytes, there is no day limited for the observance thereof.
(as is well observed by some) but a subsequent directory for the particular
day.

The institution it self we find in verse. 10, without any restriction to
infancy in that latitude, See Ainsworth. Number. 9 6, 7, 8. (...)
as comprising Males of any age, omnis mas, every male whether man or child
shall be circumcised. Thus the new Testament, Gal. 3 28, (...), male and
female; there is no limitation of it, therefore it may as largely be taken as
the word before mentioned, Genesis 17 10. We see then that the Covenant is still
in force, and the command thereto annexed, sc That Infants should be sealed,
only the Seal of circumcision is turned into baptism.

Those males and females ( Gal. 3 28) are equally privileged according to the
teno^ of Abraham's Covenant; for, says the Apostle, we are all one in Christ
Jesus, and if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to
the promise: But children are Christ's: Erg. Abraham's seed, and therefore
consequently alike privileged with Abraham's children. Add to this the words
of the Text, Acts 2 -- And let every one of you be baptized, for the promise is
to you (Jews and Proselytes) and your children. This was the first open
promulgation of the Covenant.

The Jews were so accustomed to that great personal promise [I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed,] as that there needed not any explanation of it; it
being ordinarily put for the Covenant, and contrariwise the Covenant put for
it. Gal. 3.14, 17. That the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles,
that we might receive the promise of the spirit. Thus verse. 17, This I say
therefore, that the Covenant which was confirmed of God in Christ before the
Law, which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanul, that it
should make the promise of none effect.

Sometimes the Apostle uses the plural Number, v. 16. Now to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made. Observe, he says, to Abraham and his seed were
the promise made. Which relates to Genesis 17. For in Genesis 12. he says, [in
thee.] Yea, Gal. 3 16. The inheritance was given by promi^e. Now in Genesis 12 1
he only says, he will show him the land, but in the 17. he gives it.
Because this proposition [I will be thy God] being the mother promise
contains all other promises in the womb of it. Thus Romans 4 13. (...), the
promise, that is the Covenant made to Abraham, is to be understood, being
mentioned in that chapter no less than four times.

This promise, says the Apostle Acts 2, is to you and your children, and to
the Gentiles (when called) and their children: To you Jews actually; (for they
were not as yet cut off) and to the Gentiles intentionally, answering the call
of the Gospel.

As for that Mr. Tom his rev.
interpretation of sending Christ, which is given by some; we say, It Is
improper to say, the promise i^, for it was already fulfilled; (though it was
included in Abrahaham's Covenant) but as for remission of sins and pouring out
the spirit on them and theirs, they are included in that great promise, [I will
be thy God and the God of thy seed.] Thus the Apostle, Gal. 3 14, That we might
receive the promise of the spirit through faith. This the Apostle had chiefly
in his ey: For the giving of the Messiah was the great promise of the old
Testament; as the giving of the spirit is the great promise of the new
Testament. See Luke 24.49. Acts 1.4, 5. and 2.33. Having received of the Father
the promise of the holy Ghost. Compare Acts 10.47. and 11.16. and 15.8, 9.
Giving them the holy Ghost as he did unto us, and put no difference between us
and them, purifying their hearts by faith. Which words show you, that it is not
meant only of the extraordinary gifts, but of the ordinary gifts of
sanctification: By spirit then ( Act. 2 37) he means not so much, or solely,
the extraordinary gifts of the spirit, as regenerating graces, with the degrees
of them.

We have now proved the first Proposition, namely, That such as are in
Covenant, are to be sealed with the seal of the Covenant. It remains that we
prove the second, sc. That Children are incovenanted. For the proof of which,
mind well the words of the Text, The promise is to you and to your Children.

Obj. The promise runs to children when they are called.

Ans. Calling in the Jews did not go before the Covenant, but followed after,
as appears by Act. 3.25. Ye are the Children of the Covenant which God made
with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the families
((...), where children must of necessity be included, as the word imports) of
the earth be blessed.

The promise was not made to their seed, because they did believe; but some of
their seed did believe because they were under the promise: which promise
reaches to spirituals as well as carnals, even to turn them from their
iniquities.

To the Jew first and also to the Gentile was this promise made. The Jew before
had a jus ad rem, but upon their repentance a jus in re. Act. 2 39. That being
suspended till they came in, and then the promise runs clear without any
interruption.

2. The Apostle shows not only that baptism comes instead, but that it is
administered on the same grounds, sc. That God is our God and the God of our
seed; we need not fear the seal is put to a blank; (because no visible faith
appears) for here is a Covenant to which this seal of baptism is annexed, and
the Covenant, I hope, none will say is a blank to which the name JEHOVAH is
added, that gives being to all those promises. Which name is so often repeated
in Jer. 31, to show that as he was known by that name when he brought them out
of Egypt: So now much more in these later days, in bringing them out of all
countries whether they are scattered.

3. An exclusion of their children would have exceedingly perplexed them, as is
undeniably evident; they being conscious to themselves of that bitter curse
which was pronounced by them, [his blood be upon us and our children.]

4. Act. 2.41. They gladly received that word, namely, the promise is to you
and to your Children, and therefore were baptized; by which it appears that
they understood that their children were included in that Covenant. If then the
Proselytes upon the receiving of the word were circumcised, they and their
Children: then doubtless those and their children were baptized on the same
ground.

4. (...)
Christ came not to loosen the Law, much less the Prophesies and promises of
old made to believers. Romans 15 8. To confirm the promises made to our fathers.

Because this might be questioned, whether the Gentiles might be partakers with
the Jews of the promises and their appertenances; For he is not a God of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles parents and children, as he was to the
Jews. Ro^. 2.29
therefore the Apostle does abundantly labor to prove, by four several places
of Scripture, That Christ is a minister of the Circumcision, to confirm the
promises made to the fathers; and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his
mercy held forth in the same promise. See v. 9, 11, 12. I do not remember any
place of Scripture, where the Apostle does bring so many proofs as he does in
this one place, showing that the Gentiles have an interest in the promises made
unto the Jews; that so he might remove all scruples, and drive the nale to the
head, and clinch it fast. For

First, If children in the new Testament had been left out, they had lost by
the coming of Christ.

Secondly, The grace of Christ had been straighter in the new Testament than in
the old.

Thirdly, Then what ground of hope had the parent to plead for his child? Or
how may the child come in the name of his fathers God (which they were wont to
do) pleading the Covenant, if he have no interest to it as from his parents?

6. We have sufficiently proved, That the Covenant runs in the natural line of
believers, as to the outward administration of it (...) at lest till it be cut
off by parents or children, only it is established with Isaac and all such as
are true Isaacs.

7. Except in relation to the Covenant in that place, Act. 2, there could be no
occasion of naming Children: For,

The Apostle might have said. The promise is to you, and those that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord shall call, without putting in Children, but he
lets them understand, That, notwithstanding that bitter curse, [his blood be
upon us and upon our children] they were not as yet discovenanted, though the
ax lay ((...) Mat. 3) at the root of the tree, ready to cut them off from
Abraham, if they closed not with Christ.

8. That limitation to children when they are called, holds forth no more
privilege to the children of b^lievers than to the children of Pagans; but how
uncomfortable this doctrine is let the world judge.

9. Is not this strange doctrine, That the faith of the parent should set the
child farther ^ff from Go^? before they were near by the blood of the Lord, but
now afar ^ff: In that very moment the parent believes not, the child is under a
Covenant; in the next moment the parent believes (for regeneration is in an
Generatio fit in instanti.
instant as generation is) the child is discovenanted; how comes this sudden
change?

10. The Argument so put as formerly is alleged, is no Argument at all; for
whether the parent repent or not repent, in case the children be called, the
promise belongs to them. If a Landlord should move his Tenant to give up his
old Lease, (wherein the lives of his children are included, which also has
certain privileges to him and his children) and to take a new one in which his
childrens lives are left out having no more privileges than mere strangers;
could he rationally persuade him to surrender up the old Lease or grant, and to
take a new one from the benefit that may accrue to the Tenant by it, the lives
of his children being left out in the Lease? And what force is there in this
manner of arguing, judge ye. You and your children have been hitherto under a
Covenant of grace; now in case you believe your children shall be
discovenanted: but if hereafter they or any of the heathens shall believe, they
shall be admitted into the Covenant, but their children shall be left out. Had
this been of any force to persuade them to enter into the way of the new
Testament? Or to comfort poor souls, that doubtless were much troubled about
that bitter curse, his blood be upon us and our children? Would it not have
disheartened them for ever, and made them stumble at that stumbling-stone?

Obj. This promise is meant of extraordinary gifts.

Ans. This salve reaches not the sore; they were pricked and wounded in the
very heart, and stood in need of comfort to support their fainting spirits; of
a God to pardon, a Christ to save, a Spirit to sanctify and comfort; therefore
we may not limit the promise to those extraordinary gifts: For what comfort had
it been to them to tell them they should receive the gift of Tongues and
working miracles? when they hung over the chimnies of hell, (as I may so speak)
or the smoke of the damned, ready to be cast into the everlasting flames, for
ought they knew, every moment.

2. It Is to all that are a far off, to wit, Gentiles: Now all such do not
receive any such extraordinary gifts, neither have they any such promise; if
so, none in these days (for ought I know) are effectually called.

To put an end to this Text observe these 3 things.

First, The promises that are made to Parents are made to their children also;
Children are under the same Covenant with their parents.

Secondly, A right to the promise is a ground of right to the Seal: Or, being
in Covenant is the ground of being baptized; for to whom belongs the Covenant,
to them belongs the Seal of the Covenant. Foederati sunt signandi.

Thirdly, Ad quos causa legis proxima and immediata pertinet, ad illos etiam
lex illa pertinet. Tom. Exer.
Upon the same ground that parents are baptized, their children may and must be
baptized: (for there is the like reason for the one as for the other) But
parents are baptized because the promise is to them: Therefore the Children may
and must be baptized on the same ground because the promise is to them also. q.
d. Ye Jews that now repent and believe, be ye baptized with your children; for
the promise is to you and to your children. The duty of being baptized extends
as far as the ground or reason of it: But that extends to Children: Therefore
so does the duty also.

WE come now to other Scriptures: For with this great scripture ( Act. 2) the
body of the scripture does concur. Abraham. Nomina in futurum proposita nihil
possunt in futuru^ promittere, sed quod nomen os Domini nominavit propheticum
est futurorum. Riv in Genesis 17 Datum fuit nomen pro signo effectus futuri, ut
quotiescunque occurreret ei nomen suum, revocaret in memoriam dei promissionem.

Nomen Abrahae mutatum ante institutionem circumcisionis, ut liquido constaret
pactum promissionis, non tantum ad unam gentem circumcisam, sed ad multas
gentes pertinere. Gat.


As Gen 17 7, and 28 4. And give thee the blessing of Abraham to thee and thy
seed after thee. Compared with Gal 3 14, That the blessing of Abraham might
come upon the Gentiles. This later text is explained by the former.

Lev. 26 42, I will remember my Covenant with Jacob, and my Covenant with Isaac
and with Abraham. Observe how he ascends: He begins with Jacob, (Esau being cut
off) from Jacob to Isaac, (Ishmael being cut off) from Isaac to Abraham. This
will he do when they accept of the punishment of their iniquity, that is kiss
the rod, and humble themselves under the mighty hand of God; because and
because (for so the original renders it) they despised his judgments. Then
says the Lord, ver. 45, I will remember the Covenant of their Ancesters; this
promise relates to their last captivity, ver. 44. Compared with Romans 11.1, 26
28.

Deuteronomy. 43, If in thy later days thou return, he will not forget the Covenant
made with thy fathers. Verse 37, Because he loved thy fathers therefore he
chose their seed after them. Cap. 7, 8, 10, ver. 15, Only the Lord had a
delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them. In
which Text observe, That God did show favor to the Children for the Parents
sake. Deuteronomy. 29 10, Ye stand this day before the Lord, your little ones and the
stranger that is in thy camp, -- that thou should enter into Covenant, He
speaks to them all as one man. Neither with you only (that is, you and your
Children here present) ^o I make this Covenant: but with him also that is not
here this day, (that is, the Observe v. 13 That he may be to thee a God as he
has sworn to Abraham.
Gentiles and their Children unborn intentionally.) Deuteronomy. 30 6, I will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed. Compared with ver. 5, I will
multiply thee above thy fathers. Which implies that this promise relates to
their return out of their last captivity: For this command which I command thee
this day, is not hidden from thee neither is it far off. This is a
Gospel-promise as appears by the Apostle Paul, Romans 10 6, The word of faith is
nigh thee; (a word of command and a word of promise being promiscuously used in
scripture phrase,) Psalm 111 11, compared with the 105 Psalm v. 8. He has
remembered his Covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand
generations. Psalm 37 25. I have never seen the rightous forsaken, or their
feed begging bread. Verse. 21, He is ever merciful and lends, and his seed is
blessed. Psalm 479, The voluntary of the people were gathered to the people of
the God of Abraham. Psalm 86 16, Save the son of thy handmaid. Psalm 116 16,
Truly I am thy servant and the son of thy handmaid; it appears not what his
father was, but it seems his mother was a good woman, this Covenant as from his
mother he pleads with God. Psalm 103 17, But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him and his rightousness, (.1.
the performance of the promises) to childrens children. Psalm. 102 28, The
children of thy servants shall continue, and their Isa. 66 22, Their seed shall
continue before me.
seed shall be established before thee. This is a Gospel-promise for the
continuance of their Children in their former state, as appears by the 17 v.
Thou art the same, or, thou art he, ((...)) so interpreted and applied to
Christ, Heb. 1 10.

Psalm 112 2, The generation of the upright shall be blessed.

Esa. 29 23, But when he sees his children the work of mine hands in the midst
of them, they shall sanctify my name. Esa. 44 3, I will pour my spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring, that is, their sons and daughters;
according to that expression Esaias 22 24, And they shall hang upon Him, namely
Christ, the offspring and the issue, that is, their sons and daughters. Esa.
(...) Significat signum, vexillum nauticum. Matt. 24. Tunc apparebit [(...)]
signum filij hominis. Number. 26 10, in signum. Haec enim omnia illis in figura
contigerunt. Page Therefore by the standard we may understand baptism, because
he says, They shall bring thy sons in their arms.
49 22, I will set up my standard to the people, and they shall bring thy sons
in their arms, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.
Compared with ver. 25, And I will save thy children.

Esa. 59 21, My word and my spirit shall not depart out of the mouth of thy
seed and of thy seeds seed for ever. This promise shall be fulfilled in the
later times, as appears by Romans 11 27, This is my Covenant with them when I
shall take away their sins. Compared with the former verse, The redeemer shall
come to Syon, and to them that turn from transgression in Jacob. And then he
tells them, This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; which he explains in
ver. 21, My word and spirit shall not depart out of the mouth of thy seed nor
seeds seed for ever. From whence observe, That the vein of election shall run
along in the loins of the seed of the elect, and their seeds seed for ever; for
that Church shall never be dischurched.

Esa. 61 9, And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their
offspring among the people. Esa. 65 23, For they are the seed of the blessed of
the Lord, and their offspring with them. This is a Gospel-promise relating to
the Jews. Non laborabunt inaniter, neque gignent liberos ad conturbationem, nam
semen benedictorum a Jehova erunt, and prognati eorum. Piscat. They shall not
bring forth children unto trouble, (q.d.) their issue shall enjoy the like
quiet and prosperous condition together with their parents, whereas formerly
they were brought forth to the pestilence and the sword, Hos. 9 12, 13. The
reason of this happiness of their children is given in the 23 verse, For they
are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them: So that
by offspring he must needs intend their natural issue, which is brought in as a
medium to prove the former proposition, namely, That they shall not bring forth
children unto trouble, or, (...), LXX. i. e. to a curse. To say this is meant
of the (...) is improper, for it is all one as if the Prophet had said, They are
the elect of the blessed of the Lord, and the elect with them; which is not
sense.

Jer. 30 20, Their children also shall he as aforetime, and their Church shall
be established before me: see the Hebr. This is a new Testament promise
grounded on Christ, (who engaged his heart to draw near to God, ver. 21.) which
shall be fullfilled in the later days. Then shall such as have scrupled this
truth ( ver 24.) consider it; for God will then be the God of all the families
of Israel, Ier 31 1, that is, parents and children.

If their children shall be as of old, doubtless as they were Church Members
visibly owned by God in the old, so shall they be still in the new Testament:
But to limit this text to their civil state only, seems to be clear against
the scope and purpose of the holy Ghost in these words, which is to show the
glorious and blessed condition of that Church. Ier. 32 39, That they may fear
me for ever, for the good of them and their children after them. This prophesy
is applicable to the Jews converted, ver 37, and is an implicit promise
suitable to that of the V. Commandment, [that thou may prolong thy days.]
Compared with Ephesians. 6 1. And so interpreted by the Apostle.

Ez. 16 21, Thou have slain my children whom thou have born to me, (for we are
neither born nor reborn to our selves) God owns them for his own though their
parents were Idolaters.

Ez. 36 11, I will settle you after your old estates, and will do better for
you than at your beginnings, Or as some read it, I will bestow benefits upon
you more than at the first. Then doubtless their children were not left out.

Ez 47 14, Ye shall inherit it one as well as another, yea, says the Lord, the
strangers with their children shall have inheritance with the children of
Israel in that land of Canaan, verse. 22. This is a Gospel-promise as appears by
many arguments which I could produce; the land being but a type of the Church
or heaven, in which children share with their parents.

Hos. 14 8, They that dwell under thy shadow shall return. This must needs
include the children, which shall be made good, especially to the Jews, upon
their last return.

Obj. These promises are made to the Jews, and can not properly be applied to
the Gentiles with their Children.

Ans. They were made in Christ, in whom all the promises are yea, that is,
affirmed; and amen, that is, confirmed to us Gentiles.

2. See Glass. Amos 9 12, Vt possideant residuum Edomi. Junius (...) per cum
vertit; ut haeredes sint cum reliquijs Edomi, and omnibus gentibus quae
vocantur de nomine meo. 1. Vt non tantum Judaei, verum etiam gentes reliquae
communi cum illis haereditate persruantur. LXX pro (...) possidebunt, legerunt
(...) requirent; unde illud (...), pro (...) legerunt (...) homo; unde illud
(...), and addiderunt vocem (...).
They are so interpreted, Act. 15.16, 17. Hos. 2 23, compared with Romans 9.24,
25. Hos. 12 4, He found him in Bethel and there he spoke with us: So that the
promises made unto Jacob are applicable unto us also. Hence it is that all the
people of God ( Gal. 6 16) are called the Israel of God.

If any shall say, That children in the old Testament were ceremonially holy:
The Apostle answers 1 Pet. 2 9, writing to the twelve tribes scattered ( Iam.
1.1) they and their children were an holy nation

Add to all these scriptures Exodus 20 5, Showing mercy unto thousands of them
that love me and keep my commandments. Matt. 1. Abraham is brought in as the
first explicit Covenanter, to whom the promise was made; which runs along in
the natural line to Christ, taking effect in some of his seed in every
generation. But least this should be thought to be a typical Covenant abolished
in Christ, whereas Matthew descends from Abraham to Christ, Luke ascends from
Christ to Adam; to show us that the Covenant extends to all believing Gentiles
as well as Jews, even to all the Sons of Adam.
I hope none will say that the moral law or the promises thereunto belonging
are abolished. Here is a promise made to those that worship God in the beauties
of holiness, I mean in the purity of his ordinances; to such and their seed
does the Lord extend mercy. (which is a fruit of the Covenant of grace not of
works) The like phrase we have in Timothy, Keep this command to the coming of
Christ, that is, if thou should live so long: So if the world should
continue to a thousand generations, (which I suppose not, for Mat. 1 those
three 14 generations took up a great part of the time from Abraham to Christ)
God will make good his word to them, if they cut not off the entail of the
promises.

Obj. When Princes offend their favorites are heaten: So when Parents
transgress their children are punished.
This is meant to those children that love the Lord, and the contrary
threatening to those Children which imitate their fathers vices.

Ans. 1. Exodus 34.7. Vtrumque absolute ponitur, Qui custodia misericordiam in
millia, and qui reddis iniquitatem patrum filijs ac nepotibus. Riv. Showing
mercy unto thousands, but visiting the sins of the parents upon the children
to the third and fourth generation: The words are put absolutely, without
restraining them to those that love or hate him, because they relate to the
parents; so that doubtless the child may suffer temporal punishment for the
fathers sins, as being a part of the father; but not eternal. Ezekiel 18.
If the command be so understood, then is there no pretense for children to
complain, The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth are set on
edge; if God did punish children only for imitating their parents vices.

2. If he spoke of children hating God as their fathers, why might he not have
said, Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto a thousand
generatons, as well as to the third or fourth?

3. If the words be so understood, then is the force of the comparison lost;
for he extolls his mercy above his justice, saying, Visiting the iniquities of
the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation, but,
Showing mercy to thousands: For the attributes of God are equal, (...) non
(...).

4. What force were there in this dehortation; You parents take heed of
idolatry, for if your children to the third or fourth generation committ
idolatry, I will punish them? It is not to be imagined, that the wisdom of the
father should argue thus irrationally: For so he should punish not so much the
sin of the father as the sins of the children.

Let none say these are old Testament proofs, (intrenching upon the prophetical
office of Christ) as if that which was written w^^^ not written for our
learning; or as if Christ were not sent to confirm the promises made to the
Fathers. Romans 15.

We thought much that the Papists should make void and unlord the second
Commandment, and the Bishops the fourth; but what shall we say to those that
wave the old Testament, unless it be in such places which seemingly make for
their own opinion; these have the leprosy in their heads, and therefore are
altogether unclean: For does not Moses expound Christ, and does not Christ send
the Jews to Moses for instruction? Ioh. 5 46, Luk 16 31.

Let us come to the new Testament, (though we say there is no more
inconveniency upon supposing of children in the new Testament to be in the
Covenant than formerly; therefore to reject Infants now, is to condemn the
wisdom of God in admitting them in the old) and hear what the Spirit says unto
the Churches; Matt. 22 32, compared with Ex. 3 6, I am the God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. The Lord makes mention of this Covenant
made with our fathers; for then he was about to bring them out of the land of
Egypt; wherein he failed not, but made good his word to a day, though the
promise was made four hundred and thirty years before, Ex. 12 42. It is a night
much to be observed, wherein the Lord brought them out of the land of Egypt; if
he had deferred to make good his promise but till the next day, he had (that I
may so say) forfeited his bond. Luke 1 54, He has helped his servant Israel in
remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his seed
for ever. q. d. God in giving Christ remembered his Covenant with Abraham. V.
72, To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers (...). i e. To show
mercy to our fathers; the fathers are the objects of this favor. But what is
this mercy and favor? The words following tell you, To remember his holy
Covenant.
and to remember his holy Covenant. Verse. 2, compared with the 76, And thou
Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest. He brings in the child here,
q. d. Behold the Covenant is made good to Abraham in this Child. Zacharias (who
was both deaf and dumb, as the word signifies and as it appears by the context,
for they made signs unto him how they would have him called) I say, Zacharias
triumphs in this, and magnifies Gods glorious grace, saying, Act. 3 21, (...),
By the mouth of all the Prophets.
As he spoke by the mouth of all the Prophets; as if all the Prophets had but
one mouth, being unanimous in their interpretation of the Covenant, v. 70,
which Covenant was made not only with Abraham, but with the fathers and their
children; and shall we have a mouth to speak or a heart to think contrary to
the sense and meaning of all the holy Prophets, which have been ever since the
world began? Far be it from us, yea for ever far be it from us, that pretend we
have the mind of Christ.

Luke 19 9, Salvation to thy house, says Christ to Zachaeus, or here is a
covenant of grace for thee and thy children; but mind how he alters the person,
For as much as he also is a son of Abraham; as if he would have standers-by,
yea all to take notice, That though Zachaeus was an eminent sinner and a
Gentile: yet upon his conversion he and his children were included in the
Covenant. Gal 4 28, Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise;
Isaac when an Infant was a child of promise, and so considered when that
promise was made; which promise was confirmed to him and to his posterity: Gal.
2 15, Natura Judaei.] Non intelligit naturaliter esse immunes a corruptola
humani generis, sed quia promissio haereditariam benedictionem faciebat, ideo
natural vocatur hoc bonum. Calv. in Gal.
We then, says the Apostle, (I and you Galatians with your brethren) are
children of the promise as Isaac. This is the sense of the holy Ghost; But as
then he that was born after the flesh, did persecute him that was after the
spirit: so it is now. There were then such as were born after the flesh, that
is, the natural seed, who in course of nature came from Abraham: So is there
now a fleshly seed of Romans 11.28. Dilecti propter Patres.] Non quod dilectioni
causam dederint, sed quoniam ab illis propagata fuerat dei gratia ad posteros,
secundum pacti formam [Evo deus tuus and seminis tui.] Call.
believers.

If then there remains in the bosom of the Church children born after the
flesh, then is there the privilege of Birth-holiness still remaining, seeing
as it was then, so it is now.

Romans 11. Children with parents were broken off from the Covenant; therefore
they were under it. Yea, They with their parents at length shall be engrafted
in again, as we shall show hereafter.

Ephesians. 3.8. That the Gentiles (that is, parents and children) should be
partakers of his promise, namely that grand promise, I will be thy God and the
God of thy seed; of which promise they are not partakers if so great a part of
the Gentiles be excluded.

Add to all these Scriptures that of the 1 Cor. 7 14, Else were your children
unclean but now are they holy; the question was not whether the marriage were
lawful, but whether they might lawfully live together, the one being a believer
the other not. (therefore to plead the unbelieving fornicator is sanctified by
the believing whore, is improper; for the question was concerning man and wife,
whereof the one was a believer, whether those might lawfully live together.)
This question was propounded to Paul being grounded on that Text in Ezra 10, or
1 Cor. 5, as is supposed by some.

Paul answers, Let not the believing husband put away the unbelieving wife, nor
the believing wife her unbelieving husband; for the unbelieving husband is
sanctified in the believing wife, and e contra, else were your children
unclean, but now are they holy. Sanctified, that is say some, they may lawfully
converse together as man and wife, else your children were illegitimate. I have
put the Argument as far as any of that opinion have put it, but the words will
not bear (...) sense; for Sanctification is never in all the Book of God used
in that sense, and why should we admit of it here? We must Neh. 8. Dabant
sensum Scripturarum per Scripturas.
interpret Scripture by Scripture, which is the safest way of interpretation;
for there is nothing hard in one place, but usually is explained in another.
Every creature (says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4 5,) is The difference between
sanctified and holy is this, the one signifies a relative Act, the other an
holiness in State. Nihil hic erit difficuliatis si sanctitatem intelligas nihil
aliud esse quam spiritualem generis nobilitatem, and eam quidem non propriam
naturae, sed quae ex foedere manabat. Call. in Rom 11.16.
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. Here it signifies not only lawful
but an holy use: and so it is taken in this 1 Cor. 7. But in the sense of some,
the Pagans lawful relations and enjoyments are sanctified to them, which to
assert is very absurd; for he only which uses all for God has all things
sanctified to him; therefore by the holiness of children the Apostle means
foederal holiness, according to Scripture phrase, Ezra 9, The holy seed have
mingled themselves with the people of the Lands. To say the holy seed, that is,
the legitimate seed, would imply that all those children of the heathens were
bastards.

Dan. 11 28, He shall have indignation against the holy Covenant, that is,
against parents with their children incovenanted.

2. The Apostle speaks to the privilege of a believer which he had not before,
[now are they holy;] a privilege, we know, is a peculiar benefit, appropriate
to some, not common to all: but this is common to all the heathens, well known
to them, much more to the Corinthians, that their children were legitimate.

But according to their sense they may live together, for their children are as
holy as the children of heathens.
3. If we say by Sanctification is meant a lawful use, the Argument is a mere
trifling, (idem per idem) for the question was, whether they might lawfully
live together? Yea, says the Apostle, they may; for the unbelieving husband is
sanctified in the believing wife, q d. They may live together, for they may
live together.

Obj. The unbelieving wife is said to be sanctified as well as her Children.

Ans. She is said to be sanctified by him or in him, but not so as to be made
foederally holy, but only sanctified to his use as all the creatures are; for
sanctification is a word of relation used with reference to persons, but the
word, holy, in the 1 Cor. 7, signifies an holiness of state, but, says the
Apostle, they are holy.

Thus we have abundantly proved the minor proposition, namely, That the
Children of believers are incovenanted, therefore we conclude, That the Seal of
the Covenant belongs to them.

O then! You that are spiritual, that have the testimony of Jesus, which is the
spirit of Prophesy, so as to understand the Prophesies; consider what I have
said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. We are compassed (as
you see) round about with a cloud of witnesses, It was one and the same cloud (
Exodus 14 23) which was light to the Israelites and darkness to the Egyptians:
Even so one and the same scripture to some is dark, and to others full of
light; because they have not the light within to see the light without. John 11.
Now the Lord grant we be not like the Egyptians, looking at the darksom part
of the cloud, (as many do) and not the lightsom part; but that this cloud may
be as a cloud by day, and as a pillar of fire by night (even in that night that
is coming fast upon us, the shadows of the evening growing very long) to guide
us in the Truth as it is in Jesus.

Obj. Circumcision was no seal of Rightousness to Abraham's posterity.

Ans. Look to the rock (Esa. 51) whence ye are hewn. q d. Consider what
mercies I showed to Abraham, the same mercy may you expect to your selves.

Promises made to believers as believers, belong to all believers; for it is a
sure rule a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia, from a thing as such, the
consequence avails to all. Thus the Apostle, Heb. 13 5, applies that of Deuteronomy.
31 8, He will not fail thee nor forsake thee. That promise was made not to
Joshua but to the body of the Children of Israel, as appears by the LXX
translation; Promises made to the Jews as Saints, are made to all; therefore
the Gospel Church is called Sion, and Jerusalem has the Jews names put upon
it, because those promises belong to it. See LXX. (...). Heb. 13.5. (...).
for as it is applied to Joshua it has but one negative, but when applied to
the body of Israel, verse 8, it has four negatives, to which the Apostle adds
a fifth, No I will not leave thee, no I will not in no wise forsake thee. The
Lord being willing more abundantly to confirm our faith adds five denials,
because he saw what doubting hearts we had.

So much for the first Proposition, sc. That promises made to believers as
believers, belong to all believers; but this [I will be thy God and the God of
thy seed] was made to Abraham as a believer; therefore to all believers:
Whereof Circumcision was a seal in the old Testament, as Baptism in the new.
Romans 4 11, Circumcision is called a seal of the rightousness of faith, which he
had being uncircumcised, that so he might become the father of all those that
believe, though not circumcised; for Abraham was called the father of them that
believe, because he was the first father that received this blessing, which was
a blessing upon parents and children; for he received it not only for himself,
but for them also, that is, he received it as a father, and so it is conveyed
to us at this day. Mr Cart.

2. The promise was made to Abraham and to his natural seed, walking in the
steps of his faith; How else reasons the Apostle from the example of Abraham?
The promise was given to Abraham through faith, therefore 't is yours through
faith, v. 13, 16, 17.

3. How makes he Abraham the father of believers in both people, if the
Covenant was not established on him as a father for his children of both
people? v. 17, who is the father of us all, before him (...), Ad instar dei,
or, Ex adverso dei, after the example of God. Exemplar enim ex adverso
opponimus.
whom he believed. God has honored Abraham's faith, that in respect thereof he
has made him like himself, sc. a father, not of this or that nation, but
universally of all, amongst all nations that believe.

4. This promise [I will be thy God and the God of thy seed] was not peculiar
to Abraham, as appears by the scope of the Apostle, Romans 4. which is to show
how we are justified, and not Abraham only; for fathers and children are
justified in the same manner; but Abraham was justified by faith and not by
Circumcision, though therein was sealed the remission of sins.

The Apostle brings in Abraham as an eminent believer, and the father of the
faithful (for he was the first explicit covenanter) as a rule to all believers;
Primum in unoquoque genere est regula reliquorum. Apostolus probaturus Gentiles
una cum Judaeis esse Abrahae filios, in hanc formam loquitur, Abraham fide
justificatus fuit in praeputio. Calv.
for the first in every kind is the rule of all the rest; and concludes ver.
23, It is written not for his sake alone that it was imputed to him; but us
also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe: So that Circumcision was
either a seal of rightousness obtained, or rightousness offered, therefore a
seal to parents and children if they believe; the like may I say of baptism
which comes instead of circumcision, and is the seal of Abraham's Covenant.
Gal. 3 29 Ye are Abraham' s seed, and heirs according to the tenor of the
promise, which runs to him and his.

5. The Covenant is the same, therefore the parties included in the Covenant
specifically, must be the same, else it is not the same Covenant; and therefore
as before, so now children are included.

That it is the same for substance, it appears by the Apostle, Gal. 3, That
Covenant was confirmed in Christ, therefore a Gospel Covenant, (...), toward
Christ, q d. It had respect to Christ.
Gal. 3.8, 28, The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen,
preached the Gospel before unto Abraham. I hope none will say we have another
Gospel, or a Gospel besides this Gospel: The Apostle doubles the phrase to show
them he speaks deliberately, as pondering what he said, If any man bring
another Gospel, etc Gal. 1.

Brethren do we look for new Scriptures, or a new Gospel to save us? Is not the
faith (that is, the Doctrine of faith) delivered once and for ever, as a
perpetual rule? Is not God one and the same though we be changeable and at odds
with him, Gal. 3 20? Is not Christ yesterday, and to day, and for ever the
same, Heb. 13 8? Was this once an evangelical promise [I will be thy God,] and
is it not so still? And if that be evangelical, (as is confessed) shall we deny
the later [I will be the God of thy seed] to be evangelical also?

6. If the command of teaching our children which God gave to Abraham, belong
unto us, then the promise made to him and his belongs to us also; for the
promise is the ground of the duty, and the duty is the means of the performance
of the promise. Genesis 18 19, For I know him, that he will command his Children,
and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do
justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has
spoken of him.

7. Christ came not (...) to loosen or slacken the Law, much less the
prophesies or promises, but rather to confirm them made unto the fathers, Romans
15 8; that is not only to the Jews but also the Gentiles; and because the
incorporating of the Gentiles was a great mystery, (i. e) a divine hidden
secret to the Jews, the Apostle quotes Hence Ministers may learn in doubtful
things to be more copious in proofs.
four places of Scripture to evince that great controverted Truth, sc. That the
Gentiles should be incorporated into one and the same body with the Jews.

8. Why should it be conceived that the Covenant of Grace should run in a
different course from all other of Gods Covenants? God made a Covenant with Mr.
Patient says, That Covenant with the Priests was a Covenant of works. Observe
there is a vein of error runs through his whole Discourse.
Phineas, did it not reach his posterity, Number. 5? So with David, Psalm 89 28.
And did not that extend to his posterity also? Did God ever make a Covenant
with any, wherein the children were not comprehended? In the first place where
this Covenant is mentioned it runs thus, To thee and thy seed, Genesis 15 18, 8,
which was ratified by the dividing of an heifer of three years old.

9. Gentiles are ingrafted into the same olive tree, and made partakers of the
fatness thereof, that is, the ordinances, promises and their appertenances; the
root was Abraham and the holy ancestors; the body of the tree the Church; the
branches particular members, whereof Infants were a great part. Observe three
things, 1. That Children were in the Covenant, this cannot be denied. 2. They
with their parents were broken off, and therefore may plead with their Mother
as an harlot, Hos. 2. 3. They with their parents are to be ingrafted in again
into the olive tree of the visible Church of Christ.

10. Where is that great Statute repealed, or that Magna Charta vacated and
made void, [I will be thy God and the God of thy seed?] Was not this one of the
greatest promises of the old Testament, (...), Exceeding great, nay the
greatest promises. 2 Pet. 1.4.
greater than which could not be? The promise in the 17 of Genesis is greater
than that in the 22.

For the Father was greater than Christ as Mediator, and therefore doubtless
that was chiefly in the Apostles ey. This promise was confirmed by many and
sundry ways, (...), by piece-meals or parcels, Heb. 1.1. yet one and the same
Covenant gradually revealed to Abraham, as he walked more exactly with God; The
glorious discovery of the Covenant was reserved to Christ's time; for the
farther the times were from Christ's coming the less light they had, but the
nearer they came to Christ the more fully was that Covenant discovered, as
appears from Dan. 9. to whom the Angel reveals the time of Christ's suffering;
and so doubtless when Christ shall more gloriously appear in his Kingdom upon
the calling of the Jews, then shall the Ark of the Covenant be seen in the
Temple, Rev. 11.19, But the Covenant was confirmed [(...)] to Abraham 1. By
Sacrifices, Genesis 15.18. (being not mentioned before.) 2. By the Sacrament of
Circumcision, Cap. 17. 3. By an oath, Cap. 22. Yea it was confirmed by God in
Christ: (therefore must needs be of grace.) Gal. 31.7. 1. By the death of
Christ. 2. By the merits of Christ.

3. By the preaching of Christ and his Apostles, Dan. 9. He shall confirm the
Covenant for one week, (which was spent in the confirmation thereof) for Christ
preached Usually the work of a Minister for conversion is done as to the old
standers in 7 years.
three years and a half, and the Apostles three years and a half or thereabouts
before the Jews were discovenanted; the ceremonies de jure did cease at his
death, with all the sacrifices, (when the vail was rent asunder) but the
Covenant was not made null, till they voluntatarily and obstinately rejected
the Lord Christ.

This Covenant [I will be thy God] was before the Law, and therefore was not
made void by the Law, and the ceremonies annexed thereunto, Gal. 3.14, 15. That
the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, which blessing extends to
fathers and children.

Brethren, says the Apostle, I speak after the manner of men, Though it were
but a man's Covenant, if it be confirmed (as this was) no man disanulleth or
adds thereunto; who then shall dare to disanull Gods Covenant made to Abraham
and Christ mystical, that is, the whole visible Church, as we see clearly in
the body of the Jews to whom the external administration of the Covenant did
appertain; if there be any force in the Arguments of the Antipedobaptists
pleading for the spiritual seed only, the like might have been pleaded against
all the carnal seed of Abraham, as the Lord pleads Psalm. 50, What have thou to
do to take my Covenant into thy mouth?

And yet even the Children of such had a right unto Circumcision, though their
parents were suspended from the Passover, as being Children under Abraham's
Covenant.

The 11 Argument is taken from the absurdities that will follow from the
contrary tenent.

1. If Children be excluded then the Covenant is not the same, seeing the
persons engaging are not the same.

2. Then are the Children of believers no more privileged than the Children of
heathens; for even the Children of heathens (when called) have an interest in
the Covenant and Seal, as well as the Children of believers.

3. Then are no Children in a visible way of salvation, Ephesians. 2.12, and without
hope; and therefore Rachel may weep for her Children because they are not.
There was a great Lamentation in Israel when one tribe was cut off, but have
not all the Churches in the world cause bitterly to lament, That two parts of
three are cut off from the Covenant of Grace?

4. Then are Children losers by Christ's coming in the flesh (as has been
already proved) for before they were in the A baptized Jew having one Infant
born before the abrogation of Circumcision, and another after; might look at
the former as a member, but the later without hope as a heathen; or else on
that elder as a heathen to day, who was a member yesterday.
Covenant, but now discovenanted, so should they be in a worse condition in the
new Testament than they were in the old: yea then was the first Adam more
prevalent to damn, than the second to save; for had he stood, we with our
Children had stood; but though parents in the second Adam stand, yet their
Children are cashiered before they have done any thing to discovenant
themselves.

5. Then should the grace of God be more large in the times of the old
Testament than in the new; but the Apostle tells us Christ is a surety of a
better Testament, Heb. 7.22. established upon better promises, Heb. 8.6. Ex.
26.9. compared with Ex. 36.9. The five curtains on the one side of the
Tabernacle, and five on the other side were of one size, and made up one
Tabernacle, Ex. 26.6. these were coupled together by loops that the Tabernacle
might be one, ver. 11. And what are those two curtains but the Church of the
Jews and Gentiles making up one Tabernacle, Ez. 47.14. And ye shall inherit it
one as well as another.] They are all to share alike in the division of that
land, which did signify, That Aequale est omnium fidelium Jus in possessione
haereditatis coelestis, parts enim aequales dantur omnibus expressa voluntate
dei, non inaequales ut a Mose and Josua qui distribuorant terram juxta
multitudinem hominum. Polan.
that is, one Church of God? These are of an equal size, that is equally
privileged, and all of them by bonds and sinews (that is the bond of the
Covenant and the grace of the Spirit) coupled and united together. Col. 2, 19.
Ex. 20.37. If then that Covenant did extend to the Jews Children as a part of
the Tabernacle, then also must it of necessity extend to the Children of the
Gentiles which make up the other part of the Tabernacle, and so both make one.
Ephesians. 2.14.

6 If Children have no interest in that Covenant [I will be thy God and the
Gods of thy seed] then have they no interest in the Mediator of that Covenant,
nor any part in Christ's mediation, which is limited to them that are under the
Covenant, Heb. 9.15, 12, 24. If so, then not saved; for, tell me I beseech you,
are any saved or brought out of the pit wherein is no water of comfort, but by
the blood of the everlasting Covenant? Zach. 9. Are not we and ours bound up in
that as in a bundle of life? 2 Samuel 23.

Obj. The Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of grace and life, but a
Covenant of works by virtue of which the land of Canaan was given to Abraham
and his seed.

Ans. Here is a palpable mistake, as appears clearly by Neh. 9.8. Thou foundest
his heart faithful before thee, and made a Covenant with him, to give the
land of Canaan to his seed, and have performed thy words, for thou art
rightous. What can be more plain than this, that the land of Canaan was not
given him considered as a working but as a believing Abraham? But because the
main stress of the Arguments of the Antipaedobaptists lies here, (for they do
confess and publicly have affirmed, That if that Covenant made with Abraham
were a Covenant of grace, there is no question but that the seal of baptism
must be annexed) therefore I shall be the more copious in showing you that the
land of Canaan was not given by a Covenant of works, but by a Covenant of
grace. For,

1. God does engage to be his God, and the God of his seed; which implies more
than a temporal blessing, for it is as much as if he had said.

First,

I will visibly own thy seed in the world, above all the people under heaven,
whereupon he sets up his Tabernacle and erects his Church amongst them: he
gives them his word and ordinances, he has not dealt so with any nation, says
the Psalmist, yea he vouchsafes his own presence and that in a glorious manner.

Secondly, When he says, I will give thee the land of Canaan, and, I will be
thy God, his meaning is, I will give them a visible subsistence in the world;
thus he made good his word to Abraham, who had the use of that land though not
by way of inheritance; the promise lay so warm and so near his heart and did so
glow upon his spirit, as that by faith he enjoyed it as his own. (as it is with
many a gracious spirit in these days, that expects the fulfilling of many
glorious promises.) For faith is the substance of things hoped for, and gives
being to such things as have no being themselves.

Thirdly, If they take me for their God, I will be their God, and give unto
them the ((...)) the holy things of David, Esa. 55.5. Matt. 22. He is not the
God of the dead but of the living, that is applied to the resurrection.

2. Canaan it self was not given as a mere temporal blessing, but as a type and
pledge of spiritual and eternal blessings. Therefore,

First, It was called the land of Emmanuel, Es. 8.

Secondly, Hence it is made a great part of the glory of that land, that it
flowed with milk and honey, even the ordinances of God sweeter than the honey
and the honeycomb, Mell^ stillante, the life-honey. Psalm. 19.
or dropping honey; this phrase Ezekiel goes over and over again, flowing with
milk and honey which is the glory of all lands. Ezekiel. 20.6.

3. Canaan was a type of the Church, and of the state of glory. Heb. 4 1, If
spirituals and eternals were not promised to the Fathers, then were they not by
faith apprehended; for that which is not promised, by faith cannot be
apprehended.
he speaks of another Rest after they were entered into that Rest. Heb. 11. If
they had rested in that land, God would have been ashamed to own them as
Children; but now they desire a better Country (says the Apostle) therefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God. Hence it was that the Lord loved
that land above all other lands in the world; and in that, Jerusalem; and in
Jerusalem, Sion; (he loved the gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob, Psalm. 87.) in Sion, the Temple; and in the Temple, the Holy-of-holies.
"The nearer any thing comes to God, the more he loves it.

4. Gal. 3. last. Then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise,
not of an earthly Canaan, but an heavenly. For the Galatians had nothing to do
with that of Canaan.

5. Hence it was that Moses was so desirous to see that good land, that goodly
Mountain, and Lebanon; his mouth runs over (he was so taken with it) repeating
it again and again; which prayer the Lord heard as in reference to the end, sc.
to see the land, but not in the way and means as he desired. Go up to Mount
Pisgah and view the land, says the Lord to many a saint, yea and to many a
reprobate that shall never set foot upon that blessed land.

6. Hence it was that they were so ambitious to have their bones carried out of
other lands into that land. Thus Jacob and Joseph.

7. Upon this account it was, that Esau was branded with a black coal of infamy
to all eternity, That he rejected this land; that so as often as he heard his
name, he might remember upon what terms he sold his birthright. Esau who is
Edom, Genesis 36.1, 8. Edom, v. 19. who is Edom, and why so? because that for a
little (red-red, that is) red pottage, he sold his birthright; his interest in
the promises, ordinances, heaven, Christ, whose land that was; and when he had
sold it he went away from the presence of the Lord to Mount Seir, being not at
all troubled for what he had done, sc. that he had discovenanted himself and
his.

8. Gal. 4. Mount Sinai in Arabia.] Why should Paul make mention of the
situation of that Mountain (when as there was none of the Galatians as might be
supposed ignorant of it) but that there did lie a mystery in the situation of
Sinai; to wit, that it was without the Foedus de quo nunc agitur, and modum
legis complectitur and finem illius, nimirum Evangelium Christi; locus hujus
foederis notabilis est, in terra Moab, vel in part haereditatis vel in aditu
haereditariae terrae Canaan; igitur in ingressu terrae de fine hujus
habitationis terrenae admonentur duci ipsos ad praestolationem redemptionis; ne
vel limitem ipsum sine fide ^alvantes inquinarent. Cocceius.
borders of the promised land, which did shadow out that heavenly Country to
which we are brought, not by the old covenant of works but by the new Covenant
of grace; of that Covenant of works as it was taken by the carnal Israelites,
does the Apostle speak of, in Gal. 4. But in Deuteronomy. 29.1. you have another
Covenant made with Israel in the land of Moab, besides the Covenant which he
made with them in Horeb. See Deuteronomy. 32.8.

9. The giving of this land is made a sign of Gods love to Jacob, Mal. 1.2. I
have loved thee, says the Lord, yet ye say, Wherein have thou loved us? Was
not Esau Jacob' s brother? yet I loved Jacob and hated Esau. Mali ^dumaei e
sedibus suis ejecti nunquam redituri. Glass. Mal. 1.1, 2.
If the giving of the land had not been a sign of his love, the Apostle had not
alleged those two examples to purpose, Romans 9. Which was to show who were the
Children of God, and who not, for, Canaanaeae privatio etiam rejectionis a
salute symbolum.

Arg. 3. Circumcision was a seal of the rightousness of faith either had or
offered, Romans 4. It was a seal of the rightousness of faith with Infants that
believe not; that look what rightousness the faith of a believer laid hold on,
Circumcision was a seal of that rightousness, Romans 4.11. Therefore a seal of
life tendered to the seed of Abraham: For what it was to Abraham, the same was
it to all his seed that did lay hold on this Covenant. If any failed and fell
short thereof, their destruction was of themselves, because they sought
rightousness by the works of the Law, and not by faith in this Covenant of
grace. We must not pry into the decrees of God, to find out the reasons of
eternal election and reprobation; Secret things belong to God, things revealed
to us and to our Children. Deuteronomy 29 last. But if we look into the execution of
that decree of reprobation, we shall find the ground of it from our selves, who
wilfully reject the offers and tenders of grace. Romans 9.32.

Fourthly, It is one and the same Covenant, Genesis 17.7. and throughout, this is
mentioned 13 times in that chapter, So Psalm. 105.8. The Covenant he made with
Abraham and Isaac, and confirmed the same to Jacob for a law, v. 10. Genesis 17.2,
to the 7. There are promises more particularly applied to Abraham, in which all
his seed did share: For what ever promises are made to any, are made directly
or indirectly to the whole body, being all yea and amen in Christ; and
therefore collaterally may be applied to us; as, That God would multiply his
seed both natural and spiritual, and make him a father of many nations, (as the
Apostle interprets that Text, Romans 4) and do not we share in that promise? Genesis
7.7, 19. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, I will establish my
Covenant between me thee, and thy seed after thee. He speaks of it as one and
the same Covenant throughout, and not as two Covenants, as some fondly do
imagine.

Fifthly, That women are enabled to conceive, bear and bring forth, and that
their children are provided for, 't is of grace.

1. Women, if believers, are saved by grace in childbearing, (...), i. (in
it,) as a way though dangerous; (by it,) as a means to further their salvation.

2. Children are given by grace to the rightous, Genesis 33.5. These are the
Children which God of his grace has given me: So the multiplying of Children
is an act of grace, 1 Chronicles. 28.23. Deuteronomy. 33.24. Let Asher be blessed with
Children; Act. 7.8. He gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, and so Abraham
begat Isaac; yea so great a mercy is it, that it engaged the heart of Enoch to
walk with God 300 years after he begat Methusalah, Genesis 5.22. Thus Abraham
walked with God after he received the promise for the multiplying of his seed,
Genesis 13. which is to be understood literally, ( Deuteronomy. 10. last) as well as
spiritually.

3. The provision the Lord makes for such Children, Iisdem nutrimur ex quibus
constamus.
is a fruit of the Covenant of grace; for God is the God of the whole man, as
our Savior reasons, therefore not only of the soul but of the body also; who
by Covenant binds himself to provide for both. How sweet is it to a gracious
soul to see all things dispensed to him, not only by a providence but also by
promise; and to see the Throne of God compassed about with the rainbow of his
Covenant, for so I understand it, Rev. 4.3: So that all his dispensations did
pass through this rainbow; whether they be afflictions, (which to the rightous
are an appendix to the Covenant 2 Samuel 7.) or temporal, spiritual and eternal
mercies; all these come swimming to us in the blood of Christ.

Sixthly, It had been little comfort to Abraham and his seed to have had only a
temporal portion sealed to them. Others of his Children were before the
Children of promise for outward, These (says the Text) are the Kings that
reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any King over the children of
Israel, Genesis 36.31. 1 Chronicles. 1.43. But what is all this? yea what is that vast
Turkish empire, but as a crum given to a dog, as Luther speaks? Doubtless if
Abraham had so understood the Lord, he would have said, (as once Luther did to
the Duke of Saxony, who offered him a great gratuity) Non sic satiabor Domine,
I will not be so put off, this, Lord, shall not suffice me.

Sevently, The bondmen born in Abraham's house had no inheritance in the land
of Canaan, yet were circumcised; yea Abraham's seed for the space of 430 years
enjoyed it not; therefore Circumcision was not solely a seal of the land of
Canaan; for as those had no right unto it: so Abraham in his posterity enjoyed
it not for that space.

Eighthly, The Apostle determines ( Quum Deus sacramenta gratiis suis adjungere
soleat, ex eo quod sacramento privati erant, colligit; neque gratiae ipsos
fuisse participes, non est quidem perpetuum argumentum, valet tamen quantum ad
ordinariam dei dispensationem. Calv. in Ephesians.
Ephesians. 2.12.) upon their uncircumcision, that they were without God in the
world, v 11, Remember that at that time ye were Gentiles, who were called
uncircumcision; that at that time ye were strangers to the Covenant of promise.
Hence that phrase, They die the deaths of the uncircumcised, he says not
[death] but [deaths] as signifying not only their corporal, but their
spiritual and eternal deaths. Ezekiel. 32.25, 26. and 28.10.

Ninthly, When the Lord renews the Covenant for that land of Canaan, (mark
well) the Lord did not reinstate them into that land after their return from
Babylon, Genesis 17.2. [(...)] And I will freely give my Covenant: So Galat 3.
nor will he bring them back out of their last captivity into that land, but by
that gracious Covenant. Jer. 3.19. How shall I put thee among my Children, and
give thee the pleasant land? Thou shall call me father and shall not depart
from me. Some say the Covenant of Circumcision is to be understood as
everlasting as Canaan and the possession thereof; which until Christ's coming
who was the substance thereof, it being a typical Covenant; but it is as clear
as the sun, That that land is promised to them in the later times upon their
general Call; for into that land must they return and fight with (the sons of
Greece Zac. 9.13. i. e) the Turk and his adherents.

Ezekiel. 20.37. I will bring them into the bond of the Covenant. v. 12, There
shall the house of Israel even all of them in the land serve me. This relates
to their last return, Romans 11.26. So all Israel shall be saved, that is, the
body of the 12 Tribes. Thus Ezekiel. 36.24. I will gather you out of all
Countries, and bring you into your own land, then will I sprinkle clean water
upon you, and ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers. v. 28.
And ye shall be my people and I will be your God: Yea (says the Text) not for
your sakes do I this, (v. 22 and 32) says the Lord God, be it known unto you.
q.d. You must not expect that land by a Covenant of works, as Moses again and
again minds the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 9.4. Say not for my rightousness has the
Lord brought me to possess this land v. 5, 6, 7. And adds this memento, for
fear Israel should forget it, Remember and forget not how thou provokedst the
Lord in the wilderness.

Will any then for ever say for the future, That the land of Canaan was given
to Abrahams' seed by a Covenant of works? I wonder at the confidence of some,
who strongly affirm ((...), 1 Timothy 1.7.) that which they are wholely ignorant
of. Surely they were hard bestead when forced to fly to this distinction to
avoid the force of that Argument taken from Abraham's Covenant; But alas! There
are many that are enemies to the Cross of Christ, (as Paul says, Phil. 3.18)
of whom I tell you weeping. I desire to bemoan the sad condition of such; for a
spirit of delusion is gone forth into the world to deceive the nations; God
having given Satan a commission (or rather a permission) judicially to harden,
not only carnal Gospellers, but some of his own dear people; and this is the
sorest judgment that I know, that lies upon this nation this day.

Tenthly, That Covenant was Gospel, therefore not a fleshly carnal Covenant,
Gal. 3.18. God gave the inheritance by promise, (...) See Genesis 17 (...)
Gal. 3.8. The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through
faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. Genesis 12. Saying, in thee shall
all Nations be blessed. cap. 22. He says (in thy seed) but from that time
(namely, Genesis 22.) to the coming out of Egypt, (viz. Exodus 12.41.) was not Nay
scarce 390, neither can the words Gal. 3. be referred to the first promise Genesis
12 For there was no (...) or confirmation mentioned before Genesis 17.18. Where it
was confirmed by sacrifice, after by the sacrament of Circumcision; lastly, by
an oath. cap. 22.
four hundred and thirty years: Therefore it must be referred to this 15
chapter or to the 17. But it is not much material to which place of the two you
referr it, seeing that it is one and the same Covenant; But more fully explained
accordingly as Abraham walked with God, cap. 12, Lecleca. It 's Dativus commodi.
when God calls them out of his country, he bids him go for himself, and tells
him, v. 3, he will bless him, and that in him all nations shall be blessed;
upon this Abraham departed and comes into this land, where the Lord appears to
him ( cap. 12.7.) and says, Unto thy seed will I give this land, (he had not
told him that before) after this there was a great famine in that land, which
was no small trial to Abraham's faith, that coming out of such a fertile soil as
Chaldea was, he should be put to such straits, and forced to travel to Egypt
for food, where he sojourns awhile, and thence returns to the land whence he
came; there God appears to him again, upon that self-denying act; ( ca. 13.7.)
Abraham takes notice that the Canaanite dwelt in the land, and therefore yields
to his brother Lot; who made choice of the fattest soil, as intending rather to
feed his flocks than to feed souls; but the Lord again appears to Abraham,
(cap. 13.4.) saying, All this land will I give, he enlarges his charter, and
lets him know he shall be no loser by him; upon another act of self-denial
(least the King of Sodom should say, He had made Abraham rich) the Lord again
appears to him ( cap. 15.1.) saying, I am thy exceeding great reward, the Lord
leaves himself in pawn (that I may so say) till he had made good his promise to
him; But in cap. 17.22. he more fully explains the Covenant.

Eleventhly, The V. Commandment is not carnal, though it have a temporal
promise annexed to it; Ephesians. Deuteronomy. 5.16. Ut prolongent dies] Potest verbum
accipi impersonaliter, prolongent, pro eo quod est prolongentur. Junius.
6.3. Children obey your parents, that it may be well with you, and that ye may
live long on the earth: Surely none will say but that children are bound to
obey their parents under the Gospel, as well as the Jews were under the Law,
notwithstanding that motive; Is there not the like reason for the Covenant? May
it not be spiritual though the Lord engage to Abraham and his seed to give them
that temporal land of Canaan? and shall we say this Covenant is a temporal and
a carnal Covenant? has not godliness the promise of this life and that which
is to come? They might as well have said the ten Commandments belong not to us,
because ( Deuteronomy. 5.) they are enforced with this consideration [which brought
thee out of the land of Egypt;] though in a spiritual sense that may be
applied to us, as literally to the Jews.

Twelfthly, Abraham was heir of the world by virtue of the Covenant of grace,
and surely Canaan was included in that promise, as being a little world in the
great world. Romans 4.13. The promise that he should be heir of the world was not
through the Law, but through the rightousness of faith: Where you see it is
plainly opposed to the Covenant of works.

Thirteenthly, From the absurdities that will follow hereupon; for then so many
particular promises, so many Covenants; whereas a Covenant is but a bundle of
promises solemnly sealed and confirmed.

The Papists having excluded the second Commandment, Such as will deficere in
necessariis, will abundare in superfluis; they are defective in the second
Command, therefore they superabound in the X; whereas the text mentions but one
Commandment, as Moses one Covenant throughout chapter 17.
divide the tenth into two; whereas they might as well make eight of it, as
first, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. 2. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife. 3. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors field. 4. Nor his man
servant. 5. Nor his maid servant. 6. Nor his ox. 7. Nor his ass. 8. Nor any
thing that is his.

As they divide the Commandments: so others divide the Covenant; [I will be thy
God,] This they make a new Covenant or a Covenant of grace. Genesis 17 to 6. and
from 7. to 14. And to thy seed will I give this land, a Covenant of works: they
grant the former to be the new Covenant or Covenant of grace and why not the
later? [I will be the God of thy seed, etc.] but they might as well according
to all the particular articles in the Covenant multiply the Covenant into
several species, making every promise a Covenant and so many, promises so many
Covenants.

Fourteenthly, If Circumcision was a seal of the Covenant of works, then the
seed of Abraham had no seal to the Covenant of grace at all, for they say that
relates to the land of Canaan which they hold to be given to the posterity of
Abraham by a Covenant of works whereof Circumcision was a seal. If this be
granted, then was the Lord wanting to his people; for did they not stand in
need of a seal of the rightousness of faith as well as Abraham, and much more?
Abraham though strong in faith was sore put to it, as appears by the story,
being willing to sit down well contented with Ismael, not having obtained the
promised seed: Yea ( cap, 16.3.) the holy Ghost seems to imply that he doubted
ten years; therefore he used unlawful means to obtain issue, going in^^ Hagar.
Did Abraham stand in need of strengthening and did not his seed much more? Had
he a seal annexed to the promise, and had not his seed the like? or did God
ever make a Covenant with his people, and not seal it? Has any a just title to
an inheritance, and not a right to the seals and conveyances? or had any ever a
right to the Covenant of grace that had not an external right at least to the
seal?

Fifteenthly, Here is not only an Husteronproteron, (for thus Abraham is first
under the Covenant of grace and then of works long after) but at the same time
under both Covenants, contrary to Romans 6.14.

Sixtenthly, The Covenant of works admits of no repentance or mercy, therefore
cannot be renewed, but this does. Deuteronomy. 4.7, 12, 13.

Seventeenthly, That Covenant was sealed with blood, (for the letting out of
the blood did signify the shedding of the blood of Christ) therefore it was
not a Covenant of works: Again it 's to thee and thy seed after thee, in their
generations for ever; Genesis 17.10, 11. Psalm. 105.8. Mr P. p. 43. The ever of the
Law is to be understood of the time of the Gospel-state, if these words [to you
and your seed in their generations] be put in. At negatur.
He gave that land for an everlasting Covenant, even to a thousand generations.
Now from Abraham to Christ there was but 42 generations, and therefore that
Covenant ceased not when Christ came in the flesh, as some say. Jer. 25.5. Esa.
24.5. Number. 25.13. Ex. 3.15. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God
of Jacob, this is my name for ever, this is my memorial to all generations.

Eighteenthly, If Circumcision were only a seal signifying, That God would
give the seed of Abraham the land of Canaan, what need was there of this seal
after they were possessed of the land?

Obj. The subject matter of the Covenant is, That they should be circumcised;
but in that, all the works of the Law are included.

Ans. Romans 2.25. Act. 15. Circumcision profits if thou keep the Law, says
the Apostle, on Gods part it was a seal of all the gracious promises, if on
their part they did perform the condition, which was, to walk in obedience to
his Commandments; but it did not profit them if they kept not the Law: as
baptism now avails not if men lead an evil life. The Apostle speaks not by
way of supposition, as of a thing impossible to be done, but as supposing it a
thing possible evangelically to be done.

If he had spoken of the perfect keeping of the law legally, (which is
impossible) then all profitable use is denied to Circumcision; but he would not
so much detract from that holy institution of God, as to deny all profitable
use thereof. Circumcision indeed did bind them to keep the whole law perfectly,
but it did profit them if there were an endeavor and a care in them to keep it,
though imperfectly.

Cap. 3.1. What privilege then has the Jew? what benefit then is there of
Circumcision, if the Jews were not justified by Circumcision? Here are two
queries, the Apostle answers to the first Much every way, but chiefly that to
them were committed the oracles of God; that is, all the prophetical writings,
prophesies and promises, etc, These were committed to them, non ut alienae rei
depositum; but as their own proper treasure, if they had hearts to make use
thereof: For the Covenant was made with all the seed of Abraham: many indeed
lost the benefit of it, not because they were not comprehended in it; but
because of their unbelief, which deprived them of the benefit thereof: yet this
unbelief could not make the faith of God, that is, the promise, of none effect;
for though some did not believe, yet others did; not all but some, did not
believe; for God has ordained, That as he keeps truth in his promises: So
there should be always some in the Church which should believe them. Thus (
Romans 9.7.) the Apostle shows that all the seed of Abraham are not the elect
seed; but does not show, That they were not under the outward administration of
the Covenant, as appears from the 4 verse, for of that Covenant Paul speaks
not. But if only the elect and faithful be admitted to the Covenant, as to the
outward administration thereof: then is there no subject left for the ordinance
of baptism; for how shall we know who is elect and who not? It Is therefore far
better to give the seal to the 99 which are not the elect, than to pass by one
to whom it justly belongs.

Thus much in answer to the first querie, Romans 3.3: To the second querie the
Apostle answers, Paul purposely deferred the answer to the 2 querie, to this
place; because in this place it received the fittest answer.
That Abraham was not justified by Circumcision, which the carnal Jew together
with the works of the law rested in, as appears by most of Paul's Epistles,
Romans 2. Gal. 5.2. They not well understanding the tenor of the Covenant of
grace, did look at it with a carnal ey, as a Covenant of works; therefore
Circumcision was urged as necessary to salvation, Acts 15.1. And in this sense
the yoke put upon the disciples, was such a yoke as that neither they nor their
fathers were ever able to bear. It Is not to be imagined that the Lord would
impose any such intolerable yoke of circumcision as some conceive the meaning
of the place to be, (for his yoke is easy, Mat. 11.28. and his commandments are
not grievous, 1 John 5.) misconstruing the Lords meaning, and cleaving to the
works of the Law; for which cause the Jews were cut off, Romans 9.32. comp. Hos.
4.5. (I will cut off thy mother) -- because they sought rightousness by the
works of the Law, and not by faith in Abraham 's Covenant, which included
Christ in the womb thereof. For Circumcision was a seal of the remission of
sins; or, as the Apostle calls it, a seal of the rightousness of the faith;
which they had, or which was tendered unto them.

Obj. Jer. 11.3. Cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenant,
(Gal. 3.) which Covenant I commanded your fathers when I brought them out of
the land of Egypt. This Covenant was a Covenant of works.

Ans. Mind the words following, [ which Covenant I commanded your fathers when
I brought them out of the land of Aegypt] was this Abraham's Covenant? was not
this Covenant delivered on Mount Sinai 430 years after? for the breach of which
they are here threatened. That the Law was taken by the Jews for a Covenant of
works, is not denied, Gal. 4. Romans 4. But that is distinct from Abraham's
Covenant.

2. Let me tell you, As some pictures, if you look on them on this side, they
resemble the king or queen; on the other side another party: So that Covenant
considered largely, as that whole doctrine delivered on Mount Sinai, with the
prefaces and promises, and all things that may be reduced to it; so it is a
Covenant of grace, as appears from Hag. 2.6. Accorcording to the word that I
covenanted with you when I brought you out of the land of Egypt, Sum vobiscum,
dicit Jehovah, (...) Cum verbo quo pepigeram vobiscum exeuntibus vobis ex
Aegypto, et cum spiritu meo in vobis. Jun. Verba (quo pepigeram) explicant in
quo and propter quem vos acceptos habuerant, and receperam in foedus. Call. lib.
3. cap. 9. Fac hoc et vives, vive et fac hoc.
so my spirit remains among you; now they received not the spirit, says the
Apostle, by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. that
is, not by a Covenant of works, but by a Covenant of grace: But considered as
an abstracted rule of rightousness; so it is a Covenant of works. Thus the
Gospel taken largely, has precepts and threatenings annexed, yea a bitter
curse, (the Lord keep us from Gospel-curses!) Mar. 16.16. He that believes not
shall be damned; but strictly taken 't is put for the glad tidings of a Savior.

3. That the Law was delivered with evangelical purposes, cannot be denied; for
Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. When Moses saw that they had broken
the Covenant, (though they had engaged, all this will we do, relying on their
own strength) he breaks the tables, to let them see that God would break
Covenant with them; therefore he is not blamed by the holy Ghost for so doing,
Act. 7. At that time the Lord said unto him, Take thou the tables which thou
brakest, and put them in the Ark; signifying that Christ must keep Covenant
with us and for us, else we shall never keep touch with God.

4. Those words [obey my voice, and do according to all that I command you, so
shall you be my people and I will be your God] if compared with the like
Scriptures, appear to be the condition of the Covenant of grace, Exodus 19.5.
Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people, Segullah signifies the
peculiar treasure of Kings.
and ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests and an holy nation. Which is
applied to them in the times of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.9. when all those types
and ceremonies were abolished, and they not under a Covenant of works but a
Covenant of grace, Romans 6.14. Thus Lev. 26.3. If ye will keep my statutes, v.
9. then will I establish my Covenant with you, v. 12. and I will walk among you
and be your God. Compared with 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them and walk in
them, and will be their God. To those scriptures add Jer. 7. Psalm. 81.13. Ah
that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! Will
any say, That these pathetical expressions, and mournful expostulations relate
to a Covenant of works, and not rather to a Covenant of grace tendered to them
again and again.

5. Consider the Text Jer. 4.4. The end of Gods requiring obedience on their
part, was not for his own but for their benefit, that he might do them good,
and give them a land flowing with milk and honey; which land, as has been
showed, was given by a Covenant of grace; for which Covenant the Covenant of
works did make way, as the needle makes way for the thread.

6. The Prophet setts to his seal, saying, Amen; having respect to those
gracious words in the close of his speech, Which word is seldom used in any
heathen author, unless in XENOPHON.
q. d. So let it be, that this people being careful to keep Covenant with thee,
may enjoy still that blessed land, which thou did by oath bind thy self to
settle them in.

Obj. But what say you to those noted places Jer. 31.32. Heb. 8.8? But finding
fault with the first Covenant, he says, I will make a new Covenant with the
house of Israel. do not these places hold forth a Covenant of works?

Ans. I say that Covenant the Prophet speaks of is not the Covenant made with
Abraham, but the Covenant made with them when he brought them out of the land
of Egypt, which (as I told you before) was 430 years after Abraham's Covenant;
Gal. 3. I will be thy God, is confessed to be a Gospel promise. M. Tombs.
and therefore does not disanul the former Covenant, and yet usually they
confound this and Abraham's Covenant, which they confess to be the new Covenant
or Covenant of grace.

2. I answer, That old Covenant largely not strictly taken, with its promises
and appertenances, was for substance the same with the new Covenant, Heb. 13.8.
Christ ever the same, as appears,

First, The old as well as the new was ratified by the blood of the Messiah,
that blood of his being as well typified by the blood of the sacrifices, Heb
9.1. The first Covenant had Ordinances of divine service, (...),
justifications; for by the blood of Christ in the use of those Ordinances, they
were justified See Grot.
as in these days it is represented and sealed to us in the Lords supper:
Therefore 't is called a Testament; now a Testament must needs be a Covenant of
grace, for where a Testament is ( v. 16.) there must be the death of the
Testator; whereupon neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood.

3. It was a marriage Covenant, Jer. 31 32. Though I was an husband to them
(says the Lord) or, Should I continue an husband to them, seeing they brake my
Covenant. LXX. or, They continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not,
(says the Lord.)
Paul takes the sense of the Prophet, not tying himself to words.

4. [ In the day he took them by the hand, Hos. 11.] denotes his tender
affection to them, Ephesians. 3.12. (...), Manuduction.] Christ hands us to the
Father.
and fatherly care of them, Hos. 11.3. Which phrase implies it was a Covenant
of grace.

5. This distinction of the Covenant into the Old and New, is not a division
into his species, but his adjuncts; for the Lord (as others well observe) made
but one Will or Testament, Heb. 8. Faulty not absolutely but comparatively.
but caused it to be writ in diverse characters, and some more legible and
perspicuous; one and the same Covenant may be either in paper or in parchment,
and be sealed with wax or blood; The Apostle says [Covenants] Ephesians. 2.12. Romans
9.4. Because so often renewed and enlarged.
therefore, I say, it is called a new Covenant, not simplely in regard of the
substance, (for the main matter and substance is the same with the former) as a
new moon and an old is one and the same moon: so the old and new Covenant one
and the same Covenant, but it is said to be new because it is ratified by the
death of our Savior exhibited, which was but in expectation before; as the
command of love is called a new command, because confirmed by arguments drawn
from Christ's own bowels.

I say, it is established on better promises; for that Covenant made nothing
perfect, but was the bringing in, A bringing in of one thing upon another,
(...).

In the ceremonial Law they had a typical pardon successively, if any sinned
then he must offer his sacrifice so often as he sinned.


or superinduction of a better hope, Heb. 7.19 In regard of the end, Christ, it
was perfect, Romans 10. but in regard of the means to attain that end, imperfect;
but in this later Christ is brought in, who has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified.

2. [Better promises] in regard of the clearness of them; for here the Gospel
is more clearly and distinctly revealed, 1 Pet. 1.10. They had a sea of brass,
we a sea of Ordinances, clear as crystal, though mingled with the fire of
contentions, till this Covenant in its full extent be revealed to us. Rev. 4.6.
and 15.2.

3. The former Covenant was much upon temporal promises in that infant age of
the Church; for the Jews (like little Children, won with a nut and lost with
the shell) were much taken with the gilded outside of the book, rather than the
inside, to take out a spiritual lesson, Gal. 4; but now in the new Testament
the promises are more for spirituals, and less for carnals; the Church having
attained to a greater stature and measure of grace in Christ.

4. [Better promises] because more large and full.

1. For the ceremonial part; for their sacrifices were for the most part for
sins of ignorance, called by the Apostle ( Heb. 9. (...) v. 7.) the errors of
the people; (there is in the sins of the people of God an overclouding of the
judgment, Lev. 6.3, 4, 5. Hence that expression of the Apostle, Romans 7.5. The
passions of sin which were by the Law.) In the general there was a sacrifice
for a sin of presumption, (...), Romans 7.5.
Lev. 16.21. but in one place only is any such allowed in particular; there is
one, (as was said of the thief on the Cross) that we might not despair; and but
one, least we should presume Lev. 6.3, 4, 5. But here the blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin, 1 John 1.6. According to his promise, Mic. 7.18, 19.
Who is a God like unto thee, forgiving iniquity, (or that obliquitie of nature)
and passing by the transgressions (that is, the voluntary and deliberate sins)
of his people. See the Hebrew.

2. More large as to the subject, it being in those days for the most part
confined to the Jews and Proselytes of the Gentiles; but now propounded and
exhibited to all nations that shall embrace the faith of Christ, Mat. 16.16.

5. The promises of the new Covenant are better promises, in regard of their
efficacy; the Spirit being more abundantly poured out now, than in the days of
old. Acts 2.17. In the last days I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, your
old men shall dream dreams, (in which God has often revealed himself, but
somewhat darkly, but) the young men shall see visions. q.d. They have a clearer
sight (oftentimes) than old men in those days; for they have the help of those
that went before them: now if you set a child upon a Giants shoulders, he will
see farther than the Giant sees. Stella.

6. This new Covenant is established upon better promises, in regard of the
continuance of it; That is, as to the ceremonial part thereof, which was to be
done away, Heb. 10.9. Porro lex ceremonijs quodammodo vestiobatur; nunc post
corporis interitum qui vestium usus erit? Tritum est illud vulgi proverbium,
accessorium sequi naturam sui principalis. Non mirum igitur si ceremoniae, quae
nihil sunt quam appendices veteris Testamenti, simul cum tot^ Mosis ministerio
finem habeant. Call. in Lev. cap. 8. v. 8.
He takes away the first that he may establish the second. Which appears to be
meant of the typical part thereof, ver. 8. But this Covenant of Abraham is a
Covenant that lasts for ever even to a thousand Generations.

7. In regard of the stability of it, Jer. 31.33. Not according to the Covenant
made with your father Abraham when I brought you out of the land of Egypt,
which my Covenant they brake, (or continued not in) But this is my Covenant I
will make with you, (says the Lord) I will put my law in their inward parts,
and write it in their hearts; if these ordinances of Moon and stars depart from
me, (v. 36.) then shall the seed of Israel cease from being a nation before me
for ever; if heaven above can be measured, then will I cast off the seed of
Israel for all that they have done, says the Lord. Jer. 33.20 If you can break
the Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of the night, then also may my
Covenant be broke with David, That he should not have a Son to sit upon his
throne; (namely, Christ to reign) and with the Levits. (that is, the
evangelical Ministers, so interpreted Esa. 66.21.) and the spiritual seed of
Christ. Add to these that great scripture Esa. 54.9, 10, 11. This is to me as
the waters of Noah; for as I have sworn the waters shall no more overflow the
earth: so will I be angry with thee no more. This scripture relates to the
Jew's last call, (as appears plainly by the verses following, describing their
glorious state) who though sinful shall never be dischurched more after this.
Esa. 33.20. For this Covenant is an absolute Covenant, Ad hanc foederis naturam
respiciens, Paullus ait, (...). Grot.
extending to their seeds seed for ever. Esa. 59. Iast. That is, there is no
condition required which God does not undertake to perform; and therefore as
that Covenant of nature shall never be broken, nor these ordinances of heaven
fail: so neither shall this Covenant with the Jew ever be made void. Hence it
is Rev. 10. that Christ is described ( ver. 1.) as clothed with a cloud and a
rainbow upon his head; in that place the Apostle speaks of the mystery of God
to be finished ( ver. 7.) That is, the calling of the Jews, upon the sounding
of the seventh trumpet. Christ is described with a rainbow about his head;
signifying, That though their state then be dubious, (as it will be till the 45
years are expired, Dan. 12.12.) yet it is clear at bottom; and, That that Church
shall never totally so be overwhelmed as it has formerly been.

Obj. That was a national Covenant, but the Covenant of grace was never tied to
any Nation.

Ans. The Covenant given to Abraham was not National at first, but domestical;
(as is well observed) bur Jacob's blessing and so his Covenant did exceed the
Covenant of his progenitors. Genesis 49.26. Now it is not said, That the blessing
of Jacob, for so it should be national) but, That the blessing of Abraham
should come upon the Gentiles. Gal. 3.14. Genesis 28.4. And give thee the blessing
of Abraham, to thee and thy seed.

2. What say you to those places of the Psalmist? Psalm. 2.8. and 72.10. and
102.22. and 47. last. The voluntary of the people shall be gathered to the God
of Abraham. Or, what say you to those passages of the Prophet? Esa. 49.1. and
42.4, 10. and 51.5. and 66.9. In which places the holy Ghost seems to have a
special ey to th^se Islands. Esa. 55.7. Nations shall run unto* thee Ezekiel.
20.40. In my holy mountain there shall all the house of Israel, all of them in
the land serve me. Eze. 39.25. I will have mercy on the whole house of Israel.
Thus Romans 11.26. All Israel shall be saved. That is, the body of the 12 tribes.
Eze. 42.15. The portion of the Levites allotted to them, as the verge of the
Temple, amounts to a space bigger than all the land of Canaan, and the Temple
it self bigger than the City. As Ezekiel measures the City: so John, Rev.
21. Which prophecy points out the new Jerusalem coming down from heaven; I
mean, the Jews again called after their rejection, and holds forth Jerusalem,
that is, that Church of the Jews as far larger than that of Ezekiel.

3. Was it not an act of grace, that God separated that people to himself above
all the people under heaven? Deuteronomy 4.6, 7, 8. And will it not be an act of the
same grace, to restore them to a far more glorious state and condition?

4. This Covenant is never to be reversed, as you have heard from Esa. 54.9.
This is unto me as the waters of Noah. I would fain know of any Neopelagian,
Whether, that if the world be never so sinful, it shall once more be destroyed
with water? they will say no, (but, I must tell you, that as in the law a
pardon of felony binds the malefactor: (for so the pardon runs) so a pardon of
sin binds the sinner to his good behavior:) Even so, says the Lord, This is
unto me as the waters of Noah, surely though the Jews should much degenerate
(which I trust they never will) yet they shall never be brought so low, as they
have been in this their last Captivity. To this agrees that of the prophet,
Esa. 33.20. Sion shall be a tabernacle that shall not be taken down. Amos 9.15.
They shall no more be plucked out of their land, For the gifts and calling of
God to that Church are without repentance. Romans 11.29. As therefore this
Covenant was National: so it shall be. It will be, says reverend Mr Buroughs,
a sufficient ground for any to plead an interest in Church privileges, that he
is a member of that Nation. Esa. 4.3. He that is left in Jerusalem shall be
called holy, the rebels being cast out. Ezekiel. 20.38.

Obj. Notwithstanding that Covenant, the Jews were equally in a damnable
condition with the poor heathenish infidels; all equally guilty before God,
Ezekiel. 20.38.

Ans. They were so by nature, but that they miscarried, it was because they
wilfully rejected the Covenant of Grace.

2. So are many of the rebaptized ones, though under the outward
administration, many of them in a sad and deplorable condition, and damnable
state though taken for saints by others, therefore doubtless there is no force
in that Argument.

Obj. Circumcision was a seal only to Abraham, a sign to his posterity.

An. Are there not signs exhibitive as well as significative? and wherein did
such signs differ from seals?

2. May not seals be to confirm a future as well as a present benefit? Or,

3. Is that seal ( Romans 4.11.) applied to Abraham alone, and not written for
those hereafter that shall believe? Romans 4.23. It was not written for his sake
alone (says the Apostle) that it was imputed to him for rightousnes, but for
us also to whom it shall be imputed if we believe.

4. Was not the promise to Abraham to be heir of the world? that is, of Canaan
included in that promise; Was it not (I say) through the everlasting Covenant,
and not through the works of the law which the carnal Jew rested in? Romans 4.13.

5. Did not Abraham's posterity stand in as much need of a seal to strengthen
their faith as Abraham did? Abraham was troubled with doubtings, and the Lord
again and again strengthened his faith. If he that was so eminent for believing
was so put to it, what shall we say to the poor shrubs. Psalm. 105. Will the
Lord be wanting to them in any thing that may strengthen their faith?

Obj. If this opinion be maintained, That the Covenant of circumcision was a
covenant of grace, it shakes the foundation of the Gospel, and overthrows many
fundamental points of religion.

Ans. Here are great swelling words, but such do but verba dare, there is no
proof for what is asserted; Dare any say in the presence of Christ when taking
leave of the world, That this doctrine destroys the foundation of Christian
Religion? Will they justify this at the last day before the Lord Christ the
Judge of quick and dead? Expectemus judicium tuum, Domine. Augustine.
We expect the judgment and determination of God himself in this controversy,
as Austin said in another case. But let us see their Arguments. They say,

First, The first fundamental point must needs be denied, Gal. 2.15. Jews by
nature] Quia promissio haereditariam b^nedictio^^m faciebat, ideo natura
^ocatur. Call. in Gal.
That all mankind by nature are the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.2. If all men by
nature be the Children of wrath, then are they not under this Covenant of
Grace; for to be under the Covenant of works and the Covenant of grace are
contradictories, which cannot be true at the same time.

Ans. Contradictories may be true ((...)) in a diverse respect, 2 Kings 17.34,
41. They feared the Lord, and, they feared not the Lord; that is, they feared
the Lord in their way, and the Gods of the nations also; and therefore it is
said they feared not the Lord. Thus Elisha to Hazael concerning Benhadad, 2
Kin. 8.10. He may recover, howbeit the Lord has showed me that he shall
certainly die, that is, he may recover of this disease, but he died
notwithstanding by the hand of Hazael. Sons in some sense are no sons, Deuteronomy.
32.5. Their spot is not the spot of my children, There are promises for grace,
2. to grace, children are under both in some sense.
yet (says the text) they are children in whom is no faith. 1 Kin. 2.26.
Abiathar is a man of death, and yet by the Kings favor he lives. The Israelites
at the same time were enemies for our sakes, and yet beloved for the fathers
sake, Romans 11.28. Paul was under the Covenant as being descended of Abraham,
and yet was by nature (as he tells us Ephesians. 2.2.) a child of wrath as well as
others: So children considered in their natural state, as the sons of Adam, are
under wrath; but considered as children of such gracious parents in Covenant
with God, so are they under grace, and therefore under those divine
Dispensations which they are capable of.

Gal. 2.15. We who are Jews by nature (that is, by descent from such parents)
cannot with all our birth-priviledg attain to rightousness. Thus we say, Such
are naturally English, that is, by descent. In this sense the Apostle uses the
word Romans 11.24. If the natural branches are broken off, etc. The Gentiles
wanted this, being by offspring sinners. (...) nature in Ephesians. 2.2. is taken for
that corrupt qualification of nature which they draw out of their parents
loins. Grace at first was connatural to us, and had been propagated from
parents to children ex traduce, if Adam had stood; as now corruption is. As
therefore the children of Israel were called the holy seed, and yet some of
them are styled the children of the Sorcerer and the whore, Ethiopians, etc.
Esa. 57.3. Amos 9.7. So may one and the same person be holy by way of Covenant,
and yet unholy in respect of those internal qualifications: For there is a
relative and a positive holiness, though they want the later, yet may they be
under the former.

2. Their children are under grace; for are not many of them under the
everlasting Covenant made between the Father and the Son. (...), before these
secular times, therefore all time, even from eternity. Are not elect children
given to Christ before all time? Does he not know them by name? And having
loved them with an everlasting love, does he not in time draw them with the
cords of his love, even with the cords of a man, suitable to a rational
creature, out of the hands of sin, Satan, and this present world? Does he not
swaddle them and bring them into the bond of the Covenant, even into that
Covenant called the sure mercies of David? Does he not gloriously irradiate
with the beams of his countenance on their souls in heaven, for their heaven is
the face of God? Will not Christ at the last day embrace such, (as he did on
earth) saying, Here am I, and the Children which thou have given me? And were
they not under grace? Is not all this a part of electing grace? Surely this is
the spring of all, the first wheel that moves all the rest, ( Romans 11.7.) and
though there be a wheel in a wheel, yet all shall tend to their good, as all
the wheels in a clock tend to make the clockstrike.

Obj. The second fundamental point that this error opposes, is the stability
in the Covenant of grace; they say, The Covenant made Abraham's seed was
conditional and broken by them, but the Covenant of grace is absolute.

Ans. The Covenant of grace is conditional, as appears by the whole current of
the scriptures, Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. Wherefore it shall come to pass if ye hearken
to these judgments and keep and do them, that the Lord thy God shall keep unto
thee the Covenant and the mercy which he swear unto thy Fathers. Lev. 26.41.
If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, then will I remember my Covenant
with Jacob, and my Covenant with Isaac, and my Covenant with Abraham will I
remember. Joh. 3.16. That whosoever believes should not perish. Where we see
plainly, That the Covenant of grace is conditional.

2. This Covenant has been broken, therefore it is conditional. (...) foedus
Foedus enim fa^ientes primo jurabant, postea transibant inter parts pecudis,
quasi dicerent, discindantur, dividantur ejus membra, fiat sicut pecus istud,
qui juramemtum violaverit, sicut habetur Jer. 34 18. Sic foederis faciendi
morem describit Livius Sacerdos feriebat porcum silice, sic a Jove feriatur is
qui sacrum hoc fregeri^ foedus, ut ego hunc poroum feris.
Psalm. 89.28 to the 37, the Psalmist pleads the breach of it, Thou have made
void the Covenant of thy servant. 2 Kin. 17.15. They rejected his Covenant that
he made with their Fathers, therefore (v. 20.) the Lord rejected all the seed
of Israel.

Esa. 24.5. They have broken the everlasting Co^enant. Number. 14.34. Ye shall
know my breach of promise: For they failed in point of faith, therefore ^hey
did not enter into his rest. Dan. 9. He shall confirm the Covenant with many
for one week, in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifices and the
oblations to cease. Christ preached 3 years and an half, and did confirm or was
ready to confirm that Covenant made with Abraham and his posterity; which
Covenant was tendered by the Apostles to the Jews, for another 3 years and an
half, but they not closing with Christ, as the sacrifice ceased with his death:
so the Covenant not long after was made void; for the ax was all that while
laid to the root of the tree, and at last for their unfruitfulness they were
discovenanted and cut off from the root Abraham, Joh. 8.35. Then was the staff
of beauty broken, ( Zac. 11.10.) even that which was the beauty and glory of
that nation, (which the Covenant of works never was) and this upon their
wilful and obstinate rejecting of Christ; which shows plainly, it could not be
the Covenant of works.

3. There were two sorts of Israelites, the spiritual and the carnal Israelite,
with both these the Covenant was made conditionally; the Lord promised them the
land of Canaan, but they believed not either that ever God intended it, There
are many that are visibly in a Covenant of grace under the Gospel that may be
cast out from Gods people, and yet it follows not but that it is a Covenant of
grace though broken by them.
or that the land was so good as was reported to them, or that ever they should
be able to enter in, because the Anakims were there; therefore (says the
Apostle) they could not enter in; for though the promise was absolute to some
of the seed of Abraham to enter in, yet for particulars it was conditional. The
Lord promised they should enjoy the land for ever, 2 Chronicles. 33.8. Neither will
I remove them any more out of the land, so that they will take heed to do what
I commanded them. Thus Ethan pleads as was mentioned Ps. 89.34. My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone of my lips; but (says he)
thou have made void the Covenant of thy servant, thou have profaned his Crown
by casting it to the ground.

Solomon broke Covenant with God in tolerating idolatry, setting up two Gods,
therefore God set up two Kings, and cut off the line of Solomon in Coniah, so
called ob contemptum, Jer. 22.30. Write ye this man childless, for (though he
had seed; yet were they cut off in the captivity, so that) no man of his seed
did sit upon the throne of David for ever. And were not the Children of Israel
cast out? Did not God depart from Sion and the Temple, (though he had promised
that in Sion he would dwell for ever, and that his ey and heart should be upon
the Temple,) because they had been unsteady and falsified with God in the
Covenant? Psalm. 89. Thus he dealt with the carnal Israelites, and with the body
of that nation, and could the spiritual Israelite plead not guilty? But yet
because their hearts were right before him for the main, the Lord did not look
at their miscarriages as a breach of Covenant, so as to make it null and of
none effect.

There may be articles in a Lease broken by the Tenant, but whilst the main
Covenant is not broken (as non-payment of Rent) the Lease is not forfeited: So
in the Covenant of grace there are many particular articles which are often
broken; but the main condition is, This Pepper-corn of obedi^nce is the
Condition.
That thou shall take me for thy God, (as I am willing to take thee for one of
my peculiar people.) now if this Condition be not broken, the Covenant is not
broken; neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, (says the Psalmist Psalm.
44.17.) This condition was not broken by the spiritual Israelite; for (say they
v. 18, 20.) Our heart is not turned back, neither have we forgotten the name of
our God. There may be fallings out betwixt the wife and the husband, but unless
she choose another husband the marriage is not null: So there may be many
fallings out between God and the soul, but till the soul makes choice of
another God there is no breach of the Covenant as to the main.

But here is the happiness of a true Israelite, That God keeps Covenant with
him and for him, there is no condition in that Covenant of grace, which Christ
has not undertaken to perform for us; therefore Hezekiah when he sees the
Father angry, turns to the Son, the second person in Trinity, saying, Lord
undertake thou for me, Esa. 38.14. There are two things by which we live, by
what God says, and what he does; by a promise and a providence; thou have said
it and thou have done it, (v. 15.) In these two is the life of my spirit.
Temporals were but as nuts and apples given to that infant Church in the time
of their infancy, to engage their hearts to God. Hence that phrase, I will give
the land to thy seed, (Jer. 17.7.) to be a God to them; but though God denied
the husk and outside of the promise, yet he gave the kernel and inside of it to
the spiritual Israelite; he promised them silver and paid them with gold. Esa.
60. To those gave he rest in a better land; with them (as his Church) he did
rest and abide for ever; his ey and his heart was toward them and their
prayers, though poor shrubs praying in the Temple or toward it, (i. e.) in
Christ or toward Christ; though they could not evidence their union with
Christ, a wistly look after Christ was accepted.

4. Therefore, I say, from adherent federal grace such as are only visible
members of the Church may fall, Gal. 5.1, 2. Dan. 11.30. And shall have
intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant. Heb. 4.1. Let us
therefore fear least a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it, that is, should really fall short of it,
as the word is usually taken in scripture phrase; but as for the elect, Christ
has undertaken for them, that they shall never perish, Joh. 10.28. Esa. 55.3.
I will give you the sure mercies of David, that is, Christ.

Obj. This Tenent overthrows the necessity of Conversion.

Ans. This Covenant includes regeneration and conversion in it, Deuteronomy. 30.7. I
will circumcise the heart of thy seed, which shows, That the outward
Circumcision did signify the circumcising of the heart; which the Lord
promises to make good to our seed now in the days of the Gospel, as appears
from v. 1, 5, 11. Compared with Romans 10.6. Hos. 14.7. Those under thy shadow
shall return.

2. Has not the Lord made faith and repentance the condition of the Covenant
on our part, ( Joh. 3.16.) which Christ has undertaken with the Father to work
effectually in the elect? For want of which qualifications many thousands are
damned for ever, though the Children of Abraham visibly. What have thou to do
(says the Lord, Psalm. 50.16.) to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou
hate to be reformed? Yet were their children under the outward administration
of it; therefore we say, They might as well have debarred all the children of
Israel from that outward privilege, as now debarr the children of believers;
upon the same account it 's said, Mat. 8.12. Many shall come from the East and
from the West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom
of heaven, but the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out, that is, such as
were so born, and visibly so continued for a while; such, I say, shall be cast
out of the Kingdom of heaven, or the Church here below, not the Church above;
out of which none are properly said to be cast, because they were never in it.

Obj. This opinion overthrows the foundation of all Gospel-Churches, As,

First, It destroys the matter of a Church, which ought to be Saints by
calling, 1 Cor. 1.2. But this tenent does unavoidably admit into the Church all
the unconverted and unregenerate children, born of the bodies of such persons
that either were or have been accounted believers.

Secondly, It admits into the Church good and bad promiscuously, and all those
unbaptized; and what light in the Gospel have you to justify such an Assembly
to be the true Church of Christ?

Ans. To the first, we say, It destroys not the matter of a Church visible
consisting of visible Saints, Therefore they are incomple^^ Members of the
Church.
for such are children, and so owned by the Apostle as holy, (i. e.) relatively
holy if not positively, 1 Cor. 7. Ezra 9.2. -- the holy seed, (i. e.) such as
are set apart for God and dedicated to him in a peculiar manner, and many of
them sanctified from the womb. Thus Jeremiah, Esaias, John Baptist, the last of
the old, and the first of the new Testamen^^* Now whether should we take the
testimony of God or the testimony of men? If we receive the witness of men,
(says the Apostle) the witness of God is greater, 1 John 5.9. Man makes
confession or profession of Christ, this is an human testimony, and we accept
it; and shall we reject a divine testimony? God forbid. Let God be true and
every man a liar, Romans 3.

2. They are acknowledged as members of the Church by the Apostle Paul; for
(writing to the Churches of Coloss and Ephesus, Col. 1.2, 3, and 20. Ephesians. 2.1.)
he directs his Epistle to ch^ldren as well as parents.

3. We answer, That children upon their discovery of themselves not to be
visible Saints, are to be suspended from the Ordinances; as in the old
Testament the Priests were to distinguish between the holy and the profane.
Jer. 7. The Lord complains that they made his house a den of thieves; such then
were not to be admitted to the Passover. In order to which the Porters were
charged to keep back from the Temple such as were unclean (in any matter)
though they were circumcised. 2 Chronicles 22.19. If this rule were observed in the
old Testament, then surely it is not to be neglected in the new.

Ans. To the second Objection. Mr Pat. page 69.

Whereas they say, Such Assemblies are no Churches, because they are not
baptized, which is essential to a particular visible Church: therefore we may
have no communion with them; for God never had any Church-union or communion
with any soul which was not baptized, that is, rebaptized.

Here are great swelling words, as the Apostle Jude says, such spirits it
seems there were in his time. But we answer,

First, If such were no Churches, then for many hundreds of years Christ's
promise fell to the ground. Mat. 16.18, 19. I will give unto thee the Keys of
the Kingdom of heaven. The Keys, as they grant, were given to particular
visible Churches, against which, making up the body of Christ, the gates of
hell (says Christ) shall not prevail; but by this Doctrine they did prevail for
above 1500 years, seeing that till that time we read not of any such Churches
as they challenge to themselves; these therefore are but sandy foundations, and
certainly when the winds of temptation shall blow, and the rain of affliction
shall fall, and the floods of persecution come, their houses will fall.

2. What say you to Rev. 11.4? Are not the two Candlesticks the Churches,
according to scripture phrase? We had Churches in England before there was any
Church at Rome; as Matthew Paris tells us. Therefore we received not our
doctrine or ordination originally from Rome; which farther appears by this,
That the British Churches in the celebration of Easter, observed the custom of
the Eastern Churches and not of the Church of Rome; which doubtless they would
have done, had they received the Gospel from thence, as Flaccius Illyricus well
observes.
which are to be slain as well as the olive trees, a little before the last
downfall of Antichrist; and does not the scripture own these Churches as true
under the reign of Antichrist, for one thousand two hundred and threescore
years: and will or dare any disown them, because not rebaptized?

3. Had they minded well the command of the holy Ghost, they had not been so
grossly mistaken: Son of man, (says the Lord, There is but one going in, and
that in the singular number; but many goings out of the Church of God, which
last word is in the plural. Ezekiel 44.5. Pones cor tuum [(...)] in ingressu
domu^, and omnes [(...)] exitus Sanctuarij.
Ez. 44 5.) mark well the entering in of the house, and every going forth of
the Sanctuary. They say we must enter in by baptism, which is essential to a
Church; but thus they unchurch all the Churches in the world but their own,
whereas we are visible members of the body of Christ before, being under the
Covenant of grace, which is the inlet to the Church of Christ, but solemnly
admitted by baptism: (...). Mat. 2.
For Christ himself was head of the Church before he was baptized, being King
of the Jews.

4. Whereas they say, Christ has no such union or communion with our Churches,
because not baptized: This is one of the greatest errors that ever was broached
in the world; but we say, The communication of Faith is made effectual by the
acknowledging of every good thing which Christ has wrought. Phil. 6.

Non habet dei charitatem qui Ecclesiae non diligit unitatem. Augustine.


I answer, I am sorry to see such a spirit of error and pride gone forth into
the world, that men should maintain such palpable errors with so much
confidence and arrogancy; for have we not proved that our Churches are true
Churches? Where Christ vouchsafes his presence, there we may and must vouchsafe
ours; unless there be some apparent ground to the contrary: But in our Churches
Christ vouchsafes his presence: Why then should any withdraw, seeing they can
render no reason for so doing?
And has not Christ walked in the midst of our candle-sticks hitherto? Rev. 2.
The experience of thousands yea millions of souls may bear witness to this
truth, and rise up and call us blessed; yea upon our late repairing of the
Tabernacle or Tabernacles, has not the Lord vouchsafed his presence and filled
our Tabernacles with his glory? Exodus 40.34. Number. 9.15. On that day the
Tabernacle was reared, the cloud covered the Tabernacle. Thus upon the casting
out of the poor blind man, Ioh. 9.35. Jesus appeared unto him and made such a
discovery of himself to his soul, as you shall scarce read in all the book of
God; but they have not only excommunicated some few, (that dissent in judgment
from them in this point) though godly, but all the Churches of God in the
world, crying (as they in Esa. 65.5.) Stand by thy self, come not near me, I am
holyer than thou, that is, I have devised a holyer way of worship than thou,
These are a smoke in the nostrils of the Lord, and a fire that burns all the
day, and doubtless God will appear to the joy of such as are cast out, clave
errante, with an erring key, and to the shame of those that thus have cast them
forth as abominable branches. Esa. 66.5.

Obj. The Jews were truly under the Covenant of Circumcision, ( Genesis 17.10.)
but never all of them so much as visibly in the Covenant of grace.

An. We grant they were all circumcised, (which still they call the Covenant)
but that they were all under a Covenant of grace savingly we deny, though so
far as it extended there was a reality in it. 2 Pet. 2.18. (...), Having truly
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of Christ; these
common gifts, purchased by Christ and given by the spirit to the sons of men,
are true and real though not saving grace. Thus the carnal Jews and carnal
Gospellers children may be said to be under a Covenant of grace truly and
really, so far as it goes, though they never attain to the enjoyment of the
spiritual part thereof; the Jew had much benefit by that Covenant as we shall
show hereafter: But it was not fulfilled to them all in the utmost extent of
it. Secret things belong to God, but things revealed to us and to our children:
That God will be our God and the God of our seed, is a thing revealed,
therefore it belongs to us: but how many of our children he has chosen, or how
far he has taken them into Covenant with himself, or how far the promise
belongs to them, is a secret thing which must be left to God. It is true
Abraham and his posterity were circumcised, Genesis 17.10. but it does not follow,
that all his posterity were in reality and truth under a Covenant of grace as
to the spiritual part thereof, though visibly they were under it as to the
outward administration, and enjoyed many common mercies by virtue of that
Covenant. For what have thou (says the Lord) to do to take my Covenant in thy
mouth seeing thou hate to be reformed? But God did not cut off that entail
till he gave them a bill of divorce.

Obj. No children fare the bette^ for the faith of their parents in respect of
this Covenant.

Ans. This query the Apostle answers, Romans 3.1. What advantage h^th the Jew
more than others? (...); Quid amplius Judaeo? He answers, Much every way.

First, That unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Word and promises,
non ut alienae rei depositum, but as their own proper treasure. Psalm. 147.19.
Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7.8. What Nation is there so great? etc. Three things make a nation
great.

1. That they have God nigh to them, and that they are nigh to God again.

2. That they have statutes and judgments so rightous as theirs were.

3. In that they are a wise and understanding people These three you have in
the Text: But how came they to be so wise if not by the enjoyment of these
Ordinances, which are the glory of all lands?

Secondly, By virtue of this Covenant they had the Tabernacle of God amongst
them, a Church erected, and they with their children members of that Church.
Psalm. 147.13. He has blessed thy children within thee. How highly does the
Apostle extol this christian privilege? Heb. 12.22. Ye are not come to Mount
Sinai, but to Mount Sion, viz. To fellowship with the Church below and the
Church above. (for these two differ but as the porch and the house, the suburbs
and the city.) Great is the privilege that members have in this respect.
Consider how near and dear such are to God. Psalm. 87.2. He loves the very gates
of Sion (in which gates they had their Assemblies) even the outside of Sion,
more than all the dwellings of Jacob What sweet enjoyments have they that walk
in such ways? If it be so sweet on earth, where a few imperfect members mixed
with many corrupt members meet together; ah! how much more sweet will it be in
heaven, when that great Assembly shall meet, and have no mixtures at all! Is it
therefore no advantage to children that they may sit down with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob in the Kingdom of heaven? But ah! how sad will it be with them, if
they be hereafter cast out into utter darkness!

Thirdly, The presence of God is in his Tabernacle, Exo. 40.34. The glory of
the Lord filled the Tabernacle, when they punctually observed the command of
the Lord by the hand of Moses.

Fourthly, By virtue of this Covenant the Angel of his presence saved them, and
stood betwixt Pharaoh and them. Exodus 14.19. q. d. Thou must strike through my
loins if thou wound Israel my firstborn. Yea the Archangel Christ has his
Angels under him, which always behold the face of their heavenly Father, and
are ready at a beck (as knowing his mind by his looks) to revenge the wrong of
these little ones, Mat. 18.10. Yea this Angel of the Covenant ( Esa. 9.3, 9.)
stands betwixt them and hell, suspending the execution of that sentence of
wrath, [In the day thou sinnest thou shall die the death,] which is an axiom
true at all times; but the seed of the woman comes in and reprieves such for a
while. Heb. 1.3.

Fifthly, By the blood of this Covenant were they brought out of Egypt young
and old: Hence it is that he makes mention of this name, I am the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, this is my memorial to all
generations. Exo. 3.15. By the same blood of Christ sealing that Covenant were
they and their little ones brought out of Babylon, and shall be brought out of
this their last captivity. Zac. 9.11.

Sixthly, They have many temporal blessings, Psalm. 37. I never saw the rightous
forsaken, (especially if liberal for so is the word often used) nor his seed
begging bread. It was so rare athing for the seed of the rightous to beg their
bread, as that David professes for his part he never saw it He is ever
merciful and lends, says the Text, v. 26. And what then, are his children
beggars? No, they shall enjoy a blessing. Genesis 21. Ismael will I make a great
nation, (v. 13.) because he is thy seed; so that wicked children fare the
better for their parents, as to outward at least. Deuteronomy. 8.18. It is he that
gives thee power to get riches, that he may establish his Covenant with thee,
Luke 13.16. And ought not this woman (being a daughter of Abraham) be loosed
from this bond? Filiam Abrahami sic appellat propter ejus gentis praestantiam,
quam deus singulari gratia amplectebatur propter fadus cum Abraham^ pactum.

Dominus arguit a re nota and consessa. Piscat.


his Covenant which he made to thy Fathers: So that we may safely say, the
Covenant is made with believers and all their seed, in respect of the external
part; but with believers and their elect seed only, as to the internal part
thereof.

Seventhly, They have common gifts, constraining and restraining grace by
virtue of this Covenant, though their nature be not changed, as the prophet
speaks Esa. 11. Yet at least they are restrained, but a lion is a lion still
though a tame lion. He has received (says the Psalmist) gifts for the
rebellious, that is, saving grace for some, Ministers and people; restraining
grace for others, that the Lord God may dwell among them, else there were no
abiding for the people of God in this world.

Eighthly, They had by this Covenant offers and tenders of grace, in that sense
they were called the children of the Covenant, Act. 3. partly because it was
tendered to them, (but not solely for this cause, for so all nations to whom
the Gospel is preached should be in Covenant, which we utterly deny) and partly
because accepted by them; herein many are mistaken that make the offers and
tenders of the Gospel simply as sufficient to render a people in Covenant with
God, without their acceptance; but we say, There must be the accepting of
those offers and tenders, and closing with Christ (externally at least,) else
it is no Covenant properly so called.

Ninthly, Many children have saving grace wrought in them by virtue of this
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30.7. I will circumcise the heart of thy seed. Jer. 31. That
great intruder, sin, that usurps authority over all, (even over such as have
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression) comes in by the fall
of our first parents: and why may not children therefore be restored by the
next parent instrumentally?

If the Lord did admit such only as believe, then the faith whereby we believe
were not given by any Covenant; but what says the Prophet Jeremiah? chapter 31. v.
34. They shall all know me from the least to the greatest, that is, young and
old; which knowledge is interpreted to be faith, John 6.45. I will write my Law
in their hearts, what law, only the moral law? Yea the evangelical law, if so,
then the law of faith. Have then elect children no saving benefit by the
Covenant till they believe? Yes, they have this benefit, That they shall
believe; for there are promises for grace, 2 to grace. When the Lord says, I
will be the God of thy seed, there is a promise for grace, q.d. The vein of
election shall break out in some of them, not all; for such promises as these
are indefinite promises, Romans 3. -- Excid^rit sermo ille, viz. promissio illa
gratiae, Ero deus ^^us and seminis tui.
and therefore true, though not verifyed in all, Romans 3.3. What if some did not
believe, to whom the promises were made, shall their unbelief make the faith of
God of none effect? I say then, that the vein of election shall break forth in
some, (though for the present it runs under ground, as some rivers do) for it
cannot be but that some of Gods peoples children should prove religious, seeing
that the church shall have a seed and seeds seed for ever; the word and the
spirit in those shall continue till the coming of Christ, says the Lord, Esa.
59.21. To which place the Covenant mentioned ( Romans 11.27.) is to be referred,
q.d. That Church of the Jews shall not fail in her spiritual offspring for
ever: This is a promise for grace in the seed, to grace in that Church, out of
which Covenant the Lord has not excluded any children of believers; therefore
parents have a ground to hope he has included all, he having not excepted any.
Here then is an object for the faith of parents to work upon, but know
assuredly that according to your faith so things go with you. Psalm. 33. last.
Let thy mercy, Lord, be upon us according as we put our trust in thee. 1 Ioh.
5.16. comp. Iam. 5.15. If any man see a brother sin a sin which is not unto
death, let him pray for him, and it shall be forgiven him. It Is not to be
expected that all should be heard in this particular, as it is not in that of
Iam. 5.15. Such promises are not universal but indefinite, because ofttimes not
always the Lord grants such their desires; the meaning is, prayer is an
ordinance to which God has made such a gracious promise, and he often does
restore the sick, prayers being put up by believers for them; therefore in such
cases we are to rely on God by an act of recum^encie, though we cannot rely on
him by an act of full assurance; but such as have much communion with God, may
know much of his mind, and have a particular faith for a particular marcie,
whether spiritual or temporal: children have general and indefinite promises,
and conditional upon faith and obedience, such as determine not the kind of good
promised, nor the particular person, and are therefore true if performed to any
person in any fort. Heb. 11.27. Many spiritual and so temporal promises are
indefinitely propounded and so to be understood, not that the Lord intends an
absolute and universal obligation of himself, neither is the act of faith in
the application of it required to be an absolute and infallible persuasion that
God will bestow these particular things upon us: but the Lord expects we should
rely on him to do what is most for his glory and our good. But let me tell you
faith may do much, ( Mat. 9.) When he saw their faith, he said to the sick of
the palsy, Be bold, thy sins are forgiven thee. When he saw their faith, that
is, the faith of them that brought him: So when he sees the faith of parents
bringing their children to Christ in the visible way of this Ordinance, (for I
know no other visible way to bring children to Christ) he says to them, Your
sins are forgiven you. Thus children are saved by the faith of the parents,
begetting faith in them. Hence that passage of David concerning his child, I
shall go to it, it shall not return to me, he means not of that state of death
in the grave, (for what comfort could that be to David that he should go to the
the grave with it?) but the state of glory, to which he was assured it was
gone, and to which he should follow after.

Tenthly, I am apt to be very charitable to the Infants of all believers that
die before they commit actual transgression, Cedo quo nomine filij vestri
salvantur nisi ex illo verbo, Ego sum deus seminis tui, ac nisi illud verbum ad
illos pertin^ret, ne ad baptismum quidem admittendi essent. Call. Inst.

Quicunque in dei foedere gratiose semel est, neque unquam ab illo foeder^ se
avertit, ille ^ona promissa consequitur; nunquam enim descrit de^^ nisi
deserent^m. See Forb.


heaven surely is fuller of such Infants, than of others; and therefore as he
said, so say I, If I had 20 Children I would not bate God one. But how are
these Children saved if not by that Covenant? I will be thy God and the God of
thy seed? from which gracious Covenant, if afterward they turn not away, they
obtain the things promised, and their souls are bound up in a bundle of life
for ever. See p. 69.

Obj. There was no promise of eternal life mentioned in that Covenant.

Ans. In that Covenant God promised them temporals more largely, spirituals
more sparingly, according to his secret dispensations of these and those times;
they were children, Hence the motto of the Prince of Wales, [I SERVE] Gal. 5.4.
a child differs not from a servant; and thus the Hebrew naguo^, the Greek
(...), the Latin word puer signify either a child or a servant.
and a child differs not from a servant in his nonage, now children are more
taken with childish things; therefore they had more of temporals and less of
spirituals, more of the spirit of bondage than the spirit of adoption, that is,
that spirit that makes us sons, (...), and testifies we are sons; but yet we
say in that Covenant life is propounded implicitly, in that he says, I will be
thy God, which is interpreted by our Savior to include not only spirituel life
here, but eternal life hereafter. Christ by virtue of his spiritual dwelling in
us, will raise us up at the last day, for as the union betwixt Christ's humane
and divine nature ceased not even in the grave: so neither does the union
betwixt Christ and the soul and the body cease. Romans 8. Seeing that we are not
raised by the graces of the spirit, but by the spirit it self dwelling in us;
it is true, Christ as Mediator shall cease having yielded up that vicarium
Regnum to his father, but he continues head of the Church for ever.

2. When the Lord explains that Covenant, Ier. 31.33. Does he not say, I will
be their God, their sins and iniquities will I remember no more? and are not
our souls bound up in this as in a bundle of life? is not here justification of
life for children to lay hold upon? Nay when the Lord says, I will write my
Law in their hearts, and they shall all know me from the lest to the greatest,
that is, young and old, is not this the Law of the spirit of life? and will not
he write the Law of faith too, by which we live the life of the sons of God?
Gal. 2.20.

3. That blessedness (spoken of Genesis 12.3.) is explained by Paul to be
justification by faith, Gal. 3.8.14. called there the blessing of Abraham which
comes upon the Gentiles, that is, parents and children. Act. 3. blessedness is
expressed by turning every one from his evil way. Esa. 44.3. I will pour my
spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring. Is not here a spirit
of life? are not the essentials of regeneration promised here to babes? and is
not that mother promise, I will be thy God, the ground of all these? Gal. 3.14.

4. What is the meaning of that phrase, Do this and live? may it not
evangelically be taken as well as legally? Ezekiel. 20. Neh. 9 Which if a man keep
he shall live therein. What force is there in these words (with reverence be it
spoken) if understood in their sense? for might not the spiritual Israelites
say, To what purpose is it? What hopes have we of attaining to that perfection,
and so consequently to life? It 's granted the carnal Israelites being not
sensible of their own weakness and imperfections, looked at that Covenant as a
Covenant of works, and so seemingly it was propounded; but the spiritual
Israelites looked at it with another ey, as it was propounded with evangelical
purposes, that is, Do this in Christ and live: Hence it was that the Lord bid
Moses put the Tables into the Ark, as signifying, That Christ was to keep
Covenant with them and for them, as has been formerly showed.

Obj. None ever had any interest in that Covenant but such as were in Christ.

Ans. Never any had any saving interest in that absolute Covenant, but such as
are in Christ in truth and reality; but there are others that are in Christ, as
the unprofitable branch in the Vine, Some render the words as the Sir. renders
it, viz. Every branch that bear not fruit in me. Joh 15. (...).
that brings forth fruit to it self: these having entered into Covenant with
God, may be said to be under the Covenant conditionally, (of which conditional
promises the Sacraments are seals) and by virtue of it be made partakers not
only of temporals, but also of those common graces by which they are
sanctified for this or that particular service. Heb. 10.29. (And has counted
the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified.) Which
grace is sometimes called life, (though it fall short of regeneration.) Jude
12. But the Covenant is established with the spriritual seed of Isaac only,
and such as walk in the steps of the faith of our father Abraham. Genesis 17.19. I
will establish my Covenant with him for an everlasting Covenant. Ismael was
under the Covenant, but mocking at the promised seed, (that is, Isaac, a child
of the promise) he was discovenanted and cast out; therefore he was in before,
( Gal 4.30.) else how was he cast out? Esau was under that Covenant of Isaac,
but he, profane wretch! sells his birthright, and goes to Mount Seir,
therefore he is cashiered also, and not so much as mentioned in the Genealogy
of our Savior upon this account.

Obj. All the promises of the new Covenant were made to the spiritual seeed.

Ans. But did not those promises run along being entailed upon Abraham his
posterity? Quamprimum quis natus est ex ^^deli parente, statim fit filius
Abraha; nam priusquam Judaeus aliquis circumcisius fuit, habebatur in numero
filiorum; baptismus enim non facit filios Abrahae, sed foedus.

Whit. de Sacr.


and are not the promises made to the visible Church whereof Christ is the
visible head? were children ever cast out of that mystical body of Christ?
Gal. 3. Doubtless the Apostle speaks of a Church which was the visible body of
Christ, to which the seals were applied, for there was no distinction of a
fleshly and spiritual seed in the old Testament, but all were included in one
and the same Covenant, till they degenerated from it.

When there is mention made of Abraham's carnal seed in opposition to his
spiritual seed, Romans 9. Gal. 4. As Ismael is said to be born after the flesh.

1. It 's not because such were reprobates, for many of Abraham's seed were
reprobates, and yet not reckoned to be born after the flesh.

2. Nor because such were begotten by carnal generation, for so Esau and Jacob
were.

3. Nor merely because born of Hagar, See Grot de jure belli. p 12.

Lege Mosis Israelitae soli tenebantur, Circum^isionis autem lege tota Abrahami
posteritas, quare qui popali extra Israelitas circumcisi sunt, eos credibile
est aut ab Esavo aut ex Cethurae posteris venisse.


for God commanded Circumcision to pass upon the concubines children. Genesis
17.12.

4. Nor merely because unregenerate, for many elect persons are not converted
in infancy.

5. But Ismael is said to be born after the flesh because Hagar was a
bondwoman, (and in that time a type of the Covenant of works) too likely an
instrument in the course of nature for a child of the promise to be begotten
of. Gal. 4.23. It Is probable Abraham might not so much make use of his faith,
as nature in using Hagar; and in this Ismael was a type of all hypocrites that
have no more than what may ^e attained to by humane industry; but Abraham ^ad
Isaac so by faith in the promise as if there were ^o use of nature. Abraham
circumcised Ismael, which shows, that as none but the visible faithful are to
be baptized: So all the seed of such are to be looked upon as elect (as Abraham
did) until God or they discover the contrary; for God has not disanulled
Abraham's Covenant which runs in the natural line, nor added to it, the whole
Gospel being but an explication of Abraham's Covenant. Heb. 4.2. Therefore it
remains in its latitude, including children as well as parents.

The Covenant having an external administration, many might be in it according
to Gods revealed will, but not according to his secret purpose; now we are to
proceed according to his will revealed in his word, for what ever Arguments are
produced against the children of believers now, might have been pleaded against
Abraham's seed of old; Believers were the seed of Abraham among the Jews. Romans
9.6, 7, 8. Therefore our Savior argues, those Pharifees not to be the children
of Abraham.
therefore Romans 9. Paul speaks not a word of a different dispensation of the
Covenant of Abraham in the old and new Testament: I say, there is not the lest
word hinted, that infants, because children of the flesh, therefore are no
children of the promise but rather the contrary: For Isaac though of Abraham's
flesh, yet was a child of the promise when but eight days old, and let me tell
you, The Covenant in some respects makes the father a spiritual father, and the
child a spiritual seed as well as natural. To conclude, the Apostle does not
show in the forenamed chapter, who were the seed as to Ordinances, but who were
the seed as to election and salvation.

For though there was a Covenant for Ismael, yet was it not established with
him but with Isaac. Genesis 17.19. He showed indeed that all the children of the
flesh are not the elect seed, but does not show they were not the children of
Abraham's Covenant. v. 7.

The children of the promise are those that are born to Abraham according to
promise, See Piscat. in Genesis 13.15. To thee will I give this land, and thy seed
for ever.] Posteria tuis non tamen omnibus, sed tantum orituris ex filio uno,
cujus respectu ^runt semen unum (i) populus unus. Sic cap. 21.12 Vbi jubet
ablegare Ismaelem, addita hac ratione, Nam is Isaac vocabitur tibi semen.
therefore all Isaac's seed according to the flesh were children of the
promise; for the promises were made to them, notwithstanding some of them were
thrown out, and some entered not in. Thus the Gospel Church has the promise of
salvation made to them, but so as many visible Saints may fall short thereof.
Heb. The word (...) signifies not a seeming but a real falling short, according
to scripture phrase, and the scope and purport of this place.
4.1. Which shows you that Abraham's Covenant contained all his seed
indefinitely, for that some should enter in: The promise is absolute, but as
for the individuals it was upon condition of faith: so there is a company of
believers elected that shall certainly enter into glory, and these determined
by God. But as for particular persons considered as visible members of the
Church; these enter in, or not, accordingly as they believe, or believe not.
When a man covenants with another, That such a piece of land shall descend to
his heirs, who shall be his heirs is unknown, only it is known in general that
the child is the next of kin: Thus in this case who shall have the benefit of
this Covenant may be unknown, but in general it is known that believers shall.
The Lord appoints his Church to look upon such persons as saints or no saints,
according to their visible holiness, and to look on their seed to be such as
their parents are; for Ismael is reckoned first as Abraham's, afterward
Ismael's seed are reckoned as enemies and strangers like himself. Exodus 12.48.
1 Chronicles. 2.17 It appears Jethro was an Ismaelite, yet chap. 17.25. he 's said
to be an Israelite. Ismael was under the Covenant, and God did much for him as
the son of such a father, Genesis 21 13. And also of the son of the bondwoman will
I make a nation, because he is thy seed: But the Covenant was established in
Isaac: All visible professors and their seed are incovenanted, (for the
promises of the Gospel are tendered to them, and they accept of them) but the
Covenant is established on true believers only; not as though (says the
Apostle) the word of promise has taken none effect. Genesis 26.28. and 34.3, 4.
The promise runs thus, Unto thy seed v. 3. And unto thy seed, v. 4. when he
speaks of the Church-seed, that is, such children as were inchurched: But when
he speaks of Christ, then he alters the phrase, saying, In thy seed shall all
nations be blessed Gal. 3.
Romans 9.6. No godly Jew (though others did) ever thought the word of God false,
because those that trusted to the works of the Law, were rejected: For in those
indefinite promises it is enough to render them true, if they take effect in
some though not in all, according to the intent and scope of the holy Ghost.
Let God then be true and every man a lier, according as it is written, That
thou might overcome when thou art judged. (...), either when thou judge or
art judged, it is mediae vocis; thus the Heb. (be mishpat) in judicio, which is
taken actively or passively.

2. We answer as formerly, there are promises for grace as well as to grace.
Deuteronomy. 30.6. Joh. 6. All the father has given me shall come unto me, and
whosoever shall come unto me I will in no wise cast out. Thus Jer. 31.34. From
the least to the greatest, young and old, they shall all know me, that is,
believe in me. Joh 6.45, 64, 65. That place of the prophet implies a multitude
of such in the Church, far above what had been in former times: to say it is
meant of the elect, as usually they interpret such places, reaches not the
scope of the place which imports a greater number than ordinary in former
times, whereas of the elect it would be true were they never so few, or in
those times no more of them, than had in any other age formerly been; therefore
it is well observed that the Covenant is the ground of faith, and not faith the
ground of the Covenant: For who can believe without a promise? what ground has
the faith of the parent to work upon, if you take away the promise? Archimedes
said if he had but footing to stand upon, he would toss the earth like a ball:
and what cannot faith do (which in some sense is said to be omnipotent) if it
have a promise to work upon? but if faith have no ground to work upon, it can
do nothing.

3. Do they not proceed according to the judgment of charity in their
administrations, as the Apostles did? Act. 8. they were all baptized from the
least to the greatest, that is, young and old, and were all these really saints*
Joh. 3.26. These were accounted the spiritual seed, till they manifested the
contrary: If such, why not children? For if the Covenant (as they say) be only
with real saints, and the seal administered only to such; then none at all are
to be baptized, seeing with Peter we may easiely be mistaken. But were it not
better to administer the seal to 99 that are not really sanctified, than deny
it to any one to whom it does belong.

The third Argument is taken from Circumcision. Infants were circumcised under
the law, therefore now to be baptized under the Gospel.

First, Because the Covenant of grace made with the Jews and Gentiles is the
same Covenant for substance, as has been sufficiently proved; though there be
diversity of administrations thereof. Gal. 3 8. A man in this or that habit is
the same man, though diverse in his apparel: even so the old Covenant formerly
adorned with that dress of ceremonies, but now stripped of them and made plain,
is one and the same Covenant with the new Covenant.

Secondly, Circumcision and baptism are both seals of the same Covenant, and
they are the same sacraments or seals for substance, and for the spiritual part
and use thereof. Circumcision sealed the Covenant of grace to Abraham and his
seed. Romans 4.11. And baptism does the like.

Thirdly, We may argue from the Analogy betwixt Circumcision and baptism: for
they both agree in the substantials, though they differ in some circumstantials.

Now they themselves do confess we may argue from parity of reason or Analogy.

1. When Analogy does not institute a piece of worship, but only helps to the
understanding of it; now as for the ordinance of baptism it is clear, but as for
the application of it to this or that subject, we need the help of Circumcision.

2. When we do not rest solely in the comparison, but have a farther reason for
it; now it is not the bare Analogy between Circumcision and baptism, by which
we enforce the baptism of infants, but the grounds of both from scripture.

3. When it holds full proportion in scripture to that for which it is brought,
which we say, Circumcision does to baptism, unless in some particulars wherein
a peculiar reason may be given. We say then,

1. They agree in their signification, for they hold forth to us man's
corruption by nature. The substance of all divinity lay in Circumcision, (as
Luther well observes) the like may we say of baptism; therefore if we would be
good Divines, let us study our baptism: For the Lord has put a great stress
upon such truths as seem little in the eyes of many.

Gnorlab signifies a superfluity, and is not sin a superfluous thing? Jam.
1.21. (...), a whitflaw.


Josh. 5.3. The hill of fore-skins. This was clearly shadowed out in the
cutting off the foreskin: and what does the washing of the body signify but
that natural uncleanness which we contracted from our first parents. Heb 10.22.

2. They agree in this, that they represent the mystery of our redemption: In
the former there was the shedding of blood, in the later the same blood is
represented by water poured on us. How the ceremonio^^ part of Circumcision is
abolisht, but the sacramental part still remains, which a believer may plead
with God; for baptism is ((...)) the earnest demand of a good conscience: (that
what is signified in that Ordinance may be made good unto us) so the word
rather signifies than the answer of a good conscience. I say it is the earnest
demand, for omnis praepositio est additio, every preposition, as we say, is an
addition, Phil. 4.17. Not because I desire a gift, (...), but I earnestly
desire ((...)) a fruit, or whatsoever was a effect of his Ministry.

3. They agree in that they represent the mystery of regeneration.

First, The cutting off the foreskin signifies, the taking away that filth of
nature: and is not baptism the laver of regeneration, and the washing of the
new birth? Tit. 3.5.

Secondly, They agree in their subjects ^o which they are applied, each of them
being administered to such as are incovenanted, which are the (...), the first
subject of the seals, (and not believers, quatenus believers, as some would
have it) whether young or old: So that being applied to Infants (though for the
present wanting faith) they are not seals of a blank, unless we should say that
the Covenant was a mere blank. Romans 4.11, 12.

Fourthly, they agree in their ends and uses,

1. In that they are initial seals of the Covenant of grace, assuring parents,
That as God is their God: so he will be the God of their seed; they are both to
strengthen the faith of parents in laying hold on the Covenant for their
children. So that when the Lord sees the faith of the parents, I am persuaded
he oftentimes says to the child, (as to that man, Mat. 9.) Thy sins are
forgiven thee.

2. In them we are dedicated and consecrated to God, Quod morale est durat, viz
fid^m pr^f^endam ex dedicatione parvulorum

(...) Sponsus dicitur puer, quando circumciditur, seucircumcisionis die, quia
tum primum populo dei conjungitur, and deo quasi desponsatur.

Exodus 4 Et ipsa dicebat, Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es, Targum. (...) Per
sanguinem circumcisionis istum datus est sponsus nobis, tu^c dicebat sponsus
sa^umum propter circumcisione^. Schindl See LXX.

(...).


that is, given up to him and to his service forever. 1 Samuel 1.^8. Therefore as
Circumcision, so baptism binds us to the keeping of the Law evangelically.

3. They serve to distinguish us from the world of heathens and pagans: they
and theirs lie all of them uncircumcised, I mean, unbaptized, with their
ini^uities upon their bones, as the Prophet says of Meshech, Elam, Tubal, and
the rest of the Nations, ( Ezekiel. 32.24, 26, 27.) branding them with this black
cole of infamy, viz. That they were uncircumcised.

4. They agree in this, That as Circumcision was not, Genesis 17. In ipso articulo
temporis, in that juncture of time. Mat. 28. (...), ((...).) in the present
tense as implying haste:
so baptism is not to be deferred. Abraham and all his household were
circumcised in that very day: even so baptism is not to be delayed, but with
all convenient speed the seal is to be applied, ( Act. 22.16. and now why
tarriest thou? arise and be baptized.) For the neglect of this Ordinance is
dangerous, as the contempt is damnable.

Thus far they agree, therefore (say some) Circumcision was a type of baptism.
Col. 2.11, 12. Paul contends with those who labored to maintain jewish
ceremonies and types, ( v. 10, 11.) showing that Circumcision, which was the
profession of the whole law, was fulfilled as a type or figure to christians by
Christ in baptism, and therefore that was to vanish away as the types did, when
they were fulfilled, v. 12. He shows how we are circumcised in Christ, which is
sealed and effected by baptism, in which we are assimulated to Christ, so that
baptism is a christians Circumcision; and then are we said to be circumcised
with the circumcision of Christ when we are baptized.

That Circumcision is a type of baptism it will appear if we examine the
properties of a type.

1. Types are inferior to their antitypes, of which they are but shadows and
figures: so is Circumcision to baptism in many respects.

2. Types were not true in themselves comparatively, being a shadow of things
to come; but in the body or truth which they type out, so in circumcision there
is a type of a type, (...) Signum ad vivum expressum. Luther.
that is, a shadow of a more lively image: but as for the holiness of children,
which some say was ceremonious, we answer, That parents and children were
federally and therefore morally holy, as the Apostle tells the Jews long after
the abolishing of the ceremonies, viz. That they were an holy nation, a
peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2. For what could the holiness of children in the old
typifie in the new?

3. When the antitype of truth is fulfilled, then the type cease: Maluerum
J^daei hoc velum ceremoniarum dissuere quam laceraere. Molin.
and thus Circumcision cease upon the ushering in of baptism, though it was
continued for a while, that so with the rest of the ceremonies it might have an
honorable burial, as being of a noble birth, even of Divine institution. What
has been said to Circumcision as to the typicalness thereof, may with much
more evidence of truth be applied to the ark, Aqua diluvij in Arca constituti^
salutaris, extra Arcam ver^ mortifera fuit. Aug.
(wherein all the household of Noah, that is, his children were saved) the like
figure whereunto baptism now saves. The like we have 1 Cor. 10.2, 6. And were
all baptized unto Moses, -- and in the sea. Now these things are our types,
(...), we may argue with much clearness from the shadow to the truth even in
this place, In nube and mari, quae baptismum i^num essicium nostro congruentem,
obscuriora potius elegit sacramenta, quod ad antithesin inter nos and illos
magis valebant. Calv.
if all were baptized, then their children; if so then, why not now? For was it
not the Apostles scope to let them know that the Jews had the same privileges
for substance with the Corinthians, who notwithstanding those privileges were
not spared, From the type to the verity the argument is of force, unless there
be some special reason to the contrary.
because so highly exalted with many Gospel privileges. O ye Corinthians
(says the Apostle) do not think to escape, for all these befell the Jews as
types; therefore as the Lord dealt with them, so will he deal with you.

However though it be denied that there is a type of a type, Significat
Ap^stelus mutuam similitudinem (...) vel ut vulgo loquntur, correspondentiam
Call. in Pet. 1, 3.
yet I hope that none will deny, that there is an antitype or a correspondent
type that comes in the room and place of a former type. Though Circumcision
properly was not a type of baptism, Beza renders 1 Pet. (...), typus
correspondens, or a type answering to a type.
yet Circumcision and baptism are both types of one and the same thing
represented, as was showed before. The ark and baptism are two several types,
yet both shadowing out our deliverance by Christ: So Circumcision and baptism
are two distinct seals, but both holding forth to us our corruption by nature,
and redemption by Christ.

Secondly, They differ in circumstantials, as

1. In the time, for the circumstances of time and day were not built upon the
Covenant, ergo, not perpetual. Circumcision was on the eighth day, for which
there was a special reason, not only in regard of the weakness of the child
the seventh day, being the critical day: but also because that day was a type
of the resurrection of Christ, which was in the eighth day; and so the sabbath
is called the eighth day, John 20. The same number of days was observed in many
other things, (therefore it cannot merely relate to the weakness o^ the child)
as for the consecration of the Priests, Lev. 8.35. and 9.1. The cleansing of
the lepers, Lev. 14.8, 9, 10. The cleansing of the polluted Nazarites, Number.
6.9, 10. and for the purifying of the altar. Ezekiel 43.26, 27. and the offering
of the sacrifice, by which Christ's resurrection on the eighth day seems to be
typified, who rose again for our justification.

2. They differ in their subject, Circumcision was administered only to the
males, baptism to the male and female. For,

1. The females were not capable of the former Ordinance.

2. Sin entered into the world by man, being an active instrument of
generation; whereas the woman is a passive instrument, Romans 5. By one man sin
entered into the world: For if Adam had stood, we had not fallen though Eve
fell.

3. They differ in durance, Circumcision was in force till Christ came, because
typical; but baptism continues to the end of the world: So that we see they
agree in all the substantials, and almost in all things else, unless in such
things for which a special reason may be given.

I conclude therefore this Argument, as Circumcision in the old Testament was
applied to children: so also is baptism to be applied in the new; for of equals
there is the same reason. Thus much for the 3 Argument, taken from the analogy
between Circumcision and baptism.

4 If children were circumcised in the old, they are now to be baptized in the
new, because baptism succeeds Circumcision, (now what is succession but the
substitution of later things for former things in the same subject, as is well
observed) for when the Jews were converted, ( Act. 2.38.) Peter enjoins them
not to be circumcised but baptized; which shows, that baptism comes instead
thereof. Thus Col. 2.11, 12. The scope of the Apostle was to take them off from
the rudiments of the world, especially Circumcision, which troubled most of the
Churches. Therefore he says, You are complete in him, being circumcised with
the Circumcision made without hands. But they might object, We want the outward
Circumcision to us and our children, which was of singular use to the Jews to
strengthen their faith: The Apostle answers, You are buried with him in
baptism, You are circumcised because baptized; For baptism supplies the place
and room of Circumcision, and is every way as advantageous to you: So that we
plainly see they were complete in Christ, as to this Ordinance sealing
outwardly. Suppose (says Mr Sydenham) the Ordinance should again be changed,
and the inversion thus, That baptism should be abolished and Circumcision set
up again, and the Apostle should express himself after this manner, Ye are
complete in Christ, in whom also ye are baptized with the baptism of Christ,
being circumcised with him; Would not this deduction be clear, That
Circumcision was ordained instead of baptism? Therefore we say, Either baptism
succeeds the sacrament of Circumcision, as to children; or else some other
Ordinance does succeed; or else nothing at all remains in lieu thereof: But
nothing else succeeds Circumcision; therefore either baptism succeeds it, or
else there is no seal of the Covenant left as to children, but they without any
visible token of Gods favor depart out of the world.

5. Because an Ordinance once enjoined and never repealed, All Gods
commandments and institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews, bind us at this
day in all things which belong to the substance of the Covenant, and were not
accidental to them.
stands still in force; but the sealing of the Covenant to the infants of
believing parents is enjoined in the old Testament, Genesis 17. and never repealed
in the new, if it be, let any man show where.

6. Because the privileges of the Gospel are as large to believers for
themselves and their seed, Quacunque de circumcisione dicuntur, ^^^ spectant ad
naturam ejus sacramentalem, quam habet ut communi cum reliquis sacramentis,
illa recte applicantur ad omnia sacramenta; sed ratio signandi in circumcisione
est talis. Ames
as under the law. Take away baptism from infants, and parents now shall want
one means and that no small one, sc. Sigillum dei, the seal of God to
strengthen their faith in the Covenant of grace for their children, which
parents had then: and children now shall want one means to confirm and
effectually promote their salvation, even while they are infants or children,
who may die before they be men. Thus much for the third Argument taken from
Circumcision.

The fourth Argument.

Children are inchurched, If children of believers be accounted to belong to
the Church, the Argument will follow for baptism. Mr Tom. p. 139. See the
Review.
that is, members of the visible Church; therefore to be baptized. Ephesians. 5.26.
That he might sanctify and cleanse the Church, by the washing of water by the
word, 'that is, of institution and promise. Where we see plainly, that members
of the Church are to be baptized. This I suppose no rational man will deny: for
upon this ground women are admitted to the Lords Supper, Calvin challenges all
the world to show where women received the Lords Supper.
because they with us are one body, one bread, 1 Cor. 10. I shall therefore
show you that children are members of the body of Christ.

First, They were members, therefore they are Psalm. 147.13. He has blessed thy
children within thee. Ephesians. ^.12. (...), Polity or Church privilege: That was a
spiritual Commonwealth whereof the Jews with their children were members; and
so are the believing Gentiles with their children; for they only are strangers
from the Commonwealth of Israel, which are strangers from the Covenant.

See Call. in Jos. cap. 5.6.

Those that were born in the wilderness were not circumcised, for they walked
forty years in the wilderness, [because they obeyed not the voice of the
Lord.] This is rendered as a reason of their non Circumcision, and not their
journeying from place to place, as some think for sometimes they stayed long in
a place; if therefore it had been the Lords pleasure that they should
circumcise their children, the Lord would have minded them of it: but for their
rebellions the Lord suspends the seals, q. d. I will disown and discovenant you
and yours, if you persist in your sins.


Act. 7.38. This is he that was in the Church in the Wilderness. The body of a
people (wherein children are included) is called a Church, though many were not
circumcised for their rebellions and provocations in the wilderness: As many
now a days in the wilderness of the Church are not baptized, through the
neglect of their parents, which is a sad omen that the Church may yet wander
long in this wilderness state. If then children were members of the visible
Church, they are so still; for we read not of their dischurching in the new
Testament. Yea the Prophet says, Jer. 30. That the children of the Jews shall
be be as of old time. Hence that of the Apostle, Gal. 4. As it was then, so
it is now. Then they were members, being the children of the promise: so now we
with our children are children of the promise, as Isaac was, though a child,
erg. consequently we with our children are Church members.

Again, Such as obstinately reject Christ are cast out, Gal 4. Therefore they
were included before, else how could they be excluded? but as it was then, so
it is now, says the Apostle. There were then those that did forsake the holy
Covenant, Dan. 11 30. so it is now; but for this they are to be cast out o^ the
Church of God. Though the Church of the Jews had cast off the leaves of its
figurative holiness, yet the substance thereof still remains

Secondly, That children are members, it appears from Romans 11. where the
Apostle speaks of a visible Church which I shall easily demonstrate.

1. There was a partaking in common of the fatness and sweetness of the Olive
tree, that is, (...), verse 17. This word intimates such a partaking as they
had, not such as they might have had, as Mr Tomb^ would make the world believe.
the visible Church, to wit, o^ the ordinances, promises, seals of the Church;
now these are in a visible Church, therefore those branches that were broken
off, were members of a visible Church. Joh. 15.6. (...), for a branch in
appearance is a visible branch.

2. The breaking off is from a visible Church, Behold the severity of God,
(...), verse. 22. The breaking off was visible and sharp. The ax of the word lay
long at the root of the tree as ready to cut them off but suddenly the Lord
takes it up, hews them and cuts them down from the root Abraham, and gives them
a bill of divorce, seeing they had voluntarily and obstinately rejected his
son, Act. 13.26. After he had discovenanted them, then he comes with that Roman
ax (as Luther calls it) and cuts them down root and branch in one day.

3. Their reingrafting shall be visible, and in a visible way, (...), stimulus,
(...), pungendo inserere.
v. 25, 26. All Israel shall be saved, that is, the body of the 12 tribes. So
the Prophet interprets it, Ezekiel. 37 22. I will make them one nation in the
land. This clearly argues that he speaks of that visible Church of the Jews,
though not as a body politic, meeting in one place, having public officers in
common, and ordinances in common: but as a Church in his general notion
considered.

4. He speaks ( Romans 11.20) to the visible Church at Rome, (for will any say,
they are exhorted to take heed they be not cut off from Gods eternal election?
this is not to be imagined.) boasting of her external privileges, whom he
warns by this visible example of the Jewish Church rejecting Christ, and
therefore rejected by Christ, because they did cleave to a Covenant of works
and not of grace; but these also taking no warning were dischurched, when they
exalted works above Christ, or at least made them competitors with Christ;
looking for justification by them, and not by Christ alone, as Kemnitius well
observes, for which that Church was dischurched.

5. If they were broken off from the invisible Church, then were they of it
before, whether we speak of reprobates or real members; if of reprobates, then,
according to their sense, reprobates were broken off from the invisible Church,
which is not to be imagined; if of real members, then such christians may fall
from saving grace finally and totally: for those individual persons shall never
be restored, though the branches specifically considered, shall be reinstated
into the visible body of the Church.

6. Romans 11.15. They are said to be cast away, which cannot be verified of the
invisible Church, seeing Christ has chosen them, ( Esa. 41.9. I have chosen
thee, and not cast thee away.) and engaged ( Joh. 10.) that they should never
perish.

7. The invisible members did believe, how then could they be broken off for
unbelief? therefore I say that the ingrafting of the Jews, Romans 11, shall not
only be by faith into the invisible, but also by calling and profession of
faith into the visible Church: the working of which in the nation of the Jews,
when called, will appear to be a mighty work of God, even as the resurrection
from the dead.

These things being premised, I thus argue,

1. If only some branches be broken off, then the rest remaining in
Church Membership, both parents and children are made partakers of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree.

2. A pari, Children are broken off by the unbelief of parents, wilfully
rejecting Christ; therefore they are grafted in by their parents, embracing
that Covenant of grace for themselves and their children: For the ingrafting of
the Gentiles must be suitable to the breaking off the Jews.

3. The Olive tree, that is, the visible Church, still remains, says the
Apostle, some of the branches only being broken off; Olcaster, v. 17. i. e
Oleastri surculus] Nam integrae arbores non inseruntur. Beza.
and we as a wild Olive grafted in, (...), instead of them, as the Syriac
translation also renders it Hence it is, the Vineyard, i. that Church for the
substantials of it is given to the Gentiles Mat. 20.16.

4. The unbelief for which the Jews were broken off, was not merely the
rejecting of the Covenant of grace, as made to themselves personally; but as it
was held out to them and their seed jointly: therefore children are included in
the sense of the Apostle.

5. Romans 11.28. As touching election, they are beloved for their fathers sake]
Election must be understood in that place of the external grace of the
Covenant, whereby God chose this nation to himself. Deuteronomy. 4 27. By which
expression we may plainly see, That the Covenant the Lord leaves to parents,
extends to their children also.

The Patriarchs are called the root, not in respect of their persons, but of
the promise which is made to them and their seed; for the internal personal
qualities are not conveyed by generation, but (as is observed by others) the
external privileges which are given to a stock or kindred do descend by
generation, from believers not considered as the sons of Adam, but as such as
are in Covenant with God.
6. Why are they called natural branches more than others? Surely not in respect
of their goodness o^ nature or natural propension to grace; for they are
naturally as stiffnecked as any people: but in respect of the nature of the
Covenant of grace, given to their ancestors and their seed, according to which
God is more readily inclined to pour out of the spirit of his grace upon the
seed and offspring of his covenanting people, than upon strangers and aliens.
Now though the Gentiles in their first ingrafting may be said to be the wild
Olive, (as the Jews at first were) yet afterward they were naturalized, and
their children become natural branches of the Olive tree, (i. e.) the Church of
God. Psalm. 128. Thy children as Olive plants, green and legitimate, for the
Olive tree admits no other graff. Ains. in Psalm. 128. The ablest of that
opinion do grant, That now in the days of the Gospel, children are under the
promise; and that the promise ( Genesis 17.7.) is a Gospel promise,
notwithstanding they deny the seal, though the promise be made the ground of
annexing the seal, whatever is said by any to the contrary. See Mr Tombs,
Review. p. 3.

Others being convinced that the Apostle speaks of a visible Church, (which
indeed is undeniablie true) fly to their old distinction, to wit, the Covenant
of Circumcision, or the Covenant of works; from which Covenant they say the
Jews are cut off to this day; to make this good, they distinguish betwixt
Abraham begetting, and a working Abraham, and a believing and faithful Abraham.
Thus they say, The whole nation of the Jews were legally holy till that
Covenant was abolisht. I answer, They make a distinction betwixt Abraham
believing and Abraham working, where none is to be made; for did not his works
[(...)] work together with his faith, declaratively, not only before men but
God? were not these works brought in, Jam. 2.18. [Shew me thy faith (says the
translation) without thy works] but it should rather be rendered [by thy works]
(...)* that is, [make thy faith appear out of thy works.]
( Iam. 2.18.) as fruits of his faith, which is the condition of the Covenant
of grace? for faith without works is dead, how then can it justify?

2. Observe, They say that Covenant mentioned Romans 11. Heb. 8. is abolished, as
being a typical Covenant: but we answer, We have already proved it to be an
everlasting Covenant.

3. What privilege, that is, peculiar benefit was it to that nation to be
under the Covenant of works? Romans 3.1. which is common to all nations
considered as the sons of Adam: but in Romans 9. the Apostle speaks of that
Covenant and the fullness thereof, as a peculiar prerogative to that nation, and
not common to others.

4. What prejudice could it be to them to be cut off from that Covenant? nay it
had been well for them if they had been cut off from the Covenant of works,
which neither we nor our fathers were ever able to bear. The Apostle tells us
they are hardened, and the Lord has sent a spirit of slumber, v. 8. that he
has cast them away, v. 15. and broken them off, v. 17. and why? because they
did not cleave to the Covenant of grace, (which they were under, Act. 3.25. and
4.4.) but wilfully and obstinately rejected Christ, being unskilful in the word
of rightousness, ( Heb. 5.13.) that is, not descerning aright that
justification was held forth in the old Covenant, but cleaving to the works of
the law. Romans 9.31, 32. comp. Romans 11.7.

5. If that Covenant be abolished, how can they be reingrafted into it? for the
Apostle here speaks of a reingrafting into the same Covenant, which plainly
argues it was no typical or carnal Covenant, but a Covenant of grace still in
force.

6. Through unbelief they were broken off, that is, (say they) from the
Covenant of works; therefore (according to their doctrine) if they had
believed, they had continued in the Covenant of works to this day, which is a
contradiction: and yet they affirm that Covenant ended with Christ, it being a
typical and carnal Covenant as Canaan was. But have not such cause to mourn,
that such a gross spirit of error should thus seiz on them, and lead them into
those false and bywaies; certainly for building upon the foundation this trash,
wood, hay, and stubble, they shall suffer loss 1. of their labor, and 2. of
their reward: For the day shall reveal it, and it shall be consumed as by fire.
1 Cor. 3.13. Ah then retract with Austin and undeceive those poor souls you
have deceived, least the Lord be angry with you!

3. Arg. Of such children is the Kingdom of heaven, ergo, they are inchurched.
Mar. 10. And they brought little children to him, that he should touch them:
and the Disciples rebuked those that brought them: but when Jesus saw it, he
was much displeased, and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Mark 10.12.

1. Observe, they brought ((...)) Lev. 26.43. (...) even because. Mar. 10 6.
(...). Hence the word Proselyte, thus the children of the Gentiles were
Proselytes.
even babes to Christ; this is recorded for our imitation, Mat. 19.13. (...),
little children were brought.

2. Christ says, Suffer little children to come to me, See the like phrase
Mar. 4.21. (...); Number lucerna venit? (i.) importatur? Is a candle brought to be
put under a bushel.
that is, to be brought to me. Is not this maxim in force in all ages from
Christ to the end of the world? Does not Christ now say to our dissenting
brethren, Suffer little children to come to me? And how should we now visibly
bring them to Christ but in that ordinance of baptism? Media applicandi
Christum non sunt alia quam verbum et sacran enia, e^. vel nullum datur
ordinarium medium, vel baptismus est medium.
I know no other way: For the invisible coming of ^nvisible members falls not
under the cognizance of the sons of men: therefore such a prohibition had been
incongruous.

3. We are not only commanded, but charged, Forbid them not.

4. Christ was very angry with his own Disciples, that offered to put them by;
for even Christ's own dear people may be injurious to children, as we see ^^ in
our days; but with these doubtless he is as much, displeased, as ever he was
with them, seeing that he has the same tender bowels in heaven as he had on
earth.

5. Of such (he says) is the Kingdom of heaven, that is, of children, and such
as are like to children: (according to the phrase of Nehemiah, Shall such an
one as I fly? that is, I or any in my condition.) For children are capable of
being subjects of any Kingdom on earth; Mar. 10.15. Whosoever receives not the
kingdom of heaven as a little child, (that is, as a little child receives it,
(...)) he shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
and why not of the Kingdom of grace? Luke chapter 48. Says, Whosoever receives
this child, Now least we should think he intended that child only, as having
some singular thing in him, he says, Luke 18.16. Of such is the kingdom of
heaven, that is, they are children of the Covenant, as the children of that
nation were till they were discovenanted.

To say it is meant of humble souls, is not sense, and therefore not beseeming
the eldest Son of wisdom so to speak: for judge you, yea why do you not of your
selves discern, and show your selves men, Isa. 46.8. Is it sense to say, Suffer
little children to come unto me, for of humble souls is the kingdom of heaven?
were not Christ's speeches full of reason and weight? how did the Pharisees
wonder at his answer, (...). Observe how he multiplies the article when he
speaks of the things of God, or that which was dedicated to his worship.
Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to that God the things of that
God. And shall we make Christ here (with reverence be it spoken) to speak
nonsense?

6. He laid his hands upon them and blessed them. Those that brought the babes
to Christ, found more love and tenderness than they could expect; for he laid
both his hands on them, Christus infantes oblatos amplectitur, ut mundus
intelligat, amplificandae potius quam limitandae patris enisericordiae
advenisso. Call.
embraced them, and blessed them, as Jacob on the sons of Joseph^ owning them
as his children. Genesis 48.5.

7. Observe he says, Whosoever receives this child receives me. Observe the
three Evangelists mention one and the same story concerning children, which was
occasioned by the ambition of the Disciples. Luke says, Whosoever receives
this child, (...), Luke 18.16. Mark, Whosoever receives, (...),) one of such
children in my name. Mar. 9.37. Mat. 18.5. (...). These Texts do imply that
Christ speaks of a particular little child; and yet least it should be thought
that other children of the Covenant were excluded, he says, Whosoever
receives one such little child sin my name, receives me (...) de primo vitae
septennio dicitur, (...) de secundo. Beza
Mar. 9.37. one of such little children. He farther adds ((...),) of such
like, specifically considered. These words, viz. [Whosoever receives such as
these] are of eternal verity; and therefore, as Augustine once said, Cave ne
deus sit, ne Christus sit, Take heed it be not God, that it be not Christ that
beggs an alms of thee, and thou deniest him: So I say in this case, Take heed
that we reject not Christ in rejecting infants, tendered to us in the Ordinance
of baptism; for may not Christ at the last day say to such as plead they never
rejected Christ, Verily in that you rejected one of these little ones, you
rejected me.

Obj. These children were sick.

Ans. He is sick that says so, for there is not the least word in the text that
way tending; nor was there any reason or pretense that the Disciples should
forbid sick children to be brought to Christ.

8. A majori, If the kingdom of heaven belong to others because such, then it
belongs to children much more; for they are made the pattern of conversion and
humiliation to all such as expect salvation by Jesus Christ. Mat. 18.3. Unless
ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. q. d. They are so far from not being members of the kingdom
of heaven, as that none shall enter into it that are not fashioned or molded
according to the mold of little children.

Obj. There is no mention made of baptism in this of our savior.

Ans. Though it is not expressed yet it is implied,

For, 1. Christ says, Suffer little children to come unto me, that is, to be
brought to me in a visible way.

2. He says, Of such is the kingdom of heaven; therefore to such the broad
seals of that kingdom appertain.

3. Whosoever receives one of these little ones in my name, receives me:
which is a proposition of eternal verity in all ages.

4. He laid his hands upon them, owning them as his own children, as Jacob did
the sons of Joseph. Now the laying on of hands was used for confirmation after
baptism. Heb. 6.1, 2. To this purpose may we apply this act of Christ to those
infants, which was to confirm the promises solemnly made to their parents in
baptism.

4ly. What is it that makes a visible member of the Church?

1. Is it the promise or Covenant? and have we not proved that children are
incovenanted? Ex promissione dei non tantum ex professione hominum, astimamus
dei populum. Bull. de bapt.

Quo jure illi infantes baptizant, hoc nos infantes baptizamus, imo long
meliore, si enim in baptismo spectanda est animi imegritas sive sinceritas, jam
certiores sumus de infantium sanctimonia, quam illi de adultorum confessione.
Bull. in Act.

The (...) were visible members before they were baptized.


2. Is it the profession of Christ? and is not baptism a real though an implicit
profession of Christ? did not the children of Israel virtually make a Covenant
with God, though by sacrifices? Psalm. 50. And do we not in all duties tendered
to God, as it were say, I take this God for my God, and give up my self to him
to be one of his people?

3. Is not the confession of God, (who says, that children are holy) more than
all the professions of men? is not the witness of God greater than the witness
of men? (1 John 5.9.) the one being an human the other a divine Testimony.

5. Christ an infant was born head of the Church, Mat. 2. Where is he (say
they) that is born King of the Jews? If Christ an infant was a member, then why
not the children of believers? there can be no reason given to the contrary.

Per baptismum patet ingressus infantibus in ecclesiam, non quod ad eos
ecclesia non pertineret prius, nam ad ecclesiam pertinet quisquis Christi est;
sed est signum visibile nostrae insertionis in corpus Christi. Bull.
6. Their children are of the body of Christ, else not saved; for half of the
elect die in infancy, which must needs perish if they be not of the body of
Christ. Ephesians. 5.23. He is the savior of the body.

5. Arg. Believers may be baptized; but some children are believers: therefore
some children may be baptized. The first proposition is granted by all,
Lutherani volunt eos etiam fide actuali credere, etsi evidentia rei eos cogat
fateri, fidem illam non esse talem, qualem adultorum, sed esse actum
inexplicabilem.

Wall. loci com. de Bap.

Hunc spiritum fidei sine omni actu esse non arbitramur, quia spiritus otiosus
non est, quemadmodum ratio, etsi se non nisi paulatim exerat.

Idem Wall.


the minor proposition is proved,

1. From scripture, Mat. 18.3, 4, 5. (compared with Mar. 9.36.) Whosoever shall
receive one such little child in my name, receives me: but whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the midst of the sea.

The opposition shows he speaks of children, For it is an undoubted maxim, Where
terms stand as opposits, the one is to be taken in the sense opposite to the
other. Now it is clear from ver. 3, 4, 5. that he speaks of children whom we are
visibly to receive in Christ's name, to such Ordinances as they are capable of;
therefore the words are so to be taken, ver. 5. (little ones that believe in
me.)

There is the like phrase Rev. 9.4. It was commanded them that they should not
hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but
only those men which have not the seal of God in their foreheads: Which
exception shows you, That by grass, green things, and trees, he means men: For
the exception (as we say) must be of the same kind. (Exceptio est ejus them
generis.) See Rev. 7.3.

2. We may see this exemplified in many. Psalm. 22. 9. Thou made me hope when
I hung upon my mothers breasts. This is true in the antitype, Christ, who had
faith from the very womb; it is true also in David, Psalm. 71.5. Thou art my
trust from my childhood, by thee I have been holden from the womb. (v. 17.)
Thou have taught me from my childhood, now also when I am gray headed forsake
me not. We see original sin lies dormant in the child for a while, but quickly
puts forth, it being peccatum actuosum. Psalm 58. They go astray from the belly:
and why may may not faith put forth betimes in some? as in Esaias, (chapter 49.)
Jeremiah, (chapter 1.5) and John Baptist, the first in the new Testament. Now the
first in every kind is the rule of all the rest. I see no reason but when a
child puts forth acts of reason, he may put forth an act of faith; and when he
begins to know his natural, he may also know his heavenly father, though it
wants that reflect act, whereby it knows that it knows; the former we have seen
verified in many children in New England and elsewhere.

3. (...) If some be sanctified from the womb, then they have faith, (
quicunque renascitur fidem habet, Luther.) For all the graces are concatenated;
but some are sanctified from the womb; for Christ as he sanctifies our natures,
so he sanctifies every age, as Hos. 12:4. Jacob being actuated by the spirit,
began to act betime, and to wrestle with his brother Esau, in his mothers womb
for the blessing.

(See Zanchy.)

4. Children have faith in heaven, therefore in earth. For,

1. If the Lord irradiate upon the souls of children in heaven, Quos pleno
lucis suae fulgore illustraturus est Dominus, cur non iis quoque in presens, si
ita libuerit exigua scintilla irradiaret. Call. Inst. l. 4. c. 16.
and they do behold the face of God, (which is an act of faith Heb. 11.27.)
then have they faith in heaven; if so, why not on earth?

2. They rest in hope of the resurrection, else they were miserable, Psalm.
16.9. that is, the soul does rest in hope; for the body properly is not the
subject of hope, now hope is the daughter of faith.

3. There will be this use of faith in heaven, to believe that which we cannot
comprehend, (for faith is the evidence of things not seen) even the infinite
being of God, who dwells in that light that none can approach unto; therefore
we conclude infants in heaven have faith, and why may they not have the seed of
it here? seeing there is no grace in heaven which was not wrought on earth.
Hence it is that regeneration is called an earthly thing, Ioh. 3. because as
for other reasons, so this, it must be wrought on earth.

4. The first Adam had power to convey grace as faith to his posterity; and
has not the second Adam much more power? Was not the faith of Adam of the like
nature with the faith of believers? though it do not put forth that act whereby
we are justified.

5. Can any live without faith, or be saved for ever without it and shall we
deny it to infants, who stand in need of justification by faith as well as we?

Obj. How can they be justified by faith which cannot act?

Ans. Faith may be said to be passive in our justification, because the habit
of faith is passive before it put forth any act; now we are justified so soon
as by the habit of faith we are alive in Christ in the first moment of our
conversion, before faith put forth any act. Thus children are justified by the
habit of faith, for as we were guilty of Adams sin, (which is imputed to us)
before we were active in giving consent unto it: so is the rightousness of
Christ imputed to children before they put forth any elicit act of faith.
Therefore I say they are capable of that passive Ordinance of baptism.

Obj. Children have no knowledge, therefore no faith, therefore no interest in
the Covenant or seal thereof.

Ans. Are they not reasonable souls, because for the present they make no use
of reason? and may they not have habitual knowledge lying dormant in them,
though no actual? is it not Christ that enlighteneth every one (not that is
going out, but (...)) coming into the world? does not the reasonable soul lie
dormant in the body till organized? does it not live though it move not for the
present? when a man is asleep he acts not grace, does it therefore follow he
has none? may not a child be included in a lease and conditions made which
render him capable of the benefit of it, if he perform the conditions therein
specified, though at the making of the lease he give no consent at all? and
were not the children in the Evangelist blessed by Christ, because they
understood it not? or was Peter washed in vain because he knew not what Christ
did as yet? Mr Tombs says, If he knew an infant such an one as John was, such
a one he would baptize, and farther he says, that such as Christ blessed might
be baptized; if therefore baptism belong to one infant, it is enough to confute
them who deny it to all; but according to this account, if only the elect and
faithful are to be admitted to the Ordinance of baptism, there is no subject
left to whom we may dispense that Ordinance.

6. Arg. Taken from examples in scripture, whole families were baptized,
Observe, the families are made the precedent.

If any one say here is a Synecdoche, the whole being put for part: We answer
with Ursin. Non est decurrendum ad figuram, ubi nulla est ratio cur non
retineatur sententia propria.


none excluded; for house in scripture phrase signifies children throughout
the Book of God. I have read it again as to this point of baptism, and could
never find in all the Book of God where the word ((...)) house or household is
used, Mat. 24 25. (...)] He made him Steward over his houshold] The word is
altered, for here he speak of servants.
and children excluded, but rather always included, servants being but the
appendix of the house. Gen 16.2. It may be I may be built by her, says Sarah
of Hagar, that is, have children by her. For^an, inquit, aedificabor ex ed.
LXX, (...), (...) (hence (...) a Son) usurpatur pro procreatione, susceptione,
and educatione liberorum, qui ex parentitibus quasi extruuntur, and quibuo
familiae tanquam domus aedifica^^^ ou fili^^^difidifioij, pator fundamenti
instar se habeat; ita quidem ut qui non habeat liberos, quasi destructus sit.
Schindl Sic Plaut in Most. Act. 1. Novarum esse aedium arbitror similom ego
hominem, quando hic natus est Et paulo post, Parentos fabri liberum and
fundamenrum substruunt liberorum.
Vt ex ea liberos consequar. Genesis 18.19. He will command his household after
him, that is, childrens children; for Esau and Jacob were 15 years old before
Abraham's death. Genesis 45.17 18. Pharaoh enjoins Joseph to bid his brethren
bring their households with them, which being explained in the next verse, is
extended to their little ones. (...). According to their bodies] that is, the
number of their persons.
Genesis 47.12. Joseph nourished all his fathers household, even to the little
ones, (...) lepi hattaph, usque ad os parvuli, genuinus videtur esse sensus,
quod omnes a maximo ad minimum paverit. Vatablus. Exodus 1.21. God built the
midwives an house, Heb. ^^^em, them, in the masculine gender, for those
midwives were courageous midwives.
that is, he gave them children, because they spared the children of the
Israelites. Deuteronomy. 25.9. So let it be done to the man that will not build up his
brothers house, (...), qui noluerit suscitare semen fratri suo, raise up seed
to his brother. In this sense Rachel and Leah built the house of Israel, Ruth
4.11. Psalm. 115.12, 13. By the house of Aaron he means both small and great.
Psalm. 113.9. He makes the barren dwell in houses, that is, fruitful mothers of
children. See Genesis 30.30. and 35.2. and 50.8. Exodus 12.3. Josh. 7.14. 2 Samuel
17.23. and 23.5. 1 Kin. 14.13. 2 Kin. 9.7. and 20.16. 1 Chronicles. 17.16. Psalm.
68.6. Add to all these the several texts in the new Testament, where in this
word house or household children are always included. Thus Act. 10.2, 47, 48.
and 11.14. the whole household of Cornelius is baptized. The whole household of
Lydia, Act. 16.15. they of her household are baptized upon her account without
any declaration of their faith and repentance, only because they were of her
family. Act. 16.31. The Jailor and his house. Observe, he first makes mention
of his being baptized, then of his faith. Act. 16.33.34. Crispus and his
household. and 18.8. Stephanus and his household. 1 Cor. 1.16. The household of
Aristobulus, and the household of Narcissus. Romans 16.10. (...). Which must be
meant of their children, which came out of their loins, as the word imports.
Thus 1 Timothy 3.4. One that rules well his own house, having his children in
subjection with all gravity. 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide not for those of his
own house, (that is, children, not servants) he is worse than an infidel. Gal.
6.10. Do good to all, especially the household of faith, and must there be no
respect had to the orphans and fatherless children of such? those doubtless we
ought in a special manner to provide for, as being included in the household of
faith. Thus Act. 4. the believers had all things common, and did not their
children share with them? doubtless they were not excluded. Genesis 50.8. All the
house of Joseph and his fathers house, went up to bury his father, only their
little ones they left in Goshen. It Is observable that the little ones are
included (for the exception is of the same kind) in the word house here
excepted, because of their unfitness for travel; but in all the places before
mentioned there is not the least word hinted why little ones should be
excluded. From all which places observe,

1. The language of the scriptures holds forth children to be the household, and
by consequence the subjects of baptism: Let them show any one place where
children are excluded if they can, for Exodus 12. includes children, though
infants were excluded, because incapable. V. 15. Lydia baptizata est and filii
domus ejus.

2. Observe the Syriac so renders that word house or household, which was the
known language of those times, and of great repute throughout the Churches of
God.

3. Of the Jailor it is said, he and all of him, (1.) that were of him. Act.
16.33. Baptizatus est ipse and filii domus ejus omnes, comp. v. 32. and cum
omnibus filiis domus suae, as in the Syriac. Of Samaria it is said ( Act. 8.8,
12.) all of them from the least to the greatest, that is, young and old were
baptized, both men and women; for children are included in the men in scripture
phrase, as Jacob says, Genesis 34.36. I being but few in number, they shall
gather themselves together against me, and destroy me. Ezekiel. 9.6. Slay both
maids and little children, but come not near any man on whom is the mark in his
forehead. Grace written in the heart by the man Christ Jesus, (who has his
inkhorn by his side) shines in the forehead of babes and others. Eccl. 8.1.
When Moses demanded of Pharaoh to let Israel go, he meant children as well as
the elder people, as he afterward explaineth himself, and shall we be more
cruel than Pharaoh, to grant liberty to such as are adult, but keep poor
infants in bondage? Thus Joh. 6.10. Mar. 6.44. compared with Mat. 14.15. 1 Cor.
10.1. All our fathers were baptized into Moses, in fathers children are
included; and thus I understand Act. 15.1. Unless ye brethren be circumcised,
(that is, you and your children) you cannot be saved, as Paul explains it Act.
21.21, 25. Thus Heb. 9. It Is appointed for all men once to die, and are not
children here also intended? So that we see plainly that by a Synecdoche
children are included in their parents.

4. The promise or Covenant is made to the parent in the behalf of the
children. Act. 16. Believe thou, In omni numero divinitus inflituto, liberi sub
patri^ nomine censentur.

Accommodat illis ( viz. infantibus) matter Ecclesia, aliorum pedes, ut veniant;
aliorum cor, ^^ credant; aliorum linguam, ut fateantur: credit in altero, qui
peccavit in altero. Austin.


and thou shall be saved and thy household. So when Christ raised the Rulers
daughter, he required no more but this of the Ruler himself, Be not afraid,
only believe and she shall be saved; now if the promise were the ground of
baptism to the parent, it must be so to the children also; therefore the parent
was bound in conscience to see his children baptized. We have no mention made
expressly of the Patriarchs keeping the sabbath, but were they not bound to
keep it? or shall we be so uncharitable to think that for so many hundred years
they altogether neglected it? though doubtless the devil did endeavor to blot
out the memory of the sabbath, and of the creation, that so he might ussher in
the eternity of the world. Sometimes we have a precept or a word of allowance,
but no example, as in that of the sabbath, and in that of the eating of the
several trees of the garden. Sometimes an example and no precept mentioned, as
in that of the sacrificing of Abel, for which doubtless there was a command,
(though not mentioned) else God would not have sent fire down from heaven to
consume the sacrifice, testifying his acceptance, if there had not been a
divine institution for those sacrifices: Therefore we say, it is sufficient to
us that the will of the Lord is revealed either by command, promise, Covenant,
consequence, or otherwise, though there be no example for it in scripture.

5. We have the example of whole families baptized in the Apostles times, (and
some in after ages, which gives light to the places of scripture mentioned)
families as families, the parents thus embracing the Gospel, are made the
precedent for that administration, therefore children must be included; for he
that excludes nothing, includes all. There was no word for women to eat the
Passover, yea it is said expressly, No uncircumcised person should eat thereof,
and yet they grant that the women were to eat the Passover, being part of the
household. Exodus 12.3, 4. and shall children (contrary to the whole current of
scripture) be excluded from this Ordinance of baptism? Infantes christianae
domus pars: verum esto non fuerin^ infantes in domibus istis, nihilominus ad
domum peri^nent, and in ea censentur, ut si fuissent in domibus bapt. zassent
eos utique Bull.


6. Children are included in the parents, as in that of Jacob, I am but few
this day. But of this before.

Obj. Children are not mentioned.

Ans. 1. We have showed that they are mentioned in the sense of the holy Ghost.

2. Suppose they were not mentioned, it is not expressly said that the Virgin
Mary or the Apostles were baptized, or the seven Churches of Asia, the Church
of Theslalonica, etc. but dare any say that they were not baptized? Where is it
said that women received the Lords Supper? for in the 1 Cor. 11.28. the Apostle
restrains the word to the males, ((...)) is of the masculine gender, Let a man
examine himself, etc.
and yet we believe that they did receive, upon this account, that they were
members of the Church. We say then, the institution of Ordinances (as of this)
is clear, but the application of them to the subject not so, but gathered by
consequence.

Obj. They are said to be believers, the Jailor believed with his whole
household, but children cannot be said to be believers.

Ans. 1. We have proved many children are believers.

2. They err, not knowing the scriptures; For though faith be required in the
constituting of a Church in such as are adult: yet in a Church constituted, as
to infants it 's not required; no more than it was in Circumcision, which did
as much require faith as baptism does; for it was the seal of the rightousness
of faith: Act. 16. There is mention made only of the faith of Lydia, yet the
text faith her household was baptized: so that the faith of the parent gives
the child an interest in the Covenant and seal thereof. As for the brethren
mentioned Act. 16.40. which they say were of the household of Lydia, baptized
by Paul. I answer,

1. The Apostle says, We spoke to the women that resorted thither, v. 13. It
seems there were no men there, or else the brethren mentioned, v. 40. were not
then converted.

2. It appears not that they were members of her family, Whereas there is
mention made (v. 40.) of the brethren, Judicio est, cum aucta esset ecclesia
illa, etjam in magno numero, s^minam illam primas tenuisse quod ad sedulitatem
in officijs pactatis attinet, isque ^nde clarius lique^t, quod in ejus aed^s
convenerant omnes pij. Calv.
(as the words imply, They went into the house of Lydia, and when they had seen
the brethren) but rather some of the city or other parts that met at the house.

3. Suppose that, yet it makes not against us, for the children were baptized
as well as the brethren.

Thirdly, The words, he rejoiced with all his house, or, Mat. 23.15. (...).
They cried out all at once.

(...), Et exultavit cum omni domo sua, credens deo. Thus the Spanish Bible
renders it. Sic (...), dicuntur, qui funditus pereunt. Bull.


there was joy in, (or, throughout) the house, he having believed. It Is not
said, that all his house believed; for the promise was made to the faith of the
Jailor, not at all mentioning the faith of any of his household, Act. 16.13.
Believe, -- and thou shall be saved and thy house.

4. Deuteronomy. 14.26. Thou shall eat there before the Lord, and thou shall rejoice
thou and thy household. Little children could not rejoice in what they put
their hands to, but might they not eat? doubtless they might, for they were of
the household.

Obj. Paul preached to all in the house, therefore not to children.

Ans. 1. May not the Gospel be preached to little children as well as others?
yea may it not in (...) some sense be preached to babes? Luke 1.76. And thou
child shall be called the prophet of the highest. Doubtless there being such an
effect wrought upon the Iailor and his house, they would bring the little ones
in their arms, rather than any should be hindered from hearing when Paul
preached.

2. This speech is synecdochical, the whole being put for a part, (to all the
house) that is, such as were capable, 1 Samuel 1.21. The man Elcanah and all his
house went up to offer to the Lord] Yet it appears from v. 22. that Samuel
being little, did not go up.
which is according to scripture phrase, Psalm. 102. He raises all that are
fallen, that is, all such as are raised, are raised by the Lord. As we say,
such a scoolmaster teaches all the children in the town, that is, all that are
taught, are taught by him: So, the Apostle preached to all in the house, that
is, to all such in the house as were capable of instruction.

Thus much for the sixth Argument, wherein we see plainly that house always
includes children, erg. We say, it is very evident, That the Apostles did
baptize the children of the said households formerly mentioned.

The seventh Argument.

Children are capable of the grace of baptism, therefore of baptism it self.

1. They are capable of inherent grace, for a subject capable of sin, is
capable of grace: but infants are capable of sin, being shapen in iniquity,
and conceived in sin. Psalm. 51. Therefore they are capable of the grace of
baptism, both which it seals, and which it conveys; for the Lord being a free
agent, has not limited himself to any time; but as before baptism, so
sometimes in, sometimes after baptism he does convey that spirit of grace to
infants. The more ordinary way for such as are adult in the constitution of a
Church, is by the word; but the Lord has not tied himself to this way,
especially in a Church gathered, but does doubtless breath in this Ordinance
also: for look what the navel is to the child in the womb, the same is baptism
to infants in the womb of the Church. Cant. 7.2. The child in the womb is not
nourished in an ordinary way, as by the mouth, but by the navel: even so
infants are not sanctified by the ordinary way of hearing, but by this of
baptism. I know other senses are given of that scripture, but as Bernard said
of the Pope, Either this is he or show me such another: So I say, Either this
is the sense of the holy Ghost, or else let any man show me a better. I would
not willingly bring a sense to the scripture, Non afferre sed auferre sensum.
Basil.

(...), i. e. According to the measure of knowledge, faith, and grace which God
has given. This is to prophecy according to the analogy of faith, when we
exceed not the measure of the gift bestowed upon us.


but fetch it from the scripture, (for we must prophecy according to the
measure of faith) which may easily be found out by comparing scripture with
scripture. Now the like phrase you shall find in Prove. 3. Trust in the Lord and
it shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones, that is, in a secret
way thou shall be fed, though the ordinary way fail. We see this truth daily
fulfilled, That though a poor man's layings-out are greater than his in-comes,
yet by a secret providence he and his are maintained: even so by the same good
hand of God are infants in the womb of the Church nourished by baptism; for the
spirit of God does move upon these waters, as some have allegorized that of
Genesis 1.2.

2. Infants are capable of remission of sins, else how can they be saved? the
promise of remission of sins in the same sentence and the same sense is
propounded to parents and children, Act. 2.37. and shall we say that remission
of sins is promised to parents, and outward privileges only to children?

3. They are capable of the holy Ghost, else how can they be united to Christ?
doubtless that spirit that does guide the be to its end, did actuate Jacob in
his mothers womb, and made him so wrestle with his brother, that he prevailed
against him; which was very ominous for the future. Thus Zanchy on Hosea.

That supplanting of Esau, Illa supplantatio symbolum fuit divini sed occulti
desiderij, quo Jacob, cum adhuc tamen uti judicio non poss^t, meffabiliter
tenebatur priori loco nascendi. 2. Symbolum fuit sancti desiderij quo
offici^batur divinam benedictionem consequendi; actus enim a spiritu sancto,
mirabili quodam and ineffabili modo, porcupivit divinam erga se gratiam, and
pro illa assequenda nihil non egit.
or taking him by the heel, was a sign of Jacobs desire of being born before
his bro^her, and consequently of ^he birthright: also 2. of obtaining that
divine bles^ing which was promised before; Non per sacramenta traducitur aut
transferu^ gratia, sed cum sacramentis. Fatemur sacramenta esse media, and
tamen deus in sacramentis immediate agit; non quod non utatur medio, sed quia
vis non transit per sacramentum. Whit.

(...). Bas.

Mihi animus non est baptismi ^im extenuare, quin signo acc^dat res ^ veritas,
quatenus per exter^^ media deus op^ratur. Gal Inst. p. 46^.

Deum tamen quibusdam, dum baptizantur habitum gratiae infundere non negamus. A
mes.

Dispositio illa sancta sit (quantum ego assequor) non habi^us nescio quos
virtutum instillando, sed menti voluntatique vitam restituendo; quae quatenus
sanamur, sive vivisicantur, vel ad fidei vel charitatis actus eliciendos
exercendosque, jam habilis atque idoneae redduntur Gat. p. 223.

Quod baptismo nos ablui, docet Paulus, Ephesians. 6. Ideo est, quod i^li^ nobis
ablutionem nostram testatur deus, and simul efficit quod figurat, nisi enim
conjuncta esset rei veritas aut exhibitio, impropria esset l^^ntio, Baptismus
est lavacrum animae.

Calv. in Ephesians 5.


for being acted by the ^oly Ghost after a wonder^ul and unspeakable manner, ^e
ernestly desired and endeavored after the grace of God, even in his mothers
womb. As some are thus sanctified in the womb, so many have a saving work from
the dawning and springing of reason. Witness that famous instance of some
little Indian children in New England, (related by Mr Eliot in his book
entitled, The tears of repentance) with which he shuts up his discourse, viz.
The profession, (if I may so call it) or rather the expression and
manifestation of faith by two little infants, of two years old and upward,
under three years of age when they died and departed out of this world. The
story is this,

This Spring, in the beginning of the year 1652, the Lord was plea^ed to
afflict sundry of our praying Indians with that grievous disease of Bloody
flux; whereof some with great torments in their bowels died; amongst which two
little children of the age abovesaid, and at that time both in one house, being
taken with that disease: The first of these children in the extremity of its
torments, lay crying to God in these words, God and Jesus Christ, God and Jesus
Christ, help me! and when they gave it any thing to eat, it would greedily take
it, (as it is usual at the approach of death) but first it would cry to God,
Oh God and Jesus Christ, bless it! and then it would ^ake it; and in this
manner it lay calling upon God and Jesus Christ until it died The father of the
child ^old me the story, with great wonderment at the grace of God, in
teaching his child so to call upon God. The name of the father is Nishohkou,
whose confession you have before.

Three or four days after another child in the same house, sick of the same
disease, was (by a divine hand doubtless) sensible of the approach of death,
(an unusual thing at that age) and called to its father, and said, I am going
to God, several times repeating it, I am going to God. The mother (as other
mothers use to do) had made for the child a little basket, a little spoon, and
a little tray; these things the child was wont to be greatly delighted withal,
(as all children will) therefore in the extremity of the torments, they set
those things before it, a little to divert the mind and cheer the spirit; but
now the child takes the basket and puts it away, and said, I will leave my
basket behind me, for I am going to God, I will leave my spoon and trey behind
me, (putting them away) for I am going to God, and with these kind of
expressions the same night finished its course, and died. The father of this
child is named Robin Speen, in whose confessions he makes mention of this
child that died in faith. When he related this story to me, he said he could
not tell whether the sorrow for the death of his child, or his joy for its
faith were the greater.

4. They are capable of union with Christ, for first Christ lays hold on us
before we lay hold on him Phil. 3 That I may apprehend that, for which also ^
am apprehended of Christ Jesus.

5. Of eternal life. All which things are signifie^ and sealed in the holy
sacrament, What hinder therefore why children may not be baptized? Act 10.

6. Baptism is of eternal use, (for what God does remains for ever, Eccl. 3.)
not only for the present but for the future; therefore children are capable o^
it. For,

1. As parents may plead a Covenant for their children, which is no small prop
of their faith, strengthened and confirmed by this visible word, Exodus 4.5^ so
children may afterward plead a Covenant as from their ancestors, (for a seal
of an estate made to infants in their cradle, is firm) and come in their
fathers or mothers name to God, as David and others have done, Psalm 86.16. Save
the son of thy handmaid; for that Covenant extends not only to temporals but
spirituals. Luke 71. The Covenant with the forefathers is made the rise of that
deliverance, v 75 which deliverance from our spiritual enemies is collected
from the general promise [I will be thy God and the God of thy seed.]
Romans 11. Beloved, (so as to be called) for their fathers sakes. Deuteronomy. 30. I
will circumcise the heart of thy seed. Which promise being spoken indefinitely,
who dare limit it to such as are of years of discretion, seeing that babes are
the seed of the faithful as well as such as are adult; and we know it is as
great a sin to limit God in his grace as in his power, who has so wisely
ordered that Covenant of grace, 2 Samuel 24. that as in every moment some die:
(and surely half of the elect, if half of mankind, die in infancy) so in every
moment some are regenerate. Which grace of regeneration from the dawning and
springing of reason, does appear in many who suck in something of Christ,
whilst they suck in the milk from the mothers breasts.

2. It lays a tie and obligation upon the child to future repentance, faith and
obedience.

1. To repentance, therefore it is called the baptism of repentance, because it
obliges and engages them to repentance. Mat. 3.11. Baptismus est lavacrum
regenerationis, sed n n ita vt rege^e ati debeant tantum illo obsignari sed
regenerandi Musc. in Matt. 22.
I indeed says John) baptize you (Pharisees, a generation of vipers) with
water ((...)) unto repentance, therefore (seeing you have now been baptized)
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance. v. 8.

2. It obliges to future faith, for circumcision was a seal of the
rightousness of faith, (which is the condition of the Covenant of grace, Mar.
16.16.) To Adonijah and Absalom as well as Solomon, if they believe, for so the
tenor of the Covenant runs. It Is well observed by some that God dealt in a way
of preventing grace with Israel, in instituting the Passover before their
deliverance: and so in appointing the Lords Supper before the work of
redemption was wrought. And thus has he ordered the baptizing of children, as
that which is precedaneous to faith, as well as sub^equent to it.

3. It obliges to obedience, for as in all duties we do virtually say, I take
this God for my God, and give up my self to him as one of his people: Psalm. 50.
That make a Covenant with me by sacrifice So in this Ordinance of baptism, the
child does implicitly covenant with God, and does bind it self to obedience for
the future. He that is circumcised (says Paul, Gal. 5.) is bound to keep the
whole law, if not legally as a Covenant of works, yet evangelically as the
condition of the Covenant of grace. If he dare not stand to the former
Covenant, (as who dares?) let him cleave to the later, and in so doing he shall
live.

Nonnulli habent a^tificium, quo prius persuadent quam docent, veritas autem
docendo suadet, non suadendo doect. Tert.

I would not first move, and then teach, but having taught, move.

Cujuslibet artis datur praxis. erg. Paul will rather seem to speak false
greek, not understanding his greek grammar, as Jerome says, (though it be an
Articism) than that they should not apply to themselves in particular what, he
spoke in general. Gal. 6.1. (...), Restore ye such an one, or put him in joint
again, considering thy self.


Having spoken sufficiently to the jus divinum of Paedobaptism, and showed
plainly that it has a divine stamp of truth upon it. Let us come to the (...)
or practical part of this point, which shall be a dissuasive from Anabaptism;
and what I shall say herein, I would say in a Church full of Kings. Now the
Lord grant me good success this day!

And that I may the more effectually prevail with you, consider,

1. The way of Anabaptism is not the way of God; for first it is not of Gods
planting, therefore secondly not of his watering. For whatsoever the Lord has
not planted, whether persons or things, that certainly he will not water;
therefore it cannot stand, but must of necessity be rooted up. Mat. 15.13.

For the first, That it is none of Gods planting, or, That that way is not the
way of God which they walk in, it appears,

1. In that they stand not in the ways, and ask not for the old paths* where is
the good old way, that they may walk therein, Jer. 6.16. (Thus Mal. 2. Seek the
law at the Priests mouth.) They advise not, nay they are not usually willing to
be advised by the faithful messengers of Christ, enquiring after the footsteps
of the flock by the Shepherds tents, but seem to be veiled [(...)] and turn
aside by the flocks of his companions. Cant. 1.7.

Yea I fear some of them if they look into their hearts, will find them
too-too-desirous to make truth on their side, (having been plunged before they
were dipped) and that that way might appear to them to be a way of God, which
they most affected; having the persons of some, and their doctrines in
admiration for advantage sake; if so, God may justly harden them as he did
Balaam, and (contrary to his own express command) bid them, Go, answering them
according to the idol which they set up in their hearts.

2. We find no instance in scripture of any that were dipped or rebaptized,
after that in their infancy they were dedicated to the service of God by
baptism; nor of any child of a believer suspended till he came to years of
discretion, and was able to give an account of his faith. We challenge them in
the name of Christ to produce any one throughout all the book of God, either
rebaptized or suspended from that Ordinance till then.

3. Such reject the counsel of God against themselves, Luke 7.30. Yea in
rejecting this Ordinance they resist God, ( Act. 11.17.) as the Pharisees did
to their own destruction.

But tell me, is it not a grievous sin to refuse that God to be thy God, and
the God of thy seed? Is not that promise [I will be the God of thy seed,] as
much evangelical as the former, [I will be thy God?] and in so doing, do thou
not discovenant thy seed as much as in thee lies? and may not the Lord
therefore take the advantage, and cut off the entail for ever? For, (says the
Lord, Genesis 17.) The uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people. He has broken my
Covenant. The seal being part thereof, and ofttimes put for it in scripture
phrase: Act. 7.8.

Quisquis neglecto baptismo se nuda promissione contentum esse simulat,
conculoat, quantum in se est, Christi sanguinem. Call.
4. Is not this to trample under feet the blood of Christ, and crucify him
again? for whereas Christ died but once, but lives to God for ever, Romans 6.14.
this doctrine and practice of rebaptization holds forth to the world that
Christ died the second time, and rose again. Quotquot rebaptizantur, Christum
denuo crucifigunt. Call.
Yea it evidently implies a possibility of falling from grace totally, else
what need of rebaptization? for as many as are buried with Christ in baptism,
are planted into the similitude of his death, and shall be also planted into
the similitude of his resurrection. Romans 6.3, 4, 9, 10. In that he died he died
but once, in that he lives he lives unto God.

5. Such unchurch all the Churches of God, saying, There is no true visible
Church in the world but their own, for the Church ever since her members were
full, We had Ministers and Churches before Rome.

Petrus Abbas Cluniacensis q^adam prolixa epistola ad Beraestatur, Scotos and
alios vetustissimos christianos, Pascha non Romano sed Orientali more solitos
celebrare, unde apparet eos non Roma sed ex Orient Doctores primum accepisse.

Cat. testium veritatis p. 546.


has for many ages consisted almost wholly of Assemblies of them who have been
baptized in their infancy; if so, then was there no visible Church on earth
for many hundred years together; contrary to Mat. 16. where our Savior engages
that the gates of hell shall never prevail against it. And shall we thus
despise and slight the womb that bare us? those arms that embraced us? and the
paps that gave us suck? God forbid; for doubtless that rigid way of separation
God never watered, I mean of such who unchurch all the Churches of the world
save their own.

6. In so doing they are very injurious to themselves, as rendering themselves
in the sight of God,

1. Covenant breakers. Genesis 17.14. And the uncircumcised man-child whose flesh
of his foreskin is not circum ised, Genesis 17.14. Qui non circumcidet, i. e.
circumcidi curaverit, sed circumcisionem neglexerit vel contempserit:
etenimverbum [(...)] est futurum kal a radi^e (...) Piscat.
that soul shall be cut off from my people: he has broken my Covenant.

2 The Lord looks at such as unbaptized persons, Exodus 12.45. When a stranger
shall sojourn with thee, and keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his males
be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it, for no uncircumcised
person shall eat thereof. Where we see plainly that if the child of the
stranger was not circumcised, Such are uncircumcis^d in the sense of the holy
Ghost, for circumcision of Abraham alone was not the Covenant or sign of it;
seeing that he and his children are joined together.
the stranger himself was not admitted to the Passover; seeing that in Gods
account he was an uncircumcised person: the like may be said of baptism, for
parium eadem est ratio.

3. I suppose with submission to better judgments, the meaning of those words,
( Ezekiel. 44.9. No uncircumcised person, uncircumcised in heart, or uncircumcised
in flesh, shall enter into the Sanctuary.) to be this, scil. That such as are
not visible saints (for the heart is manifested by the life) and have not
received the seal of the Covenant, namely baptism, which is uncircumcision in
the flesh here spoken of, shall not be admitted into the Church of God, that
new Jerusalem, the name whereof is Jehova Shammah. Eze. 48.5. Which makes much
for the proving of the thing in hand, as we see in Exodus 12.48. When a stranger
will sojourn with thee, let all his males be circumcised, for no uncircumcised
person shall eat thereof. He whose child was uncircumcised, was uncircumcised
himself in Gods account: Even so he whose child is unbaptized, is said to be
unbaptized himself; and herefore not to be admitted to the Lords Supper For
baptism is called Circumcision, ( Col. 2.12.) and put instead thereof.

7. They are not only injurious to themselves, but they have says the Lord,
taken away my glory from their chil^ren. Mic. 2.9. For what is the glory of
his people? is it not the Covenant of grace and Christ held forth therein with
the seals thereof?

8. Consider the absurdities that follow upon it.

1. By this doctrine he that is unbaptized himself, may lawfully administer
baptism unto others (which we deny unless he had a special commission so to
do, as John Baptist had) for the first Anabaptist was baptized by one that was
baptized in his infancy, therefore his baptism was null* and so consequently
all their baptizings are mere nullities.

2. It leaves the children of believers in as sad a condition as the chil^ren
of heathens, being in no visible way of salvation, for they depart out of this
world without any visible sign of Gods favor.

9. In renouncing their baptism they act Satan's part, who will not make a
league or Covenant with any soul, till he have renounced his Covenant with
Christ first.

10. The Churches of Christ have no such custom, 1 Cor. 11. It cannot be proved
that ever the whole Church of God erred, though Councils have; it is true we
grant that as Nullum tempus accurrit Regi: So no prescription will ly in force
against God and his truth, (...).

Ignatius

Rev. 2.24. Hold fast, i. such doctrines, rules, ordinances, as those primitive
and Apostolical Churches then had and did enjoy; this injunction was in
opposition to those who had begun to decline and degenerate to corrupt
principles and practices.


which will appear by the testimonies of the ancient, and the practice of the
churches til these later times. Justin Martyr (who lived in all likelihood in
John's days, as Mr Baxter well observes, for he was converted to christianity
in the year of our Lord 128. and wrote his first Apology in the year 150. as
Helvicus from his own testimony gathers.) says, Post quam vero per Christum
aditum ad deum nacti sumus, non carnalem suscepimus circumcisionem, sed
spiritualem, quam Enoch and similes custodierunt, eam vero nos per baptismum,
quandoquidem peccatores fuerimus, propter misericordiam ipsius dei accepimus,
omnibusque adeo illam accipere integrum est. Thus Irenaeus who lived within
some 43 years of John, Omnes venit per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam qui per
eum renascuntur (id est, baptizantur) in deum, infantes, parvulos and pueros,
juvenes and seniores, ideo per omnem venit aetatem, infantibus infans factus,
sanctificans infantes et in parvulis parvulus, etc. Observe by the way that
renasci is an ordinary term among the fathers signifying as much as baptizari.
Tertullian is clear in this point, so is Origin, who says, Quid causae est cum
baptisma ecclesia in remissionem peccatorum detur, secundum ecclesiae
observantiam, etiam parvulis baptismus non detur. lib. 5 cap. 6 ad Romans Cyprian
(who lived within near an hundred years of John) with 66 Bishops in Council,
determine that children may be baptized before the eighth day. Higinus Bishop
of Rome did first ordain Godfathers and Godmothers at the baptizing of infants.
This Higinus was near the Apostle John's time. Austin tells us it is such a
Church custom, and withal it is an Apostolical tradition. Accordingly the
Magdeburgenses in their Centuries observe that in the first hundred years after
Christ infants were baptized. Lucius King of Britain, and the first christian
King in the world, (who was converted by the prayers of the Saints, as Matthew
Paris relates) was baptized with his house and whole people, (therefore
British children also.) Which Balaeus more fully clears, Cent. 1. cap. 27.
Lucius (says he) sent to Rome the more speedily, because he heard that many of
the nobility (especially at Rome) together with their wives and children were
baptized. Learned Doctor Ussher in his book of he Religion of the ancient
Irish, chapter 5. says, That t^^t Irish did baptize their infants without crism. I
could never find, says the Lord Brooks, the beginning and rise of this
practice, namely, baptizing of children, whereas it is very easy to track
heresies to their first rising up. The Waldenses (says Flac. Illyr.) Semper
baptizarunt infantes. Catal testium verit. p. 434. Therefore we may conclude
with Calvin, Nullus est scriptor tam vetustus, qui non ejus originem ad
Apostolorum saecula referat. Call. in Romans 4.11.

Whereas some insist much upon the testimony of Grotius against infant
baptism, who pleads the Canon of the Neocaesarean Synod, Art. 315. The words of
the Council are these, (...). Concerning her that is with child, That she may
be enlightened or baptized when she will, for she that brings forth does not
communicate in this with the birth that is brought forth, because every one
manifests his own free choice in confession. Whence Grotius observes, Proles
baptizari non solebat, nisi propria voluntate and professione. That the child
uses not to be baptized, but of its own proper will and profession. I answer
that Grotius contradicts himself in his Annotations on Mat. 19.14. For first he
quotes that saying of Irenaeus to confirm the custom of baptizing infants, Ideo
per omnem venit aetatem, and infantibus infans factus, sanctificans infantes,
in parvulis parvulus, sanctificans hanc ipsam habentes aetatem. etc. Huic
Christi dicto inter caetera innititur mos etiam infantes baptismo tingendi,
quem Augustini temporibus per omnes ecclesias fuisse receptum, hoc ipso satis
constat, quod Pelagiani cum eo argumento ab Augustino and aliis premerentur
nega^e id ipsum nunquam ausi fuerint; sic in epistola Cypriani ad Fidum, an
recte baptizentur infantes ne dubitatum quidem, sed an possint baptizari etiam
ante octavum diem quosdam haesitasse. But afterward this reconciler of
Protestants and Papists, unsays what formerly he had said, alleging the sixth
Canon of the aforesaid Council, that so he might unbottom this institution of
God, and put it upon the authority of the Church which he so much admired, as
appears by his Examen ad Rivet. ad Art. 9. p. 47. De baptismo infantium quid
responderi possit disc^t qui volet ex Cardinali Peronio, responsione ad
epistolam Casauboni cap. 8. Ego in ecclesia authoritate, cui deus sacramenta
and aliquod in ea jus dedit, acquiesco.

2. I answer, Theodore Balsamon in his Scholia upon that Canon, says, Some in
the Council said, That women with child which came from the infidels (as Mr C.
well observes) to join with the Church, ought not to be baptized, but to stay
till the babe they went with was brought forth, least that when she was
baptized, it might seem that the child in her womb was baptized with her, as
being altogether united to her* whence it will come to pass, that after the
babe is born, either it may be left unenlightened, (or unbaptized) or if it be
baptized, it may be thought that it is rebaptized. This he makes the occasion
of that ancient Canon, and it is very observable what was the occasion of it. 1.
That they might avoid that mischief of leaving babes unbaptized. 2. That they
might avoid the other extreme of rebaptization. But let us see what Balsamon
adds farther* speaking of such infants, that they could not make promises,
etc. F^r how it is with the babe in the womb none can enquire, nor be surety
for, says he, but infants ( sc. that are born) do affirm by those that are
their susceptors, and are accounted to be actually enlightened (or baptized)
with divine illumination or divine baptism. They then accounted baptism of
infants no antichristian baptism, but divine baptism. Therefore I conclude the
testimony of Grotius is altogether invalid.

Secondly, This was never watered by God (nor ever will) therefore not of Gods
planting. For,

1. Their ministry (as they call it) who disclaim the office, I would not for
all the gold of the East and West Indies, I had no better fruit of my labors to
show than some of them have. Barn.

(...) Perdix congregat and non parit, congregat ova alterius a^^s, illisque
incubat ac si sua essent sed ubi fuerint exclusi pulli deserunt enim, quas^
cognoscentes quod ea illos non pepererit, and suae matri s^se adjun^unt. Alij
cuculus, qui non diu in regione aliqua commoratur, ideo non nidificat, sed
occupat ova alterius avis, ijs incubat, and quando excluduntur pulli, non
sen^^tur eum, sed deserunt. Schindl.

Non fortunat deus labores eorum qui non sunt ordinati, and quanquam salutaria
quaedam afferunt, tamen non aedificant, Luth. tom. 4.

Omnium Provincia^um prima Brittania pub^^citus nomen Christi recepit. Bellar.
cap. 2


is not usually blessed by God for the conversion of poor sinners; many indeed
are perverted by them, few or none converted that ever I heard of. But as many
call their neighbors bees to their own hives* which (as they say) thrive not
with them, or as the partridge or cuckoo gathers young ones which she has not
hatched: even so do they gather members out of other Churches* in whose
conversion they were not at all instrumental. Therefore I do not believe they
were commissionated by Christ to preach the Gospel, seeing usually his presence
does not accompany them in their undertakings. How does Paul prove that he was
sent to the Gentiles, as likewise Peter to the Jews, Gal. 2.8. but by the
efficacy of his ministry? for faith the Apostle, he that wrought effectually
by Peter to the circumcision, the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles.
This was excellently typified by Aarons withered rod, the budding whereof was
an emblem of the success of his ministry, by which the Lord did clearly
manifest that Aaron was a saint of the Lord, set apart to that office to serve
in the tabernacle, though Moses was an holier man than he.

2. Their spirits run out after this way, putting a greater stress upon it than
upon any other Ordinance; Many are zealous only in this, indifferent in other
matters of greater concernment, but Physicians say, Vniversalia sunt bona,
universals are good, whereas to be hot in one part and cold in another is a bad
symptom of a distempered body.
now where man lays a greater weight upon any institution of Christ, than
himself has laid, it is just, with God so to leave them, as that they should
find little or nothing in it, much more when it is but an humane invention
which perishes in the using, Col. 2.20. (...) [Eat not, taste not, touch not,
(the words should be so rendered) all which perish in the using.]
and leaves no impression behind it, as all men's imaginations do.

3. This is the inlet those grand errors in the world, They seldom stick at the
denial of infants baptism.

Nulla est veterum haeresium quae n^n videantur his authoribus repuliulare.
Melan.

Anabaptista indoctus Soeinianus, Socinianus doctus Anabaptista Hornb.


not which accidentally follow, but which properly and naturally flow from
those principles, as a just hand of God upon that way. For do we not daily see
that such deny the trinity, the personalitie of the Son and the holy Ghost,
saying, (as they of old) There are several manifestations of God, one in Moses,
another in Christ, and another in himself. And do they not cry down the Sabbath
because not so clearly held forth in the new Testament? Number. 26.10. And they
viz. Dathan and Abiram became a sign to give warning to all for the future,
that they usurp not the Priests office. The like you have in Jude, v. 11. [they
perished in the gainsaying of Core.] It seems there were such in the Apostles
time that cried, (Are not all the people of God holy) as the former did.
do they not cry down the ministry, or at cast the office of the ministe^ie,
(saying, Whoever will, though the lowest of the people may consecrate himself,
and administer the seals) though God has signally appeared in all ages
(espe^ially of late in England) against all those that rose ^p against Levi.
Deuteronomy. 33.11. Strike through the ^oyns of them that rise against him, and of
them that ^ate him, that they rise not again. This prophecy or prayer will be
of force till the worlds end, for the prayers of the saints dyed in the blood
of Christ, are of eternal efficacy, there being a necessity incumbent on God,
that the prayers of the s^ints be made good, ( Act. 1.16. comp. with Psalm.
109.8.) though put up many hundred years before.

Yea do they not unchurch all the Churches in the world, making rebaptization
essential to a Church, yea necessary to salvation? ^arther adding, That God
has no Church union or communion with any Church in the world that is not
rebaptized.

I might mention many more gross errors which flow from the principles of
Antipaedobaptists; only let me tell you some have confessed, That when they
have been inclining to that way, they have found their hearts sitting loose
from all former owned principles of truth, and as the first matter fit to
receive any form, impression or error whatsoever, though formerly loathed and
detested.

4. That way seldom thrives but when it is countenanced and made much of,
especially by the higher powers: whereas truth on the other hand has
flourished most under persecution. I. G.

5. Do they not aba^e in their graces, having lost that heat and zeal that
formerly they had? if they examine themselves I fear they will experience this
truth, that their bow is not bent as formerly, their spirits more feeble, and
the things which remain in some ready to die, Rev. 2.2. For when they departed
from God, then God departed from them. Mat. 2.9. It Is observed that one
executed for murder in the city of London, confessed, Mark 9.30. [No man that
works a miracle in my name, can (lightly) speak evil of me.] [(...)]
suddenly, Nemo reponse fit turpissimus.
That from the time of his going under water, he sensibly found God departing
from him. I. G

6. Yea do they not ofttimes, having cast off this Ordinance of baptism cast
off all, and losing one lose all? I wish we had not cause to lament for our
superordinanc'd men, that are above ordinances but below piety, who first
sucked in this error from them, and then were as rasa tabula, as white paper on
which you may write what you please. Austin writing upon John tells us a story
of a certain man, that was of an opinion that God did not make the fly, but
the devil; says one, If the devil made the flies, then the devil made the
worms, and God did not make the worms neither, for the worms are living
creatures as well as the flies, true, said he, I grant it the devil did make
the worms; but then said the other, If the devils made the worms they made the
birds also, for the birds are living creatures as well as the worms, true, said
he, the devils made the birds; then said the other, If he made the birds he
made the beasts, for the beasts are living creatures as well as the birds,
true, I grant it, said the other, the devil made the beasts too; then said the
other, If the devil made the beasts he made man, etc. Thus, says Austin, by
denying God in the fly, he came to deny God in man, and to deny the whole
creation: So I say, in denying one Ordinance to be an Ordinance of Christ, many
come to deny all Ordinances; yea the God of those Ordinances, and turn mere
atheists.

But though some have not cast off Ordinances, yet it is to be feared (and I
can assure you some have sadly complained that) they never saw God so powerful
in their way as in others. (Blessed be that glorious name of his free grace,
who freely breaths where and when he lists, and uses as much liberty in
using as in choosing instruments in his hands.) And no marvel, for they being
not commissionated from Christ to do what they do, cannot expect Gods presence
with them. Mat. 28. ult.

I beseech you therefore brethren in the bowels of Christ, consider seriously
what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

7. Are not many of them loose in their lives? (I know some of them are
precious saints, Can you show me one man of them, who is not blemished with
some of the aforesaid wickednesses, I mean, lying, treachery, perjury,
disobedience, sedition, idleness, de^enion of their wives, uncleanness, etc.
Baxt. p. 142.
which in the simplicity of their hearts follow their leaders, as they that
followed Absalom) but by their fruits (says Christ) ye shall know them, that
is, by that which they naturally and usually bring forth, in time ye shall
discern them. Mat. 7. Which phrase is twice repeated to show us the certainty
of the thing.

8. This practice of them has never helped on, but hindered the work of God
wherever it comes. It Is well observed when the light of the Gospel from the
lamp of Luther did begin to shine in all the corners of Germany, high and low,
those unhappy men Stork and Muncer, did begin also to breath out a pestiferous
vapor to overcloud those golden Candlesticks. Satan and Antichrist his eldest
son, got not so powerful assistance against the spirit of God in Luther, from
the Emperor Charles, (although the greatest prince of all those that for five
hundred years did sway the imperial scepter) nor from all the Bishops of
Germany, (though the most potent Clergy that is or ever has been in
christendom) as from these two obscure and ignorant creatures; who together
with their practice went out in a snuff.

9. God has usually appeared against them in all their disputes for that way,
witness the dispute at Coventry betwixt Doctor Brian and Mr Kiffith and others;
witness the dispute betwixt Mr Baxter and Mr. Tombs, who in his review does
ingenuously acknowledge again and again that he was worsted by Mr Baxter;
witness the dispute betwixt Mr. Cragge and Mr Tombs aforesaid, in which Mr.
Tombs was egregiously nonplus't, though he had all advantages against his
adversary, he having not studied the point, and being taken at unawaies,
whereas Mr. Tombs was well versed in that controversy. It Is very observable
how Isaiah expresses himself, chapter 42.3. He shall not quench the smoking flax,
until he bring forth judgment unto truth: but Matthew renders it until he
bring forth judgment unto victory. Whence we may gather the truth of that old
maxim, [Great is the truth and does prevail.) And therefore I dare boldly say,
There is such a light kindled in the three nations, (as the Martyr once said of
the Gospel in England) which all the adversaries in the world will never be
able to extinguish.

10. How many thousands are there in the world, of papists and others, that are
confirmed in their religion, and hardened in their sinful courses, by reason of
the miscarriages of many of that way? It Is not without cause that caveat is
given ( Mat. 18.) concerning offenses, Woe to the world because of offenses,
(where he speaks of little children from the 2 and 3 verse to the 5.) Seeing
that this way has given as great a blow to religion, as any one thing I know
acted for these many years. But Anabaptism is at the height, and therefore
nearer it is fall, for their folly is made known to all men.

11. Consider their actings from first to last, and how blasted by divine
providence. The time would fail me to tell you of Muncer, Quid^m illorum sunt
commiseratione dignatores quam supplicio.

Beza.

Etiam Erasmus Anabaptistas commiseratione dignos ^iebat, ut qui magnam partem
errore potius quam malitia peccarent.


(who at the point of death did acknowledge his error, his mind being
exceedingly cast down, so that he was not able to give an account of his faith)
the first of that sect in Germany, and his consort Stork, of Balthazar, John
Bocold that botcher of Leiden, and others, who said, That the grace of the
Gospel had been long enough offered, that from henceforth all who had rejected
it were to be killed with the material sword. Although there were some good
people amongst them, yet these their leaders with many others were corrupt, and
did miserably deceive the people, (as in other things, so in this) persuading
them, That now was the time come the saints should possess the kingdom; but
they were mistaken, as the sons of Ephraim in taking the cattle from the men of
Gath. It Is supposed to be about the time when the Israelites dwelt in Egypt,
Exodus 13.17. who upon the promise to Abraham concerning Canaan, before their
time did make an inrode upon the Philistines and were destroyed by them. 1 Chronicles. 7.21. And what the issue was of that party in Germany, I refer the
Reader to Sleidan, Hornbeck, and others.

12. Auxentius an Arrian with his adherents (says Mr. Philpot) was the first
that denied infant bap^ism, Anabaptismi institutio non nupera and nova est, sed
any annos quoque mill trecentos turbas in Ecclesia dedit gravissimas; and
tantum virium acquisivit ut hujus saeculi nostri conatus, tantum lu^u^ adhuc si
eum illo con eratur, videri possit interim tamen d^vinae veritatis te^s tu^c
quoque exrugnatus and plane dejectus esse Zuingl de Paedobapt.

Origo ^anaticae Anabaptistarum sectae buic anno debetur. sc. 1521.

Sculpt. An^al.


he died Ao 380. Fox ad 1555. After him others opposed it, who were the great
disturbers of the Church in those days. It Is observable that in the several
ages in which infant baptism was opposed, it was by such as were grossly
erroneous in other things. Now what probability is there that the Lord should
conceal his truth from his faithful servants in all ages being eminent for
piety in their generation, and reveal it to such as were for the most part his
enemies, and opposers of the crown and dignities of his son Jesus? Seeing then
the Church has been possessed of this divine institution for these fifteen
hundred years and upwards, and their possession not questioned till of late,
let us contend earnestly for it, and not suffer our little ones to be cast out
of their Church Membership, till our dissenting brethren come with their
ejectione firma, according to the Law of Christ, which they never will.

Obj. If this be not the way of God, how comes i^ to pass that so many go that
way?

Ans. Universalitie is no sign of the truth, for all the trees said to the
bramble, Come thou and rule over us, but they said not so to the rest of the
trees. The ground of the mistake is,

1. Because this truth is not so clear, truth lies (as we say) at bottom, and
is not easily found out, but by diligent search and inquiry made. The
essentials to salvation are clear and evident, but other truths not so.

2. Many have not found that benefit by their baptism they might have had,
because they have not endeavored to improve it for their spiritual advantage,
therefore it is no marvel though with profane Esau they say, What profit shall
this birth-priviledge do to me. Genesis 25.32.

I shall never forget thy word, says David, for hereby thou have quickened me,
that word that humbles the soul, and that word that raises and quickens the
soul, will not easily be forgotten: even so those Ordinances which christians
have reaped good by, they will not suddenly cast off and renounce. But if they
reap no fruit by them, it is no wonder if they forsake the ((...)) assembling
themselves together; which the Apostle holds forth as the high rode to the
great transgression. Heb. 10. Not forsasaking the assembling of our selves
together into the Synagog, for if we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin.

3. Many have not been so rooted and grounded in the principles of religion, in
the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, ( Heb. 6.1.) in the present truth of
this age, (i) the truth that is so much opposed. Hence it is that they being
but children are tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the slight ((...) the cogging of the die) of men, and cunning
craftiness whereby (...) they lie in weight to deceive. Ephesians. 4.14. It was the
complaint of Gildas, that the Arrian heresy, and other poisonous errors
infected the ancient Britains, because they were a people always desirous of
novelties.

4. The polity and industry of the adversary, they will compass sea and land
to make one proselyte to themselves and their way, rather than win one soul to
Christ.

5. The not receiving the truth in the love thereof, therefore God has given
them up to strong delusions to believe a lie. When the wrath of God is kindled
against a people, there is no error so absurd but Satan can persuade it; as we
may see in the doctrine of Mahomet, that great Quaker, and the first of that
sect since Christ, who was raised to scourge the Church for her apostasies, (
Rev. 9. ult.) especially the Church of Rome.

6. Their affections bribe their judgment, Esa. 7. Nisi credideritis, non
intelligetis.] As the old translation renders it.
(which is done several ways) the hearts of many, I fear, being engaged to that
way for carnal and by respects, Romans 1.24. (...): In their lust^ he delivered
them up to a reprobate mind] that is, a mind not approving of the things of
God; therefore not to be approved of.
that they may rise in the world; therefore it is no wonder that their judgments
are captivated, and they brought under the power of error Romans 1.24, 28.

So much for the first Argument, namely, Anabaptism is not the way of God. I
shall be brief in the rest.

Secondly, Consider the neglect of this Ordinance of Christ does argue the
Church is still in the Wilderness, and for this and other Wilderness sins, may
continue long in that state; for their rebellions of old the Lord was angry
with Israel, and seemingly did discovenant them, and cast them off as none of
his people, making them like the residue of the heathen, who all then died
uncircumcised, as the prophet Ezekiel speaks; and is not the Lord angry with
many of this generation, on whose seed he has set no visible sign of his
favor, but suffers every man to do whatsoever is right in his own eyes? which
Moses makes a sign of the Wilderness state of the Church of God. Deuteronomy. 12.8. Ye
shall not do after all the things that ye do here this day, every man
whatsoever is right in his own eyes.

3. Consider how angry the Lord was with Moses for deferring the circumcision
of his child: Moses was now going to be a reformer of others, and had not
reformed his own family, therefore the Lord would have slain him; and is not
the Lord angry with not only private christians but some public persons, for
their neglecting of this great Ordinance of infant baptism? I fear he is, which
sooner or later they will experience; for in the sanction of the second
commandment, God threatens to visit the neglect of this Ordinance of God upon
the fathers to the children, to the third and fourth generation.

4. The contempt of this Ordinance argues profaneness of spirit, that many do
so undervalue, nay despise this birth privilege. Esau for a little red pottage
sells his birthright, (i. e.) promises, the land of Canaan, the Ordinances,
with the seals of the Covenant, and after he had so done, he left the Church of
Israel, (as those do that renounce their baptism) and went to Mount Seir, being
not troubled for what he had done; therefore he was branded with that black
cole of infamy as a profane person, [ Esau that is Edom] which words compared
with chap. 12.14. do argue that the birthright was not merely a civil thing,
but typically did represent those sure mercies or holy things of David ( Isa.
55.3.) held forth to us in the Covenant of grace. This example of Esau the
Apostle applies to the Church of the Jews in the new Testament, Let there be no
profane person among you as was Esau, as if he should say, Do not part with
your birthright privileges upon such easy terms, as many now adays do, (for
it seems they were apostatizing and falling back from the Ordinances of the new
Testament, unto their former beggarly rudiments) least there be hereafter no
place left for repentance, though you should seek it carefully with tears.

5. Can any forbid water that children should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? Is there any impediment on Gods part
prohibiting? no; for he bids us bring them to him: On childrens part
prohibited? no; for of such is the kingdom of heaven: Or in respect of the
thing it self? no; for it is a passive Ordinance: What should then hinder why
children should not be baptized?

6. Such as lay hold on the Covenant, and keep the Sabbath, (for these two
usually go together) such will God make joyful in the house of prayer, even in
the Church of God. Let not the Eunuch say, (says the Lord) I am a dry tree
and have no children; nor the stranger say, I and my children are utterly
separated from the Lords people, for these will he bring to his holy mountain.
Isa. 56. (which is a Gospel-promise as appears by the context.) Oh then lay
hold on the Covenant for you and yours, if you desire to share in the
soul-ravishing joys of the people of God!

7. Consider the vision of Philpot, who tells us, That as Peter had a vision a
little before those Messengers of Cornelius came to him, by which he was much
satisfied concerning his conversing with the Gentiles, Act. 10.17, 28. Even so
this holy man of God Mr Philpot, a little before some came to him to be
informed in that great question of infant baptism, had the like vision; namely,
a description of a glorious city apiece, into which we are solemnly to
enter by baptism. For, says he, the militant ( i. e. the present) Church ought
to consent to the primitive Church. By which appearance he was much confirmed
in the present truth.

This testimony of that worthy and eminent servant of the Lord, being an
humane testimony, may challenge an humane credulity, though not a divine, if
we consider,

1. That he was a judicious sober man, not lead by fancy as many are.

2. That he was a Martyr of Jesus, to whom, as others, Christ did eminently
appear, and reveal those things to them which he would not to the men of the
world.

3.. That when he had this apparition, he was near his death; now the soul does
prominere in morte, shine forth in death, and sees things more clearly being
carried to the top of Mount Pisgah, the Mount of God.

4 That this vision was never questioned by any Papists or others that ever I
heard or read of, We may be induced to believe by the Church as an instrument,
but not as the formal reason into which our faith is ultimately resolved.
Ecclesia est per quam, non propter quam credimus.
therefore I am the more apt to believe the truth thereof. Alanus Copus Anglus,
p 966.
Alanus Copus, though he endeavor (but in vain) the confutation of Mr. Fox,
laboring to prove the falsitie of the relation of sundry miracles and visions,
yet never gave the least hint concerning this.

But I have held you too long in this Discourse therefore I will briefly
conclude: Only let me as^ you this question, (as our Savior in another case)
The baptism of children is it from heaven or from men? if of men, reject it;
(for it will perish in the using) if from heaven, (as I am assured it is) see
you slight it not, least you seem to withstand God, and be found fighters
against the Lord of hosts. Act. 11.17.

I have now discharged my duty, and shall lay down my head in peace, expecting
the judgmen^ and final determination of God in this standing controversy of
the times; to whom in heaven I appea^ for the vindication of this great truth,
Nihil enim a sacro Christi, sive ^re, sive spiritu prodiens minutum censetur.
(for no truth is little that issues from the sacred mouth of Christ) though
managed by a poor worm; humbly beseeching the Lord to grant, That what is sown
in weakness may rise in power.

FINIS.

