EPISTOLIUM-VAGUM-PROSA-METRICUM: OR, An Epistle at Random, IN PROSE and METER.

To be delivered, to all whom it may concern; but, was first intended only, for
two or three of the Authors Friends in Authority (if he has so many left) to
mediate in Parliament, the Redress of his destructive Grievances; in the
expression whereof, many Particulars of Public Concernment are interwoven.

When Justice raigns, the Land does flourish;
When, it is unthron'd, the People perish.
The Author, is George Wither Esquire; Who, in writing this Address, being
transported beyond the sense of his Personal Sufferings, discovers by a
Poetical Rapture, that whereon the peace of these Nations depends; and, what
IS, and what WILL BE, their sad Condition; as also, what New-Purgatories, and
Fiery-Tryals, they are likely to pass, if GOD's Mercy, prevents not: which that
they may endeavor to obtain, their old REMEMBRANCER gives them, once more, a
Fore-warning; resolving, this shall be his Last Time, of sounding them an ALARM.

When Disrespects, to Wrongs, does Ruin add,
He, may be wise, who seems a little mad;
And, in that FIT speak things that needful be
To turn those men, that are, more mad then he.
Printed at London, in the Year 1659.

August 10. 1659. Epistolium-Vagum-Prosa-metricum: OR, An EPISTLE at Random,
in Prose and Meter.
OUr English Proverb says, that Charity begins at home; and, this Divine
Precept, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, implies, that there ought
to be in every man such a moderate and well-regulated self-love, as may be a
standing Rule whereby to regulate his love to other men: Also, from this saying
of Paul, He that provides not for his family, is worse then an infidel; I do
collect, that, He who provides not for himself, is worse then a Beast: It is
every man's duty, in order to the preservation of his Country, to preserve him
also, as much as he can, who loves and studies the peace and welfare of it; and
I knowing no man living, who affects the welfare thereof, more then I do, may
be culpable perhaps of unfaithfulness to my Country, by neglecting my own
preservation. Therefore, that, I may discharge the duty which I owe to my
Country, my Self, and my Neighbors, by taking timely care of my own
preservation, (being at present in much hazard, and by none else regarded) I
have sent abroad this wandering Epistle to fetch in aid; which if it come into
such hands as I purposed it should, and to whom I did first, and principally
intend it; then, you, who are now perusing it, are none of those Idol-Gods, who
are insensible of those Prayers and Complaints, which are presented unto them;
Or, one of those men in honor without understanding, who are like the Beasts
that perish: but, one in whom I hope to find that Candor and Humanity, which
renders men heedful and sensible of their Neighbors Grievances: In that hope,
and on that account only, I am emboldned hereby to crave your furthering the
presentation of that my Petition and Narrative to this Parliament, which (if no
other charitable hand shall first undertake it) you shall receive in Writing,
to be presented to the House; and also printed Copies of them for your private
Information touching my Cause, with two Preparatory Addresses, directed to
every Individual Member of the said Parliament; if you give me an encouragement
thereto, after the receipt hereof, as I hope you will: for, if there has been
offered to this Parliament any Grievances, more considerable then mine, (all
Circumstances and Consequences considered) I will be contented they should cast
my Cause out of their House, and me out of this Commonwealth.

I am enforced to such a Whimsie as this, because, all my endeavors hitherto
have been as ineffectual, as if I had solicited the Statues in
Westminster-Abby, or in White Hall Garden; and because, also, I, (having lately
made trial) find no Member of Parliament, willing to offer unto it a Petition
at this busy time, though a little longer delay may prove destructive to me,
injurious to many, and dishonorable to this Commonwealth, wherein Justice has
been already deferred (as to a main part of my Grievances) nigh 17 years: For,
it will be no little dishonor, nor a slight disadvantage thereto, if at such a
time as this, a faithful servant to this Republic, after so long and great
sufferings as mine, shall not seasonably be indemnified from dangers and
damages (soly occasioned by her defective Securities and unperformed
Engagements) which will else destroy him: especially, when large Indulgencies
are granted to her malicious Enemies and notorious Offenders. Vouchsafe this
Wanderer such respect as it shall deserve; for, it begs not contrary to Law;
has a Pass, under my hand, who employed it, only to prevent those
Provocations which may be occasioned by being slighted in a Personal Address;
and I will take order that it shall be no further troublesome then you please,
after it has declared my Requests.

I am in a straight, from which none under GOD can deliver me, but the supreme
Power of these Nations; whereto, though it be difficult to procure access, (by
reason of those Insurrections which are now begun) I am necessitated to attempt
it; and do conceive that the supreme Authority now in being is obliged to
vouchsafe me Protection, yea, and Hearing and Relief in some measure, even at
this season, which may seem unseasonable. I act in matters concerning GOD and
my Soul, according to that measure of Illumination which he vouchsafes by his
Word and Spirit, neither uncharitably judging, or inwardly disaffecting them
who do the like: It is also my Principle to submit unto that civil Authority,
which has the most visible Power, and to be Active and Passive under it, both
for preservation of the Common-peace, and of my private interests, without much
busying my self in examining how rightfully, or by what means it got into the
Throne; considering how difficult it is for a private Person to discover the
Mysteries of State, with the many Intricacies wherewithal they are involved;
and how dangerous it is, to dive into those Whirl-pooles, wherein, are so many
contrary Fluctuations. I content my self, with such a Notion thereof only, as
GOD brings to my knowledge; who, has by his Word informed us, that all Powers
that be (whatsoever they be) are of him: And, as I am enjoined obedience by his
Precepts, to that which is in present being; so, I have the practice of the
Apostles, and of their Master CHRIST himself to warrant it, who submitted to
the Roman Monarchs in those times wherein they lived, in all Civil Matters,
though they were Infidels, cruel Tyrants, and very wickedly obtained their
Sovereignty.

I am carried into this Digression, to prevent what I know, is spoken privately
to my disadvantage; and therefore bear with my proceeding in it a little
further. According to this Principle, I acted and suffered with a good
Conscience, whilst the supreme Power was divided betwixt the late King and
Parliament: so, I did, when it was soly in this Parliament, and when GOD
permitted Oliver Cromwell to usurp it, by a Stratagem, for a Correction due to
our sins (and for our extraordinary Experiments, both by his Probation, our
Own, and other men's, in things of highest concernment) I endeavored, during
that Permission, in my Place, and according to my qualifications, and by a
Compliance, so far forth as was warrantable, to preserve the Common-peace; to
continue a claim on the Peoples behalf, of their just interest; to divert him,
from accepting of that whereof he was ambitious, and whereto he aspired, whilst
he pretended the contrary, (though with some hazards to my self, both in
relation to him who well enough perceived my intention; and of my reputation
also with many of them, who misjudged thereof) and to prosecute likewise, a
means of my deliverance from those my personal Oppressions, whereof I still
have cause to complain. And (my Conscience persuading it was both lawful, and
my duty to make trial of that Power) I omitted no honest Course or Opportunity,
to signify my Grievances, that I might obtain remedy. But I labored with no
more success, then if I had petitioned to the Dead: For neither by him who
usurped the Throne (though by many References he pretended to do me Justice)
nor by any of his Assemblies called Parliaments, though I continually attended
them; nor, by his Council, nor by his Successor, could I procure so much
toward the obtaining of common Justice, as to have one Petition taken into
serious Consideration; yea, though I was always faithful (as I think my self
bound in conscience to be) to that Power which GOD permits for the time
being, to reign over us.

Therefore, this Parliament, which he violently interrupted, being now again by
GOD's Mercy restored; and the Distractions and Necessities of this
Commonwealth, rendering it so difficult as aforesaid, to get admittance for
private Petitions, that I am yet without Relief, and likely to be quite
destroyed as to my outward well-being, before this Parliament, will in the
ordinary course, without some extraordinary means, take cognizance of my sad
Cause; I am resolved by this Expedient, and the Preparatories, which I think
therewith useful, to make trial, once more for ever, whether or no, there be in
this Nation (as I yet hope there is) that Righteousness and Mercy which
establishes Governments, and which is likely to restore our lost Liberties,
and free us from present Burdens, and future Oppressions: And, this Trial, if
it prove but as effectual as my last Expedients, to the two late Protectors,
presented unto them a little before the death of the first, and the removal of
the last, will shortly (though it produce not what I reasonably expect) put an
end at least to those vain hopes, which every day increase my Consumption; and
which have already, almost every way consumed me, by long chargeable
Solicitations and numerous Petitions, hitherto taken into men's hands, and
pockets, but not into their hearts.

But, lest my Petition, Narrative, and Preparatives aforementioned, which are
the Foundation of this Epistle, may not herewith come to your hands; and so the
true state of my Case be to you, in some considerable Circumstances unknown; I
will here insert a Copy of my Petition intended to this Parliament.

To the PARLIAMENT of the COMMONWEALTH of England:
The Humble Petition of Geo. Wither Esquire;
Shows,
THat, this Petitioners Demands and Accounts being stated upon Oath by the
Committee for Accounts, etc. they were afterward re-examined (a trouble rarely
(if ever) imposed upon any other) by two Committees of Parliament successively,
(to wit) the Committee of the Navy, and a Select Committee. The said Committee
of the Navy, reported by Col. Thompson, that, 3438 l. 18 s. 4 d. was then due
to this Petitioner, beside some Demands then respited.

That Report, not being brought into the House until about six months after (in
which time, the best part of a million was, to this Petitioners damage charged
in Course before it) the sum of 1681 l. 15 s. 8 d. etc. part of the said 3438
l. was charged upon the Excise in Course, March 22. 1647. but, without
allowance of any Interest, though 700 l. thereof (for which this Petitioner
paid interest) was by him, engaged for, and disbursed for the State; and though
likewise, the rest of the said 1681 l. was also made immediately payable unto
him, by Warrants or Orders about four years before, and due for service under
the same Commander, at the same times, and in the same places, for which his
fellow soldiers had either present payment in ready money, or interest allowed.

This, being made evident, it was ordered December. 25. 1648, that 300 l. more
should be charged upon the Excise, in consideration of Expenses and Interest
before that day laid out, for the said 700 l. and that Interest of 8 l. per
Cent. should be paid every six months, both for the said 300 l. and 700 l. out
of the Excise also, from that time, until the said 300 l. and 700 l. should be
discharged. To this Order, the Concurrence of the Lords was desired; but about
a week after, and before that Concurrence could be obtained, this Parliament
took away the House of Lords, and this Petitioner could never after get
Principal or Interest, or the said Order to be allowed.

The remainder of the said 3438 l. was the same March 1647. made payable out of
discoveries at Haberdashers-Hall, and afterward by another Order out of
Compositions at Goldsmiths-Hall; which not being effectual, this Petitioner
after many tedious and chargeable Solicitations, petitioned again; and then
this Parliament referred the whole Cause, and the finding out means for this
Petitioners satisfaction, to the said Select Committee, who found 3958 l. 15 s.
8 d. to be then due, and declared, that they thought fit, it should be thus
paid, (viz.) that the said 1681 l. should stand charged upon the Excise as
formerly; and that interest should be paid for that whole sum (as in equity it
ought) after the rate aforesaid, from the 22 of September. then last past, until
the Principal were paid; and that for the rest of the said 3958 l. 15 s. 8 d.
there should be settled upon this Petitioner and his heirs, Lands by them
nominated, as they were valued in the Sequestrators Books, whose yearly
valuation was 240 l.

No Result appearing upon this Report in a long time after, this Petitioner
once again petitioned, and upon the 2 of January 1650, instead of the
satisfaction last mentioned, it was ordered, that the said 1681 l. 15 s. 8 d.
part of the said 3958 l. should stand charged upon the Exoise as before, but
without mentioning any interest, whether intended or not: if not intended, then
both the money lent, and the residue having been due above 16 years, yet
payable but in Course, which has been stopped above seven years, (without any
certain termination of the said stop) is likely to be a payment amounting to
many thousand pounds less then nothing; and the payment which the Petitioner
has for the Remainder, is worse.

For, by the same Order, instead of 240 l. per an. according to what the said
select Committee though sonable, he was to have but 150 l. per annum settled
upon him the said Petitioner, out of the Estate of Jo. Denham Esquire; for
satisfaction of the remainder, of the said 3958 l. which Lands (all things
considered) he was to pay for, at 40 years purchase in ready money, whereas he
could have bought for less then eight years, the like Lands; yet, this
Petitioner accepted thereof, and had the said 150 l. per annum, conveyed unto
him out of the Manor of Little Horsly in Essex, part of the Estate of the said
Denham, and purchased the rest of the said Manor for 1645 l. and odd money;
paid for it, according to his contract, and was put into quiet possession.

But, whilst he was in possession, he made not one penny of clear profit, by
reason of interruptions; and has now been ejected about five years out of the
whole Manor, without either Rent or Recompense, and has spent also about 600
l. in troubles and suits yet undetermined, to defend and recover his Title;
which Suits were occasioned by a pretended Lease to one Thomas Offly Esquire; which
is probably forged, to the defrauding the Commonwealth of between 3 or 4000 l.
and the said Lease, if it be real, was at a great undervalue, compounded for by
a Member of this Parliament, to the wrong of the Commonwealth as well as of
this Petitioner, as will appear by the Narrative hereto annexed, and by what
this Petitioner shall further demonstrate. By these procceedings, this
Petitioner is damnified so much, beside his troubles, and the loss of precious
time at the latter end of his life, that he protests in the fear of GOD, he
is in danger with his whole Family to be ruined in his Estate and Credit, and
that he verily believes, he had been about 5000 l. better in his Estate, if he
had quitted the said 3958 l. 15 s. 8 d. when it was first due.

This Petitioner further shows, that about eight years past he purchased of
the State a small parcel of Land at Ash in Surry, whereof he is totally
deprived also, by a Member of this Parliament, who has ever since detained the
said Land and Rent from him; and who having been often summoned by the
Commissioners for removing of Obstructions, to show his Title, refuses or
neglects so to do; and this Petitioner being not able to commence a suit for
it, is likely for ever to lose both his said purchase, and what be paid for it,
unless the said Member may be ordered, to do that which is agreeable to
Justice; which he humbly desires he may be compelled to do.

And, in Consideration of the rest of the Premises, this Petitioner humbly
prays also, that the Requests at the Close of the said Narrative hereto
annexed, may be granted, so far forth as they are just; and that your Honors
will put such a speedy end, to his said Grievances, that he may die in Peace:
For he will be contented with whatsoever you shall determine, and pray for your
Honors.

Let, not this be slighted; for my life is worn out by Oppressions, (the 70
year of my Age being past) and, you may perceive by the preceding Petition and
the Narrative, that this Parliament before the interruption thereof, (by the
prevalency of some among them, and now justly excluded) as also by their
Interruptors, in delay of Justice, have caused me to be damnified in at least
8000 l. by detaining a very considerable part of my Estate above sixteen years,
and by not making good their Contracts and Engagements, wherein I consided; and
whereby (as I believe) there has been cast upon me more then 40 times the
Burden justly imposed upon any man of my Revenue: which (considering how
serviceable I have been without constraint, in adventuring my life, and
contributing my Estate with the first, in order to a preservation of
Common-Right and Safety) has been an unequal distribution; and reduced me to
such Extremities, as I expected not to be plunged into by Friends, who have
been so merciful to their Enemies; and who made promise of better things; for,
they were such Hardships, as I could other while hardly brook; and such, as if
my greatest Adversary had been in the like case, I should have afforded him
more pity then I have found. This, I profess without falsehood or equivocation,
for, I have had daily vexations thereby; and at sometimes been so afflicted,
with shame and grief, when I thereby failed their expectations, who confided
upon my Credit, and my Engagements to them, that it made my life wearisome,
(especially when they were necessitous persons) until I could find means to
supply their need, how much soever it were to my disadvantage. To preserve my
self, as much as I could from this vexation and scandal, and to supply my
personal wants, (occasioned by other men's deceiving my hopes) I have been
enforced to fell away lately above 2000 l. worth of my then remaining
Livelihood, real and personal; and am still engaged by my continuing
Oppressions, in almost as much more, though I have since the sales last
mentioned, sold by parcels, to the dismembring of my Inheritance, all that was
disengaged, and at my free dispose: yet the Consumption goes on; insomuch that
the remainder of the portion left in possession, (unless part of that which is
due to me may be paid, to free it from Encumbrances) is likely to be forfeited
within a few months. And, though that Forfeiture should be saved, my Revenue
will not be sufficient to discharge Taxes and Parochial Payments, with the
Interest of my remaining debts, and inavoydable Expenses by them annually
occasioned, (without a further supply out of what is detained from me) and
afford a maintenance for my self, my wife, children and servants, (though a far
less number then heretofore) after the rate of 5 s. the week one person with
another throughout the year, to provide meat, drink, raiment, servants wages,
childrens portions, and all other necessaries in sickness and in health.

And less I should have had (as rich as the world thinks me) if my frugality
(which has been reputed a parsimony to my disparagement) had not been many
years rather proportioned to my weak Estate, then to the rank in which I lived:
For, I shall shortly be in danger, to have neither Stock upon my Land, nor
Goods in my House, nor a House wherein to hide my head, except it be a Prison,
if my Creditors be not more merciful by forbearance, till I can make money of
what is yet left, then my Debtors have been to enfore me to that hazard: who,
(if I had been justly dealt withal) should probably have long since possessed a
Revenue of above 500 l. per annum, free from Debts and Engagements, and might
have raised also 5000 l. for my Childrens portions, who have yet nothing. And,
which is worse then so bad; I, whose Credit was so good, that when occasion
heretofore required it, I have borrowed 100. 200. 300 l. yea, 600 l. in one
place for several years upon my single bond, (as will yet appear by the bonds
cancelled) am now doubtful whether my security will pass alone for 10 l. And, I
believe, that they who (perhaps to disparage me in another kind) report I have
Lands to the yearly value of 1000 l. (which is a great deal more then twice so
much as I ever yet had) will not better my credit by that fame, as to borrowing
at this time: and though it do not, Poverty, when the Commonwealth is poor,
will to me be more honor, then to be rich; considering how I am impoverished.

Not many men have so unfeignedly told the world heretofore, their outward
Condition, as I have declared mine, when it was requisite; nor discovered their
inside more sincerely, by publishing their thoughts, to his own hazard, for an
advantage to his Country: But most are such dissemblers, that they believe not
one another. If men think I now dissemble, and am as rich as report has made
me, perhaps whilst I am here at London soliciting my Cause, they will steal
away my only Son and Daughter, in hope they will prove rich marriages: which
nevertheless I am resolved to adventure; as also, how the Militia in Hamshire,
out of which I am by Providence (if not by some other means omitted) will
proportion my burden to other men's. I hope well of their impartiality; but, if
(as I am informed) they have imposed upon me the setting forth of two Horses, I
shall be scarce found able at this time to provide them Bridles; and some of my
Countrymen may as justly be charged with a whole Troop: according to which
proportion, if a Militia be armed in all other Counties, Charles Stuart, were
better stay at Bruxells, then come hither, though Spain, France, and the
Emperor should assist him.

How this revealing of my Poverty will obstruct my Credit, as to borrowing
hereafter to relieve my necessities; and how it may hinder the advance of my
Children in Marriage, the prudence of the world, would have advised me to
consider. But I regard neither her Counsel nor her Practice: If Marriages,
according to our Proverb, be made in Heaven; and, if (as I believe, and have
had experience of it) good Husbands and Wives, are Gods gift, and at his
disposal by an extraordinary Providence, I will trust to his providing them
Spouses and Portions: and whatsoever my future want shall be, do purpose to
deceive no man, by making my Estate seem better then it is; though they be not
of that mind, who obstruct the establishing of Registers to prevent fraud.
When I was much poorer then at present I am, GOD, raised me up a Friend, who
knowing by what means I was necessitated, (and how unlikely I was to repay him)
brought nevertheless unto me without my asking ought, (without obliging me by a
note under my hand, and without so much as requiring a promise of repayment)
500 l. by parcels, at several times, during the continuance of my wants; And
the same GOD, who thereunto inclined him, without any earthly relation, is my
GOD at this day, and will be so for ever.

Herein consists that which keeps up my spirit, at this present,
notwithstanding the long neglect of my Oppressions, and the Wants, it has
brought upon me; and though the Parliaments late leaving me out of Public
Employments, has occasioned me to be suspected by their Friends, as not
well-affected thereunto; to be he laughed at by the Commonwealths open Enemies,
and as much hated as heretofore, because they well enough know my continuing
faithfulness to her Interest: Though it may cause me to be jeered by Newters;
to be slighted by my debauched Neighbors; to be the sooner stripped of what is
yet left, by Creditors and Publicans; and to be made liable to the fury of
every Armed-party, into whose hands I may possibly fall during these times of
Insurrection; notwithstanding all this, now likely to come upon me, I neither
distrustfully repine at what I suffer, (though I use the best means I can to
remove it) nor fear what may come hereafter, because GOD is my Refuge. If it
were not so, which way should I turn my self to find comfort? My Estate is like
a Candle burnt within the Socket: Age has somewhat abated my strength: Friends
and Acquaintance (like such as Poverty produces) stand afar off: my
Comforters, are like Job's: my Enemies are malicious, and increase: my dearest
Relations, have nothing to contribute but Tears or Complaints to the afflicting
of my heart with unprofitable pity: and though I have looked for Helpers, not
one appears, but He who never fails those that trust in him; and he also
otherwhile hides himself, because of my transgressions, till I am ready to cry
out, Oh God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and then he discovers himself
again, and smiles on me. But, what is this to the world? though he be so
gracious, that I have no cause to murmur at his permitting me to be harshly
used, nor do repine at that permission; I will nevertheless not forbear to
declare how the world deals with me, though she calls it murmuring.

But, some will perhaps object, that I cannot be so necessitated as I pretend;
for it is evident that I have such and such a visible Estate. I confess, I have
an Estate visible afar off, partly in Reversion, and partly encumbered; but, it
is not Tangible, as to my necessary occasions. Like Tantalus, I have an
appearance of food at my upper lip, and water to the Chinne, but not in
possession more then I have declared; and those false appearances of plenty,
make them who know not how it is really with me, and know how long I have
subsisted in a seeming good condition since I had cause to complain, think me a
male-contented murmurer, (which is none of the least disparagements) rather
justly reprovable for complaining, without need, then to be pitied; which
Unchristian prejudice, has not a little increased the Cause, and prolonged the
justness of my complaints. I have yet, a visible Estate; but a great part of it
lies like an Orphans portion in the hands of a powerful unconscionable
Guardian, who makes use of it for his own occasions; and leaves him to beggary
and starving. The Residue of my Livelihood, I possess as Bees do their honey,
when the Combs and Cells are so broken and masht together in the Hive, (which
stands sound in outward view) that instead of being nourished by it, they lie
entangled, and sprawling out their lives, smothered in the midst of their
plenty; and am in a worse condition then the poor perfecuted Protestants in
Piedmont, and other places, for whose relief Contributions were of late largely
and charitably made, (pray GOD they were as sincerely disposed of) yet I am
likely to be ere long in a more sad estate: for, they being driven from all
they had, by their Enemies, retained their Liberty, which I am likely to lose;
they had their reputation increased by suffering for their Conscience, and some
Friends also to relieve them; whereas I am ruined in my Estate and Credit, by
and among those whom I thought my Friends: and what succor are my Aversaries
to whom I am exposed, likely to afford me? or, to whom shall I complain? There
is a Catholic Congregation, whereof I am a Member, among whom there is true
compassion; but, they are personally as unknown to me, as the 7000 in Israel,
who had not bowed their knees to Baal, were to Elias, who knew not one of that
number. I have only a spiritual Communion with them, and my supplies from
them, will be rather in spiritual Communications, then in temporal things,
wherewith I shall be well enough contented. The earth is the LORDS, and all
that is therein, upon whose score I shall expect what is necessary for life, if
all were lost; and for the services which I have heretofore done for my
Country, and for the love I still bear to it, I may claim so much at least, as
due to me of right, though it had paid me all the debt it owes me, and though I
had lost it another way.

That which most afflicts me, is not altogether the damage which I outwardly
substain in having the adventuring my life and estate for this Commonwealth, so
little regarded; nor the shameful poverty that I have been exposed unto, by
those who have more cause to be ashamed of it then I: But the dishonor and
hazards which are brought upon this Nation and their Representative, by such
like neglects of Justice as have occasioned my complaints, and our universal
hazard, is my greatest grief; seeing, to my knowledge, they might have been
prevented with a little cost and trouble, if some had not wilfully obstructed,
or neglected Justice, for sinister respects. The money, which has been owing to
me above 16. years, might have been paid 16. times in that space, out of
treasure disbursed much less for the Public honor and profit. Also, the Lands
of 300 li. yearly value by me purchased of the State, and fully paid for seven
years past, and yet still detained from me, (without having received one penny
in clear profit, or any allowance for that damage, beside the loss of 500 li.
more consumed in vain to defend my possession, and recover it being lost, by a
pretented Mortgage, which is probably forged) might have been re-established
upon me long since, if the said Mortgage had not been unduely compounded for by
a Member of Parliament; or if the validity of his Title, might have been
examined, together with such actings relating thereto, as do seem to have been
practiced to defraud the Commonwealth of between 3. and 4000 li. as well as to
deprive me of that Revenue.

These things, I declare not, to asperse the Parliament, who could not help
them, whilst their power was interrupted; but, to prevent the dishonouring
thereof, now that power is restored: and so far I am from intending otherwise,
that I think none but an Enemy thereunto, will so misunderstand me, though some
among them were guilty; Seeing, the defects by unsound Limbs can be no more
disreputation thereto, then it was to the twelve Disciples, that there was a
Traitor among them; or, then it is to a man, otherwise well qualified, to be
born with a crooked member, or to have a scab upon his body by casual
Infection, which he endeavors to be rid of, as soon as he knows it. Nor does
my insisting upon the particulars aforementioned, proceed out of despair that I
shall be left quite destitute, of things necessary to life: For, GOD, who
provided for me when I was most deserted of the world, as I have already
declared, assures me of the like mercy hereafter: Nor, do I thus discover my
nakedness and sordid poverty, in hope to move compassion, by my own endeavor
only; or when my own time requires it: For, I am not such a stranger to this
Generation, and to the temper of most men therein, as not to know, that this
Discovery (unless GOD restrain them, or change their minds) will expose me to
the more misery and contempt; and give men encouragement to tread me over head
and ears into the dirt, rather then to relieve me, or raise me up, when they
see me sinking.

Therefore, that which I have now written, and heretofore expressed to the like
effects, is not wholly for the foresaid causes; but partly, to discharge my
Conscience, in using that, which was wont to be the ordinary or extraordinary
means of redressing Oppressions; and partly, that if they succeeded not, I
might leave an experiment to them who shall live when I am dead, that there was
a time, and may be again, wherein Hypocrisy, Apostasy, Avarice, Pride,
Selfness, and hardheartedness, so abounded, that no words would move; no
demonstrations persuade, no endeavor produce a reasonable or natural
consequence; but, that the more rationally, the more evidently, an oppressed
man shall make known his oppressions, and an innocent, vindicate his innocence,
the more shall they neglect his sufferings; and the more maliciously, the more
impudently practice to disgrace and frustrate his justification: And I have
also written this, that considering there be times, and Contingencies, wherein,
and whereby, The Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, nor
Bread to the wise, nor Riches to men of understanding; some, thereby, may heed
and remember, to repose Trust, not in themselves, or in Princes, or in
Parliaments, or in Armies, or in the People, or in any other save in GOD, only.

But, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi, our Terrestrial GODS, have now work
enough to secure themselves, and to look to the common safety: and therefore,
some seem to think it criminal to offer a private grievance, at this time, to
be redressed by them, how destructive soever it be. These men, having never
felt such oppressions as mine, nor wanted any thing necessary, these do,
instead of a charitable assistance, or fellow feeling of my sufferings when
they hear them declared, tell me, that such complainings may be of dangerous
consequence; that they are symptoms of a discontented mind; and that I must be
patient. Good Lord! how wise they are? why do they not reprove and blame all
the Saints in Primitive Ages, as impatient and malecontented persons, because
frequent in complainings against their Oppressors? why do they not counsel
those who are like to starve, through want of bread, not to be hungry? and
those who are sick and wounded, not to be sensible of pain? how zealous of the
Common-peace are they, who never contributed any thing toward the preservation
of it, except words, which cost them nothing? If I had contributed and
adventured no more, I should not have needed their grave advice or reproof at
this time, but should have been thought as wise as they, and might perhaps had
as little cause to complain. There be some, who are never sensible of other
men's dangers or losses, till they themselves are likely to be impoverished or
destroyed; other some there be, who never get any thing, until all is in hazard
to be lost; and if I am destined to such a Lot, a time so busy, and hazardous
as this, may be the most seasonable time for preferring my Petition, though it
appear unseasonable to some: for, I am not so irrational, to desire more then
may be granted, or to expect a full repair; but rather, that so much time only
may be spared, as will suffice to order a supply for those Wants which cannot
longer be born; and a stop set to those proceedings which will be destructive,
before a more ample provision may be made.

The Parliament, I confess, has now little leisure, and less then at any time
heretofore, wherein Private Grievances, were put off by former Assemblies: yet
I know it has not so little leisure, as not to spare half an hour, to the
charitable purpose last mentioned. The commonsafety, is visibly in danger; But,
I hope not so endangered, that it is disenabled from! doing such a work of
Justice and Mercy, as may prevent an increase of their own dishonor, dangers,
and expenses. The Commonwealth is in great want; but, their wants will be
greater before they will become less, if (as in my Case) Justice be deferred to
the doubling or trebling of their debts, by leaving those things unexamined
(until Witnesses are dead, or Evidences embezzelled) which might probably
discharge the greatest part of them, by timely recovery of that which will else
be lost. I was delayed as I now am, by every Parliament and Power in being,
during the interruption of this Parliament, with this Answer: The Public
affairs afford not leisure: But, who believed it? Nay, who believed not the
contrary, that observed, as I did, for what things they found leisure? Leisure,
was often found since I first petitioned (though I cannot say it of my certain
knowledge since this Parliaments restoration) to hear private Complaints, far
less considerable then mine, on the behalf of themselves, friends, kinsmen, and
other relations, even during those Weeks and Months, wherein private
Petitions, were excluded by Order of the House; as if such Orders had been only
purposed, to give them the more casie admittance. O God! why am I necessitated
to bring to remembrance, misactings, whereby thou have been provoked, and thy
servants exasperated? Leisure, has been found for Malefactors, when it
concerned but their Estates or Lives only; And why could not leisure have been
as well afforded in so many years, to preserve my Estate, and my Credit, which
I more value then Life; and for preservation whereof, I would have given my
estate, and two temporary Lives to boot, if I had them? Leisure, has been
found, to qualify rigid proceedings against the Commonwealths Adversaries;
yea, to accommodate them; nay, to ingratiate them; and leisure, is found still
to the like purposes; which I grumble not at in respect of them: But, why might
not I as well in all that time, have obtained such favor? why might not such a
day or hour of leisure be found out for me? why might not I, who have been
Instrumental for this Republics preservation, have been as much befriended as
her Enemies, who sought to destroy it? but because the Commonwealth, and her
Servants, have not such diligent friends as their Enemies?

Oh God! remember not this negligence and partiality to the Public
disadvantage at this time, wherein faithful friends, and trusty servants, are
as needful as ever they were. These are the Provocations, which have made
their leisure, so little, and their business to be so much, still multiplying
those troubles, which increase their expenses, and streightning them in time:
and, the more they labor, and the more money they bestow, the more will their
work, and disbursements be, until those things which occasion it be reformed;
and, if there be any one in that honorable Assembly, who believes not this;
or, who is not so much humbled, for the failings which have been heretofore
among them, that he can be willing to hear them mentioned for prevention of the
like, (by him who desires the preservation of their Power with honor) I shall
be more afraid of the disservice that such a Member may do to GOD, and to his
Country, then of his displeasure, or of any mischief that can thereby befall me;
and therefore, having said what I think, concerning the Leisure, which they
heretofore had in Parliament, to take more Cognizance of private Grievances, I
will add somewhat in answer to their Allegation, who say, Public Necessities,
make the Parliament incapable of relieving mine; and that, I ought not at this
time to petition for it, but rather to rest satisfied.

This, is as dissatisfactory to me, as it would be to my Creditors, when they
are like to be undone by want of their money, if I should tell them, my
necessities are so great that I cannot pay them, and that therefore they must
rest satisfied; though they saw at that time, in and about my house, many
unnecessary things, which were more chargeable then profitable; by the sale
whereof, I might easily pay them all, and live as well contented, and with
more, or with as much Credit as without them. Doubtless, my Creditors, if it
were so with me, would expect a more satisfactory answer.

In, like manner, I knowing the Commonwealth has some Appurtenances, not so
necessary as chargeable, and many things disposable, whereby my Grievances may
be eased, and my Credit preserved, without any disadvantage thereunto, cannot
be well pleased with such a Put-off, as perhaps I might have been, if I had
lived these last 16 years (as I desired to have done, and yet do) by a Woods
side in a Country Village, where I had been kept without knowledge of what is
done in Committees, Courts, Councils and Parliaments. Why, must a greater
burden then I am able to bear, or then falls to my proportion, be laid upon my
back to uphold that which is falling? or to stop that Breach, whereby all the
people of these three Nations, are liable to an inundation? Why should it not
be rather equally divided among them; or among those who are best able to
sustain it, until such an equal Division could be made, rather then that so
much should be cast upon me, or upon any other, as will destroy him? What
justice is there suitable to our Christian professions, or to the mercies which
GOD has vouchsafed to this Commonwealth, to do otherwise? Or how much differs
this partial distribution whereof I complain, from what was barbarously
practiced among the Gentiles of old, when they sacrificed innocent persons to
their false gods, that their wind-bound Fleets, (as did the Grecians) might
have prosperous Gales? And, why was this Generation so imprudent, to requite me
with evil for good, in so extraordinary a manner, as they have done, who have
been a diligent Observer of what they have done? and who, am as sensible of
Courtesies and Discourtefies, as other men? And also, better able to illustrate
it when I am scurvily and unjustly dealt withal, then some wiser men, or then
many thousands of other oppressed Suppliants, who have cause to complain? Why
had it not more care of its own honor, though no regard of my Credit, to use
me thus, considering I have some advantages on my side, whereby it will redound
more to their shame, then the like Injustice to many hundreds of them, whose
Obscurity makes their Sufferings less heeded, and sooner forgotten? If I, have
thus suffered who had these advantages; who am known to the greatest number of
the most considerable persons in the Nation; who have had familiarity with many
of them, not without some appearances of good respect; who was acquainted with
the greatest number of Parliament Members, and had many among them who
professed to be my Friends; if I have found no better effects of all this; how
alas! have some of those been neglected and oppressed, who had scarce one of
those advantages? Verily I am persuaded, that God purposely corrected me for my
sins, by keeping me so many years under Oppressions, occasioning my continual
attendance in places of public Transactions, that I might be an Eyewitness of
those Prevarications which have occasioned so many Changes within so short a
time, and that I might leave a memorial of it to those whom it may concern
hereafter: for, such things I should never have believed, in a time wherein so
much honesty and Religion is professed, if I my self had not heard them, seen
them, and felt somewhat of them in my own person, to ascertain me, that they
proceeded not from those Causes, which are by some pretended, to extenuate or
excuse them.

It is not altogether public want, as is alleged, which has kept me and many
other distressed men, from their debts due upon the Public Faith; or caused
that the Parliaments Engagements have not been performed; or, that their
Securities are made snares, and ineffectual: But, Malice, Covetousness,
Selfness, Vanity, or Negligence at best, have been the chief occasions thereof,
as I could demonstrate by many particulars, which I forbear, lest it may
reflect upon those whose honor I desire to preserve, and upon some individual
persons, whom I hope to be now sorry for their failings. I could make it
evident, that since I complained of Oppression, by the detaining what is my
due, many vast sums have been vainly and needlessly ( I will not say wickedly)
squandred away, which might have been bestowed more for the Commonwealths
honor and profit, in disengaging the Nation, from just debts long due to poor
distressed Men, Women and Orphans; such as I have seen attending early and
late, and from day to day soliciting for relief of their urgent necessities,
with Tears, Exclamations and Imprecations, without any regard vouchsafed to
their importunities or distressed Conditions; except such a dissembled regard,
as increased their necessities, by giving false hopes of that performance,
which they never made, neither perhaps ever intended. Who observed not how much
was lately consumed in Flashy Bawbles, whilst those poor Suppliants perished by
want of necessaries? And how much also has been lost, by defrauding the
Commonwealth, and neglecting that means of supply which was lawfully due? I
profess in the fear of God, my belief is, by what I have heard, seen and
observed, during the 17 years wherein I have been treading the Maze, and
running round in the Wheel of my yet endless Solicitations, that the Mulcts
and Fines which might have justly been raised upon Discoveries (and which might
have been made) out of their Estates, who have falsified their trust, cheated,
dishonored, or been mischievous Enemies to the Government, and this Republic,
(and the payment whereof has been prevented by Bribes taken (or upon other
considerations as unjustifiable) to the use of single Persons, or shared among
parties in Power, entrusted by the Commonwealth) would have more then
discharged all her Engagements, and afforded also a Remainder for public uses;
especially if the Postmastership, with such other means of raising money, had
been from the beginning, husbanded for the public advantage. Why should any
thing, to that end disposable, be otherwise disposed of, at this time, then for
the Public, and to preserve their Lives, Estates and Credits, who ask but
their own, and have hazarded and spent it in her service? Wherefore, whilst the
Common-faith is engaged, should any part of the Forests (with the tyrannous
Laws to them pertaining) be reserved to feed wild beasts for the disport of
vain and idle persons? and to give occasion of reviving again hereafter that
Oppression, which was one of the greatest under which this Land heretofore
groaned? Or, why should the Accounts of so many Sequestrators, and Receivers,
lie unexamined, by whom much money was received, which is not yet accounted
for, or paid into the Common-Treasury, to supply public wants? And wherefore,
during the present necessities, should it not be reputed as honorable an
Expedient, to pay this Commonwealths debts, by conferring to that end, all
Offices thereby disposable, (with a competent allowance for their execution)
and by selling those that are saleable, (and not for administration of Justice)
as it is to give them in reward of services done, or to bestow a Plurality of
places and profitable Offices (sometimes two, three, four, yea more at once)
upon one person, who is neither necessitous, nor perhaps has any way deserved
so much as one of them? All which Particulars, with many other unmentioned,
when I have well thought upon, as oftentimes I do, I cannot choose but believe,
that either this Commonwealth, is not so poor as it is pretended to be, or else
that there are some very much to blame.

But, I hope, those failings which were heretofore, will be now amended, and
things better ordered hereafter: For these misactings and neglects, with some
other, have exceedingly incensed the Nation, and were doubtless an occasion in
part, of that dangerous Insurrection which is newly begun in several places,
and like to be universal, if GOD prevent it not by mercifully quenching those
Flames without pouring upon them much blood; as I believ he will, for the
safety of his chosen ones among us, and to deceive the hopes, and frustrate the
purposes of his and our malicious Enemies, who at this time, (by what is
designed here and in foreign parts) do presume, they shall get a large step
toward the advance of their own Kingdom, by our destruction: and so it will
be, if he put not a Bridle in their mouths: Therefore, when that day of
salvation appears, it will become us to be thankful in humility, to rejoice
with trembling, and to use that victory, which God shall be pleased to give,
over our seduced Brethren and Countrymen, with moderation, as men conscious in
our selves, that they are thereby corrected as well for our sins, as for their
own; as also, with that fellow-feeling, which our natural body would have, if
some members thereof were tormented, or to be cut off: for, considering that
their provocations, or misunderstandings, (as it is probable,) transported a
great part of them with a blind and preposterous zeal to their Country, rather
then any malice the eunto; and, considering that many of them are not only
seduced by the subtle Arguments and insinuations of seeming friends, who
intended one thing whilst they pretended another, but also really believed in
their own hearts they had a good cause, (and that the miscarriages which they
saw, and the misconstitutions from which they conceived them to spring, did
oblige them to vindicate their own and the whole Nations rights and freedoms,
from that intrenchment, which in their judgment seemed to be made upon them)
they may be objects of Pity in some measure. God incline them whom it concerns,
to be just as he is just, and merciful as he is merciful, according to that
proportion whereof man is capable. I will now again proceed with what I have
more to say concerning my particular Cause.

The Parliament, is (I confess) much more straightened at this present then
formerly, as well in time, as in the want of many other things needful, by
reason of that condition, whereto their Obstructers and Interrupters have
brought this Republic: in which respect, I have hitherto forborne to be
over-importunate for my relief, and would have waited until it had been at
better leisure, and better able to redress my Grievances; but, I can now
subsist no longer: and evidently perceive also, that I must break in upon it,
if I will be heard before it be too late. For, procrastinations so multiply
oppressions, instead of giving opportunities to diminish them; that, this
Parliament (as it has heretofore thereto happened, and to many other) may
suddenly and unexpectedly be ended, before I shall be heard; and that their
Leisure and Treasure never will be more, nor their troubles fewer then they
are, unless there be a more impartial distribution of Burdens, and a more
charitable regard to those private men's Oppressions, who have been always
faithful to the Public Interest, and are now consumed by their free
contributions, and by the want of that which has been kept, and exacted from
them against their wills. If they believe GOD, to be just, and not like some
among themselves, how can they expect a blessing upon their consultations and
endeavors, whilst they permit them to perish, by withholding their means of
Livelihood, who voluntarily engaged both life and livelihood for their
preservation? and whilst they suffer those who first served them in their
greatest need, to be quite forgotten (as to things which may concern their weal
and safety) or to be last remembered, except it be by those only, who watch for
opportunities to destroy or disgrace them?

Such there be, even among those, who should be more mindful of Gods justice
upon themselves, and of his late superlative mercy to them and us, in restoring
their lost Power, and in vouchsafing to make them his Probationers once more.
These, I would not fear to distinguish from others by Name, if I had warrant
for it, and, as good proofs to ascertain their mischievous and malicious
condition to other men, as I have to assure my self of it. Such we have
discovered to have been among them heretofore; and such to be there now, they
themselves will discover ere long: and perhaps, I could offer to the
consideration of such as these, that, concerning their own persons and families
(which they think unknown to the world) that would make them afraid there is a
GOD, though he be not yet in their Creed. These, are the Achans which trouble
our Israel: Among these, is that Jack on all sides, that turns with every
wind; that Politic would, befooled with pride and overweening, and that Love
corrupted with dissimulation and avarice, by whom many proceedings relating
both to public and private Justice are obstructed; and whose Tables are made a
snare oft-times, to the falsifying of this old saying in barbarous Latin,
usual among some Lawers, Esculenta, and poculenta, non sunt Bribamenta. Such as
these, have added indignities to my oppressions, procuring me to be
disgracefully put out of that Commission, wherein, I have faithfully served my
Country many years, to preserve the peace thereof, according to my
understanding, and as opportunity was offered; and, they have seemed to rank me
among Malignants, and persons disaffected to the Commonwealth, by causing me to
be left out of the Militia, in Hampshire, where my Family is settled, and where
it as much concerned me to be Active, in preserving my own interest and safety,
together with the Common-peace, as any Gentleman in that Country; and (I may
speak it without arrogance) I have as well deserved to be therewith trusted;
and made my trustiness so well known, both to the friends and enemies of this
Commonwealth, that I am sure, the last, will remember it when it may do me a
mischief, though the first, shall forget it, when it may do me good.

This Affront, had it concerned my personal safety and Reputation only, (though
that is not to be neglected) I would have disdained to take notice of it at
this time, had I not cause to be jealous, it tends further then to my personal
disadvantage; and, that I was not omitted by forgetfulness or mistake, but by
design. They could not justly put me out of the Commission of peace, who till
then served in three Counties, as a Commissioner, in regard I was never charged
with any Delinquency: Nor because I had not a visible estate there befitting
such a Commissioner; for, they saw an appearance of it; and if there be any
Justice in this Commonwealth, it will be hereafter as competent a subsistence
for me, as I desire, or, as may make me capable of that dignity: Nor was it
because I am a non-resident in that County; for, my Family has been settled
there above two years, and I have there acted by that Commission when I was in
the Country, which was five or six times in the year: and, if I had not been
resident, non-residence is not a just cause to leave any Gentleman out of the
Commission, who was inserted, and has a habitation in the County; for, then,
most persons named in the Front of the Commission should be left out, to the
disservice of the Commonwealth; which, is put to no more cost, then of so much
room in a piece of parchment as will contain their names; and if they come into
the Shire but once in two or three years, an occasion may happen whereby some
necessary piece of service may at that time be done, worth the cost, which had
else been omitted. And, that I was not omitted or exploded by any forgetfulness
or mistake, it thus appears; There are four Gentlemen in that County with my
self, (besides another lately in Commission, and now left out also) who bear
both my Christen and Surnames, two of which, never being so authorized before,
are empowered since my Omission; one of them in the Militia; the other, both in
the Militia, and Commission of peace, distinguished, by their places of
habitation: and doubtless, he who put out me whom he found upon the Roll, and
who am the most ancient Commissioner of my Surname, and put in him whom he
there found not, and distinguished him by the place of his abode; did intend,
not only to manifest thereby that another was put into the Commission in my
stead, but also, that it might be the more certainly known, I am knowingly put
out; which, a Person, being one of the best men who serves for that County,
(and who gave in my name) being informed of, professed he knew not why, or by
whom, I was struck out.

I, do not insist hereupon, with any desire to be restored to what I was, or to
be invested with any new Trust; For, I desire the contrary, though some of
those, who were instrumental, to have me left out of all authority (lest I
might perhaps, have hindered their late design) do maliciously and untruly,
report I seek to be restored. It seems some disadvantage, to have contempt
cast upon me at this present; But, if they prevail, who have now taken Arms
against the Parliament, I perceive (by what I discover already) that I and my
Family, whether I am authorized or not, are in hazard to be destroyed with the
first; and a Justiceship, or the little share which I should have had in the
Militia, would have more endangered then secured me: Therefore it best becomes
me, who so well know the world as I do, to retire as much as I can from her
intanglements, and those employments wherein I am sure to be a looser. I take
most pleasure in those things which no man can give me or take from me; and
love not to be tossed in and out, like a dog in a blanket, as I and many better
men have been heretofore, according as we were thought upon, or forgotten; or
as the Commonwealths friends, or our Maligners, prevailed in Parliaments,
Councils, and Committees. Such usage (if no provision be made against it) will
make every ingenuous man (whose free-spirit disdains to be made a Shuttlecock
for every proud malicious sool to play withal) shun those Places out of which
he may be cast with dishonor, how well soever he shall demean himself. I may
be very well pleased that I am left out of all Public employments, as the
Commonwealths, and my affairs now stand: For I may justly say, as it was of old
Prophesied by Isaiah, it should be said at such a time as this, and I do now
say it: I will not be a Healer, make me not a Ruler; for in my house there is
nor bread nor clothing: for my Country is ruined, and my Countrymen are
destroyed, because their words and actions are against the LORD, Isai. 3. There
are enough ambitious to be authorized, who have means to support the Charge and
Envy that attends public Employments; let the Ruins of these times be under
their hands: I am not qualified, (nor the wisest men among us) for such
undertakings, if this (as I belive it is) be such a time as Esaias describes in
the same Chapter, the effect of whose words, I will here insert, that you may
judge whether it be so or not.

The Lord of Hosts, does take away the stay and staff of bread and water; the
mighty man, and the man of war; the judge and the prophet; the prudent and the
ancient; the Captain of Fifty, and the honorable man; the Counselor, the
cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator; Children shall be their Princes,
and Babes shall rule over them; the people shall be oppressed every one by
another, and every one by his Neighbor; the Child shall behave himself proudly
against the ancient, and the Babe against the honorable; they grind the faces
of the poor, and the spoil of them is in their houses, etc. Were the Prophet
now living, he could not have more lively described this Generation, then it
was pattern'd out in his time, by Jerusalem and Judah, and recorded in his
Prophecy; nor can we expect better events thereupon then befell them, if GOD be
not extraordinarily merciful. But how can it be amended, whilst malice pride,
and avarice do mask self ends, under public pretenses, even when dangers
visibly enclose us, and GOD is beginning to visit us again with the Sword? or
with what comfort can I or any honest man, serve his Country, where they who
should assist him, will rather obstruct his endeavors, and destroy him?
verily, if I were in a capacity to serve my Country as I have been heretofore,
I am doubtful whether to be put in or left out of public employments, would be
most or least hazardous, considering I know not above one person in authority
within many miles of the place wherein I must now live, with whom I can more
safely associate, or more comsortably converse, then with an open Enemy, or a
suspected Familiar; and may truly affirm, that none of those whom I have
provoked, by engaging against them and their Party in the Field, on the behalf
of my Country, during the Civil War, have to me been half so inhumane and
mischievous, (though they are still my enemies) as many are, who seem to
befriend me, and that Cause whereto I adhere; yea, though to some of them I
have done good Offices, and no disservice, in all my life.

This, implies somewhat, which deserves heed: And if I have any portion of a
discerning spirit, I do foresee, that if I be still neglected, as I have been,
I shall be but singly exposed a little beforehand, to that disgrace, and
outward ruin, which will be more universal within a short time after; and
extend to another Overturning, unless there be a more hearty Returning to GOD,
by executing Justice, showing Mercy, and Self-denial, then I yet discover. By
such a Change, I may be repaired, and eat the Fruits of my former labors in
peace, during the rest of my life; else, I must spend my days in bewailing my
afflicted Country, and my dearest Relations. Many, in scoff, have called me
Prophet; and (though I arrogate not that Title) I have been instead of a
Prophet to this Generation; and have had some part of a Prophets Reward; for, I
have met with that contempt and dishonor in my own Country, and among my own
Kindred, which usually befell Prophets heretofore. I have not merited to be
called a False Prophet, by that mark which the Holy Ghost has given us,
whereby to know him: that is, by foretelling things to come, and endeavoring
upon the fulfilling of them, to withdraw men from the true GOD, or from the
true way of his Worship: But, I have, thereby taken many times, occasions
rather to withdraw men from their sins, and bring them nearer to GOD, by
declaring what shall befall the Penitent and Impenitent, according to what is
threatened or promised in his Everlasting Word; and, doubtless, whether I be a
Prophet or a Poet (which two words in the Greek, signify the same thing) I
have done the work of a Prophet among them, in some measure, and it will have
effects upon them at last, for their Good or Evil.

Influences, from the same Spirit which inspired the most ancient Prophets;
have been vouchsafed to some in all Ages, relating to men's temporal Weal or
Woe, as GOD has been pleased to prepare them by Fore-warnings, though there
has been since the time of the Apostle, no Prophesies declaring any other
Gospel or Principles of saving Faith, but what they have preached or
prophesied; and if any man on earth, or Angel from heaven should declare any
other, I would not receive it, neither could believe it: By such a proportion
of the Spirit, as is conferred on many of GOD's people, I, being assisted in
contemplating his Word, wherein his Threatenings and Promises be recorded, did
fore-declare, both verbally and emblematically in my Britains Remembrancer, and
the Title Page thereof, long before they came to pass, many Particulars which
were fulfilled, in and by the Changes which have been lately in these Islands;
and (though more derided then regarded) many of them were accomplished in their
sight who scoft at them, and in part upon the Persons and Estates of those who
persecuted me for divulging them. The rest of my Fore-warnings and Conditional
Predictions, then and since divulged, (and not yet fulfilled) will hercafter be
verified also, though still derided and slighted. Therefore, I will as Jonah
did, (but with more charitable expectations then I conceive he had) retire to
my Gourd, even to the remainder of my now blasted Estate, which like the soon
withering Gourd of Jonah, GOD caused to spring out of nothing, in the dark
night of my affliction, to be a subsistence and shalter for me during his
pleasure; and I will patiently sit under it, whilst it continues, to observe
what will be the Event of those Conditional Threatenings and Promises concerning
these Nations, which I have to them applied, according to what was
prophetically declared, and exemplified of old, to fore-warn and instruct all
future Ages; which being the Contemplative Objects, from whence I deduced all
my predictions, they were no delusive Enthusiasms, or derivatives from
Astrological Speculations, but only from the Const^llations and Aspects, which
those blessed Luminaries, the STAR of Jacob, and the Prophets and Apostles have
to, and with, each other. That, which these promise or threaten, is all
whereunto I have respect in these my Calculations; and, my resolution is, to
praise GOD, whether his appearances be in Judgments or Mercies; whether, he so
smites my Gourd, (as that of Jonah) until it totally withers, or shall improve
it, into a more durable Plant, to be a Refuge and Refreshment for me and mine;
yea, whether he preserves me in this time of Troubles until they shall end, or
sweeps me away (as I confess I have deserved) in the common Calamity, I will
unfeignedly praise him.

If we do as Nineveh did, the Mercy tacitly conditioned, and thereto
vouchsafed, will be our lot; which, I pray, hope and wait for. And that I may
sit the more easily, in expectation thereof; as also that the same seasonable
Fruit evidencing their Justice and Charity, who are now in Power, may produce
comfortable effects to themselves and others, as well as to me, I desire you to
whom this shall come, (if it may seem reasonable, and be in you power) to
mediate, for one Act of Grace to be vouchsafed on my behalf, which is but this
only; that I, who have served my Country in my Generation, according to my
Talent, almost 50 years, at my own cost, may be henceforth exempted from
Public Officiatings and Taxes: Which Favor, considering how early I began to
act and suffer; how disadvantaged I have been, how disabled I am by what is
detained from me, to bear the Burdens imposed, (and how little time I am
likely to enjoy those Privileges) will not over-balance my former services and
Contributions, though the like Immunities were vouchsafed also, to one person
of my Posterity, whilst it continued. Such Privileges were granted in the most
generous times, and it would be an honor to this Commonwealth to revive that
practice for an Encouragement to faithful and honest endeavors; yea, and such
a mark of their respect conferred on me in these corrupt times, would make it
appear to those who live now, and shall live hereafter, that there was always a
faithful and well-affected Party in this Parliament, struggling against the
Corruptions and Oppressions whereby honest men suffered; and that they
prevailed at last, to the exaltation of Justice and Mercy. Your mediation for
this respect, together with a timely condescension to the humble Requests in
the conclusion of my Narrative (at least so far forth as may consist with the
Commonwealths present necessities) will oblige me, by a specialty more then
ordinary; and such a respective laying me aside, may not only enable me to do
my Country better services in a private condition, then perhaps, my old age can
perform in Public Nigotiations; but by that means likewise, the Malignity,
Pride and Eavy, which now disturbs my peace, would quite wear out, or at least
in some measure abate, when I intermeddle not with those Employments, whereof
other men are ambitious.

To obstruct the granting of such reasonable Requests, and to detract from the
Commonwealth's most faithful servants, and other honest men disfavoured by men
of corrupt Principles, it has been the practice of some heretofore (even in
Parliaments) causlesly to asperse absent persons, who cannot easily come to
take notice of their particular Detractors, or to vindicate themselves. This,
to me seems a great breach of the Trust reposed in Members of Parliament by
their Electors, who empowered them not to execute their private malice, under
public pretenses: and as it is no mean injury to scandalize a man innocent,
before the Representative of his whole Nation; so, it is no less then a capital
offense against the Parliament (in my judgment) to endanger the making it
guilty of receiving false Accusations, or scandals; which, if it were a natural
body, (as it is a Body Politic, that has nothing to do in heaven) might
endanger the admission of it into GODS holy hill, according to the judgment of
David, in his 15. Psalm. I have here touched upon this, in hope it may be a
means of preventing the like practices hereafter. If not, it were but just,
that every Member of Parliament, who misrepresents any one absent to his
disparagement in that honorable Assembly, should Ipso facto, be incapable of
acting, or Voting there for the future, unless he had first submitted to an
acknowledgement of his oversight, or made good his Accusation, as one in a
private capacity, if he whom he had scandalized were a private person. In this
manner, I my self have been abused (as I am informed) as well in relation to my
getting of that Estate, which GOD, by his extraordinary providence conferred
upon me during my Troubles and Oppressions, heretofore, (by making my enemies
more helpful toward it against their wills, then the willingness of all my
best friends, or my own endeavors) as also in misreporting touching my
sufferings, and actings, in other particulars. Therefore, (that culpable
persons may be known as they are, and honest men cleared from Causeless
jealousies and aspersions, as much as is possible) I could wish (if the
Parliament thought it needful) that a strict scrutiny might be made into every
man's dubious actings, wherein the Commonwealth, has been considerably
concerned since the Civil Wars first began; And likewise that an account may be
given by every one who became extraordinarily rich while the Commonwealth was
impoverished; how, and by what means he has so enlarged his estate. If what I
have heard be true, I am a wonderment in that respect beyond many other; for I
am told that a person of Quality, and a neighbor of mine, being in discourse
with other Gentlemen concerning those who had increased their estates to
admiration from a very poor condition, was pleased to say thus; How -- and --
got their estates, I very well know, said he, (naming two Parliament Men who
had suddenly purchased very large possessions, having very mean estates a
little before) but how George Wither became rich, that, quoth he, I wonder at,
and cannot imagine. To prevent therefore, such wonderments, let an inquiry be
made, beginning first as aforesaid, with me, and be carried on by a Precedendo,
until it has gone round the Nation: and I defy malice and all the world to
charge me with what it can.

It may perhaps be further objected (because, I have heard somewhat tending
that way) to the rendering of your mediation for me to this Parliament, the less
effectual, that during the time wherein Oliver Cromw^l, by GODS permission
usurped their power, I was for a Single Person, and endeavored to maintain his
Reputation, in what I might; and magnified the Title of Protector, as most
honorable, and pertinent to our well-doing. It is true, that I did so; but my
being of that judgment, as our constitution then was, merits no disfavor or
neglect: For, I never was absolutely, for, or against, a King, or a
Commonwealth, with, or without a Single Person, but according as GODS
extraordinary dispensations, the present necessities, the Law of
Common-justice, and the Peoples assent in Parliament made it expedient or not
expedient; nor otherwise then the most prudent of this Parliament lately seemed
to judge thereof. For, either way, a Government may be good or evil. The United
Provinces, and some other Commonweals, have well enough subsisted without a
Single Person; yet the Venetians (the most flourishing Commonwealth, and of the
lengest continuance of any since Christ, have their Duke without any visible
disadvantage; and the most famous Commonwealth of Israel had a Moses, a Joshua,
and other Judges, who successively exercised a single Authority Let that be
considered, as also, that it is my Principle to uphold the Power which by GODS
grace, or permission, is for the time being set over us; and that I may as much
as in me lies, preserve the Common-peace, in a prudential way, until Gods
Probations are determined, and his secret will, is made manifest. Let it
therewith be considered likewise, that in all my Addresses to Oliver Cromwell,
and in all things by me publicly or privately Written to him, or done for him,
as the then Supreme-Officer, I had evermore a care, to offer unto his
remembrance, and to other men's, that, the power permissively only vouchsafed,
was but Conditional: and, that if what was tacitly the condition thereof, were
not by him performed, it would be at last the destruction of him, and of his
Family, or of both, without repentance: and that likewise, the preservation of
the Peoples just Freedoms, both spiritual and temporal (being part of that
tacit condition) was by me insisted upon, so far forth, as it might be done,
in those times, and to a person in his place, without making all that to be
ineffectual which I principally intended: as would more evidently appear, if
all those Caveats and forewarnings were published which I exhibited unto him,
and others in private to that purpose, without regarding how disadvantagious it
would be to my personal interest, as my affairs then stood, and which were not
a little hazarded, and made more destructive by the boldness which I then
assumed; who neither basely flattered him, for my own ends, as many did, nor
ascribed any thing as due to him in the Place he possessed and exercised, but
in order to the Public welfare; and as he had been instrumental (at the
Peoples cost) in conquering those for them, who had formerly deprived them of
their liberties: For, I did only commend those Actions of his, which were in
themselves commendable, without justifying him in his personal deservings as to
the intention, otherwise then their outward appearances might induce me to hope
of it; and, whether or no, he was really such as he pretended, could be
certainly known to GOD, and to himself only.

And, whereas, it may be yet further objected, that in some passages of those
Poems and Discourses, which have been by me heretofore published or
communicated in private, I have averred or implied that the Power of this
Parliament was necessarily interrupted, in respect of us, and justly also in
respect of GOD, whose justice and mercy, have had thereby the more evident
manifestations; I do confess ingenuously that I was, and still am of that
judgment; and do believe by the little sorrow, and much rejoicing, which
generally appeared in the people both well and illaffected thereunto at the
time of their Interruption, that most men were then of my opinion: For, it was
not only, undeniably evident, that many proceedings were then carried on to the
infringment of Common-right, as well as to the multiplying of private
Oppressions, by the prevalency of some corrupt Members, over-voting those who
were faithful to their Trust; But, that a Malignant party among them, had also
brought in, and were then continually bringing in, so many qualified like
themselves into their House, and who were so industrious, either to break the
Army by dividing it, or, by raising up another against it, that it would
probably have restored the Common Enemies to their subdued Power, or brought
all to a destructive disunion, and confusion among our selves. Therefore, GOD,
in justice to the one party, and in mercy to the other, made use of that which
was perhaps corruptly designed, by some, for their own ends, and converted it,
to bring his good purposes to pass; particularly to prevent this Parliaments
being everlastingly destroyed, by some of its own Members; To give them and
others, an extraordinary experiment, by their Probations, what they were in
whom they confided; how little trust there is in men exalted to honor, (how
pious, how honest, or how mortified soever they are or pretend to be) and to
humble those who are now again restored, that, with thankfulness for his double
mercy, in their correction and restoration, they may reform in themselves and
others, hereafter, that which was amiss heretofore. To those ends, and for such
like, GOD, (as he did Nebuchadnezzer) drove them from the Throne, to live among
the Common-herd until almost so many years as he was expelled; whereby, if they
be not yet so humbled, as willingly to be remembered of it, to observe their
former failings; to acknowledge with an awful rejoicing, these past
transactions, and their present mercies and chastisements, to GODS honor; and
to be merciful to others, as he has been to them; and at seast to excuse me
for what I have formerly and now written, with a good Conscience, to preserve
my Countries peace, and their honor, without any purpose of dishonouring them
(as I hope they will understand it) then, not I alone, but all the
well-affected of this Commonwealth, will be much deceived in their
expectations: and we must suffer until GOD shall be pleased, to send us other
Deliverers, or to deliver us himself: And, I do verily believe, that this
Government as a Commonwealth, (or whatsoever it shall be,) will come to no
happy, or prosperous Settlement, until it shall first do me justice, who have
so long suffered, and been so constantly faithful thereunto; and till they have
embraced also, the Counsel of those neglected poor men, who have contributed,
and may contribute means for their preservation, who had else been, and shall
be destroyed. This belief or suggestion (call it what you will) I cannot expel
though my life should depend upon it, and though I have long strugled against
it; as proceeding from a selfish overweening: and the ejection of it, is the
more difficult, because, when it first possessed me, it entered upon this
occasion, which I will faithfully relate. I was many years past, (as I think
other men have been during the trials of their patience) more curiously I
confess, then became a Christian modesty, desirous to foreknow, what and when,
would be the conclusion of those troubles which GOD had brought upon these
Nations; and, my inquisitiveness, received this answer out of my own heart:
Would thou know the successes before their coming, which GOD has kept
secret? Then, thus much, and by this means know it: Thou in thine own person,
and outward condition, shall be a sign unto thy self, what the event will be,
and when: According as thou do externally prosper, so shall this Government:
when thou art relieved by their Justice from thy Oppressions, they shall be,
within a while after, delivered from their Confusions; and when thou
perceivest, they have left thee to be destroyed, be assured, that their
destruction, will not be long after. This may be only a melancholy fancy; but,
a short time, will discover, whether it be so, or not; and GODS will be done.

Thus, I sometimes bustle with the world, that, she may know I am not yet dead,
though I do otherwise, look sheepishly (they say doggedly) upon my Oppressors,
that, they may perceive I am sensible, how they use me; and though I am
otherwhile a little surprised with a fit of melancholy, when I consider what my
Creditors and Relations do, or may suffer; yet, so little is my heart troubled
in respect of my self, that I would not change fortunes with any of them, when
my condition is at the worst, and their at the best; For, though they have
broken my Estate, and cracked my Credit, if ever they break my heart (unless
they break the Trunk, wherein it lies,) I Will forgive them. For,

Haec mihi manent verba, perituro,
Nec habeo, nec careo, nec curo:
Et, Veriora forent, in futuro.
When I was young, these Words my Motto were
I, neither have, nor do I want, or care:
And, Death, will make them truer then they are.
Make use of these hints, as opportunities are offered, and as GOD, shall move
your heart, who works out sometimes, by as ridiculous attempts as this may
seem, effects which could not be brought to pass by a more likely means. Saul
went forth to seek only his Fathers Asses, but found a Kingdom; and perhaps, I
who at first, hereby intended no more then to be eased from my personal
Oppressions, may find somewhat thereby at last effected, which will give motion
to that which will cure all our Public Grievances. GOD, I hope will incline
this Generation, before it be too late, to do that which will be most for his
glory and the Common-safety; which is an unfeigned execution of Justice and
showing of mercy, according to the mercies received; and, whereby only, that
great breach, newly made, can be so stopped, that another Inundation of blood,
break not in upon us. That acceptable Sacrifice of righteousness, will drive
away those Judgments which yet hang over our heads, and procure such a
blessing upon the Parliament, that it shall be enabled to setle a Government,
which may preserve both our spiritual and temporal Freedoms, inviolated, and
from intrenching upon each other. A little Frankincense sincerely offered,
appeaseth much wrath; and perhaps, one hour, timely spent, to hear the Cause of
a private Sufferer, ready to be destroyed, may be so acceptable, that it shall
produce more toward a settlement in one week, then was effected in two months
before; and their Oil and Meal, shall be rather increased then diminished, by
making him a little Cake, out of that little which is left, if their faith be
not more consumed, then the provisions in the Cruze and Barrel.

If there be any Expressions in this Epistle, or in any of my Papers relating
to the Grievances, whereof I complain, which may seem over-sharp; be pleased to
consider how much I have suffered, and how long solicited, without effecting any
thing but an increase of my Grievances; and let that plead my excuse: If any
shall be offended, that I declare those Truths (which many are not willing to
hear of) in such Language, and in such a mode, as is not usual with oppressed
Suppliants; Let it be considered, that this is a time, wherein the deaf, dumb
and blind Devils which possoss men, are not to be cast out by ordinary Charms:
and that, I am yet left in a worse condition, then many of the Commonwealths
most malicious enemies, their guiltiness excepted: For, my life and estate
being innocently taken away, would have been a mercy, compared to that shame
and vexation of spirit, which my Oppressions have occasioned at sometimes, not
only, by the scandalous upbraidings and importunities of my necessitous
Creditors, and by the sense which I have often had of exposing my dearest
Relations to unsufferable wants and griefs; or by the indangering and loosing
my Credit, as well as my Estate; But, also, by some secret trials of my says
and patience, in concernments of a higher nature, whereof the world shall never
know.

Thus much, being expressed, for the reasons aforementioned, and to ease my
heart, by ordering into words, some part of those many confused thoughts, which
lay troublesomely indigested within me; it has made my condition seem to be
more tolerable, then I thought it of late; and it has somewhat quieted my
mind, because, this will partly answer for me, to many objections made in
places, where I shall not be present to hear them: it may also save or recover
some part of my Credit, by declaring to those whom it may concern, that my
failing a while the Expectations of my Creditors, proceeded not from any
dishonest principle, or purposed wrong, but from inavoydable necessities; and
that it arises not from any dissatisfaction to the present Government, that I
am not so serviceable thereto as I have been, and should still be,
(notwithstanding all former neglects) if I had been able.

I have somewhat more to add, and feel a Rapture coming upon me, which will
constrain me to declare, that which is more considerable then my private
Grievances; But Prose is not so proper to that subject, as Versisying; and
therefore, I will walk to the conclusion of what remains, upon my Feet in Verse.

THough very much, and long, I have endured,
And, desperate Griefs, must desp'ratly be cured;
I, try no extaordinary Courses,
Till strong necessity thereto inforces:
For, though sometimes, I feel so great a smart,
That, I am therewith pinched at the heart,
I, still find ease, within a little space,
By Patience, well prepared with Herb-grace.
My Genius, lately moved me to this Charm,
(Which, if it does no good, can do no harm)
And, therefore, I thus prove it: GOD, direct
And, bless it, with a prosperous effect:
For, if what over-hangs us, at this time,
Nor Prayers, Narrative, nor Prose, nor Rhyme,
Nor Reason, can incline this Generation
In sixteen years, to Justice, or Compassion,
I, shall believe my days of private mourning,
Must, till another Publick-overturning
Prolonged be; or, else, till I shall have
A Cure for all my Sufferings, in the Grave.
However, (as I do) I will till then
To keep my Claims on foot, employ my Pen
Sometimes in private, to make Proof of those
Who to the World-ward, have made holy shows
That either by their aid, I may obtain,
What, I have long petitioned for in vain;
Or, that to men unborn, I may declare
How merciless, their Predecessors, were;
How shamelesly unjust; how may ways
GOD proved them; how many several days,
Weeks, months and years, he waited, to make trial,
How long, they would defer that self-denial
Which they had voted; and that, times to come,
May glorify GOD, in the Final Doom;
Which, to the World, will openly be known
In greater Judgments, or, in mercy shown,
When our three Factions, parallel to them,
Which were the Ruin, of Jerusalem
Have acted out, their Parts; and left the Stage,
To those, who shall begin another Age.
GOD, is the same, in all his Attributes
(Whatere to him, our Vanity imputes)
And, just now, by the Eyes of Contemplation,
I see a mixed-Cup in preparation,
Wherein, such Drugs are blended, sharp and sweet,
As, for our present Maladies are meet;
By which, I gess, what things may come to pass,
As Good, or Evil Counsels we embrace;
And, I will tell my Thoughts, though being told,
I fear, they will be slighted as of old:
For, I confess, that which my Soul foresees,
She sees like him, who saw, men walk like trees.
The ruin of that BEAST, is now at hand,
Which does as yet, the HOLY-LAMB withstand;
And, he of late, has so affrighted been,
Lest, his approaching Downfall must begin
Among these Nations, that, with all his might.
He seeks means his Vassals to unite
Who must assist him; and in secret wise,
He has conveyed hither, in disguize,
Those Locusts, which ascended with a smoke,
Whereby, they unperceived, Disguizes took
Of several Forms, resembling many Creatures
Of differing Shapes, and of as diffring Natures,
To hide their Fraud; These, lately power have had
By Sorceries, to make the people mad,
And, by fomenting Discords, to destroy
The means, whereby, that peace they might enjoy
Which would preserve them, and prepare a path
To that great work, which God determined has.
For, though the sons of Belial, do condemn
This Power, which God has now set over them,
Because, in outward show, no such effect
Is like to spring, from thence, as they expect;
Yet, shall the Power (against which many prate,
And rail, and write, maliciously of late)
Henceforth, from Violence, protected stand;
And be destroyed by no mortal hand
Except their own; and, till they shall in heart
From just and pious Principles depart:
But, either quite destory, or foil all those,
Who, them, in their Authority oppose.
Yea, though, those Interruptions they have had,
Whereby, they are not, now, so able made
As they may be, when time, adds thereunto
Compleatness, for the work they have to do:
They are, all that is remaining at this season,
Conducible thereto, in humane Reason;
And, what to disadvantage them, does seem,
May give them, at the last, the more esteem.
The more contemptible, they now are thought,
The more dishonor will on them be brought
Whom they subdue. If, they be poor, and weak,
The louder, to his glory, will that speak
Which, he, by them effects, who foils proud Kings
And mighty Foes, by despicable things.
This, is the power, whereto we should adhere;
And, though to many men, it does appear
Both by deficiency of Members lame,
(And, some, still to retain, who do it shame)
It Is GOD's Reserve, to save us from the Curse
Which we deserve: and we should make a worse
(As we are qualifide) if, he, now should
Permit things to be done, as many would,
Who know not, what some underhand intend,
That make fair shows, their Freedoms to befriend.
GOD, has like Daniel in the Lions Den
Them, from the beastly rage, of brutish men
Preserved hitherto, (even, when to me
It seemed impossible, they safe could be)
And, this not for their righteousness was done;
But, merely for his mercy sake alone,
That, those few, who their trust in him repose,
Be not insulted over by their Foes.
For, in them now, the safety does consist
Of every justly-claimed interest,
And, of each person, who seeks not to do
Those things, that are destructive thereunto;
Or, to himself, by breaking of that peace
Which tends to our general happiness.
If to make up this Representative
There do remain but forty men alive
Of all those persons, which all England through
Should represent each City, Shire and Borough,
If they be persons principled aright,
Who in the fear of GOD themselves unite,
They shall perform the work that is to be done,
As if of their full number wanted none:
Nay, better, though among them there be some
Who to that work destructive would become.
That number, them, does lawful constitute
By Custom, and for Action does repute
Sufficient (whilst together they shall stay)
Though all the rest absent themselves away,
And to exclude all, who offensive are,
Though, one half of their hands and eyes they were.
They are essentially, as fully free
To all Intentions, as they need to be,
Or can be now made, without extirpation
Of that, which is for common preservation,
Made lawful, by a Law confirming more
True, Sovereignty, then any heretofore;
Even by a sentence, for this Commonweal.
Decreed by him, from whom there is no appeal:
And all the Arguments which I have yet,
Heard or perused, to invalid it,
Are so infirm, so frivolous and vain,
That, whilst it here, a Being shall retain;
I Will add thereto, my help, to make them strong,
Whether to me, they shall do right or wrong.
Which help, though chiefly it, consists in words,
Will sometimes be as useful as their swords,
Unless despised: And, if they can believe
What will be said, such help, this Charm will give,
Though it begins with terors. Mark it well:
For, it is a helpful and a lawful SPELL.
The Drums are beaten up. The Trumpet sounds
Alarums, threatening future Deaths or Wounds.
That Grand Conspiracy; which was foretold
And typifi'd, by Isr'els foes, of old,
Is forming up a Body, to prevent
What may arise out of this Parliament;
Ashur, and Ammon, Amaleck, and Tire,
Yea, Earth and Hell, against them, now conspire.
Their Foes, from all parts, do begin to clustre,
Gog, Magog, and the Man of Sin do mustre
Their Forces up. In their own bosom, lies
An Ambush too, of dangerous enemies;
And, nothing gives me so much cause of fear,
As, that, which may lie hid in secret, there.
Yet that fear, is surmounted far by Hope,
Which, has unto despairing set a stop:
For, they are that small Remnant, whence may spring
Those Armies, of our everlasting ^ing,
Which will subdue the world, and set his Thron
Upon the ruins of great Babylon,
IF, they desert not, what they have professed,
And, in his favor, lose their interest:
That IF, remembering (lest before the I,
We set the F, and cry aloud, Oh FI)
Let them be mindful, in humiliation,
That this year, is their last year of Probation;
And of all willful failings, now take heed,
Lest worse things, then befell them, do succeed.
Let them take courage also, and not fear
What, they shall either suffer, see, or hear:
For, he that saves by few; the wise, befools,
Defeats the strong, and works with any tools
Resideth yet among them; and will never
Forsake them, whilst they do their best endeavor.
That, so it may be done, let them still mind,
Both what is before them, and what lies behind.
Let them remember, He that stands may fall,
That, every promise is conditional;
And, that, GOD's promises, will be to them
Performed, as they to others, and to Him
Perform their promises: for, though this wrong
He pardons oft-times, and forbeateth long,
There is a set time, which now draws near,
In which, he will, no longer, so forbear.
Let no man slight these Cautions, though by him,
Pronounced, who may despicable seem:
For, in these days, it often comes to pass
That, GOD, speaks, (as to Balaam by his Ass)
To wisest men, by those whom Fools they deem;
To Kings, by persons that ignoble seem;
And, if their Wills, as wilfully as he
They shall pursue, like his, their End shall be.
This Power now ruling, raigns by God's Commission;
Yet, not without a fore-premis'd condition:
For, by unrighteousness, it shall not stand,
Though it were as the Signet on his hand.
If, they themselves with outward washings, flatter,
And shall not cleanse the inside of the platter;
If, those defects of Justice and Compassion
Which lately brought Consusions on this Nation,
Be not forthwith repaired in some-degree,
(As means by GOD's grace, will vouchsafed be.)
And, if a Model truly Genuine,
This August sixteen hundred fifty nine,
Be not conceived, and fully born, before
The time, exceeds the end of nine months more,
With all the essential parts, of such a thing,
As may receive a timely perfecting,
(To qualify that Rage, which may increase
The Breaches made into the Common-peace)
Then, all that this Power, thenceforth can endeavor,
Will either be a nullity for ever;
Or else, a furth'rance, to that horrid pother
Which will make facile entrance for another
Oppressing hand, that, will but Justice do
So far, as Vengeance does amount unto.
Hear this with patience; although spoke by me:
Consider well, if thus it may not be,
All ye, whom it concerns: For Isreal's Rock,
(Who hates requiting mercies with a mock)
Has said, that he must rule with Righteousness
Who does over men, a ruling power possess;
And, we have felt, that Piety is vain,
Unless therewith morality, does reign.
But, all may yet be well; unless, the Beast
With many heads, mars their own interest
By ignorance, or wilful disobeying;
Or else, our Trustees (by our trust betraying)
Fail in performing, at their promised day,
That, which is hoped for, and for which we pray.
Most awful GOD' who when this world was made,
Gav'st that a Being, which no Being had:
Whose Wisdom, from a Chaos made of naught,
All things into a perfect order brought;
And, by thy Word, eternally Divine,
Did out of Darkness, cause the Light to shine;
Enable those, who have the present Power,
To act, what will be for their Weal and our.
And now, Oh all ye people of this Land,
At their need, aid them, with a liberal hand
And loyal heart, to act for your avail:
Let not the fault be yours, if they shall fails
Lay all your Animosities aside,
For, though to them dishonor may betide,
The Consequence thereof, will make you sorry:
Their shame, will be the ruin of your glory.
If, otherwise it happen, what success
May follow, 'twill be needless to express,
And, to prevent it, I, thus often, here,
Add this word IF, (which else less needful were)
For, great will be our sorrows, when they shall
Unmindful be of that conditional.
We many ways lie open to perdition;
And, GOD, has Magazeens of Ammunition
Enough, to punish, all Offenders, either
Singly; in parties; or else, all together
As he shall please: yet, he vouchsafes a show,
Of such things, as he probably may do;
That, we, our wills, and practices may bend
To act with Him, in what he does intend.
Those Judgments, may not all at once ensue,
Which may be feared, and will be justly due;
For, GOD's Long-suffering, shall perhaps once more
Justice with Mercy mix, as heretofore;
And, prove us, by a means, that some abhor,
And, other some, have madly longed for.
We have a Grand-Foe, whom he laid aside,
And, will reserve, till he has foolifi'd
Their Expectations, who forgetful grow
Of what they suffered, but a while ago:
And, as he showed how mischievous a thing,
The Jews desired, when they craved a King,
By granting of it: (that, they might perceive
By feeling, what they would not else believe)
So, by the like Experiment, perchance,
He Will once more, cure this Nations ignorance:
Because, the gracious sentence by him given
On their behalfs, within the Court of Heaven,
Has been by them despised, and contemned,
By siding with the party, there condemned.
Good GOD! how dare such Traitors to pretend
Their Countries Laws, and freedoms to befriend?
What Humane Law, or Power, will such as they
With Conscience, or due Loyalty obey,
Who disobey Thine? Justify thy Foes?
Thy awful sentence, wilfully oppose?
And, either will have him, to fill the Throne,
Whom Thou have thence ejected, or else none?
This Provocation, may thy Justice move
(By some enlargement of his Chain) to prove
How fit, for what he claims to be his own,
That Outcast, is by thy Corrections grown.
At that time, (if, it possible shall be
That such a time, may be vouchsafed by thee)
If, he, unfeignedly himself resign
To that Course, which thy Providence Divine
May dictate, to complete an Instrument
For settling such an equal Government
As by thy Laws, and by the Laws of Nature,
Belonged of old unto the humane-Creature,
And, will conduce unto the Common-good,
Without expense of Treasure, or of Blood;
A Blessing might succeed unto these Nations,
Beyond our present hopes and expectations:
And, they, who now are plotting to make void
Thy purposes; would see their own destroyed.
Then, should the glorioust work be brought to pass,
That ever for man's good, designed was;
And, way made, for that Kingdom, which their pride
Does, as a mere Phanatick Dream deride;
And which, some Saints, too, (who in faith attend
The coming of it) much misapprehend,
By fanc'ing things, which greatly inconsist
With such a Kingdom, as is that of CHRIST.
Whose final Conquests, not a Carnal-Sword
Must make; but, that two-edged one, the Word;
Even that victorious Instrument, the Truth,
Which does proceed out of his sacred-mouth.
And, they, whom he does arm against his Foes
With the other Sword, are but in place of those
By whom the trees and stones, were feld and squared,
When matter for the Temple was prepared:
Partly by servants of the King of Tire,
(Who wrought not for God's honor, but for hire)
Partly by Solomon's; who did intend
Their labors, to a far more noble end.
If, he premised, shall have an intent
This way to act; and such a settlement
Can bring to pass, as may preparatory
Unto the Kingdom of Gods Grace and Glory
Appear to be; he, thereby should attain
More honor, then to repossess again
The Kingdoms lost, and to have thereunto
Annexed, three times thrice, as many more:
For, then, that Roman-Monarchy, whose date
From her full-growth, with His, who sprang from that
Seems numb'red, to the set time of their falls,
In that sum, which her proper numerals
Make up (when simply joined in numeration
According to their worth in valuation,
Reckoning from that year in which CHRIST was slain,
And in which, Rome did to her height attain)
Should fall by his aid; and win him a share
In that, which for thy Saints, thou do prepare;
And I do wish he may (by shunning that
Which hazards it, before it be too late)
Be partner in that honor, if it be
No bar, to what determined is by Thee.
He, might, then, possibly survive to view
How far forth my Conjecture will prove true,
Who (finding that the length of Satan's chain,
And of the time in which that BEAST must reign,
Are, as they should ensue successively,
Summed, in M. D. C. L. X. V. and I,
Which takes in every Roman numeral)
Do gess the time, when Babylon shall fall;
Will yet be forty years, or thereabout.
In which account, although I may be out,
Of this I Am certain; that it shall not stand
Beyond thy time, and that thy time's at hand.
But, should God (unto whom alone it is known,
What special mercy, shall to him be shown)
Vouchsafe to prove him, and he then contemn
That Course, which Justice will propose to him,
As probably he will, and covet that,
Which was by others, lately aimed at.
If, he strive, to establish such a Throne
As his forefathers lately sat upon;
He, may prolong the Judgments, and the wrath
Which, on these Isles, God's Angel poured has
He, may be vexed, and enraged like them
Who, when they should repent, do but blaspheme;
As many now do, and as 'twas foretold
That (when GOD'S wrath, was poured out) they would.
He, may defer the mercies, which appear
To many of the Saints, approaching near:
But, nothing better can be hoped from
That Kingdom, which his Party prays may come,
Or from himself; till we more cause have got
To trust him, then his falsehood to the SCOT
May promise; or, their Tutorings, from whom
He, fraighted, with ill Principles may come.
Almighty God (should he be pleased to prove him)
Can suddenly destroy him, or remove him
If he, when readmitted, tyrannized,
Or, from what he professed, apostatized:
He, that can make the worst thing serve his ends,
As well as that, which to his pleasure bends,
May make what proofs he will: But, we who know
No more, then what time, and events do show,
Must Act as Reason dictates: Else, we shall
Or may be ruined, by what will befall.
If we well weigh what hazards they will make
Who, to keep tame that Lion undertake,
Which from the dam has lived wild in the wood,
And been a long time fed with human ^bloud,
And also, what a charge, and what a pain
It is to keep him always in a chain.
If, we heed well, what Plagues unsufferable,
It threatens, hither to admit the Rabble
Of Malcontents, which that ejected King,
Would with him, by his readmission bring;
How much, those will deceive their expectation,
Who are most zealous of his restoration;
And, that, our charge, our dangers and our trouble,
They will in likelihood, much more then double,
Rather then make our miseries the less,
Or, bring with them, a settlement of Peace;
These and such things considered, we, are more
Then madmen, if we him again restore;
Unless, GOD sends him for a punishment,
Or makes him such a real penitent
As was Manasses; whereof, we yet have
No signs, nor so much faith as to believe
So great a Miracle, when there is naught
To us appearing, why it should be wrought.
I, write not thus (and, GOD, so prosper me,
As this is truth) that, he debarred should be
From ought, which for his weal might be enjoyed;
But, that, my Countries weal be not destroyed.
I am no Foe to him, because that so
He is to me; but, as my Countries foe,
Or, one, who seeks unjustly to become
Possessed of that, which GOD debars him from;
And, I believe, (whatere he, may suppose,)
Scarce one man in a hundred, among those
Who, now his cause, or him, seems to befriend,
Does it, for any conscionable end,
Or love to him, so much, as out of hate
To those, who now possess the Chair of State,
Through hate, or Envy; or, in hope that they
Shall by a change, be profited some way:
And that the most part, moved through levity
Neither considring, what they do, or why
They so would have it, only, ebb and flow
According as the present wind does blow:
For, most of these are but deluded Fools;
Men, from malignant Families, or Schools
New come; or, else, of desperate Estates,
Or, of cracked Credits, or of cracked brain'd-pates;
(Or, such as live by vanity and sin)
Who, most desirous are to bring him in.
And, I believe, that all men, whom he draws
To join with him, shall perish in his Cause.
Tho some, (whom we know liers, and intend
To cheat us,) very much of late commend
His manners, praise his meekness, magnify
His Christian Patience, and his piety;
And have induced some hon^st men, to hope
He is not so vowed vassal to the Pope
As we have heard: yet, they who find the fraud,
And purposes, of those who him applaud;
(As also, whereunto they, are inclined,
Who publish this,) are not become so blind,
As not to see the bottom, and the end
Whereto their words and their endeavors tend.
And, these (not without cause) are much afraid
A Wolf, may in a Lamb-skin, be araid.
These fear, that from the Skarlet Strumpets Cup
He, and his Party, have such dregs drunk up,
That, they are now in those Distemperatures,
Which renders them incapable of cures;
And, so much, with those vanities, besotted
Whereon most Princes of the earth have doted,
That, these, when their hopes, are at height, will feel
(Like ill-wrought clay, upon a Potters wheel)
Themselves, to dirt be crumbled in the making;
Or, crack, and break to pieces, in the baking:
And, that, whatere the Peoples dotages
May promise, there will be no hope in these
Or in their Prince; unless there may be given
A testimonial of their change from heaven:
Nor, will it be for our advantage, then,
Unless, we also, be reformed men.
How, GOD, of him, or will of us dispose
Is kept in secret, and he, only knows:
But, whether, he shall better be, or worse,
(Likely to be a blessing, or a curse)
He, neither is so good, nor yet so bad,
But, he, or such another, will be had
As we demean or selves. Such, as are we,
Such, every way, our Governors will be.
For, GOD, gives every People, as their dues,
Such men to be their Princes as they choose;
And whether, good or bad, puts them together,
To be a curse, or blessing to each other;
Till them from their allegiance he shall free,
As their demerits, or their merits be
Relating to themselves, or unto him,
That is the Sovereign over both of them.
Ah! were this Generation, but as wise
As complete, in their martial Bravaries;
Or, but as meek, as they are wise in show,
And knew as well, the things they do not know
As those they do; and could more lay aside
Their avarice, their selfness, and their pride,
Which bar them from the knowledge, and the love
Of that, which would their best expedient prove:
They would begin, their failing more to mark;
Find how they grope, and stumble in the dark,
And, GOD, would give them open eyes to see
How, and whereby, their peace might settled be;
And that the Course whereby they thought to flourish
Is but a by-path, to their ways that perish.
As we are yet, our struglings be in vain,
To cast our burdens, and shake off, our chain:
We do, but, when one side, does scorch and burn,
The other side, upon the Gridiron turn:
Or, shall but leap, (do whatsoever we can)
Into the Fire, out of the drying pan;
Till, we our duties, better think upon
To Godward, then we hitherto have done;
Until more generally, we do obey
This Power, which over us now bears sway;
Till also, they make good the expectation
Conceived, since their additional-probation;
And, till among these Nations, here be seen
A greater change, then hitherto has been.
But, what change can here be, to set all right,
But such a change, as must destroy us quite,
And make all new? unless, the change be made
By him, from whom, all things their being had?
Or, some expedient, or reserve be found
Like that, made use of, when the World was drowned?
For, most among us, are grown so depraved,
That, very few, can to Good use be saved.
Their wisdom, power and wealth, most men employ
The welfare of each other to destroy.
The Common People, do not understand
Those things, which GOD, and men have now in hand;
And, give assistance to rebellious Forces,
By railings, imprecations, skoffs and curses,
Instead of Prayers; and, so mis-believe,
That, now, no Charmer, can them undeceive.
So harsh and general a Diapaze
Of discords, in no Climate ever was
Since in Jerusalem the triple-faction
Forementioned, wrought incurable distraction.
No People ever were so blind, so giddy,
So vain, so false, mad, foolish, and so heady,
But, where a sad unparalled confusion
Threatened to bring a terrible Conclusion.
They, like to Sampsons Foxes, from each other
Turn heads; but, are united so together
With Firebrands, by their tails, that, as well they
Who run the same, as they which thwart their way
Destroy the Cornfields through which they run,
And, meet with greater-mischiefs then they shun
He, that oppresses, does of those complain
Who, do apparent wrongs by him sustain;
And, often, finds means to tell so smooth a tale,
That innocence is dashed against the wall:
He, that the truth, nor loves, nor tells, nor teaches,
Writes, fights, pretends, yea, pays, and prays, and preaches,
As if he did profess it without guile;
Yet, is a friend to falsehood, all the while.
Some, without honesty, the truth profess,
Some, hold the truth, but in unrighteousness;
And, twixt these two, (as they the power divide)
CHRIST, and most honest men are crucifide.
With Tragedies, they make their Party glad,
And, joy in that, for which good men are sad.
They love no news, like that which breeds strife,
Lies, (as if they were nourishments of life)
They feast on; and at them, who their untruths
Disown, they storm, as if then, from their mouths
The bread were snatched: yea, when they know them false,
They love to tell, and hear, seditious tales,
By which the Common-peace may be ore thrown,
Although thereby, they quite destroy their own,
And multiply those burdens, which, they lay
To their Charge, who, had took them else away;
Or, if not hindered in their enterprise,
By malice, falsehood, and Apostacies.
Their slandrous Tongues, and Pens, whom wound they not
Save him that is unknown, or else forgot.
They skoff, and jeer (not wickedness and folly,
Which may be jeered) but things that are most holy:
And, since times round began, no humane eyes
Did read so many cursed blasphemies,
So much profaneness, and scurrility,
Or such impure and filthy ribaldry,
As in this Isle, has in so little space,
Been published, to our National disgrace.
But, what can more from those expected be
Who think none but licentious men are free?
And, whose ambition, more affects to have
The freedom of a Beast, or of a Slave,
Then that which both by nature, and by grace,
Belongs of right, unto the humane race?
Like earboar'd slaves, (who, bondmen have been made
So long, that, when their freedom may be had
They slight it) so do these; and, as conceiving
There were, no possibility of living
In this world, (or hereafter to be saved)
Except they served a Tyrant, and were slav'd;
They, now rebelliously, a Captain choose
To lead them back to bondage, like the Jews;
As if it were designed by these Nations
To be like them, in all their deviations.
Oaths, against Oaths, and Covenants are took,
Fitter to be repented of, and broke
Then to be kept; and, Piety, they make
A seeming warrant to infringe and break
That which obliges all men's Consciences,
And, wherewith, nor GODS Laws, nor man's dispenses,
Thus, at this present, constituted is
This Nation; and, what change, must mend all this?
Oh madmen! (if ye are not so bereft
Of reason, that among you none is left)
Be you your selves the Judges, if I lay
That to your charge, which is not as I say.
Or, whether I dared say it, in a time
So wicked, without warranty from him,
Who, in this sad day. of our Visitation
Inclines me to it, for your preservation.
To cure these Frenzies for his future glory,
GOD, is preparing a New-purgatory,
To purge what may be purged from the dross,
That, of the Pure Gold there may be no loss.
The Judgments, now beginning, shall go round,
And through these Islands, till all those are found
Who have been false, in that which they professed
To GOD, or to the Publick-Interest.
From house to house, from man to man, they shall
Procession make, till they have seized on all.
All shall be proved, whether poor they be
Or rich, or, of a high or low degree,
By outward, or by inward fiery trials,
Till they are brought to real self-denials
Twixt GOD and them, through mercy to repent
Their failings; or, to outward chastisement.
Those, who shall in this Island, escape his hand,
Vengeance, will seize on, in a Forraign-Land:
The Foes of Peace among the Common-rout,
A Pestilence, or Famine shall root out.
They, who have shuffled from the Soldiers fury,
Shall fall into the mercy of a Jury;
And, when they, from the Sword, are in some hope
To hide; shall then be hampered in a Rope.
The mischiefs they have shunned in the street,
Within a secret Chamber, they shall meet.
Those men, whom nothing publicly pursues,
Their Consciences, in private, shall accuse;
They, who immovably do think to stand,
Shall fall, without the motion of a hand;
And when the things they feared, cannot annoy them
That, which they slight, and fear not, shall destroy them.
Exceeding dreadful, during such probations,
Will be the many sufferings of these Nations,
Except those days be short'ned, or GOD, shall
Enable to sustain what may be fall.
For, that, which now is coming to the Test,
Is not, alone, the peoples interest,
As, what was lately controverted here
Betwixt them, and deceased Oliver;
Or, him and Stewart: or, a thing so vain*
As now, the Dane and Swede, or France and Spain
Are striving for: But, whether good or evil;
CHRIST, or the Man of Sin, GOD, or the Devil
Shall have the Sovereignty; and woe to those
Who shall, that righteous interest oppose,
Which is to be decided, when the day
Shall come, to set their battles in array.
But, it is already come; at least, so nigh
As to be seen by Contemplations eye.
It Is come; and, (though not, as it is misconceiv'd
By those, who have a Throne for CHRIST contrived,
As carnal as that is, which now must fall)
It will ere long, be visible to all,
Who have that eye salve, which may help their eyes,
To see Truth shining through dark mysteries.
The Banners, of both Parties are displayed;
Both their Militia's, are in part aray'd;
The soldiers wages, on both sides is known,
The secret word, on many is bestown:
And, not one Promise does to me appear
Of an escape, from that, which men may fear,
Save, as in their Probations, they make good
Their charge, (though to the loosing of their blood
If need require) with trusting to that grace,
Which, neither Is, nor shall be, nor ever was
To any wanting, who did not refuse it,
Nor when it is received, shall abuse it.
But, what will follow, can alone be known
To them, on whom that grace shall be bestown;
Or, by the Events, of those Contingencies,
Which from a just progression, will arise;
And, must, the steps-probationary be
To that, which is GOD's absolute Decree;
For, whose accomplishment, I will attend
Till that time comes, or, till my life shall end.
Here, I had ended; but it fares with me
As with him, who, again shall never see
Those he departs from; and would leave behind him,
Somewhat, to make them, otherwhile to mind him.
Thus, would I do; or, rather, if I may
Make others mind themselves; and what this day
Seems drawing nigh. Oh, let him, with regard,
That speaks for you, (not for himself) be heard.
Let him, Oh Englands Representative,
Who, now, has but a little time to live,
(And, fain would write, or say, before he dies,
That, for thy Weal, which thou should not despise)
Let him this once be heard, with that respect
Which may produce a rational effect,
Lest, all thy Consultations, Cost and Pain,
Do prove at last, to be bestowed in vain.
To him, who to your selves, did you restore,
Your selves resign, more now, then heretofore;
And, seek not, like your tyrannizing Kings,
At this time, to contrive and settle things
More for your selves, then to advantage those
Who, trust in you, for better ends repose;
Or, to advance your Freedoms, more then their
Just Rights, for whose sake, they conferred are.
Let not him, suffer more, who shall accuse
For breach of trust, then they who trust abuse,
As heretofore: For, there was once a time
Wherein, to charge a Member, for a crime,
Was prosecuted with a greater zeal
Then his Guilt, who, then wronged the Commonweal:
Even when to Stangate, yea, (some say) well nigh
To Lambeth-house, the People heard them cry,
It Is for a MEMBER: and preserved was he
Within that House, who ought expelled to be:
And, all the mercy, to the Accuser shown,
Was, to be kept a Prisoner in his own.
But they who did it, were by Providence
Cast out; GOD keep all such, for ever thence.
Consider whether there do not, as yet
To your own knowledge, men among you sit
Who much obstruct the mercies, GOD intends,
And, your progression in those righteous ends
Which you propose. (I mean not any one
Who erres through humane Frailty; For, then none
Should be excused) but such as do transgress
Through Envy, and malicious wilfulness;
Or such Presumers, who, as Achan did,
Took Gold and raiment (things, that were forbid,
On danger of a Curse) such as bereave
The poor of their subsistence; or deceive
The Commonwealth; and whom their Avarice
To other things unlawful did entice,
Whereby oppressed Innocents are wronged,
And Justice to their ruin, is prolonged.
Consider, what may be the sad event
Where any such as these, are prevalent;
And, if you find such, and desire to thrive,
To them, in time, their due demerits give;
For, why, by palliating of their guilt,
Should your blood, like the Benjamites be spilt,
Who brought on their whole Tribe, a wrath divine,
For murdering but one Levites Concubine?
Consider, when your Pardons were bestown,
Whether it were not for ends of your own;
More to secure your selves, or to befriend
The Nations Foes, who on your Grace depend;
Or, otherwhile, because, you durst not do
That Justice, which you were obliged unto,
Much rather, then sincerely to express
Your love to mercy, and to righteousness.
If so, you find, it; then, betimes lament
Your failings, and effectually repent.
Consider, if, when we, to pacify
The wrath of GOD, a day shall sanctify
In Fastings, or Thanksgivings; whether, he
Can pleased with those sacrifices be,
Which cost us, nothing, but to spend a day,
(And formally, to pass some hours away)
In Emptiness, or Fullness; or, to hear
Those sins reproved, which, we will not forbear;
Yet, not to leave behind us, till the morrow,
One symptom, of true thankfulness, or sorrow?
Had it not then been fit, to lay aside
Some part of what, in Vanity and Pride
Has been consumed; their sufferings to relieve,
Who cannot from the Public purse receive
What is their due, until GOD shall restore
Abilities, to make that Pittance more?
Consider, (since among you there are some,
Who, do believe, a Kingdom is to come,
Whereof CHRIST must be King) whether or no
Your Government, should not be modeled so;
That, when the People, shall Elect by Voice
Double Trustees; GOD should by lot make choice
Of which him pleases? When that we have had
Our Option, wherefore should not His be made?
So 'twas, when Israel, first a King enjoyed,
And, when the first Apostleship was void.
Who would not be content to stand or fall
With what, would so indifferent be to all?
Or, not submit to him, who will become,
Do what we can, the Giver of our Doom?
Or, who will this oppose, but they who doubt
GOD, will in his Elections, leave them out?
More might be said: But, you know how to draw
The Body of a Lion, by the Paw.
If, these things, you consider; and shall do,
Your best endeavor to conform thereto,
This, I am sure of, (though I cannot tell
What will be done) that, all they, shall do well
Whose Consciences, unfeignedly attest
That, they, to do all well, have done their best.
How pleasing, this will prove, well know I not;
But, how I might have pleased, well I wot.
If, I, had flattered those men in their ways,
Who, whatsoev'r they merit, look for praise.
If, Pillows to their Elbowes I had sowed,
Soothed up the Covetous, fawned on the Proud,
And been like many other, so ripe-witted,
My Poems with their humors to have fitted:
Had I, another been, not he I am,
None knowing what I was, or, whence I came;
Then, had (as I did) thirty years ago,
Foretold what should be, and, what see they do
Accordingly fufill'd; and then, had got
By that success, (which often fails not)
Amongst the People, such a reputation,
As they, who seem to speak by Revelation;
It may be I had been a Saint esteemed
As Madmen are in Turkey; or, now seemed
Less despicable; or, else, my predictions
Had been as well regarded as those Fictions
Or foolish lying Prophesies, by which
Impostors, this deluded age bewitch.
If, I, on that advantage, had made known
Some Crotchets or Chimera's of mine own,
For selfish ends; or, had I then pretended
To some new-light; such Novelties commended
To his age, as are pleasing, at this day.
Or had I, (which, I could, as well as they
Who practice it) put on the tempting Dress
Of seeming zeal, and formal-holiness;
Forborne to speak, what few men love to hear;
Not bid them leave, what no man can forbear;
And, in those things complide which most affect;
I might have been the Father of some Sect:
Yea, so, should have been favored perchance,
As to have got some temporal advance:
For, few men, (could my heart therewith comply)
Had better means, for such a cheat, then I.
But, these were not my Aims, and I have gained
As much, as I had hope to have attained.
And, having fully proved what is in men,
Will henceforth lay by, my displeasing Pen:
Not doubting, but this Letter, will effect
As much as whilst I live, I must expect.
I, now have writ enough, to that intent
Which first I had; yea, much more then I meant
When I began, this; and thereby make known
A Cause, more worthy heeding, then mine own;
Wherein, if I prevail hereby, no more
Then, by what I have written heretofore,
I, shall believe the effect would be much less
Hereafter, should I, any more express.
The Preface last year to my SALT on SALT,
Forewarned (and I think it not my fault
If none regard it) that, to us, this year
Effects of dreadful Thunders, would appear;
And, so it comes to pass: yet, little heeded,
Save as things, which have casually succeeded:
I Will therefore, henceforth let them credit give
To what they dream, and I do not believe.
Enough is here writ, to make most of those
That shall be Knaves, or Fools, to be my Foes.
And, where can I live, (unless God shall please)
Where, I can long be safe from some of these?
But, in their presence, he my Table spreads;
My Soul, nor their Power, nor their Malice dreads;
He, heretofore, has me defended from
Their Purposes, and will, for, time to come,
In that which most concerns me; though men may
Take Life, Estate, and outward things, away.
I have already said, and Writ enough,
For men profane, and Hypocrites to scoff:
Therefore, henceforth, let each man do the thing
That likes him, as when Israel had no king.
Let him, that will be wilful, have his will:
Let him that is filthy, so continue still,
Until another, to supply my room,
Shall with a more prevailing Spirit come.
Look to thy self, Oh BRITAIN! I will here
No more be thy despised REMEMBRANCER:
For, as those, who (when they neglects did meet,
Were bid, to shake the dust from off their feet)
I, am excused; and, it is not my belief,
That, I am bound to preach unto the Deaf,
And cast away my Pearls, as I have done,
Where they and I, shall still be trampled on.
My Soul, is clear from any blood of thine;
GOD grant, thou may as guiltless be of mine,
Thine own, and other men's; and at thy need,
Speed better, in thy suits, then yet I speed.
I will no more, affright thee with Alarms
By my Predictions, of approaching harms,
As in times past; nor add to thy offense,
By minding thee, of thine impenitence;
Nor seem to play the Fool, to make those wise
Who, will not see, wherein their safety lies:
But, cease to meddle in those Publick-matters,
Which, thy False Prophets, and Prognosticaters,
Have puzzell'd: But, to him, a suitor be,
Who, from what is threatened, can deliver thee.
To works of this kind, here, I fix a bound,
This, is the last time, wherein I will sound
My Trumpet to these Nations; or make known
Ought which concerns thy matters, or mine own
In public wise, or, in a private way,
Save, as my Neighbors, either do, or may;
Unless, I, from within, have such a Call
As cannot safely be dispensed withal:
Or, else, an outward Call from those who may
Command me, if they think, that I can say
What to the Public welfare will relate:
But, there is little likelihood of that;
And, therefore, I intend to spare my breath,
To vent my Thoughts in private till my death.
Oh! that I fail not, of my expectations,
( In this dark Den, of cruel habitations,
By outward or by inward perturbations)
To take thy Kingdom, (Wherein, at this day,
Thine enemies and mine, the Tyrants play)
COME, come, LORD JESU, quickly come away.
I begin this Wandring-Epistle, with respect to my present temporal condition
only; without having the least thought of the preceding Catastrophe. But, as
it heretofore befell Sampson, (and has often befallen many of Gods servants in
their Frailties) with the Philistines, he must first have occasion given, by an
outward injury, before he could be rowzed up to execute GOD's Vengeance upon
the Enemies of his Country; so, before my Dull Flesh could be capable of
admitting that publick-spirit to come upon me, which might sufficiently
emholden me to declare what is at this time necessary to be offered to my
Country-mens Consideration, she must be first reduced to a great straight, by
the hazard of her too much beloved temporal Concernments: And, as Expositors
upon the Psalms, affirm of the Prophet DAVID, it has now happened unto me.
Whilst he (as they conceive) was contemplating and complaining of those his
personal Persecutions and Afflictions wherein he was a Type of the MESSIAH, he
was suddenly transported above the sense of his own Sufferings, into Raptures
prophetically expressing the persecutions and passions of his and our REDEEMER:
In like manner, I, whose present outward Estate, much resembles this
Commonwealths confused, needy, and hazardous Condition, (as I have heretofore
particularly demonstrated) having a purpose, as aforesaid to express my
personal Grievances only, in order to a timely Redress, was carried by a
Poetical Rapture, into an unpremeditated Apprehension, of what may possibly
come to pass, and nearly relates to this Republics well or ill being, as the
pre-conditioned means of her welfare shall be neglected or performed; and to
touch also upon some Particulars, of a higher concernment; even upon such as
relate to the Kingdom of CHRIST and his Saints, with a Hint upon somewhat
thereto pertinent; which being misapprehended by many who wait for that
Kingdom, may occasion trouble to themselves and others, not without
infringement of the Civil-peace, and dishonor to that spiritual Kingdom which
we pray for, if they be not wary of those carnal delusions which the Enemy
thereof seeks to mingle with their dim Notions of that mysterious Monarchy, to
make them thereby somewhat instrumental to prolong his Empire in the mystical
Babylon.

The latter part of this Discourse, was on a sudden dictated to me in the
Language of the Muses: therefore, though Verse be so much grown out of esteem
and fashon, more then it was when I first began to versifie, that amongst most
men it is in as little esteem as I my self am; and so untuneably accented by
most Readers, that in reading them, they mar the sense, and make worse Music
then a Smiths File, or scraping of Trenchers: Nevertheless, I have inserted
them as they were received from my Inspirer, as pertinent both to my Cause, and
to them who should assume it into Consideration. Farewell: who thou art, into
whose hands this will come, I know not: But, if thou shall accept it, and make
use thereof according to my reasonable Requests, thou art one of those, to whom
it was originally intended, by thy Servant in all reasonable services,

Geo. Wither.
August 10. 1659.
EPIPHONEMA.
THe more, I muse, the more I may,
Till night, ends in eternal day:
For, every hour, brings forth new things,
From whence, new matter daily springs,
Whereof, I shall but speak in vain,
Whilst my Corruptions do remain:
But, when I must depart to Him,
Who nor begun, nor ends in Time,
And, hence, quite out of sight, am gone,
My words will more be thought upon.
Or they (when recknings are set right)
Will help make measure and full weight.
Ensuing times, will useful make them,
Tho I, (in scoff, called Prophet) spoke them:
And, when of nothing, I have need,
They, paradventure, or their seed,
Who in my lifetime, have undone me,
Will (dead) bestow a Grave upon me;
As they that (issuing from their wombs
Who slew them) built the Prophets tombs.
A POSTSCRIPT.
DUring the Interval betwixt the last Assembly called a Parliament, and the
restoring of this, I became so sensible of that sad condition, whereinto we
were generally brought, that, I was stupefied as to all endeavourings
concerning my own Estate; and thought they would be as little effectual, as to
go about to repair a Lodging in a House every part whereof was in a flame; the
foundations ruined, and the Superstructures ready to fall. Therefore, knowing
it to be every man's duty to do what he could to preserve the Common-interest, I
expelled selfness, as much as possibly out of my thought, for a few days; and
examining mine own heart, what expedients it could offer thereunto; I
apprehended, that the first step toward preventing what I feared, would be a
right understanding, of that much mistaken Cause, which has been lately
carried on through many Labyrinths, Turnings and Returnings, until most men had
quite lost the true Notion, of that, for which, they first contended; insomuch,
that some Obliquely, and some other Diametrically opposed it, to the engaging
of many thousands into Factions destructive both to the Public, and to their
own private safety and welfare. I perceived likewise, that some had honestly,
but imperfectly; and some so maliciously stated our Good old Cause, (as they
termed it in scoff) that it made men abhor it, who had formerly, thereto
adhered; and to occasion those mutinous and seditious Conspiracies, which are
newly broken forth into Rebellion, likely to join a Foraign Invasion to
Domestic Insurrections; which in hope to prevent, I stated the said Cause
according to my understanding, before the Restoration of this Parliament, with
an addition of some Preparatory conceptions, which I thought useful toward such
a settlement, as that, whereof our late Innovations and Changes, had for the
present, made us most capable: And, I so fitted (as I conceived) my
illustration of our just Cause, with simple expressions, suitable to their
capacities, whose right understanding thereof, is most needful, that, I thought
it might have much conduced to the quieting their spirits, whose
misapprehensions only (and not a malevolent wilfulness) had made them to be
verbally, or actively, opposers of their own Interest: For, without imposing
upon them, any Magisterial Authorities, of whose validity they can have no
certain knowledge (as they usually do, who seek to inslave men's Consciences, no
less then their Bodies, and Estates, by frighting them, with Laws made either
without their assent, or with a constrained assent, by those Tyrants who had
usurped upon their just Rights) I deduced their claim, from the Original
thereof; evidencing it, by such Principles, and Reasons only, as the Common
people, may be Judges of; and by bringing to their remembrance, such Truths and
transactions, to evince the justness of their Cause, as are for the most part
known unto themselves; especially as they have relation to the late King, and
those, who succeeded him, in his Tyranny.

This, I resolved to publish, till the Resurrection of this Parliament; at
which time I thought it would neither be so needfully nor so warrantably done,
in regard there then appeared a lawful visible power, able enough to prosecute
that work, without my Notions, though perhaps, their humility would, and their
Prudence might have made some of them serviceable: and upon that supposition, I
was once again, minded to communicate my Conceptions aforementioned in public,
since their Restoration, together with my PROTECTORIA, (which is a Collection
of such Addresses and other Writings, as I had composed in relation to the
Protectors, whilst they were in being,) as not impertinent to the facilitating
of their work without the doors of their House: But, I have already,
contributed so much of my Estate, toward public services, and, so much is
detained from me, that I was not able to print it, at my own cost; and (I, not
then purposing, to be known Author thereof, lest it might have the less esteem)
no other man, to my knowledge, would put himself to that charge: Moreover, here
has been ever since, such a multitude of single sheets and Pamphlets, daily
fluttering about every man's ears, busying their eyes, and filling their
Pockets, that my Papers would probably have been obscured among them; And, I
have also, in this Epistle bound my self from publishing any more hereafter of
this nature, except, upon a Conscientious account, or by the command of my
Superiors. Therefore if any of my Writings last mentioned, or any other, but
such as have been formerly printed, (or by command, and as aforesaid) do come
forth by their procurement who have, or shall have Copies of them; Let not the
Trouble, or discontent, which thereby may be occasioned, be imputed unto me. I
will add but this Corollary. My sins have justly deserved that God should
permit me to be oppressed; Therefore, though with penitence, I have made use of
this Epistle, among other means for deliverance; I trust not thereupon; nor
upon any thing which I can say or do, or which any other man can say or do for
me; but in Gods free mercies only; and if he will not deliver me, I will not be
delivered.

Geo. Wither.

FINIS.
Faults Escaped.
In the last line of the Title Page, for turn, read cure: page 14. line 28. for
the same, read some.


