THE WITCH OF WAPPING OR An Exact and Perfect Relation, of the Life and
Devilish Practices of Joan Peterson, that dwelt in Spruce Island, near Wapping;
Who was condemned for practicing Witchcraft, and sentenced to be Hanged at
Tyburn, on Monday the 11th. of April, 1652.

Showing, How she Bewitched a Child, and rocked the Cradle in the likeness of
a Cat; how she frighted a Baker; and how the Devil often came to suck her,
sometimes in the likeness of a Dog, and at other times like a Squirrel.

Together, With the Confession of Prudence Lee, who was burnt in Smithfield on
Saturday the 10th. of this instant for the murdering her Husband; and her
Admonition and Counsel to all her Sex in general.

London, Printed for T^. Spring 1652.

THE WITCH of WAPPING.
MAny are of opinion, that there are no Witches, but let them read in
Leviticus, and they shall find that in the time of Moses there were Magitians
and Sorcerers; and that Saul went to the Witch of Endor: This is enough to
confirm that there were Witches in the nonage of the world; and that this
latter Age has produced such creatures, this following Relation will
sufficiently testify; wherein is fully related the Life and Practices of one
Joan Peterson, who lived in Spruce Island, near Shadwel, all which was proved
against her at the Sessions holden at the Old Baily on Wednesday Apr. 7. 1652.

There are two sorts of Witches, which the Vulgar people distinguish by the
names of the Good Witch, (I wonder how that can be,) and the Bad; by reason,
when one bewitcheth a party, the other unwitcheth him again: Now this Joan
Peterson, it should seem, was both; for as it was clearly proved, that she had
done much mischief, so there were diverse that came to witness that she had
cured them of several diseases, amongst the rest I heard one of them say, that
he had been so grievously troubled with the Headache, that he could take no
rest for 5 Weeks together, and that he had made trial of many Doctors, but
could have no redress, and coming to Peterson, she gave him a Drink, which
after he had drunk of thrice, he was as well as ever he was; I demanded of him
if the Drink did purge him, and so removed the humors, and he answered, it did
not purge him at all; which seemed very strange to me, the man being so
grievously tormented with that intolerable pain.

Also there was a Cow-keepers Wife, that had one of her Cows lay in such a
condition, that she and all that saw the Cow did verily persuade themselves
that it was bewitched; whereupon she came to this Peterson, and promised her a
reward, if she would cure her Cow: She desired the woman to save her water, and
bring it to her, which she did; then taking the water, she set it on the fire,
and it had not been on long, but the water rose up in bubbles, in one of the
which she showed her the face of the woman which the Cow-keepers wife suspected
to have bewitched it, and so prescribing what she should do to recover it, she
took her leave; diverse other things of this nature, and several cures she has
performed, but whether they were done in Gods name, or whether she used
unlawful means, I shall leave that to the charitable reader to judge of, my
self desiring to wave my judgment herein.

Now concerning her evil actions I shall relate only such as were clearly
proved against her, by very credible witnesses at the Old-Bayly on the 7 of
April, and for which she was condemned to die, viz. One Christopher Wilson,
being very sick and weak came to this Peterson and agreed with her for a
certain sum of money to cure him, which she undertook to do, and in a short
time cured him, but demanding her money of him, he denied to pay her so much as
they had agreed for, whereupon she burst out into these speeches; you had been
better you had given me my money for you shall be ten times worse then ever you
were; and very suddenly after he fell into very strange fits, and for twelve
hours together would rage and rave like a mad man, and afterward for twelve
hours more would slabber out his tongue, and walk up and down like a mere
changeling; in this condition he remained certain days, and then he fell very
sick, and at this instant (if he be not dead) languisheth away, and rots as he
lies.

Also there was one of her neighbors, who had a young child, which was very
strangely tormented, having such strange fits that the like was never known and
had continued certain days in that condition to the great grief of the Parents,
and the admiration of all those that beheld it, and it was brought so low, that
they expected every hour when it should depart the world, and the Parents were
forced to procure one or other every night to watch with it, whereupon two
women that were neighbors, desired that they might watch with it, which was
very thankfully accepted of; about midnight, they espied (to their thinking) a
great black cat come to the cradles side, and rock the cradle, whereupon one of
the women took up the fire-fork to strike at it, and it immediately vanished,
about an hour after the cat came again to the cradle side, whereupon the other
woman kicked at it, but it presently vanished, and that leg that she kicked
with, began to swell and be very sore, whereupon they were both afraid, and
calling up the master of the house, took their leave; as they were going to
their own homes they met a Baker, who was likewise a neighbors servant, who
told them that he saw a great black cat that had so frighted him, that his hair
stood an end, whereupon the women told him what they had seen, who said he
thought in his conscience that Peterson had bewitched the aforesaid child, for
( quoth the Baker) I met the witch a little before going down the Island: the Baker
witnessing of this which is formerly related, was demanded whether he had not
at other times as well as that been afraid of a cat, who answered no, and that
he never saw such a cat before, and hoped in God he should never see the like
again.

There was one likewise who had been a Maidservant to the foresaid Peterson,
witnessed that one night lying with her Mistress, being in bed she told her
that a Squirrel would come to her, but wished her not to be afraid, for it
should do her no harm, and accordingly about midnight there came a Squirrel (or
a Familiar in that likeness) and went over the wench to Peterson, which so
affrighted her that she lay as if she were in a trance; and she further
affirms, that her Mistress and it talked together a great part of the night;
but being demanded what they discoursed on, she replied, that she heard her
conference very perfectly, but she was so bewitched by it, that she could not
remember one word. Also her son (a boy of about 7 or 8 years of age) being asked
by some of his School-fellows how his mother could do such strange things, he
said, that she had a Squirrel that taught her what she should do. Moreover it
was affirmed by a man that lived by her, that sitting by the fire side late one
evening talking with her, on a sudden Peterson shrieked and cried out, who
asking her what she ailed, she said do you see nothing? not I replied the
other, look where it comes, says she, and then he perceived as it were a black
dog, who went directly to Peterson, and put his head under her armpits,
whereat the man was so astonished, that he ran out of the house as if he had
been frighted out of his wits. These and other strange things being proved
against her, she was condemned to be hanged at Tyborn on Monday the 12 of
April, 1652.

On Saturday the 10 of this instant April, one Prudence Lee, was burned in
Smithfield for murdering of Philip Lee her husband, who was a Bailiffe, and
lived in Bell-Alley in Golding-Lane. She came from Newgate to Smithfield on
foot, between two of the Sheriffs Officers, attired in a Red Waste-coat; and
being brought to the Stake, and death presenting himself before her, she
confessed as follows.

That she had been a very lewd liver, and much given to cursing and swearing,
for which the Lord being offended with her, had suffered her to be brought to
that untimely end, she further confessed that being jealous of her husband, and
some unfitting words passing between them, in her passion she stabbed him, for
which she earnestly prayed to the Lord that he would forgive both that all her
other grievous sins, desiring than as she was a President, so she might be a
warning to all women, that they attempt to do nothing rashly, especially
against their husbands. Then the Executioner setting her in a pitch barrel,
bound her to the stake, and placed the straw and Faggots about her; whereupon
she lifting up her eyes toward Heaven, desired all that were present to pray
for her; and the Executioner putting fire to the straw, she cried out; Lord
Jesus have mercy on my soul; and after the fire was kindled she was heard to
shrike out terribly some five or six several times.

It is reported that her husband was a very wicked liver, and that he kept
company with strange women; and that when she committed this abominable
murder, she found him in company with another woman, at the sign of the Last,
an Alehouse in Rotten-Row in Old-street; which occasioned very evil language
to pass between them; upon which she drew her knife and stabbed him.

FINIS.

