A witty ANSWER, And VINDICATION To a foolish Pamphlet, entitled New Orders
New, Agreed upon by a PARLIAMENT of Roundheads. Or, Old Orders Old, newly
vampt By a Parliament of Rattle-heads.

Confirmed by the Brethren of the malignant Party Now assembled at Rattle heads
Court, a way-bit from YORK.

With the ignorant rashness of Mr Short-breath, a damnified Companion, Mr
Speaker of the House.

Avowed by Nicholas Periwig, alias No ears, Cler. Parl. Ratle.

LONDON, Printed for Not: Morton.

A witty Answer, and Vindication to a foolish Pamphlet, entitled New Orders,
New, agreed upon by a Parliament of Roundheads.
ALthough our zeal, sincerity, and pious devotion to the public Good, and
universal Accommodation of this Kingdom, especially the security of the City
of London, affords us little leisure to spend our times so vainly in answering
a scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, New Orders agreed upon by a Parliament of
Roundheads, yet the malignant party (whom we justly conceive composed it)
taking all occasions to multiply calumnies upon our zealous integrity, we
cannot be so much wanting to our innocence, as not to clear our selves from
those false aspersions.

If the inconsiderate Penner of this Libell had discreetly considered with
himself, That if in the spacious Theater of the Universe the singular
conditions of singular persons are articulated in some express place, his
Pamphlet might have worthily became a Tragedy, wherein he may plainly see his
own ignorance acted. Wherefore the Rattle-heads (to whose Periwigs their
French-infected hair and ears infinitely stands engaged) have according to
their own giddy imaginations assembled at a convenient place, named Rattle
heads Court, a way-bit from York, conduceable to their resolutions. Hither
does the Council of the malignant party gang usually, and do style themselves
the Resolute Senate of the Times.

As for the appellation of fools, which they reflect upon us, it is a word so
obvious and frequent amongst them, that we will not wrong them so much as to
deprive them of their own Titles, which are the chiefest they have in their
Court.

The end, for which they do gang to this Court is this, Their ungodly and
irreligious Actions being contradicted, and condemned by the true Protestants,
whom they call Puritans; they have now thought it expedient to call a Council
of their own tribe to maintain those wicked actions. They sat in form of a
Parliament (may there no exceptions be taken at the word, nor any derogative
from the reverent and honorable name of our happy blessed Parliament, but
only a reflection to their word) where Mr. Short-breath was Speaker in the
house, whose lungs being as weak as his brain, did prate with as much
judgment to his Court, as a Billings-gate Oisterwife does sometime to her
Welsh Auditory, with as much confidence as if all the castles in the air were
built in his brain, with as much celerity of speech, as if he were resolved
that his temerarious-intended words should be performed at the Greek Calends:
and lastly, with as much rancitude and loudness of voice, as if he had
ejaculated, and blown his words forth with a Sow-gelders horn. The Clerk of
the house was Periwig alias No-eares, for what abounded in his specious hair,
and obstreperous words, was wanting in his ears, and knowledge. Thus being
conveened in Rattle-heads Court in this manner all in order (for they say every
order is a regular Law, and where no order is, there is incivility, Ergo it is
as much Law for them to be ruled by order, as it is order for the Law to be
ruled by them) they began to declare their several opinions, each man
strangely contending to see whether his rashness or folly did exceed.

Orders made by the Parliament of Rattle-heads, assembled at Rattle-heads Court
a way-bit from YORK.
SInce the malignant party assembled at Rattle-heads Court, have apparently
understood the hopeful reformation of the Church, the truth of the people,
and the sincerity of some piously affected, and that they being sensible of the
unfeigned devotion of some Protestants (whom they call Puritans) and what
promising piety that devotion may produce, if not by them prevented: Its
therefore ordered by the Rattle-heads,

1. Since a Supremacy, higher and superior Powers be the Ordinances of God,
and that there needs no parity, or equality of persons, be it therefore
ordered that we be all Kings.

2. That we have all Bishops because they will advance Popish superstition, and
that we ordain the Star Chamber and High Commission Court for them, where they
may tyranize once more.

3. That we have Churches, though we never go to them, and those Popishly
adored too, that the world may think we are very holy, though (God knows) we
hate it above al things in the world.

4. That we have Bells, Organs and Babilonish Timpans, that we may laugh,
sport, talk, and be merry in the Church upon any occasion, while they delude
the ears of others.

5. That we have Crosses, for they seem not only Popish, but likewise are not
commanded by Scripture, and they are pretty guegawes to behold, and therefore
we acknowledge them worthy to be in the Church, that we may adore and worship
them too, contrary to all Christianity; especially let the glorious light
Cheap Side Cross (the gilded shadow of the City of London) be a happiness unto
you all, that when you have nothing to do, you may deceive idleness in gazing
upon that with reverence: And for the more frequent honor of the Word, let
Cross be interposed in the name of every street, as Fleet Cross street etc.
Thus Cross being so obvious, and every holy word rooted out and extirpated
from our mouths, nothing but what may relish of Arminanisme, and Popery may
remain in our convocations.

7. That we may assume no other names to our selves but Rattle-heads, and that
we may appear to be so by the manner of our Periwigs, the length of our curled
or crisped hair, by the pearl or ribbins at the ears, which distinguishes
those that have ears amongst us, or those that have none, by the carbuncles of
the face, and the redness of the Taverne-coloured nose, by the precious virtue
whereof we do not only smell out the levity of some Citizens wives, but are
also feared and honored as old beaten soldiers of Bacchus, as Captains or
Ancient-bearers at least, because we always carry the color in our noses, by
the nicety and curosity of the habit, the length of the cloak, the fashion of
the dublet, the complete shortness of the breaches, the correspondency of the
points, the fashion of the Oister-moulded boots, the gingling of the
Coach-wheel roweld spurs, by the French troubled stradling of the legs, as
far asunder as Lawyers lines, by the swift fanning of the air with the
lascivious hand, by the wagging and often shaking of the head, like a Barbary
Hackney, by the mightines of our credits, which is able to undo a hundred
Citizens in a year, by the transparancy of our charity, which is so invisible,
that neither the right hand nor the left did ever know it, by the multitude of
our good works, which no man living did ever know, or can ever number* and
lastly by the miser-like penury of our good words, and the prodigality of our
Oaths. Thus being known to be Rattle-heades by these manifold signs and
tokens, that this Rattle-heads Court be our general meeting place.

8. That we have all pictures of Saints, Cherubims, etc. because they are
pretty bables to feed our delighted eyes, and fancies, and to keep off our
minds from hearing the word preached.

9. That any Rattle-head (being the world's, beloved) may, and shall have
authority by Us, the Parliament of Rattle-head, to fight, swear, damn^, lie,
slash, and kill in any place: whether it be in Saint George's Fields, at
Westminster with drawn swords, at Grocers Hall in a warlike manner, at
Kingstone upon Thames, at York with naked swords, crying in the streets, who is
for the King? or marching toward Hull in an Hostile manner, or lastly whether
it be in taking a purse in the Kings high way, which we must confess we do
exercise sometimes for recreation's sake, telling the parties so pillaged, that
the Parliament have ordered, that all money should be disposed to pious uses,
and that the King wants money; therefore it is necessary that their moneys
should be disposed to the Kings pious uses, etc. or in reading the Cupidinean
Lecture to a Yorkshire maid under a hedge, or lastly whether it be a Welsh
escape from the Tavern, the reckoning being unpaid* provided only, that it be
not in an Alehouse, for that tends to the advancement of small-beere-prose,
and the introducement of Heresy, therefore the escape is more commendable from
a Tavern, being the mother of Popery, etc.

10. That in our prayers we need not pray for salvation, or the forgiveness of
sins, but only for the King, Queen, Prince, State, and especially for
Bishops, Universities: without the help of the spirit, only the Lords prayer,
and any other form of prayer, being used, though we understand not one word
thereof.

11. That damnation be never preached to Rattle-heads, because it is vanity to
tell men of that, which they know already.

12. That instead of Matrimony, if any Cavalier takes affection to any
Citizens wife, he may exercise his talent as the spirit shall enable him
without any further circumstance.

13. That in the burial of the dead, prayer is as needful, as requisite,
therefore it ought to be used, as well as auricular confession.

14. That our Children (I mean our illegitimate ones) be baptized at eight
days old at the farthest, and their Godfathers and Godmothers shall (like some
vapouring Courtiers) make large and ample promises of their regeneration,
though they perform nothing.

15. That the book of Common prayer be in reverent estimation amongst us, and
that we be filled so full with the fat of that porrage, that we shall need
neither preaching, teaching, or any other instructions whatsoever, but only
that.

16. That all things be common amongst us, whether it be a purse by the high
way, a Citizens wife, or an escape from the Tavern, which is common.

17. That we receive the Sacrament kneeling to the Crucifix.

18. That none shall wear short hare, for as soldiers are known by their
colors, so we are known to be Rattle-heads, by our long hair.

19. That our diet be very sumptuous, and costly: and if our moneys be
deficient, and our purses cannot reach to such delicious curiosities, that it
may be lawful to run on the Cooks score, till the debt grows Old, and at
length till we conjoine them both, and become a Cook-old.

20. That all learning, Order, Discipline, and the Universities be in venerable
reputation amongst us, although we do neither follow, or be instructed by
either.

21. That every year there shall be the Rattle-heads Army here celebrated,
and if no Antagonist be found to march against us, then we will encounter with
Venus, or at least with some of her Meritrician sect: howsoever we will have an
Arminian to be our Captain, agreeable to our dispositions, and we are all in
an Army, for the Anagram of Arminian is In an Armi.

22. That whosoever shall not agree, and condescend to the due observation of
each particular Order by us here established, shall be held as Puritans, enemies
to the Sat of the Rattle-heads, and worthy to be renounced, suspended, or
excommunicated, and never to be readmitted into the society of the malignant
party, or God-dammefied Companions.

FINIS.

