The Copy of a LETTER From ALISBVRY.

Directed to Colonel Hampden, Colonel Goodwin, and read in both Houses of
Parliament, May 18. 1643.

Relating how his Majesty has sent 12 or 1400 of his Forces, under the Command
of the Earl of Cleveland, the Lord Shandosse, the Lord Crayford, and Sir John
Byron, into those parts, who amongst many other cruelties fired a Country
Town called Swanborne, in seven places, Murdered diverse, and amongst the rest
one Woman big with Child was cut in pieces by them.

With An Ordinance concerning the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Die Iovis, Maii 18 1643
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be
forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentor.



LONDON, May 19. Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey. 1643.

THE Copy of a Letter from AILESBURY directed to Colonel Hampden, Colonel
Goodwyn, and read in both Houses of Parliament, May 18. 1643.
WE cannot but acquaint you, that you may make it known to the House of
Commons, if you please, in what miserable condition this County is at this
time, the King has sent into these parts about 12. or 1400. of his Forces,
commanded as we are informed by the Earl of Cleaveland, who is accompanied
with the Lord Shandose, the Lord crawford, Sir John Byron, and others of Note,
who according to the known Law of the Land, pillage and plunder all the Towns
where they come, they murder our neighbors that make but any defense to
preserve their goods, one woman (amongst the rest) big with child, who could
make no great resistance, they cut in pieces, what housholdgoods they cannot
carry away* they sweep clean diverse of our pastures, leaving no Cattle
behind them, and that no cruelty might be left unexercised by them, they have
this day fired a Country Village called Swanbourne, in 7. places of the Town,
for no other reason but because they were not willing to be plundered of all
they had, and guarded the fire so carefully with all their forces divided into
several parts, that no neighbors durst adventure to come to quench it, all the
while it burn^d our Forces in this Garrison consisting only of Foot, saving one
troop of Horse, we were not able to encounter with the Enemy, nor relieve our
neighbors thus despoyled, but yet to interrupt that, which to them is a sport,
we drew out some Forces in their sight as far as with safety we could, whereby
they have not acted this day all the mischief they intended to execute before
night, but what they have left undone to day, we expect they will ere they
leave us, make up, for they are now so strong that they quarter at Buckingham
and where they please, in those parts without resistance. We wish the
Parliaments Army were so accomodated, that this Country (which has hitherto
bin, and yet is most ready to serve and obey the Orders of the Houses) might
not be destroyed and made utterly unable to contribute unto it, before we can
be relieved by it, but relying upon Gods providence, and the best means which
may be afforded to preserve us, we rest

Ailesbury 16. May, 1645. Your very loving Friends to serve you John
Wittewrong, Tho. Tyrrill.


Die Martis, 16. Maii, 1643.
WHereas William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, stands Impeached in this
present Parliament for High Treason, and for diverse other great offenses and
misdemeanors, and by reason of many great and weighty businesses he cannot yet
be brought to trial for the said offenses and misdemeanors, and he in respect
of his said Archbishopprick of Ganterbury, has power to give and Collate fit
Clerks diverse Parsonages, Vicaridges, Prebends, and other Ecclesiastical
promotions and preferments, and if any of them should become void, and he left
to prefer whom he please to the any, the same may prove very inconvenient,
he bestowing them upon unfit and unworthy persons; Be it therefore Ordered and
Ordained, by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, that in case any
of the foresaid Parsonages, Vicaridges, Prebends, or other Ecclesiastical
promotions or preferments now be, or shall hereafter and before the trial of
the said Lord Archbishop become void, that the said Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury shall forbear to present or Collate any person or persons
thereunto, without the leave and Order of both Houses of Parliament: And it is
further Ordered and Ordained, that the said Lord Archbishop shall from time to
time until his said trial, present and Collate such fit person or persons, to
every such Parsonage, Vicaridge, Prebend and other Ecclesiastical preferment
as aforesaid, which now are, or hereafter before his said trial shall become
void, as by both Houses of Parliament shall be nominated and appointed. And it
is further Ordered by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament, that al
Archdeacons, Registers, and other Officers, Ministers, and persons whatsoever,
shall forbear to give or make any Admission, Institution, Collation, or
Induction of any person or persons whatsoever, which by the said Archbishop
shall be presented, in or to any such Parsonage, Vicaridge, Prebend, or other
Ecclesiastical preferment, other then such person and persons as shall be
nominated and appointed by both Houses of Parliament as aforesaid. And it is
lastly Ordered, that the said Lord Archbishop, and the Churchwardens of every
Parish and other Officers of the Church, where any Parsonage, Viccaridge,
Prebend, or other Ec-clesiasticall promotions or preferments, in the Donation
or gift of the said Archbishop is, shall within two months after the
respective avoydance thereof, give notice of such avoydance to the Lord Speaker
of the House of Peers for the time being.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

