A Cordial Confection, To strengthen their Hearts whose Courage begins to fail,
by the Armies late dissolving the Parliament.

It is wrapped up in An Epistolary Discourse, Occasionally written to Mr. To.
Hamon, Merchant, by Geo. Wither, Esquire; about a week after the said Parliament
was dissolved; and is thus communicated by a Copy thereof, as very pertinent to
these distracted times, and tending to preservation of the COMMON-PEACE.

For (other things of Public Concernment, being interwoven) it truly states
the Peoples Cause (in plain Expressions, suitable to the Vulgar Capacities) and
frees it from many scandals. It contains an Expedient, (hitherto not heeded, or
neglected) whereby Charles Stuart may be settled in Peace, if he please:
whereby, we may have a better Parliament then we lost, or ever had: whereby,
our Armies may be kept constant to Order, whilst they are needful, and in a
short time quite disbanded: whereby, the Peoples just Freedoms may be recovered
and perpetuated: whereby, not only these Nations, but all Christendom also,
may be established in a Righteous Peace; and it has neither destructive Inlet,
Outlet, or False Bottom.

Psalm. 11.3. When the Foundations are overthrown, what shall the Righteous do?

Printed at London, by James Cottrel, 1659.

A CORDIAL CONFECTION Against the fainting of the Heart in these distracted
times: BEING The true Copy of an Epistolary Discourse, written occasionally by
Major George Wither to Mr. R.H. Merchant, in relation to the hazardous
unsettlement of this Commonwealth, by the late dissolving of the Parliament,
October 13. 1659. and composed the 24 day of the same October.
Psam 39. and Job 32. I said, I would keep my mouth with a Bridle, while the
wicked are before me; I held my peace, even from good, till my sorrow was
stirred, and till my heart was hot within me; and then my musings burned within
me, and I spoke with my tongue. Hear me, therefore: for (as Job 32.) I will
neither accept any man's person, nor will I flatter; lest my Maker take me away
suddenly.


SIR,
I Have learned, that, he who, judges a matter before he hears it, is culpable
of that Folly, which makes him liable to shame: Therefore, when you lately
demanded my Judgment concerning the Armies dissolving the Parliament, on
Thursday last was sennight, and what Consequences I thought would probably
ensue, I told you, That I would not answer to those Questions, until I heard
what Reasons they themselves alleged for their Justification, and what
prosecutions they thereupon intended; neither of which, being to me known, I am
not warranted to declare my opinion in relation to those Demands; nor have I so
high a conceit of my own Judgment, as to think I shall then be able to give a
satisfactory answer: For, though I rightly pre-conjectured of many things
heretofore, upon foregoing symptoms, which made it easy enough for any
rational man to discern their Consequences, without an extraordinary
Revelation; yet my foresight, at this time, is very dim, as to conjecturing
what that Action will produce; and, it will require a Metaphysical Apocalypsis.

Nevertheless, lest, before that shall be divulged by the Army, whereon
rational Conjectures and Conclusions may be grounded (for, I pretend no higher)
the Common-peace, or your private Tranquillity may be disturbed, by things
feared or prosecuted, the mean while; I will hereby, give you an Account, upon
what considerations I keep my own heart quiet, and from rendering those things
worse, by prejudicacy, which I cannot make better by censuring what is acted or
purposed beyond my sphere, how irregular or unwarrantable soever they do
appear. This moderation, I think my duty binds me unto, until I know certainly
upon what Principles, or upon what Necessities, they are voluntarily executed,
or unwillingly constrained; especially when they are done by persons, who have
considerable Interests to hazard, and a repute of being conscientious,
rational, moral, pious and prudent men; and more especially, in such
prevaricating times as these, wherein the sincerity of some, and the
Hypocrisies and Apostacies of others, do, as it were, compel GOD and Men to
dispense with their ordinary Laws; and when ancient Foundations, are made
destructive to those ends for which they were first ordained; even to be
hindrances to the enjoyment of humane society, to the true worship of GOD, and
to the safety of the people, through the petulancy, or arrogance, of some in
power, who, by their adding of unsound Principles, or perverting of those which
are sound, for a wrong use; or, by disguising their Form, with unbeseeming
dawbings, or by raising upon them burdensome Superstructures; do employ
themselves for their private advantage, in patching, pulling down, and
re-building, as their self-interests incline them, though it be to the
overthrowing or endangering, of their well and safe being, for whose sakes
only, those Foundations were laid.

What induced them thereto, who were Actors in the late Innovation; or what
they now design to prosecute, and by what Rules or Means they hope to
accomplish it, we shall know when GOD and they please, if it be known to
themselves, whereof I am somewhat doubtful: But, whether they have done rashly
or advisedly, warrantably or unwarrantably, the evident hazards wherein the
Commonwealth is at this present, being made greater then they were, as well by
the distractions which that Breach has unhappily occasioned, as by those
preceding it, (to the encouraging of Domestic and Foreign Adversaries)
obliges every Lover of his Country to apply himself, rather to those
endeavourings which are healing, and may probably secure it from their
malicious intendments, who unquestionably seek the total destruction thereof,
then to contribute to those mischievous Designs, by weakening our selves,
through dividing our Power, and wasting it in opposing those who have been
approved Friends to the same Cause which we own; and I hope will so continue,
though they have wheeled about into an Extravagancy. For, it may be they have
discovered some Stratagems, or Ambuscadoes (not appearing to us) which may
destroy them, and the peoples interest also, if not speedily prevented; and
thereupon conceived themselves necessitated to that diversion, and to prosecute
a defense and settlement of the Common Cause, in another manner then
heretofore, upon justifiable Considerations. If this be their Judgment in
sincerity (as the experience I have had of some of them, inclines me to hope)
they are, at least, excusable, if not altogether Blameless: and, as our Affairs
now stand, I think it safer to keep our Friends by palliating their failings,
then to make them our enemies by Exasperations; though we have another way,
whereby we may be safe, notwithstanding the Army should quite desert us; as I
shall demonstrate unto you hereafter: But I will first expostulate, and offer
to consideration, some things concerning Them and us, which their late attempt
has occasioned me to weigh in my own heart.

If it shall be objected, that they have heretofore been changeable, and do now
again proceeed both contary to Order, and to their own Engagements,
Declarations, Votes, Professions and Resolutions, thereby rendering many (even
of their best Friends) to be jealous and doubtful of their sincerity and
constancy to that Cause which they have heretofore owned and vindicated; (which
is true enough) An Answer in part, to that Objection, may be employed toward the
Extenuation thereof, by asking, what other Party, or Persons empowered to serve
the Public in Place and Affairs of high Trust, has not as much failed in like
manner, and receded from former Votes and Resolutions with connivence, when
either they who should have called them to an account for it, were as much
guilty? or, when it could not be done without hazarding the Common Peace, in
regard of the Delinquents power? Whether also it be not more agreeable to
Justice, and a good Conscience, to vary our Purposes, or counter-act to our
former Engagements, then to prosecute them, when we find they will destroy that
end, for which we first engaged? And whether we have not more cause to confide
in those without suspect, who are changeable upon that score, then in them who
foolishly think it a point of honor, wilfully to persevere in what they have
promised, (right or wrong) though it be destructive to them unto whom their
promises were made; yea, and to the Popular safety, against which no Promise or
Engagement is obliging? What persons entrusted have not been sometimes enforced
to mutability, either by emergent accidents, or by disagreement among
themselves; or by the counter-actings, of those to whom they were subordinate,
or with whom they were coordinate, or by some other distinct power? But,
though neither their Judgment, nor their Conscience, nor a real necessity
inclined the Officers of the Army, to what has been lately done; but, that a
Souldier-like Indignation, only provoked by the apprehension of some
undeserved affront or disrespect, had rashly transported them; yet, their and
the public interest are so complicated, that they being considered as men in
whom humane infirmities are to be expected; and then, at this time, as (Causa
sine qua non) the persons who have now the most visible power of this
Commonwealth in their hands; it would, at such a Juncture of Affairs, evidence
more madness (in my judgment) then prudence, not to comply with them in an
amicable manner, to secure that which IS, rather then to destroy it, by
quarrelling about that which IS NOT; and which was likely enough (as in effect
it did) to have destroyed it Self, the Army, and many other, if it had much
longer continued.

I will not defend any man's arregular actings, of whose Irregularities I know
not the Motives; nor will I absolutely condemn them: For, though it be my
Principle, not wilfully to act contrary to Rule, because, I never had Motive
internally, nor warrant externally so to do by any compulsive necessity, or
otherwise: Nevertheless, I know there have been heretofore, and that possibly
there may be now and hereafter, (when the people of GOD are in extraordinary
streights) such impulses of spirit inducing other men at some times, to
extraordinary Executions, that I dare not judge them to be performed with an
evil conscience, or without Divine approbation; because I am not privy to the
secret passages which are or may be betwixt GOD and the Prosecutors; and
because also, I find, that the Holy Ghost has justified many in undertakings
of that nature; as Phineas, Rahab, Jael, and others remembered in Holy
Scripture; who were active, so repugnantly to common Rules of just proceeding,
and to the literal sense of Laws morally and ordinarily obliging; that, I
should have thought them worthy to have been condemned for Murder, Treason,
Truce-breaking, and barbarously infringing the Law of Hospitality, if the
Spirit of GOD had not by Sacred Writ, informed me, that those Prosecutions,
were effects of their Faith. The example which many do take from these
aforenamed, to precipitate themselves into the like actings, by a deluding
Spirit working upon their Corruptions, who read the Scriptures with an
unsanctified heart, is nevertheless to be carefully heeded and a voyded; and
there are many Symptoms and concemitant Circumstances observable (some of
which I have enumerated in one of my private Addresses, heretofore made to
Oliver late Protector upon occasion offered) whereby, every man may discern
infallibly, whether a good or an evil Spirit has inclined him to such
undertakings: and I do believe, that there have been in these latter days, as
well as heretofore, good causes why GOD should vouchsafe extraordinary
dispensations.

For, I have been an Eyewitness, (and according to my understanding, a
diligent Observer of what GOD and Men have done in these latter times) by being
constrained to reside most part of my life, where Affairs of public
Concernment were managed; and was bound to that attendance, which gave
opportunity to be assured of what I have heard and seen; as also, to be
thereupon moved to publish Remembrances, bearing witness (for this, and for
future Ages, as I believe) touching the Controversies which GOD had with these
Islands, during the Reigns of King Charles and his Father; with Memorials of
the Prevarications that then were; of the Interchanges of Judgments and
Mercies, whereby GOD visited them; with timely Fore-warnings, of what has
since befallen that Family and these Nations, in many particulars, wherein
GOD's Justice is evident, with what mind soever it was prosecuted by the
Executioners thereof. I have likewise, for the most part, been continually
Resident, ever since the beginning of the Parliament last sitting, and lately
dissolved, where I might and did, take notice of their most signal
Transactions, (not without being made sensible of some of them.) I was
personally known to the greatest number of them (as likewise to very many of
the following ( onventions called Parliaments) and had so many occasions to
know them, that few private persons of my degree has had experimentally a more
perfect cognizance, of what they were, or of what they did: And, I do profess,
in the fear of GOD, that I conceived, the few right-principled and
conscientions men among them, were able to do so little good, and the rest to
act so much evil, that (as I have sometimes publicly intimated) I expected
nothing from them, but an increase of Confusions, likely to produce inevitable
Destruction; until the late Restoration of the first Parliament: on whom, I for
a while hoped GOD's extraordinary Mercy to them vouchsafed, might have so
wrought, that it would have produced extraordinary good effects.

But, that miraculous Restoration, was forgotten so quickly, by too many of
them, that it produced little of that fruit which was expected; though just
prosecutions were (as I believe) seriously intented and endeavored by some
among them. Their needless neglect of common Justice to distressed Suppliants
ready to perish, and their gross partiality was so apparent; their time so
wasted by impertinencies; their proceedings otherwhile so slow, and another
while so rash; the Notions of some so metaphysical, and of othersome so merely
carnal; their Results so wavering or contradictory; interferings so frequent,
and their puzlings so many, to the daily enerease of private and public
Grievances, with small redress of any; and the people so generally discontented
to see their burdens multiplied, without any regard of making good their
Securities and Engagements: that observing all this, and seeing six months
consumed without effecting any thing considerable, in a time threatening so many
dangers, and necessitating their endeavor to preserve the good affection of
their old Servants: I was confident (as appears by my Epistle at Random,
published six weeks before their dissolution) that another Change would shortly
follow, if they did not speedily better improve their time, and season their
endeavors for the Public, with Justice and more works of private Mercy. And I
feared a worse thing would have happened, though, that which is come to pass,
will be bad enough, if GOD be not more merciful then we deserve.

And I am persuaded, that a principal Cause of their late dissolving, was their
continual neglect of mingling some Acts of private Justice and Mercy, with
their endeavor for the Public, according to their Engagements made to those,
by whom they had been preserved in their greatest need and danger; which duty
they slunk from, under a pretended Zeal to settle those Affairs which required
speedy prosecution: whereas, it was well enough perceived, that they could
find many days and opportunities, to take into Consideration many Petitions,
which concerned Themselves, their Relations and Favorites, who were not
destructively grieved, even when the Commonwealths Pressures were most
considerable; not caring how those sores which pained the meanest Members of
the Body, whom they represented, might possibly Gangrene at last, to the
destroying of the Vital parts thereof. For, the Commonwealth consists of
Individuals; which being neglected one by one, brings on by degrees an unheeded
Consumption, and dismembring of the whole. A Body Politic having no
affections, cannot have Cognizance of its own, or other men's wants and hazards,
but by the natural Faculties and Affections of the single Members thereof: And
doubtless, when GOD, who has care of every private man's Oppressions, observed,
that (notwithstanding his late exemplary Mercy to them vouchsafed) no sad
Remonstrances of poor men, destructively grieved and wronged by them and
others, though often exhibited, and prosecuted, with no less importunities,
then those which prevailed with that unrighteous Judge, who neither feared GOD,
nor cared for men, could move them to more consideration then heretofore; but,
that as formerly, private Petitions were still excluded from week to week, and
from month to month many years together, till great numbers of oppressed
Petitioners were dead and undone: this, so provoked Divine Wrath (aggravated by
the many pre-caveats which they had) that, when they showed more diligence and
resolution, to secure themselves, and the common Interests, then in ten times
so many days formerly, GOD permitted what was then done, to be an occasion of
removing themselves once again, out of the Throne; that, it may appear how
invalid and unacceptable men's best endeavors are, when Justice and Mercy are
grossly neglected Their vain excuse by some of them alleged, of wanting Time
and Treasure, to settle the Government, and supply the Commonwealths
necessities, made them not excusable: For, GOD, and I, and many other men,
know, that much time, and great sums of money were spent, which might have been
better bestowed, to preserve some of them from ruin, to whom they had long
owed it: And, they were put in mind, that the poor Widow, who made a Cake for
the Prophet in his necessity, before she provided one for her self and her
hungry Child (when there was scarce enough left to make another) had a
miraculous supply of Oil and Meal, for a reward: and so should they have had,
if their Faith and Charity had been but half so much as hers.

Of what would be the Event upon those Failings, I forewarned some of them,
both in private, and public, if not amended: which I now mention, rather to
glorify GOD's Justice, then to aggravate their Shame. And I do not thus
plainly express what I know of their former acting, because I think you will
keep it private (for I am content you communicate this Epistle to whom you
please;) nor have I done it, because I think their power is so annihilated that
it will never be visible again: For, I will not recant this, though they should
be restored; which (though unlikely) is not impossible: For, as well the
Mercies as Judgments of GOD; are unsearchable, and His Mind no less difficult
to be found out in the one, then in the other. His ways are not as man's ways,
nor his thoughts as ours. If, as I believe (and know in my own particular he
has done) He restores to Grace lost, many single persons, several times, why
may I not hope, He will be as merciful to the Repr sentative of three whole
Nations, in vouchsafing a third Probation? If he would have spared five wicked
Cities for the sakes of ten rightcous men, why may I not believe, that he will
restore a Parliament for the sakes of ten righteous persons, or a
proportionable number thereto, if there be but so many among all the Members of
that parliament, or in the Counties, Cities and Towns whom they represented?
And why should not I have the same belief concerning the Army, though they have
now prevaricated, and many times heretofore? Verily I believe there are and
were many righteous men Members of the late Parliament, and of this Army, who
would have prosecuted the peoples Cause, in another manner, and to better
effect, if the self-mindedness of some other, had not obstructed them; and I
believe also, that the greatest part of the Officers of the Army, whether that
which they have lately done be altogether of GOD or not (or whether there be in
it a Traitorous Design against the Parliament contrived by some of their
Chiefs) had a good intent;and as once many of the Israelites being called by
Absalom, under color of a Vow to GOD, when he rebelled against his Father, did
join unto the rest in simplicity of heart, not conscious of ought mis-intended:
so perhaps did they. If it indeed be so, their Seducers will speed like
Absalom; and they who were seduced, will return obedience to them, unto whom
their obedience is due, as the Israelites did to David; and our great hazard
thereby occasioned, will become a means of our greater safety; that which has
been obstructed, will be carried on with less interruption; our Governors will
better heed, what GOD's purpose was in that which he has done for these
Nations, and how they ought to have proceeded heretofore: which I heartily
beseech his Almighty Majesty they may timely perform, that further effusion of
blood in a hostile way, may be prevented, and that he would be so merciful to
every Party among us, now disagreeing and divided from each other, that we may
be made happy in a timely Reconciliation to Him, and to each other.

A main Cause of our Wanderings as it were in a Wilderness, (wherein we have
been like so many Beasts and Serpents to each other) and of GOD's bringing us
as it were back again toward Egypt, when we were well onward in our way to the
Land of Rest, was the not understanding, or not regarding to observe and
prosecute, what he intended; and our adhering to humane policy, rather then to
Divine Indictions, like Jeroboam and Jehu, who when GOD gave unto them their
Masters Kingdoms, (with conditional promises, to settle them upon their
posterities) lost them with dishonor for their disobedience and
unthankfulness. And as those two Kings trusted to their own Policy, so did our
Parliaments and Protectors, though they were told upon what conditions the
Kingdoms of their Masters were conferred upon them: and they have added this to
the rest of their sins, that they have endeavored to improve GOD's Donations,
another way and to another end, then was providentially intended, by that
Decree of GOD, which was written in Red Letters at a Trial in his Martial
Court, with points of Swords.

For, when that great Controversy, which had depended many Ages betwixt this
people and their Kings, concerning the usurped Prerogatives of the One, and the
Spiritual and Temporal Freedoms of the Other, which (last mentioned) are Rights
so due to the People by the Laws of GOD and Nature, (though long usurped) that
none, there of make question, but Tyrants and their Parasites, or persons of a
brutish, sensual and slavish Qualification: when (I say) those Claims had been
after several days of hearing (as it were) argued in the high places of the
field, between the late King and that part of the People, who thought it more
noble to be Freemen, then to have badges of their servility clapped upon them as
Titles of Honor; when they had upon a joint Appeal and a Trial by the Sword,
according to the known Common Law of England, and the Law in force throughout
all Nations, a Verdict at a Court from whence there is no further Appeal, (and
when likewise, that Trial was past, and quiet possession thereupon given to the
Conquerors) Reason required prosecutions of another Nature then those which
were afterward begun and pretended, thereby to settle the people in a future
enjoyment of their Liberties and ancient Rights: For, they should immediately
have repealed or altered all those Laws, which had relation to a Tyrannical
Government, and laid a new Foundation proper to the Popular Interest; yea (as
the Gentiles heretofore, in like Case, used to consult with their Apollo) they
should have consulted the Oracle of GOD, and searched after such Directions as
He commanded his people the Israeiites, to follow, when he made them Conquerors
of Canaan: which, would rightly have instructed them what course they ought to
take. Among which Directions, those that I remember as most considerable in our
case, are to this effect: They were neither to serve their GODS, nor to observe
their LAWS; nor make peace with those among them, who should adhere to their
former Idolatries, and heathenish Customs; nor spare so many of them, (for
politic ends, or through foolish pity) as might endanger their own safety; nor
root them out all at once; nor permit any of their own Tribes to enjoy an
inheritance there, who had not assisted their Brethren in the Conquest; with
such like: which, if our Governors had heeded, and made use of so much of
those Cautions and Precepts as were pertinent to our observation and practice,
doubtless our troubles had been ended long ago; or, at least we should not have
had so many thorns in our sides, as at this day we have.

Somewhat of this Nature, and to the like purpose, I offered to their
consideration, whom it concerned to take notice thereof, but with little or no
regard; for, not remembering that but a while since, some of themselves, then in
power, were as inconsiderable persons as I am, they were so elevated, that they
thought it a disparagement to take advice in such matters, from so obscure a
person: yet, knowing my self concerned in the Public Welfare, I persisted in
endeavoring what I thought pertinent thereto: And when Oliver Cromwell late
Lord Protector had taken upon himself the Supreme Authority, (thereto
providentially admitted both for his own Probation and our) I submitted
(according to my Principle grounded upon Divine Precepts) to that Power which
was in being, and complied with him in things tending to preservation of the
Commonwealth, in hope to insinuate thereby, somewhat into his Consideration,
for Public Advantage: And, because, I had not such a measure of the Spirit
which rested upon Elias, as might warrant me to say unto my Sovereign Prince,
in plain terms, Thou art wicked, (when I saw him prevaricate from what he had
professed) yet I endeavored, as Paul did to work upon King Agrippa, first, by
publishing somewhat whereby I might preserve and increase a good opinion,
without any sor did flattery, (though some who misunder stood my Poems, have
conceived otherwise) and then I sought by private Addresses, to screw into him
a serious Consideration of his Duty, in many particulars relating to GOD, to
the People, and to Himself; declaring boldly and plainly (not a little to my
personal disadvantage) that the power conferred upon him was not vouchsafed for
his own sake; but, that he might thereby glorify GOD, and settle upon his
People those Rights, which were so anciently and naturally their due, that no
Prescription could be a just bar to their Claim. And though perhaps he
surreptitiously and unjustly hastened to get possession of that power which GOD
had designed him, (as Hazael did, after the Prophet of GOD had foretold him he
should be King) yet I perceiving, by his honorable new Title, and by other
Circumstances, that GOD had permitted a more absolute Arbitrary Power to be
devolved upon him, then any of our Kings ever had, because without such a
Power, it was impossible for him to bring us to a perfect Settlement, (being so
unsettled and divided as we then were, and yet are) I presumed both to declare
unto him, to what intent that exorbitant Power was permitted; how long he was
to enjoy it; in what manner he should thereby proceed; and what would follow if
he employed it to any other end.

But, (before I had presumed so far, or declared any thing, to the making
ineffectual my good Intents, by ought which might be distastful) I then
perceiving he took as little notice as the Parliament had done before their
first Interruption, of that course which I tought pertinent to the introducing
of a Righteous Government; and that he probably intended rather to establish it
for his own and his Posterities advantage, then for the Peoples Accommodation,
(or else, that he might trifle away the Opportunities then given, by
prosecuting his own Designs until they were lost.) I signified unto him in a
Discourse prepared in form of a Declaration to these Nations, how he might
settle a Righteous Government (as I believed) with safety and honor, if he
would engage himself to the People, by publishing a Remonstrance to that effect
for their satisfaction. This Overture being made at a time wherein his fears
and hazards were very great: Though that Discourse was very large, he with much
seeming Contentment, heard me read it over to the last word; and then
protested, according to his usual manner, that it answered to his heart, as the
shadow of his face in the Glass (then hanging before him in the room) answered
to his face; and pretended he would publish that Declaration, and act
accordingly, as soon as he with one in whose discretion he much confided, had
considered what alteration it might need, (or words to that effect) and then
received it of me, promising to return it with his final resolution, within a
week.

At the weeks end, or thereabout, he, or Mr. Thurloe then Secretary, (who
seemed also to approve thereof) delivered back unto me my Papers; and the
Protectors Answer, which then was, That he himself, together with the said
Secretary and my Self, would within a few days, examine it over, to see what
verbally, might require alteration, or what addition would be necessary; and
that being done, he would then without fail, take order for Publication
thereof. But, afterward he apostatized from that Resolution, to his own
dis-advantage, and to the occasion of what has since befallen to the Public
Detriment; yet, pretended many months together, a firm adherence to what he
had seemingly resolved on, keeping me all that time in attendance; gave me the
Key of his Closet at the end of the Shield Gallery in White Hall, (wherein his
Books and his Papers lay) to retite unto when I came thither; carried me often
to his own Table; frequently discoursed with me concerning my Proposal; and
appointed many set days wherein to review the said Papers, but failed always in
performance; wherewith I being a little discontented, told him, I thought his
mind was changed; and giving him back the Key of his Closet, purposed never to
wait again upon him, in relation to that business. He then, with very
respective words to me, excusing his clays, assured me that at six of the Clock
next morning, he would send for his Secretary, and dispatch that which he
intended, before he would admit any other person into his presence. I came
before the appointed hour, but was then also put off, until a little past three
in the afternoon, at which time ^^attended till past four; and then, hearing
that He, and his Secretary, were gone forth in a Coach to take the Air, I
purposed to depart, and loose no more time on that occasion: and as I was
leaving the room, one informed me, that about the same hour, in which I was
appointed to attend Him and his Secretary, their necks were both in hazard to
be broken, by the Protectors usurping the Office of his Coachman; and that
they were both brought in so hurt, that their lives were in danger. Of that
imprudent, if not disgraceful attempt mis-befeeming his person, I endeavored to
prevent as much of the dishonor, as I might, by a little Poem, as I thought it
my duty, in regard he executed the Supreme Office at that time. After this, he
called on me again, a^ if his mind had not been wholly changed, and referred
the said Papers to his Privy Council, who referred them to a Sub-Committee, of
which Sir Gilbert Pickering being one, gave it a high approbation, and was
pleased to say he did not flatter me; but from that time forward, I heard no
more of it. Another service I did, which much ^^n^ed to His and the Public
Safety, whereto Sir Gilbert Pickering is privy likewise; an^ in consideration
of the forementioned services, the said Protector having, without my asking
that, or any thing else, (oct to be relieved according to Justice from my
oppressions, which I could not obtain) gave me the Statute-Office, and
afterward made it little worth unto me, because (as I conceive) I expressed my
thankfulness for it, in declaring unto him those Truths, which he was not
willing to hear of. Pardon this digression, for it is somewhat pertinent.

Thus, both the said Protector and the late Parliament, either through
oversight, wilfulness, or misunderstanding the state of the Peoples Cause, (or
how far forth for the Commonwealths best advantage, they ought to have
prosecuted the execution of that Sentence which GOD gave on her behalf) acted
not only repugnantly to the Welfare thereof, but also, by endeavoring a means
impossible to be effected. For, to say the truth, they were nor, nor now are,
nor ever can be, in a capacity to have an orderly proceeding toward a Peaceable
Government, much less an establishment thereof, in a Parliameatary mode,
according to the old constitution of Parliaments: yea, I will confidently
affirm (though it will seem a great presumption) that, as Affairs now stand,
the People cannot by any ordinary means be reduced to such a posture, as may
bring them to agree upon, or admit of, any settled Government whatsoever
agreeable to the Laws now extant, or otherwise, by reason of the
irreconcilable differing Judgments, Factions, Divisions and malignant
Disaffections, which are begot and fomented more and more among them, by the
habit of licentiousness, which they have now gotten. Nor will their turbulent
Animosities be ever calmed, until there shall be some Foundations first laid,
by an unresistable Arbitrary Power, deposited for a while, in one or more
persons, whereby an orderly proceeding toward settling a just Government, may
unresistably take place. This constrained the Roman Senate to constitute
otherwhile, in such cases, a Dictator, who had such an absolute Power, for a
time. This is the natural Cause (if violent motions may properly be called
natural) why the Determinations and Beginnings of most Governments, Monarchical
and Popular, in all times and places, were derived from the Sword; which (how
displeasing soever it be to those whom it may concern) is the remedy to which
we, and all Nations in out condition, must submit, before they can have a
lasting Peace. The Sword of War is the only Umpire in all such extremes, and
it must be endured until we are brought to such a temper as will make us
governable by the Civil Sword; and that it may preserve us, in the mean time,
from Dom stick Insurrections, and Foreign Invasions. And indeed, there is no
such cause to fear it, as we pretend; for, it is not the corruption, violence,
and want of sincerity, which is usual in Armies, that endangers us half so much
as our sins in general: For, whilst they are unrepented and increase, even the
best Government, and most Righteous Governors on earth, shall not secure us:
and when we are as we ought to be, the worst shall not be able to harm us. The
LORD of HOSTS, who is our GOD, is Generalissimo of all the Armies in the World;
nothing is acted for, or against any People, but by his command or permission;
and if we displease Him, who shall protect us? If our Ways and Designs be such
as He approves, who can hurt us? He is our Supreme, yea, sole Judge in all
causes triable by Combat, and by the Sword of war, in a peculiar manner; and
none who love Righteousness, need be afraid of his doom.

This will be a sweet comfortable Cordial, to those innocent and honest men,
who through humane infirmity, are frighted by the Distractions of these times,
and dread what our Army may do; if their professions should be hypocritical; or
if they, who are yet sincere, should fall from their uprightness: and this
being well considered, will terrify them, who trust in an armed power, and
hoped that would protect them in all their Falsehoods, Oppressions and Wicked
Designs. This will also be unpleasing to them, who would by their own power,
their own way, and to their own ends, establish a Government at this time among
us; and no less disgust them, who ascribe Divinity to Kings, or make Idols of
Parliaments, as many have done, and some yet do among us; and of which
superstition, I my self (being educated under a Tyranny, which kept me ignorant
of what I was born to) have hitherto been guilty, as may appear by many
staggering and dubious Expressions, scattered here and there in my Writings,
which I am content should remain upon Record, to testify that I think not my
self infallible; and that I do not impose my Assertions Magisterially, with
expectation that they should be subscribed unto, without due examination.
Nevertheless, let not that which will 'bide the Test, be rejected.

As there are many among us, who cry out for Kings again, thinking them to be
more then of humane Extract or Institution: because they neither know that they
were the Peoples Creatures, made originally but to be their principal Servants,
to see those Laws duly executed which they themselves made; nor take notice,
how by degrees, they have made them who were their Masters, to become their
Slaves; nor do remember; how they have oppressed them; nor consider how much
more they intend to oppress them, nor how they will again oppress them, if they
be readmitted; nor that they were the cause of all those Burdens, which at
this time lie upon them, and for which they clamor against those who would
remove them: In like manner, many do as inconsiderately cry out for
Parliaments; which if they be not well constitute, may be more destructive then
their Kings. But, they would have Free Parliaments; and such they call Free, as
should be formed of the wisest and honestest men among us, as near as is
possible, made Members thereof, at the choice of all persons who have a
considerable interest in the Commonwealth, freely admitted to elect; which
would be such a Parliament as may possibly be hereafter, when a Foundation
whereon to fix it, and an orderly Medium for such Elections is provided: but
such a Parliament was never yet in being (if before my remembrance Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament were elected, as they have been in many
places, within the time of my knowledge) and it is the great Mercy of GOD,
considering how many were brought in by the Court-Faction for their ends, and
how many screwed in themselves for their own ends, that so much of our
Spiritual and Temporal Freedoms is yet left.

That which is now interrupted, and against whose imperfection and
unlawfulness, so many have lately clamoured, was as good and legal a
Parliament, all things considered, (even when it was at worst) as any
heretofore, to all intents and purposes, whilst it had being and power; and
every Act thereof, till it be repealed by its own or by another absolute Power,
is as binding as the Acts of any other Partiaments: For, a powerful being in
the Members thereof, gives it Essentiality according to the nature of that
being for which it was ordained, as truly as the reasonable Soul in a Body of
flesh gives being to a man, who, whether he be lawfully or unlawfully begotten,
or born with too many or with too few Members, or whether he be maimed by
others or by his own default, is nevertheless a Man whilst the Soul and Body
continue together. Whilst, power (which is the Soul of a Parliament, or at
least, that by which a Soul is know to be in it) remained in that which was
lately interrupted, if not totally destroyed, it might have performed what
would have been necessary for the present, to supply those defects, which may
else destroy the Body whom they represent; and during the time vouchsafed by
GOD for their second Probation, it might (if not again interrupted) have been a
help to prepare a more perfect Medium toward establishing a Government, then
yet we have any, and which might have given unto future Parliaments a
Constitution more likely to preserve it, then ever they had heretofore: For,
all our Parliaments formerly convened, were constituted by Tyrants, or Princes
little better. They were their Creatures, and not the Peoples: They were
called, prorogued and dissolved at their pleasure: were made up of such
Persons, and of such a Number as they listed: were chosen by, and for such
places, and out of such orders of men, as they privileged to that purpose; and
were originally ordained, for no other intent, but to preserve the Peace of
other men so long and so far forth only, as it might uphold their Grandeur,
and make the people Instruments to enslave themselves thereunto: though,
through GOD's Mercy, the People have by degrees, acquired means in Parliaments
to recover some part of their lost Liberties, much against the wills of their
Kings and Creators: But their Liberties will never perfectly be recovered,
until a Foundation be laid by the Power of the Peoples own Sword, in the hands
of faithful Trustees, whereupon a just Government may be erected, with
outworks to defend it from Innovators; and whereby Parliaments may be so
regulated, that the peoples Civil, Natural and Spiritual Proprieties and
Freedoms, may be preserved without violation, as much as possible.

What would be the effects of giving Liberty at this present (as it is by the
greatest number desired) for any man to choose, or to be chosen a Member of
Parliament, but the destroying of Propriety, Morality and Piety, together with
all the just Liberties of the people, which they have so dearly paid for, and
were likely to recover when almost quite lost? For the worst men are most
numerous, and the greater part of them consisting of those, who by conniving
at, or complying with Tyrants and Oppressors (under whom they shall enjoy most
Licentiousness) were the chief Causers and Continuers of our late and present
Troubles; and these having, still their hearts wholly inclined to renew them,
how easy will it be, for them, by indirect means, to bring into a Parliament,
Members like themselves, more then enough; yea, doubly, to over-vote those who
are elected by that part of the People, who ought to have chief Benefit of that
Conquest which GOD lately gave them? For do we pursue and apprehend Thieves and
Murderers, who have robbed and slain honest men, to make them and their
Abettors, sharers in the goods they catried away, when they are again
recovered? Or, do we make them keepers, or disposers of our persons or estates?
Did Gideon make them to be partakers of his Victory, when he overcame Zeba and
Zalmunna, who, when he was in pursuit of them, derided him instead of relieving
his fainting Army with bread? Verily, they ought to be rewarded like them, who
have opposed the Common Cause, by their hands, tongues or pens; and even they
also, who have not therein assisted their brethren, rather then to be
vouchsafed partnership in their Freedoms: And it would not only manifest these
Nations to be very imprudent, if without good assurance, of their being better
affected to their just Cause then heretofore, they do admit them both to an
equal enjoyment of that and all other Freedoms with themselves, and to a
capacity, upon their imprudent claim thereof, to be their Lawgivers, the
Keepers of their Liberties, and Disposers of their Estates and Persons; But, it
would imply also, a high contempt of GOD's late Dispensations, to communicate
the benefit of them to his Opposers. The right of choosing, and of being chosen
Members of Parliament, is now in those only, who have gotten it by Conquest;
the Law of Conquest is paramount to all their humane Laws; it is nor only
Municipal, but Catholic, and gives just Liberty to the Conquering Party, to
make new Laws as they please, and to continue, suspend, abrogate, or reform all
other humane Laws within their own Territories, as they conceive them to be
helpful, or a hinderance to their Common Welfare. It is that Law by which the
LORD of HOSTS has decided our Cause, as I said before: it is that by which all
the most famous Monarchies of the world in all Ages, were first constituted and
settled, before they could safely lay the Sword aside, to be governed by other
Laws; and they who are dissatisfied with that settlement, are not to be
regarded.

That, therefore, which the Parliament should have done, (in my judgment) when
the power of the Sword was in their hands; and that which their late
Successors ought to have prosecuted, when for the Parliaments failings the
same power was translated to them, was not to employ their Authority, and the
Revenues of the Commonwealth thereby grasped, that they might advance
themselves; build up what GOD has broken down, trifle away precious
opportunities, and consume the public Treasure in making an Image of the BEAST
formerly adored; or in patching up that which was useless, and not possibly
repairable, and would more increase then diminish the Peoples Grievances: They
ought not under a pretended Zeal to the Common Welsare, instead of contriving a
Government, whereby Justice might be indifferently and impartially administered
to all, (and every man been thereby equally made capable of honor and profit,
according to his merit, for an encouragement to Virtue) to have plotted how to
model it so, as, that Employments and Dignities, whereby the public Honor and
Safety, may be most advanced or hazarded, should be continued to themselves,
conferred on their nearest Relations, and derived to their Posterity: But, on
the contrary, they should have improved GOD's appearing for us, and the power
thereby acquired, like magnanimous Conquerers, to settle in despite of
opposition, such a Government as GOD would have given them a pattern of, had
they sought it; and, whereby Justice and Mercy should have been duly
administered. They should have exercised that power in making (as it were) a new
Heaven, and a new Earth, by establishing the Superior Orbs in motions tending
to Pious and Righteous Dispensations; and by confining every part of their
inferior Globe, to such Rules of obedience to their Governors, and to such
Agreements among themselves, that good Influences might reciprocally descend
and ascend to preserve the honor and well-being of both; Which by prudent men,
having courage, fearing GOD, and hating covetousness, might have been effected
by the power which they had once, yea, oftentimes, in their hands; and made up
these three Nations into one well-tempered Body, though consisting of many
thousands disagreeing in Judgments, Manners, and Affections, (some good, some
evil, some indifferent) so that they might have peaceably been made serviceable
to GOD, and to each other, as a skilful Apothecary makes a wholesome confection,
by mixing many Simples of contrary qualities; even of Vipers, Serpents, and
some Drugs poisonous in their own nature, which in Composition, make the best
Ingredients the more virtuous. To this end, was an Arbitrary Power put into
their hands, by the Sword, which if they had known how they should have used
it, would have been a comfort to good men, and a terror to the wicked partial
self-seekers only, to whom it has been hitherto most advantageous.

We fought to preserve our Freedoms which were left, and to recover those we
had lost; yea, we fought for our Laws; but, not for those which were imposed
upon us, by their prevailings, who had corrupted, or over-voted our Trustees by
a Party of their own, and established wickedness for a Law; by which means our
Laws that are magnified by some, as if it were more heinous then Sacrilege, to
seek to have any of them reformed, are become (in their execution at least)
more oppressive then the Sword: For, I am confident, that the needless
expenses, thereby yearly occasioned, do amount to much more, then all that
which is yearly charged to maintain the States Fleets and Armies; and that as
many, if not more, are impoverished thereby every year, as were in any one year
by plundering, during the late War. It would fill a Volume to enumerate the
Practices and Formalities, occasioning the vast expense and intolerable
Vexations, whereto, men plunged into that misery, are liable, especially such
as are compelled to travel above 200 miles, four or five times in a year from
their habitations. Yea, even our Trials by Juries (which is applauded as one of
these most equal ways of determining Controversies) is no less injurious then
any, by reason of the Ignorance and Corruption of Juries, packt by as corrupt
Officers; as also, by the shortness of the time whereto a great number of
Causes at times of trial, are limited, both at London and Westminster, as also,
at the Assizes in the Counties; where, by the straightness of the place
otherwhile, and by other considerable defects, Trials are frequently, so
superficially and hastily slubber'd over; Parties, and Witnesses, (on whose
Testimony the whole Livelihood of Persons and Families depend) so thronged,
interrupted, discountenanced, or negligently heard and examined, that a Cast at
Dice would have given a cheaper and a more righteous Verdict, then is passed in
some Causes. But this is beside my Text, and not added out of any disaffection
to our Laws or Lawyers; for I honor the Laws, and the Professors thereof, who
are unreproveable.

It may be for these, and other Oppressions of that kind, (whose removal some
grand Gown-men are thought to obstruct) GOD has stirred up the Swordmen to
take notice of that Grievance; and seeing it more likely to be enlarged then
removed, or made less, one sin shall be punished by another. Or, the Officers
of the Army, fearing perhaps that the disbanding or disablement of their
Brigades and Regiments, was intended by some in Parliament, for their better
carrying on of Designs advantageous to their own Persons or Factions, to the
public detriment (in which practice it is thought some of them can hardly be
over-gone) or peradventure, they perceive that timely provision to secure this
Republic from the Common Enemy was neglected; and, that not only their
Estates, Families and Persons might therewith be ruined, but that the dishonor
likewise, of all the evil Consequences thereof, would at last be imputed to
them, and upon these, or on some other Considerations have resolved to assume
the management of the peoples Cause, into their own hands for the future, and
so to proceed in the Course hitherto neglected, that they may clear their
besported Reputations, by using the Military Sword to establish the Civil (as
others at first should have done) and then to sheath it up again, and lay it
aside; which I pray GOD may be the worst part of their Design; and that
whatsoever be designed by them, he will be pleased graciously to make use of it
for the good of these Nations, and pardon what was well intended, though
irregularly acted.

For, I hope, whether their former proceedings have been justifiable or not,
they are not persons of so little Conscience and Humanity, that they will
persevere in what is amiss done, when they are convinced of their error, and
that the Power which the people by their Representative, first gave them; which
is yet maintained at their cost; and which GOD has, at this time, permitted to
reside in them only, (and is no where else visible) shall not be wilfully
employed to the destruction of those who trusted them, though it be a while
exercised contrary to order, and their good liking from whom they received it:
For, such an Ingratitude, will be answerably avenged, and they would thereby
become the most infamous Army that ever was in the world; because, they have
pretended to more Piety and Justice, then ever any Army did heretofore. The
Falsehood and Perfidiousness of other Armies, was but the Falsehood and
Perfidiousness of Heathens, Turks, or de baunched Christians, and it made them
infamous as mere carnal men only: But, this being an Army consisting of
persons not only professing Christianity, but, having the repute of Saints
also, their perfidiousness will render them as abominable as Devils; and even
they who to their own advantage make use of their persons, will hate them in
their hearts; be always distrustful of them; and not only scatter them as soon
as possibly they can, but expose them also to such a condition, as may disable
them to be further mischievous hereafter, and to be justly abhorred of all men
wheresoever they live. But, as that experience aforementioned which I have of
some in this Army, makes me presume they will not wilfully deceive our hopes of
them: So their Knowledge of the many occasions which have been given to make
Them and Others justly jealous of the Common Safety, inclines me to think it
possible, that what they have lately and heretofore done, contrary to order,
may (as to some of them) deserve more then an excuse: For, when I consider
GOD's Dispensations of old, with such undertakings as have been prosecuted,
when his honor and the safety of his people required them; and how the one is
blasphemed, and the other endangered at this time, I conceive that it may
proceed partly from a Divine Impulse; whereof (though I cannot be so assured)
they who have been Leading Actors therein, may be ascertained by what Spirit
they were moved.

Whilst I was writing this, I cast mine eyes upon a Copy of those Papers
aforementioned, (then lying before me) which I presented to the first
Protector, and wherein are expressed those Concomitant Circumstances, which be
requisite to warrantize an irregular Act: Therefore, I will here insert them,
word for word, as they are there) because, perhaps it may come to the knowledge
of some who will now need those Cautions, as much as the Protector did
heretofore. They are these ten.

First, there must be an unfeigned, and an apparent necessity of deviating from
Rule and Order; at least such a necessity as is apparent to the Actor, and
which may, or might have been apparent to others, who had like means to be
informed thereof.

Secondly, it must be for preservation of a nobler Interest, Authority or
Command, then that which is thereby violated.

Thirdly, it must be practiced in Faith, without any self-end or by-respect to
private Interests, (such only excepted, as are so naturally therewith wrapped
up, that they cannot be separated.)

Fourthly, there must be warrantable Example in holy Scripture, of like
practices in like cases.

Fifthly, there must be an outward calling thereto, by the Office of the
undertaker, either Spiritual, Civil or Military, or an extraordinary calling
evidenced by some gift or qualification proper to that undertaking, or by an
appearance of GOD's presence with him, by some evident work of Providence not
common.

Sixthly, there must be a visible power in some measure, enabling the
Prosecutor in probability, at least, to begin, continue and finish his part of
the enterprise.

Seventhly, it must be done in Charity, without Envy, Hatred, Malice, or a
Revengeful mind.

Eighthly, there must be an internal Energie of the Spirit of GOD, witnessing
to his Conscience that he aims only, or at least chiefly, at His Glory; and
strengthening him, to suffer undauntedly, contentedly, and modestly, with
submission to GOD's Will, if the Enterprise miscarry; and not with that
dejectedness, impatience, or desperateness, which is in Impostors and
Malefactors.

Ninthly, he must not willingly permit any other to bear the outward penalty
due by the Law for his irregularity, but rather offer his own person to those
who are to preserve order, and depend on GOD only, for the reward of his
undertaking; seeing, men cannot take notice of GOD's secret dispensations; for
it is sin against the outward Rule, to do evil that good may come thereof, as
well-meaning men sometimes do; though it be a greater sin to do good, that evil
purposes may take effect, as Hypocrites often do.

Lastly, He that acts to the Breach of at Law by a Divine impulse, will
nevertheless find in his heart, such a respect to Order, that he will
unfainedly be industrious to reduce all things to their pristine orderly
Course, as soon as the necessity which constrained his irregularity, is so
evidently removed, that it may be safely done; except it shall so come to pass,
that Providence, from thenceforward, shall change the old Foundations, and
order all things anew, as sometimes it is pleased to do.

Without these afore-written Concomitants, the Prosecutors of irregular
actings, ( though their intentions may possibly be good, and their attempts be
permitted by Divine Justice, to prepare her way, to what shall afterward be
executed according to GOD's purpose) are deluded by the Devil, or by their own
Lusts and Passions, to be brought to condign punishment for some known or
secret sins formerly committed, rather then warrantably called: Yea, and when
men are duly called to such attempts, and the main work which GOD intended
thereby, is outwardly accomplished for his glory and the public welfare, yet
if there be a defect of any such Circumstance or Qualification as is essential
to the sanctification thereof, or at least, any falsehood or hypocrisy
unrepented of, relating thereto, in the Actors, they will thereby lose much of
their honor and reward. Thus much is transcribed out of the forementioned
Address.

Now whether that which was acted enormously by the Officers of the Army, was
accompanied with the forementioned Circumstances, or not, it will more concern
them then us, to be assured of: We can have no certainty of it, because it is a
Transaction between GOD and their Consciences only; but of this we may be
certain, to preserve in us a charitable hope of them, that there may be
sometime extraordinary actings contrary to ordinary standing Laws and Orders,
agreeable to the well-pleased Will of GOD, both internally and externally
warranted: For Phineas upon his single knowledge of a transgression committed,
executed Justice upon the Offenders without an ordinary Commission, yet he was
highly honored and rewarded for it; and Jehu slew the King his Master, which
by Our Law made him guilty of a double Treason, and High Treason it was
questionlesly accounted by the Jewish Law; yet GOD recompensed it with a
Kingdom; which his Posterity should have inherited for that service, if he and
they had but performed those conditions whereupon it might have been confirmed.
If it be alleged, He was visibly anointed to that purpose by a Prophet; I may
answer, That of little force his anointing had been, if there had not been
also, a spiritual anointing, much more effectual, poured out in visibly, upon
him, and his Companions: for Jehu in himself, was considerable for nothing
(that we know of) but his furious march: and his Companions (as their own words
imply) judged the Prophet who anointed him, to be a mad fellow, by his
deportment: and (for ought I perceive) the Jews, for the most part, in those
and future times, had no better opinion of their Prophets, then men have in
these days of the Quakers, and of some other among us, because many of their
actings, whereby they were made signs, to that Generation, appeared to them as
ridiculous, as those which are perhaps permitted at this time, to be signal to
us. And what would then the visible pouring forth of Oil have effected, without
a spiritual anointing, which like the white stone, mentioned in the Revelation,
is only known to him that has it? This consideration, with suchlike, makes
me think fitter, to look to my own Actions, and Warranties for them, then to
judge of other men's proceedings, whose Warrants I cannot know.

This I well know, That we are in an exceeding desperate condition; and like
the Frogs and Mice preparing to a Battle, which if not prevented, will expose
us to the Kite; nay, we are in a far greater hazard, according to my
apprehension of it: for, we appear to my Fancy, not unfit to be resembled (in
what may probably befall us) to a great number of Bulls and Lions; Bears and
Dogs; Men and Horses; Tigers and Goats; Wolves and Sheep; Foxes and Lambs;
Swine and Leopards; Women and Children; Innocents and Malefactors; armed and
unarmed; Princes and Peasants; Pastors and their Flocks; Old and Young; Poor
and Rich; thrust and thronged all together promiscuously into the Cirque of a
Theater, to be torn and to tear each other to pieces: whilst our Neighbors,
Foes and Friends, (if we have any) sit Spectators on seats round about, to
behold that horrible Spectacle, till we being destroyed, or wearied with
destroying each other, they may come down without danger to themselves, and
divide the spoil of that which is left, possess our Estates, and make slaves of
our persons: yet, that Herd of Beasts, which we call the common People, is so
stupid and insensible of what is likely to come upon them, that like natural
Fools, they sit grinning on each other, in those meeting places, where they
recreate themselves by hearing and repeating those things, which are beginnings
of their own destruction; run together with a brutish delight, to be Spectators
of their own miseries and massacres to ensue, if an overruling Providence
prevent it not; and like madmen, rejoice when they think it begun. Of this I
my self have often took notice, and particularly upon that day whereon the
Parliament was last interrupted. For, when by the Vollies of Shot, it was in
London supposed that the Parliaments Guards, and the Armies Forces were
engaged, the people who then flocked into the Temple, to look toward
Vestminster, where they hoped that Engagament was begun, did in my sight and
hearing, express their barbarous joy, with so much disaffection to both
Parties, and with such unchristian Language, and unmanly Gesticulations, that
being filled with grief, and transported with indignation, I could not withhold
from openly reproving them. O GOD! By what ordinary course is such a Frenzy
curable? whose power can calm the rage of such Waters, but thine only, who
command the storming Winds, and art obeyed? and when thou say to the
Seas, Proceed no further?

The Vessel of this Commonwealth, now weather-beaten and torn, is in more
danger then that, wherein jonas would have fled to Tarsus; for, though we have
cast forth a great part of our Goods to secure it, our danger still continues,
and increases; and we are not so sensible of it, nor so much think upon GOD,
or on our sins, which are the cause of it, as the Heathen Mariners then did.
Moreover, that Ship, had but one Delinquent which occasioned the Storm; and his
being thrown into the Sea, brought immediate safety: They had many Skilful
Seamen to guide it; but all our Pilots are cast overboard, and none left in
appearance, but guilty Passengers: This, might make me despair; yet my Hope is
greater then my Fear, by contemplating GOD's mercy to Jonas: For, though he
were a Delinquent, who had knowingly offended, as it were in a contempt of GOD;
though, he were cast out into the Sea, far from Lan^, where was no hope of
escaping; though it was when that Sea was so extraordinarily enraged by a
Storm, that it made safety less hopeful; and though he was then swallowed by a
Whale, which was as it were conveying of him down quick to Hell, (as he himself
apprehended it) from whence there is no redemption; yet he was preferved by
that which was naturally, irrecoverably of it self, destructive; and vouchsafed
also so much Grace, as to be employed again in the service of him, and by him,
against whom he had been rebellious. Oh GOD! how infinite are thy Mercies! and
how exceeding merciful are the severest of thy Judgments!

Yet, because GOD expects, that, in all emergencies and extremities, we should
use the reason and grace that he has given us, as the Mariners and Passengers
then did, toward our preservation, and not as Jonas, retire into our private
Cabins, nor into the Holds, and there sleep out this Storm; I have kept my self
waking, whilst other men slept; to look upward, inward, and round about me,
every way from whence means of Salvation may come, (or, whereby, an increase of
danger may be prevented) that I may stir up my self and others to meet GOD, who
is always ready to provide it, and come along with it, if he be sought for in
time. I have considered what some might have done, but now cannot; what some,
other may yet do, but will not: what many intend, and will do, if they can, to
undo us; and what we should and may do, if we lose not opportunities yet
offered, by pride, partiality, self-seeking, and consuming that strength which
is left, in opposing each other, and them who perhaps, by an irregularity
providentially permitted, are brought into a straight, for the present, that we
might be thereby enlarged for ever after; and be better secured by a Storm and
a Whale, then by the Ship in which we were steering a wrong course; yea,
peradventure by this Breach (which makes our Enemies cry, Aha! so we would have
it!) that shall be occasioned, which will cement the Hearts of our Governors,
of our Armies, and of the people, more strongly, and more affectionately then
ever heretofore. It is not now a season wherein to pursue Vengeance: When
Shimei cursed his King, and Joah would have taken off his head for it; David
thought it possible that GOD might commission him to curse; and whether it were
so or not, he prudentially judged it unseasonable to avenge an injury done to
him, and punish a fault in another, when he lay under a Chastisement for his
own, greater transgressions against a greater King then himself. GOD, has
winked at so many of our failings, and that so often, that we are obliged to
wink at each others escapes. Our Princes, Parliaments, People and Armies, have
complained of each other; but, the truth is, we are all become so guilty, and
have so many ways given occasions of provoking each other, as well as of
displeasing GOD; and of increasing both our sins and punishments; that, if
there be not a more Christian Forbearance, more Unity, Love and Reformation
among us, (then yet I see) and a speedy endeavoring jointly and singly toward
an unfeigned agreement, in Civil Concernments; then, as first the Regal, and
then the Parliamentary power was destroyed; so, shall first the Army, and then
the People, be deprived of their Power; and this perhaps to let in another
Party as wicked as themselves, or worse, to be plagued and rooted out among
them, to make room for a more pious and Righteous Generation, if we be not in
time warned by other men's examples.

A Question somewhat like one of those which you propounded to me, was proposed
by David, when he said, When the Foundations are overthrown, what shall the
righteous do? but he himself thereto implies an Answer, in the words next
following; for there he shows, what GOD will do, and what will at such times
be the portion both of those who have righteously or unrighteously acted: GOD
give us Grace to consider it. To prevent, what I feared, would come upon us, I
have added my spoonful of Water, from time to time (as occasion was offered)
toward quenching of the Flames which I saw kindling, and have sent abroad many
Remembrances and Caveats, which have been as ineffectual, as if I had written
to the mad men in Bedlam to persuade them to be sober; and yet I am still moved
by somewhat, which will not let me be quiet (notwithstanding my late resolution
to the contrary) to adventure my Notions toward their cure, sometimes in
private, as I do at this present to you: And, since the late Rupture, have
looked seriously toward those four Winds, kept by four Angels, who are
commanded to let them breathe, or restrain them, as GOD shall permit them to be
active, together or apart, either according to their own natural power, or as
he shall please, by his extraordinary compliance, to make them a furtherance or
an obstruction to our Settlement. And, now, in regard many men depending much
upon mere natural Causes, have raised expectations from them, according to
their several hopes and affections; I will inform you, what upon inquiry into
their self-sufficiency, may probably come or not come from them respectively,
(leaving GOD's unrevealed determinations to his own good Pleasure) there are, I
say, four Mountains, from whence men's Windy Hopes issue, and they are these: 1.
Charles Stuart, and his Party: 2. The Parliamentary Authority, which was, and
seems in a possibility of reviving again: 3. The Body of the People, whom they
represented: And lastly, the Armies now in being: of which Four, I will
discourse in order, and declare what I perceive probable to proceed from them,
according to my understanding; and leave it to be considered, and censured, as
you and they shall please, to whose view it shall come.

The coming in of Charles Stuart, is much desired and wished for, by those who
aim at their present, quiet and personal, or worldly advantages only, because
they neither understand nor care for that which will be most for GOD's Glory,
or the public Welfare hereafter, so they may have a speedy Settlement upon any
terms, which will put quickest end to our present Troubles. But, his coming
with such a consequence as they dream of, will neither be so speedy, nor the
Sequel so satisfactory as they imagine; for though the late Breach should make
the way easier then it was; Yet if he come by force, he will find a rugged
passage, and long and dangerous marches before he arrive at White Hall; and may
be staid a while also, to see some playing at Duck and Drake, upon the great
waters in his way hitherward, and what Wagers will be tried about diving and
swimming before he comes on shore. The Pond over which he must pass, is so
great, that he will hardly find means to waft himself and all the Beggars and
Baggages that must be brought along with him, unless our good Friends the
Hollanders help him; who, we hope, will either be more honest, or at least so
politic, as to consider, that if Spain and France, (as the report goes) will
assist him, upon a design to propagate their Religion, and uphold Monarchy, as
well their Commonwealth and Religion, will be in danger, as ours; and that if
they of France and Spain, or either of them, prevail to settle an obliged
Friend to their Cause on this side of them, to hold the Dutch play upon the
Water, they will hew out a passage well enough on the other side by Land, to
the Spanish Kings old Inheritance, to which no Prescription is a bar, by a
Royal Maxim: But, though France and Spain, the Dutch, Dane, and Devil to boot,
should assist him, yet he may come short; and I believe, most of those who long
for his coming, will loose much of their present enjoyments, and of their
fairest future hopes also, before Charles Stuart arriveth here in peace; and
perhaps speed worse then so, before he be settled: For, they, who have paid
dearly for what they conquered from his Father, will sell it at a rate much
dearer, before they forgo their interest: And it is infallibly evident to every
man of understanding, that if he comes in by force, it cannot be without their
Foreign Aid, which over and above those many thousands of discontented,
debauched and beggarly Scots, Irish and Englishmen (which wait for such a
time) will spue out after them into these Islands, all the Bandetti, Thieves,
Rogues, needy Persons, and unuseful Soldiers which over-burthen their
Countries already; so that this place will then be an Epitomy of Hell, where
all shall be tormented by those Furies and Devils incarnate, which will be
brought in thereby: For, it will be impossible then, to make distinction
between Friends and Foes to the Commonwealth, who have not Swords in their
hands; neither will it be regarded, if they have any thing to loose; and if he
prevail at last by a Foreign Aid, the best that can be expected by the
greatest part of the Natives, is to be enslaved under all manner of
Servititudes, both Spiritual and Temporal; the apprehension of which, will make
all those who have either Religion, Honesty, or Love to their Country, or to
Themselves, fight it out to the last man: and these things considered, there
will be no probability of a happy or speedy Settlement, if Charles Stuart come
in by force.

But, it is hoped by some few, that he will come in by compact and consent,
upon such terms as will render his coming acceptable. Well, admit this, and
also grant that his Afflictions had prepared his heart, to offer or accept of
such conditions as may preserve the Temporal and Spiritual Freedoms, due to the
people by the Laws of GOD and Nature; and that he would covenant to secure us
in a future enjoyment of our Estates and Consciences under a Righteous
Government; in such manner, that he and we by GOD's Blessing, may be happy in
each other. Grant also, there were a willingness and a reciprocal Condescension
on both sides, without Fraud, to all reasonable Propositions; and that his
Party now in exile, would be contented with such a reasonable allowance, as
might not be over-burthensome to the Commonwealth, whereto the necessities of
some, and the generosity of others, may possibly incline them to accord: Yet
how should such an Agreement be begun, prosecuted or secured? I know no safe
Medium whereby this may be made feisible. Stones and Sand will never make a
Building without Lime, or some other glutinous matter. If the Dutch should
interpose, they might perhaps mediate more for their own advantage then for his
or ours: so probably would the French and Spaniard also, whose Designs would
be more advanced, by our continuing disagreements, then by our reconciliation:
and we shall find a pad of mischief in the straw, if they have any hand in it;
and receive, it may be, a Snake into our bosom, if he should be admitted by
their mediation: for it may rationally be suspected, that they will not appear
for him either in an amicable or hostile manner, without hedging in some
concealed Engagement of his to them, or to one of them, which may be hereafter
disadvantageous to our Spiritual or Temporal Freedoms, or both: and if he
should be secretly reconciled to the Church of Rome, during his abode, among
them, by those opportunities which they have had to work upon him, and then
come over, seasoned with this Principle of theirs, That no Faith or Contract,
is to be kept with Heretics, (and we then appear to be such in his esteem)
what security shall we have, whereupon we can safely depend?

Moreover, it is considerable, that to make an honorable and lasting
reconciliation, he must not only come in with the love and assent of that part
of the people who will insist upon the preservation of their just Freedoms
claimed; but he must also first renounce that pretended Right which he claims
as due from his Progenitors: for, if he still think that to be a right inherent
in himself, as many absurdly do, (because they neither understand right Reason
or Law) and if the people shall receive him without abjuration of that Claim,
they do thereby make void the Sentence which GOD has given on their part, at
the Trial by Combat; and give away for ever, that which they recovered by
Conquest: and so, by our Atonement, we shall but prorogue our Troubles at best,
till he or his posterity have acquired power to renew the old quarrel upon this
false Maxim, Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi; thoug the truth is, Nullum Tempus
occurrit populo, no time or Prescription, is a just bar to the Peoples Right;
for whose sake, Kings (being but their servants) were at first ordained. Though
I have showed it before, yet I will here again briefly touch upon the state of
our Cause, because it is not well enough heeded.

This people lately claimed their natural Freedoms, which the King had usurped:
the King claimed, likewise, his long usurped Prerogatives: after a tedious
contest on both sides, they at length jointly appealed to GOD, to give sentence
according to Justice, upon a Trial by Combat, as it is manifested by the
Words, for Distinction, given out by both Parties, when they joined Battle:
GOD, by making the Peoples Champions Conquerers, gave Judgment on their behalf:
Thereupon the King and his Party quitted the three Kingdoms, and left the
Conquerors in quiet and absolute possession; and all the Kings and
Commonwealths of Christendom taking notice both of the process and success,
witnessed that Restoration of their just Rights, by making Addresses to them
as the Sovereign Power: all which undeniably demonstrate, a Conquest, whereby
all the pretended right of Charles Stuart and his heirs, was as peremptorily
cut off, as ever the like Claim was heretofore from any Family or Person, at
the translation of any Government from one person or Family to another, in any
Kingdom or Empire, since the World began. And, whatsoever can be alleged to
the contrary, or, whosoever murmurs against this Verdict, or shall assist him
(if he be of this Commonwealth) to possess his pretended Claim to these
Islands, is a Traitor to his Country, and a Resister of GOD's doom; and none
but presumptuous, ignorant, debauched or slavish-minded persons, will persevere
after all this evidence, and final Decree in GOD's Court Martial, (from whence
(as I said) there is no appeal) to oppose the Conquerors Title, or reproach
them as Rebels and Traitors, as yet some impudently do. This is briefly, the
true state of that Cause, which is in decision termed by our Adversaries, (and
scornfully by some Cox-combs) who are Enemies to themselves) The Good Old
Cause: and this being duly considered, Charles Stuart has, in my
understanding, no more Legal Right to these Islands, then I have to France and
Spain.

He cannot justly be admitted hither, but on such terms as may preserve the
Peoples Interest, unless GOD in wrath admit him, for a punishment of our sins,
and to be a plague to those who desire it in contempt of his dispensations;
which otherwise, neither our present divisions, or the power of all his
Confederates beyond the Seas, would be able to effect, notwithstanding the
Superlative sottishness of some among us, who seem fit to be governed by none
but a Tyrant; and by whom Charles Stuart himself would be sufficiently plagued,
whether he be tyrannically inclined or not, if the Government of them should be
on him imposed: For, though some desire his coming, it is not in love for his
own sake; but, in hope to enjoy under him, a licentious Freedom; and upon the
least failing of their expectations in that hope, they would cry Crucify him,
the next day after they cried Hosanna; and wish for those again, whom they now
revile: For, many of them, are the same persons who opposed, reviled, and
pursued his Father even to his death; and against him, who should rule over
them piously and righteously, they would be much more exasperated. This is not
a rash censure, founded upon passion or conjectures; but, a probable
conclusion, on that long experience which I have had of the giddiness, malice,
and brutish condition of that inconsiderate Rabble, which makes the loudest
Clamours, and who are transported with the greatest madness.

No private interest makes me a verse to Charles Stuarts admittance, neither
have I any disaffection to his person; for, I never received in jury by him:
But my averseness, is merely in relation to my Country, which, in my
understanding, cannot enjoy a happy Peace, together with his person, as affairs
now stand, in relation to Him, to his Confederates, and to this Commonwealth. I
desire nothing, by endeavoring to bar him, or any other, from that which he,
or they ought in Justice to possess; and, though I may suspect that my Actings
against him for preservation of the Common Liberties, will render me liable to
his fury, and to the rage of his Party, I shall be no more afraid of him,
though readmitted to morrow, then he is now of me, though he should come, both
with an unrestrained Power, and a revengeful Mind; because, I have discharged a
good Conscience, even in doing that which may most offend him. Nay, upon
Considerations of another nature, I shall have no cause to fear him, or to
think I shall be more cruelly dealt, withal by him, then I have been by those
in power, among whom I now live, though he should take away my Life: For,
though I have served the late Powers faithfully, with my Estate, Person and
Credit; yet, by their long neglect of Justice, in some things, and by their
actual Injustice, in some other things, they have so exposed me to contempt,
and so nigh ruined me, both in my Estate, and Credit, without which Life is
little worth; that, Charles Stuart, cannot be so unmerciful to me as they have
been, except, when I am quite deprived of my Livelihood and Reputation, he
should suffer me to live, until I saw likewise, the destruction of my Family
and the Commonwealth, whose welfare is to me more precious then Life; though,
for all my Contributions and Services, (to the endangering of my Life, Estate
and Credit) I could not obtain so much favor, toward the relief of my
Oppressions, as to have one Petition read in her Grand Assemblies during above
nine years continual Solicitations. In brief; as in relation to my self, I
have no reason to respect any one of the former Powers more then the other;
for, as the Porter said, Whosoever were King, he should be but a Porter; so, I
may say, if they who shall come hereafter, be not more righteous then they who
ruled heretofore, I am sure to have but little Favor, and much Mischief: and
as for Charles Stuart in particular, if he comes hither by that passage, which
we are likely to make for him at this time, and shall walk in ways no better
then his Progenitors, and our late Governors have trod, I cannot have so much
cause to dread him, as he will have to be afraid of himself; and I shall do him
better service, perhaps, (if I live to see him here in power) then any one of
them, who most desire his coming: For, as I did to his Father, and his
Successors, I will make bold (though with as little thanks or belief) to tell
him plainly and truly, what will befall him and his Posterity; and then, I
think, my work will be at an end, and I shall leave the Stage.

Now, I have done with Charles Stuart, unless GOD's indignation sends him
thither; and then I must endure the Storm, (as well as GOD shall enable me)
which will issue from that Mountain (and I verily believe, that will be well
enough, because (though I affect them not) I am usually safest in Storms; and
thrive best, by GOD's mercy, when my greatest Enemies, think they shall
irrecoverably undo me.) I perceive, that neither such peaceable Gales, as many
expect, are likely to proceed thence, nor such dreadful Tempests as are by some
feared, if we make them not great by our own defaults: and therefore, I will
turn toward the next Mountain (the late dissolved Parliament) if I know where
to find it; which will he a very hard matter; for, the Father of it is dead;
the Mother upon which it was begotten, knows not whither it is departed; and in
the place where it was born, lived and acted, I find here and there a Limb;
but, of so many united, as may make them a Parliament, I cannot hear any news;
no nor so much as a Paper from any one Member, laying claim to their lost
power. All I hear, of it, is but Echoes, which signify little; or, some
raging sounds, implying that wrathful indignation, which will never accomplish
the will of GOD; or, else scurrilous Invectives, scattered by we know not whom,
without names; and raised perhaps from private Suppositions, conducing only to
an enlargement of the late Breach, as if designed by the Common Adversary to
that end; and by such as are accessory to that endeavor GOD, who raised up
Lazarus, when he was dead, buried, and stunk, may (if he please) once again
restore it; and what he will do, no man knows; but, in common Reason, we can
have little hope of it, or, of having any Deliverance from our hazards, by
that, whereto we can make no Address, and which had not power enough to save it
self, when it had a visible Authority. The Horses, which drew their Chariot,
like those in the Fable of Hippolitus, being frighted, has overthrown it,
dashed it into pieces; and so scattered their Members, that should Aesculapius
undertake the cure, he could not set them together again. When they were in
being, and had Authority de Facto, (though some think not de jure) we were
obliged to be obedient whilst that Being lasted, because there was no other
visible power, to preserve the Common Peace. We had then some hope they might
(though made lawful by necessity only, have been a means of constituting a
better Parliament, then they themselves were: but, what can we now hope for
from them? Or what subjection owe we to that, which if it had some being, can
give us no protection in our obedience? Or unto whose use ought those Fragments
and Fractions of the Power, which was delegated and entrusted by them into
particular hands, be now employed, but, to their use, and for their safety, by
whom that now-invisible Representative, was entrusted? Let us not then, deceive
our selves with Shadows, and run after Voices in the dark, which come we
neither know whence, or from whence, lest we fall into a bottomless Pit.

That Mountain is now quite breathless; there breathes no Wind from it, nor
can, unless GOD extraordinarily breathe again into it; and therefore we are to
address our selves to that visible Power, which GOD has permitted to rise up
in the stead thereof, by what means soever it was advanced: for, though perhaps
it was treasonably acquired, that which ought not to have been done, being
done, is of force; and it was justly permitted of GOD, though unjustly acted by
men; and the Act was of GOD, though the obliquity of the Act, was their who
perpetrated the same; as the rending of Ten Tribes from the house of Solomon,
was of GOD, though it was treasonably prosecuted by Jeroboam: and they who
armed themselves to reduce them to their former subjection, (as perhaps we now
intend to do) were so told, and thereupon desisted from their purpose. This
considered, they who at this present, exercise the supreme power over these
Nations; and they also, who received heretofore power by Commissions from the
late Representative whilst it was in being, must (as well for the safety of the
whole Commonwealth, as for their own security) preserve that Power, as entire
as they can, for their safeguard, whose safety was thereby primarily intended;
and ought not to sacrifice it, either to Revenge, or to the Ghost of that Body,
whereto they have now no Obligation; and essentially violate their Trust to the
People, under color of preserving fidelity to the shadow of their Invisible
Representative, lest they find at last, they were deluded by their own
Corruption, or by a deceitful Spirit: And they in particular, who have assumed
the Sovereign Power, instead of that which is abolished, or suspended, ought
not to deal severely with such as not out of wilfulness, but rather in
Conscience, and through want of due information, shall not comply therewith,
until they have means to be fully informed, what in honor and justice, they
are obliged unto, in so extraordinary an Emergency. In the whole, I could
discover no likelihood of help, in our present necessities, from that Mountain;
and, perhaps, GOD has buried it, as he did the Body of Moses, no man knows
where, lest they who trusted overmuch in it, might commit Idolatry again
therewith, and think he could no way else deliver them from their Oppressors,
but by that Parliament.

The third Mountain, which with the Wind from thence blowing, will be next
considerable, is the Grand Body of the people, whom they represented, whose
Limbs, are now scattered. From this Mountain, I hear as it were the sound of a
mighty Wind, but can perceive no product likely to be answerable to the noise
it makes, nor any birth at present more considerable then a Mouse. It is
expected perhaps, that the people will be avenged upon those who have destroyed
their Image, and offered violence to their late Representative; but Cui bono,
to what purpose, if it were of GOD? They will raise up a Power, some think, to
prosecute also their Cause. That Is a dream, (if not an impossibility) likely to
produce such an event, as the rage of the men of Ophra had against Gideon, when
he brake down the Image of Baal; and we may as well endeavor to gather all the
drops of a Shower into one Bucker, and as soon imbody therewith the sparklings
of Char-coa^s, and the sprinklings of Dew lying upon the grass tops, into an
Electuary: For, the Members of that Body, are so many, so scattered, and so
divided into Factions, by their differing Judgments, Assertions and Interests,
that, without an overruling Power, they will never be brought to agree upon
any Medium to preserve themselves; much less to vindicate that Parliament,
which the greatest part of them, would not acknowledge to be their lawful
Representative, whilst it continued in Power: For, many of them sought the
ruin thereof, when it was in being; rejoiced when it was destroyed, (as they
think it to be) and were sorry for nothing, so much, as that the Army was not
also therewith annihilated. Yea, not a few of those who faithfully served that
Parliament, and conscientiously did their best endeavor to preserve it, were
so dissatisfied with their partial and unjust proceeding in some things; with
their neglect in other matters, and with the dubiousness of their Authority,
that they adhered thereto, for no respect so much, as because they had thereto
engaged themselves, and knew no other visible means under GOD, so likely to
prevent a general and destructive Confusion; or, else, for that they thought
them empowered at first by GOD's permission, and graciously restored after
their long Interruption, (for that purpose which they themselves have
pretended) until this people should be prepared (by those Changes wherewith he
will further prove them) for such a Government, as will be most for His Glory,
and their good. In expectation of this Mercy, they, who were their Friends, now
wait upon GOD, and think themselves not obliged to endeavor an avengement upon
those, who have done GOD's Work, for ought they know to the contrary; and, most
of that part of the People who disaffected the late Parliament, will not engage
against the Infringers of it, in hope to see their own malicious Design
against the Commonwealth, to take place by the removal thereof, by the
distractions, or miscarriages, of the Army. Upon these, and such like
Considerations, I concluded, that, from this Mountain, (until it were put into
a better capacity) nothing could be expected answerable to a rational
Expectation; but, some mad Combinations, in several parts of the Commonwealth,
for and against reviving the late Parliament, which is doubtless designed, and
will be fomented by the Common Adversary, to make him an Inlet, and bring at
last to his side, one part of their dissenting Forces.

Then, I lifted mine eyes toward that other Hill, from whence many men look for
help: to wit, the Army; for, though I expect salvation from that Hill only,
which over-tops all Mountains, I considered that also; and, at the first fixing
of mine eyes upon it, I saw many doubtful and terrible Appearances, which did a
little affright me. It resembled, me thought, a Hill with three tops, seemingly
divided, with some slashes of fire, and smoakes breathing and issuing out from
between them, which portended such mischiefs as many feared would ensue their
dissolving of the Parliament: For, this is the Hill which justled aside that
Mountain, and I was jealous it might rather prove to be Mount Ebal, whence
Curses were pronounced, then Mount Gerazim, from whence Blessings could be
expected; and it may possibly be unto us as GADS-HILL, which has been a Hill
of Robbors, as well as GODS-HILL, notwithstanding any thing, that I can
absolutely warrant to the contrary. But, I hope better: for, as the sins of the
Israelites, made GOD incline David's heart to discover the pride which was in
it, by numbering the people; and then for a punishment of that offense, brought
him into such a straight, that he himself was to choose whether his Penance
should be the Sword, Pestilence or Famine; and upon his resigning himself with
penitence, to GOD's good pleasure, had a Correction, vouchsated in mercy, which
gave occasion of purchasing that piece of ground, whereon the Temple was
afterward erected: So, perhaps the Army, or the Officers thereof, having in
some special manner sinned against GOD; and, they, and these Nations being
mutually occasions of transgressions in each other, which have provoked GOD
against both, we are brought into the like streights; which, if they produce
true Repentance, with an unfeigned Resignation of our selves to GOD, he will
not only correct us in mercy, but, make this Breach likewise, an occasion of
erecting such a Government, as will together with advance of our Welfare, make
some preparation for that Kingdom, which will glorify him throughout all
Nations.

Upon these, and such musings, that Mountain, which before appeared to me as
contemptible as a Molehill, and to send forth discomfortable blasts, seemed to
have a more venerable Aspect: yea, to have much Holy Ground in it, and to
breathe forth refreshing Gales. It then appeared to me, like that Mountain, in
some respects, on which the Israelites beheld Clouds, Flames and Smoke; from
which they heard a Trumpet and Thunders, and which the People were enjoined not
to touch, on penalty of being stoned. Methought also, I saw appearances of GOD
upon it, and the Popular Mountain last mentioned, to move gradatim toward the
same, and therewith incorporating into one strong Hill, which if our sins
hinder not, will be jointly active and passive, according to my apprehension,
in the profecution of that Expedient which is most heroic, and which will
produce many future Experiments, teaching us better to know GOD's, our own, and
other men's intentions, and the way to both our settlement, and to that Kingdom
which has no end This Course, if the Army, and they who have pretended to
GOD's glory, and the common welfare, have resolution and faithfulness enough to
pursue as they yet may; they shall thereby wipe off, all former and present
Aspersions, with everlasting honor: the upbraidings and reproaches of their
Malignant Detractors and Oppressors, shall effect no more against them, then
the barkings and bawlings of Dogs against the Moon: their former failings, will
be means of prevailings hereafter: every Stumble, shall set them two steps
forwarder: though they were more disabled then yet they are, the united powers,
of all their mighty Adversaries abroad and at home, shall be to them, but as a
Field of stubble before a Flame; and their over-powering them with multitudes,
shall be but like heaping up straw and dry brambles, to cover a strong Fire:
For, GOD shall return into their Camps with invincible Auxiliacies, lodge in
their Headquarters, and rejoice in protecting and enabling them as heretofore,
to the producing of miraculous effects, and to the reterting on their
Adversaries (who are puffed up with vain hopes by their Divisions) that scorn
and confusion which they expected should befall these Islands are long: and I
have here averred no more then GOD will perform on his part, if the Armies, and
they who pretend for the common Interest, shall not apostatize from what is to
be performed on their parts.

Let them take heed to this: for, it is the effect of those promises, which are
made conditionally to all men throughout all Generations, and recorded to be
transferred and applied particularly and universally as occasion is offered:
and, that which is contrary to what is here averred, will befall them, who
falsify their trust, or engagements for GOD's or their Countries Cause, even
to their own inexpressible shame and destruction. For, as when the ways of men
please GOD, he makes troubles to be their advantage, and their greatest Enemies
to be their Friends: so, when they wilfully displease him, he makes their best
Friends to be their Enemies, their strength to weaken them; their wisdom, to
befool them; their prevailings to overthrow them; and that, wherein they take
most delight, to be their greatest vexation: yea, if they persevere in their
wickedness, he will make them at last, to be their own destroyers, as were the
Jews, whose destruction, GOD said, Was of themselves. So, is our desolation
likely to be: for, we are as like them, in all things, as if we had been
patterned out by them; yea, as well in other particulars as in our manners, as
appears by what follows.

There is a distinct being among us, resembling that of Judah and Israel; and
we are both separated and mixed, as they were, in relation to Temporal and
Spiritual Concernments: our Friends and Enemies round about us, were in every
respect typified, by their Friends, Adversaries and Confederates: we are as
obstinate as they, in prosecuting our carnal Designs: we dote as much upon our
own Customs and Traditions, as ever they did: like them, we deride and
prosecute, those who are stirred up by GOD, to declare his Will, to reprove our
sins, and to forewarn us of his Judgments: like them, we prefer our present
profit, and a temporal Kingdom, before a Spiritual: as many Factions, we have
among us, as they had, a little before, and at the time wherein Jerusalem was
destroyed: and if Christ were in the flesh among us, as he was with them, we
are as likely to prefer a Murderer before him, and to crucify him. We deserve
therefore to be rejected as they were; nay, far greater Judgments then fell
upon them, because, what they did, and what thereon ensued, is recorded for our
instruction and forewarnings. But, no Examples, of ancient times, nor those
which we have seen in our days, will work upon us, or move us to any
considerable amendment; rather, on the contrary, we delight in lies, and take
pleasure in deriding the most sacred things, yea, in abusing each other, and in
hearing each other abused, by scurrilous Invectives: and methinks I see, with
what ridiculous Gesticulations, and vain rejoycings, our Adversaries beyond the
Seas, peruse our scurrilities. These, we can find time enough to read or hear:
but what may tend to edification, reconciliation or performance of our duties,
we have neither money to buy, nor leisure to peruse, nor will to take notice
of, though it be put gratis, into our hands: but, we keep them in our pockets,
as Caesar did that Letter, which might have prevented his death, till the
mischief whereof we are forewarned, comes upon us. OH LORD! Deliver us from all
our Enemies in this time of our hazard; especially deliver us from our selves,
without whose prevarications, no other enemies could hurt us.

One thing, comes now suddenly to mind, not impertinent, which I will here
insert, lest it be forgotten; and it will concern you, (whom I believe to be
one of GOD's Elect in this City of London) to put other men in mind to be be
heedful thereof: I have observed so many wicked Spirits, to be lately conjured
up, and let loose among you, and now possessing the greatest number, as well of
the richer sort, as of poor Artificers Tradesmen, Apprentices, Clerks, and
other debauched, despicable, and giddy-headed persons, whose hearts are filled
with malice, and their mouths overflow with hellish Curses, direful
Imprecations, and scandalous Language against their Superiors, and those things
which they understand not, manifesting in them, a proneness to desperate
Mutinies and Insurrections, when occasion shall be offered, that it is GOD's
great mercy, this great City has not been in a Flame long since: and, I am
persuaded that a great Judgment hangs over it, which had ere now descended, if
a considerable number of righteous men, had not stood in the Gap to divert it;
and for whose sakes, GOD, has hitherto spared it. There seemed to me, a
Forewarning Symptom thereof exhibited on or about the 23 day of June last, at
which time a Prodigious Meteor (the like not heard of by me heretofore) was
seen by the effect, which ought to have been more heeded then it was. A Flame
descending in a Whirlwind, about two Furlongs Westward from the Suburbs of
your City, consumed to the roots, the stumps of the Sun-scorched Grass on the
ground, many poles every way (which I saw, and have mentioned in another
occasional Discourse) not without observing GOD's mercy to the City, in
restraining it from passing a little further Eastward, where was combustible
matter enough, which by feeding it, might, as the Wind then sat, have made it
a more dreadful, and a more observable Forewarning.

But, that which last precedeth, has brought another Mountain to my
consideration, from whence there may possibly, issue such Winds, as will be of
more consequence, toward the settling or unsettling the Common peace, then from
any one of the four aforementioned, considering the posture we are in. It lies
neither East, West, North or Southward; but, is that Hill, even that great
City, wherein you are. I dare not express, what I either hope or fear, as in
relation thereunto, lest it may be more offensive then profitable: and
therefore, smothering my thoughts, I will only pray to GOD, so to qualify
their spirits, who are distempered, and so to direct them, who are peaceably
minded among you; that, in the great Trial of their prudence, which is now at
hand, they may prosecute what will be most expedient for their own and the
public safety, seasonably, faithfully, and with courage: for, the turning of
the Balance to the wrong or right side, will now (next under GOD) be in their
Power; and the greatest future honor or shame, will accordingly be their
portion.

From that, which I have here hastily scribled, out of those many Notions which
lay confusedly in my heart; (and which like an Olla podredae, will afford some
Refection, though the whole dish be not for every man's diet) you may pick out
thus much at least, that, I hope GOD, who makes light spring out of darkness,
and produces good effects from evil, will be pleased so to dispose of what
shall issue from these Mountains, or from that which some of the Army have
irregularly done, (whatsoever they intended) that it shall advantage us at the
last; and that he will in the mean time restrain both the City and
Commonwealths Forces from that Engagement against each other (which our Friends
fear, and our Enemies hope for) by making them consider what sad effects may
else follow, to the ruin of their Country, and to their own shame and
distraction; that he will give them grace, to preserve that Power entire, which
was at first put into their hands, for the safeguard of the People and their
Rep esontative, (and since they have assumed a Supreme Power, instead of what
was intended to be subordinate) to make that use of it, whereto they are
obliged in Gratitude, Conscience and Justice, even to preserve the Common
Peace, and to strengthen their hands, whom GOD shall stir up, and endow with
such a portion of his Spirit, as may enable them, to settle a Righteous
Government, by reducing those things into order, with a strong hand, which are
not otherwise reducible by humane wisdom; and then resign again the Military
Sword, to be returned into the Scabberd, and continue in quiet subjection to
the Civil Sword, as in times past, when the Peoples Representative had it at
command.

If this you think to be my hope, as indeed it is, you may then ask me, how it
shall be effected: if you do, all I can tell you, is only of another branch of
that hope, which, is, that the Commonwealths Armies, who have now the visible
Power in their hands, will become of one mind, and being lovingly and firmly
united, will either speedily restore, (if it be needful and possible) those
whom they have scattered, or, resign it cordially to such as GOD shall
providentially call together, and fitly qualify for so great a work; and from
whom the said Armies (having so delivered up that supreme Power) may receive
back a subordinate Authority, to be faithfully and obediently assistant
according to their commands in their several places of trust for the future:
for, though it may seem absurd or improper for them, who once had the greatest
power, to make others greater then themselves, and then to receive back a less
power; yet, that, is but such a denial of themselves as is just; and no new, or
strange thing, seeing the People in whom is virtually the Sovereign Power, do
constitute their Representative to be the supreme active power, of the
Commonwealth; and then are again in several Parties, and distinct Capacities,
re-impowered thereby, as their various occasions and services require it.

You may then ask me, likewise, whether some of the chief Officers of the
Armies, may not have a secret intention of advancing themselves to the public
wrong, and by having an influence upon the common Soldiery, render them to be
more serviceable to themselves, and their purposes, then to the Republic, as
it has happened otherwhile heretofore. I hereto answer, that, GOD, has a more
prevailing influence upon Armies, then their Officers can have; and he being
the LORD of HOSTS, can turn the hearts of their Officers and Soldiers (if any
be depraved) or make the Soldiery, by their Officers late example, to cast off
their obedience to them, as they did cast off their obedience to the late
Parliament, and perhaps with as good or a better Conscience, then some of them
have so done, though they were thereto really necessitated: For, if the
Soldiery shall be jealous of any self ends, in their Officers from whence the
late Innovation might spring; or are not convinced in their Consciences, that
the late defection was warranted by GOD, and by an unquestionable necessity
apparent to them; and shall withal, perceive that it will plunge them into a
Bloody Engagemem against each other, both to the destroying of themselves, and
to the endangering of their Country, as probably it will: I hope, they will
consider, by whom they are paid their Wages; for whose defense and service,
they are imbodied; that, they are a part of the same Body which is to be
secured, and which is exposed at this time to hazard; and that they are not
obliged to obey those who abuse their trust, contrary to that end for which
they had it conferred upon them; and that then they will deliver up their
Delinquent Officers, and not make themselves guilty of other men's crimes, lest
they hazard the whole Army, as the Benjamites did their whole Tribe, by not
delivering up the Delinquents of Gibea, who did abuse to death, the Levites
Concubine.

But, if the Parliament cannot be restored; or if (though they may) the said
Parliament cannot confide in the Army; or, if the Army being reconciled, shall
be persuaded in Conscience, that the late Parliament was not capable of making
a firm Settlement; and that their Officers, having with good warrant, done that
which they did, and knowingly intend such a course, as will more conduce to an
Establishment of the Peoples just Liberties, and safety, then that which the
Parliament prosecuted; and that it will be also more speedy and more honorable
both to these Nations and to them: what must we then do? Doubtless, we must
then submit to the present necessity, and to that expedient which they will
prosecute; and those men of understanding, courage, honesty and piety, who
believe it to be so, and rake notice what a hazardous and desperate condition
this Commonwealth is visibly and unquestionably in, at this time, (being called
together, and empowered by those on whom the supreme Power is now devolved)
must act for our preservation so far forth as they are able, notwithstanding
any Law heretofore made to discourage them; and leave the event to GOD: for, no
man that acts for common safety, when the Sword has absolute power, and shall
also command it, can justly be questioned afterward, for acting contrary to any
former Law, which could be binding no longer then during that time wherein the
Civil Sword had Sovereignty. Indeed, if during that time he acts contrary to
such Laws as were made for a Legal Government, and to the destroying thereof;
or, shall not conform again to those Laws, when a Military Jurisdiction is to
be laid aside: he is a Traitor, is liable to condign punishment, and not for
acting that which necessity required, when the Sword superseded the Law
formerly in force.

But, who has Authority to levy money, for payment of the Soldiers, and to
defray other contingent expenses, that a proceed may be made toward settling a
Government; and that Plunder, Free quarter, and the common Enemies attempts may
be prevented the mean while? I will imply an Answer to these Questions, by
asking who is not authorized to do it in such a case as we are in, or may be
in, if he be actually in Arms, and sufficiently strengthened so to do?
especially if commissioned by those who have the most visible supreme
Authority, to secure the Public Interest? Or, who, though not commissioned by
any, is not warranted, if he be enabled, (and shall do it sincerely) to
endeavor preservation of the Common safety and interest, by an Arbitrary
Proceeding, in a time of universal danger, and when it cannot be done in a
legal manner? May any man come without blame, and with thanks, to help save a
single City, endangered by a raging Fire, and take Instruments useful thereto
out of any man's possession? Yea, enter into his house, and pull it down if need
be; or, burn the Suburbs of a City, whereby an Enemy may be advantaged in
laying a Siege thereunto, and the said City be lost? And, shall it not be
allowable for any man to do as much for preservation of the whole Commonwealth,
consisting of many Cities, Counties, Towns and Villages, yea, of three populous
Nations, when they are in danger to be destroyed, or (which is worse) to be
inslaved? Are not all the Goods, and Lands, yea, and the Persons also, within a
Commonwealth, her Goods and Lands, and Persons; whose soever they are, or in
whose occupation, propriety or possession soever they be? This cannot be
denied: and may she not then take her own to secure her self, wheresoever she
finds it? Verily it may lawfully be taken by the Law of Nature, and Salus
Populi, which is the Supreme Law whereto all other humane Laws are subservient:
and cursed is he, above all other Transgressors of humane Laws, who either
abuses this Law by neglecting to put it in execution, so far as he is able,
when need requires it; or who shall pretend to a necessity, when there is none;
or make it seem greater then it is, to advantage his private Designs to the
oppressing of other men: and wicked and unjust is that Commonwealth o^ Ciyt,
which, when the danger is past, does not contribute out of the Common Purse a
reasonable repair of their particular damages, whose goods were seized or
spoiled to prevent a general detriment, by an Arbitrary or irregular Act.

One Objection more may be yet made, which is employed in this Verse of the
Poet: Nulla fides, pietasve viris, qui castra sequuntur.
No Faith, or Piety, is in their words,
Who, have no living, but their Swords.


Armies, are as dangerous and unstable, as the Seas; ebbing, flowing, calmed,
enraged, turning and returning, as Winds and Tides move them. They are but an
Arm of Flesh, you will say, and we can have no assurance of their constancy,
whereby we may be confident thereof; and, our Army, may set up, one of their
own Officers, or call in Charles Stuart, or make some other use of their power
at last, for their own advantage, to the destroying of the Peoples interest;
and, what shall we then do? Truly, we must then do as, I hope, you and I do
now, and ever shall do, in prosperity, and adversity. We must do as the
Israelites did when they were oppressed. It is recorded, that, when for their
sins, they were (as we now are) at such and such a time, so, and so oppressed,
they cried unto GOD, and obtained deliverance. They cried, and were delivered;
and sinned again, and cried again, and were again and again delivered; as we
have often been. Yea, though their hearts were not right, and their cries
proceeded more form a sense of their Oppressions, then of their sins; yea,
though they cried and prayed, but as Ahab once did, and as (I fear) most of us
have often done; yet, they had temporary deliverances; and they returning to
their sins, the punishments again returned, increasing from seven years
bondage, to seventy years captivity: and, we starting aside as they did like a
warped Bow, are in danger of the like Chastisements: For, our verbal profession
of trusting in GOD; our loud vocal Prayers, and sometimes a days abstinence
from food, prevails very little, except there comes therewith, a still voice
from the heart, which cries for mercy, as Abels blood cried out of the earth
for vengeance. To tell the greatest part of men, that they must trust in God,
is in their apprehension (though they seemingly receive it as good counsel) as
if they were plainly told that there is no hope of their deliverance: For, they
feel their hearts cannot trust in him, except we show them some other thing
left wherein they might trust, if GOD should fail their expectation, as they
fear he will, when he looks into their hearts, and sees that they trust him no
longer, then those outward things continue whereon they placed their
confidence. If we cannot trust GOD with our Army, who is the LORD of Armies,
except we may be assured our Armies will prove trusty, or, unless we see some
other earthly reserve to rely upon if that should be false; we must then suffer
for our unfaithfulness, without remedy; and may be likened to a foolish man,
who having an excellent stout Horse able to bear him to the Lands end, is
afraid he may miscarry in a Journey of ten miles, unless he has also, a wooden
Hobbyhorse to be a Reserve. He, that could cast down the VValls of a strong
City, with the sound of Rams-horns, can save us without an Army, and in
despite of the most puissant Armies in the world; and, he has deserved better
of these Nations, then to be distrusted by them.

For, what People under Heaven, has had more Experiments of GOD's timely
assistance in all extremities, then has been vouchsafed by him unto us both in
times past, and within our remembrance? Nay, what Histories record a Mercy
vouchsafed to any Nation since the beginning of the world, like that which we
enjoy at this present amidst our Confusions? We are a living active Body
without a Head: A burning Bush that is not consumed: A People without a
Government, yet not embrewed with each others blood; which I believe (though
few of us heed that mercy) is a wonderment to all our Neighbors round about
us; and is a token undubitable that GOD is yet in the Bush, and will gather us
together as Chickens under a Hen, to be brooded by him, if we were not wilful:
for, if I should enumerate (beside our three late signal Changes without
Bloodshed) those other late mercies, which but I my self have taken heed of in
my time, have been so extraordinarily linked to each other, that we had been
utterly destroyed, if any one of those Links had been broken off, it would
amount to a large Volumn; or, if I should commemorate, how many of those
outward trusts have failed us, whereon we relied, it would appear, that all
other Dependencies are empty vanities. I will particularize a few of them, that
we may be more mindful how we have been deceived by those other helps wherein
we trusted, and learn henceforward, to think GOD's Protection is all-sufficient.

We had a King of whom we had great hopes, as appeared by our mourning, for his
long absence in Spain, when he was Prince; and by our extravagant rejoycings at
his return; and many had an extraordinary confidence in him when he first
assumed the Regal Authority: yet, he became our Oppressor soon after; and much
was designed, which might have more oppressed us. We had afterward a Parliament,
on which we so much depended, that we made an Idol of it, and were no less
oppressed thereby. We had many eminent Persons among us, whom we thought such
true Patriots, that we almost deifi'd them; and supposed they should have been
our Deliverers, from the servitude which we groaned under; but, many of them,
apostatized from our Cause, and other some were taken away by death, whom we
thought most sincere; and both failed in our greatest need. We had a Protector,
whom some did compare unto (nay, prefer before) Moses and Joshua; and he made
such fair shows of Piety, that we much trusted in him, and thought it
impossible he should deceive us; yet, in him alse, there was no trust. Then the
Parliament being restored, we again reposed our confidence therein, and were
again deceived: many have trusted in themselves, in their power, in their
estates, in their own piety, in their policy; and all those things vanish away
also like Smoke: some other at this present trust in our Armies, in the
strength of men and horses, in Forts and Fleets, with such like; and now begin
to distrust them, feeling not only our late hopes of them to be shaken, but
our Fears likewise to be by them in creased: and what should all this teach us,
but to relic on him only, who is immutable? He has Wisdom enough to know
what is best for us; Power enough, to effect it for us; Love enough, to
vouchsafe it; Faithfulness enough, to perform his promises; and Ubiquity and
Eternity, to be present with us at all times, in all places, and in all
extremities: yea, he has freely engaged by his Word and Promises, to do all
this for us, if we have but Faith enough to believe him; and will also give us
that Faith, if we heartily ask it. If we think not this a sufficient Reserve to
secure us, though our Armies, and all things else in the world, should be false
and helpless, we are worthy to be deserted; and can have no security, until we
search out the Cause of our diffidence, and then endeavor to remove it: which
Cause, is our many great unrepented sins; and in special, our hypocrisy, our
gross partiality, our self-seekings, and remissness in doing Justice, and in
mercifully relieving the oppressed, the Widows, the Fatherless and the
Friendless; which sins, were the principal causes of the Desolation of all
Kingdoms, and Republics, heretofore destroyed, in former Ages.

Our Sins, have been the sole Cause, that our Kings, our Parliaments, our
Protectors, our Armies, our Navies, our Counsels, our Cost, our Conquests, and
that we our selves, have been destructive to our selves, to each other, and to
a happy progression toward the settlement which we have long expected:
Therefore, until these sins are more truly repented, all the wisdom and power
upon earth, shall not avail us; but every day will increase our troubles, until
there be a final extirpation of all that which now hinders GOD's work: For, if
our Armies reconcile to each other, an unarmed power, shall break them in
pieces: If, by their Union with the People, who are wellaffected to their own
Cause, we could secure these Islands from Foreign Invasions, and Domestic
Insurrections, until our own wisdom had contrived and settled such a Government
as we most desire; yet, if our sins remain unrepented, GOD, may make us
miserable by Famine, which would consume us with a lingering death. If our
Industry, were able to prevent or mitigate a Famine; he has Pestilences and
other Sicknesses at command, to make a quicker dispatch; and if we had cures
for these, he can rain down Fire and Sulpher from Heaven, as he did on Sodom
and Gomorrha. GOD, is a sure Refuge against all these, and against evils more
to be feared then all these; and if we reconcile our selves to him in Faith and
Repentance, we shall not need to seek for safety in the Reeds of Egypt, or, by
climing Rocks, or creeping into Dens; or by fawning upon Tyrants, Dogs, Devils,
and despicable Deliverers, who cannot save themselves. We shall then, neither
fear ill News, or Midday, or Mid-night-mischiess; not the roaring of Lions,
nor the hissing of Serpents, nor the murmurings of the People, nor their Fury,
how horribly soever they rage; nor the failing of our Corn or wine, nor the
increase of our Troubles, or of our Enemies, though they enclose us with
Armies; nor suspect our own Armies, nor dread the malice of the Devil, nor our
own Sins, which are more dangerous then all the rest aforementioned: For,
nothing shall then harm us; but, even those things which are most mischievous
in their own nature, shall be made our advantage and security. Moreover, when
we do not trust in any outward means of safety, but value them only as tokens
of GOD's love for the Givers sake, and make use of them as Auxiliaries from
him, he will multiply and continue even those outward Accommodations which our
frailty desires; that, they may help support our fleshly part, when Faith must
employ the Faculties of our minds and bodies in working out with him, both our
Temporal and Spiritual Salvation.

I speak this experimentally: for, I being subject to such infirmities as all
other men are, when I am buffered by Satan for my sins past, by GOD's
permission, (or to prevent sins whereinto I had else fallen) do, oftentimes,
(like men in danger of drowning, catching hold of a Rush) entertain such vain
hopes, as may keep my flesh quiet, and the less burdensome to my Spirit; that,
thereby pleasing her self a while, till she be a little enured to the
Affliction which lies upon us, it may be the more tolerable: and I am thankful
to GOD, even for such vain hopes, as come to nothing; and for that ease which I
had by them, whilst they lasted: But, I placed no trust in them; for, GOD is my
only trust, whom I so well know by those manifestations which he has made of
himself, that I cannot despair (though I tremble) when I contemplate the
severest of his Judgments; and am so assured he is merciful, that I cannot but
trust in his mercies, how long soever delayed, or, how far off soever they seem
removed: And, when in such distractions, troubles, and doubtful consequences,
as those wherewithal I am now exercised, (and which these Changes threaten to
make greater) I feel my heart distempered; then, I make use of such Cordials as
David has left in his Book of approved Experiments; and, I thus expostulate
with my heart in his words: Why art thou so dejected, Oh my Soul? Why art thou
so disquieted within me? Hope thou in GOD; for, I shall yet praise him, who is
the health of my countenance, and my GOD.

If, we get but this Reserve, we are safe enough, though the Army should fail
us, and though neither that, nor any other earthly hope, took effect: we should
not then, destroy the comforts of the day present, so often as we do, by an
impertinent vexatious caring for to morrow. GOD, should then keep our Armies
trusty, and so far forth fortify and strengthen them, that they would restrain
their old distempers, and be a terror to those only, who wickedly or
foolishly seek to hinder the settlement both of our Peace, and of their own. He
would then prepare the hearts of all the People, to be desirous of, and
conformable to, what must be done for their wellbeing: He would qualify and
empower persons to prosecute it for his glory, and for the consolation of those
who are faithful and peaceable in our Israel; yea, he would then so clear the
eye of Reason and of Faith, which sin has clouded, that many thousands of
those, who can yet see no possibility of modelling any safe, just, or lasting
Government, save according to the old mode, and by re-admitting all that has
been exploded and rejected, shall perceive that to be feisible which they
despaired; cheerfully submit thereto, when it is completed; and contribute
willingly, to the means of completing it: and, I am persuaded that in the
Mountain of Contemplation, I have had a little glimpse of that complete model
which will take place, when the date of that Mole or Moon-Calf, is expired,
which is mentioned in my Britains Genius.

I cannot express what I saw; but, I do believe (by the little glimpse
aforesaid, which I had of it) that to make a Government perfect and durable,
there are some Foundations to be laid, which must be everlasting, (as in
respect to that everlastingness, which belongs to things of that nature) and
that those Foundations must be guarded with Pedestals deeply laid, and barred
about, that none may undermine, deface or shake, much less remove them, in any
length of time, to the endangering of the whole Edifice. That, also, the
contriving of those Foundations, and of some of the first Superstructures, must
proceed from righteous unbyassed persons, who are in unity in Spirit; or else
it must be begotten by one and the same Father; that there may be a natural
sympathy in the whole Structure; that, all the parts thereof may be made
homogeneous and adequate one to the other, to prevent oppugnancie; and that
such additions as must be raised and pulled down in future time, and perhaps
raised and pulled down again as occasions will require, may neither deform or
weaken the principal Members of the Fabric. They, likewise, who shall be
entrusted to modellize our Government, to make it such as it ought to be, must
so frame it, that it may correspond with, and be subservient unto the Kingdom
of Christ, by considering what is morally, legally, or Evangelically pertinent
to all Nations and Ages; and what is but Ceremonial or Judicial, and belonging
peculiarly to the Jews only in their own Country, and during the time wherein
their Law was in force; lest, they form a Jewish Commonwealth instead of a
Christian Government, and bring us back again by degrees to a Legal Bondage,
instead of an Evangelical Freedom. I, contemplatively apprehended also, that
these following Particulars, with some other of that nature, were to be
unchangeable Constitutions in the said Government. 1. That all persons
whosoever, pretending right to a Supremacy over these Nations, were to be for
ever excluded. 2. That no other single person, or number of men, great or
small, should have a Perpetual Soveraignly, but be sometimes reducible to a
condition of Subjection. 3. That none should govern Arbitrarily, but by
positive Laws, except in extraordinary emergent necessities, so long time only
as the necessity should require it, by their Judgment and Assent who are
competent Judges of that necessity. 4. That no man's Propriety should be
infringed, but in the like necessity; and that, recompense should be made out
of the Public Purse, as soon as may be after the necessity is removed, to
every one then damnified thereby. 5. That the Peoples Trustees, may have
election of all Public Officers, and GOD have his choice by lot, out of those
Elections. 6. That GOD 's Throne in the Consciences of men, may be usurped by
no humane Power; and that no man or men empowered, under pretense of
Conscience, or otherwise, may enjoy any Liberty or Privilege, contrary to the
Moral Laws of GOD; or the Law of Nature; or destructive to humane society; or
to the giving any Foreign Power, or Person, a Jurisdiction, within this
Commonwealth; or to the obstructing of Common Right and Justice. 7. That
whosoever, will not submit and subscribe to those Fundamentals (when it is
required) shall be as an excommunicated person, having no benefit of the Laws,
or Protection by the said Government; and suffer as a Traitor, if by act or
word he wilfully infringe them.

Such Contemplations as these relating to our future Government, I long since
had, and here and there hinted them in Public and Private expressions, to some
in Authority; and though they were then little regarded, I hear that some of
them are lately taken into Consideration: and I might have added more perhaps,
as considerable as those, if I had not perceived that my Overtures had been
slighted by them, who saw they obstructed what was designed for their private
advantages.

But, why this Generation (which pretends much to the gifts of the Spirit
that shall be vouchsafed to his Children in the last Ages of the world) should
be so averse from those Cautions, Forewarnings, Tenders and Expedients by me
exhibited, I conceive not, unless it be out of Self-wil, and Pride of Heart.
Why may not GOD, if he so please, save this Commonwealth, by a poor man's
Expedient, that is not very wise, as well, as he did heretofore save a City by
a poor wise man that was as little regarded? Some indeed have been pleased to
ask my Advice, with seeming seriousness, as if they thought it might be
pertinent to their well-being, as the Jews did some of their approved Prophets,
pretending Conformity therein; but, when they perceived it was not consistent
with their own D^signes and Self Ends, they wholly waved it, as those did. If
to have Evidences of my being rightly informed, by a measure of Divine Grace,
and by what has succeeded on my Pre-conjectures; there have been some such
evidences on my part. If Education may be a means of informing me, I was
educated in our Universities, and Inns of Court. If to be a Soldier may ought
qualify me, I was a Commander in our first Army, so conformable to the Precept
given to Soldiers by John Baptist, in resting content with my pay, that I have
not been malevolently discontented though nigh 1700 l. made due to me by an
Ordinance of Parliament, has been kept from me almost 17 years, without
receiving either the Principal or Interest, though 700 l. thereof was money
lent, and for which I have paid interest ever since; and though I may possibly
be kept without it 17 years longer, longer. If Manifestations of my good
Affection to the Common Safety and Welfare may make my offers considerable, I
have contributed without compulsion, the adventuring of my Estate and Life. If
my Religion, be of any concernment, I am a Christian and a Protestant. If my
Conversation be pertinent; who can object ought against it, or lay any thing to
my charge? If a competency of Estate be requisite to gain esteem, I wanted not
that, until I was deprived thereof, by Oppression, and by the want of Justice
and Mercy in other men. If to have conversed with Books, and to have observed
long time the manners of men, and to have heeded the Constitution of our
present times and Affairs, may be any thing helpful to inform me what may be
now expedient; I have had those helps also. Nay, if to be poor, ignorant,
contemned, meanly gifted, and of a low and obscure condition, are such
qualifications, as make men in these days most capable of illumination, and of
that knowledge whereby they may best serve their Country in giving good advice;
I am in all these respects as likely to be that way serviceable, as any of
those Huntsmen, Falconers, Tailors, Tinkers, Cobblers, Plow-men, Brewers or Dray
men, which are now, or have been heretofore, Officers of the Army, Members of
Parliament, of Committees of Safety, or Counselors of State. And if I had the
volubility of tongue, which is in some; Ignorance enough to make me confidently
speak Nonsense, and many words to little purpose; the shamelessness of a
Whore; the Conscience of an Hypocrite; and the valor of an English Mastiff, to
fly upon any dangerous attempt without fear or wit; and but that advantage
which two or three Officers of the Army have at this present: I should not
think it a hard matter, if GOD (as one of the Royal Party once said, stood
neuter, and as our Affairs now stand) to make my self a King, or a Protector,
or something equivalent, either before next March, or else before Spain and
France, had complemented themselves into a firm and lasting Reconcilement, as
near to a conclusion as they now think it to be.

Though I have hitherto publicly contributed my endeavors in vain, yet I will
privately, as I do now, employ my Talent to preserve the Common Peace, in hope
to bring in (by a more acceptable hand) those things which I conceive pertinent
to consideration; and which will be a means to stir abler Instruments, to
become active toward establishing such a Righteous Government, as is yet
possible; or at least to prevent some of those mischiefs which Anarchy
threatens: For, if all the Premises were duly considered by those whom they
concern, and what Results may rationally be deduced from them, they would
discover an Expedient, (and the only Expedient now loft) if they be capable of
any wherein they themselves may be active; by which, these Nations, Charles
Stuart, our Governors that are or may be, and all the Princes of Europe, may
be happy; make all their Subjects and Neighbors partakers of the same
happiness; and escape that Doom, which they are in danger to undergo with that
Scarlet Whore, by whose Cup of Fornications, they have been made drunk. I will
declare without respect of persons, what that Expediont is; though I know it
will be derided, if communicated in public. But, he, who pretends to assist
men that are in an intricate Labyrinth under ground in the dark, where are many
crooked turnings and returnings, and gives him directions in a Paper only,
leaving them no light whereto they may accustom their eyes a while, nor
whereby they may see how to read what is given, (or, what Passages they must
avoid or take) may justly be thought to mock them: Therefore, before I show my
Expedient, I will endeavor to remove some Prejudicacies, relating to my self,
and other men, by declaring what it is, which will hinder every Party
aforementioned, from putting it into practice; and that is included in this
brief sentence, Non videmus id manticae quod in tergo est; which applying to my
self in the first place, I thus English in the singular number: I partly see
what is in my Neighbors Pack;
Not that part of the Wallet at my back.


I confess, I feel it very heavy, and do more then guess what is in it: Some of
my Neighbors, who know not so well as I, what I carry, take upon them, as if
they knew those things to be therein, which my Conscience assures me are not.
^f they think otherwise, let them search it, and discover what they find
offensive to GOD, to them, or to my self, so it be with as much Charity, and to
as good purpose, as I have told some of them, what is in their Budgets; and I
will take them to be my Friends, and thank them. It is too true, that by humane
frailty I have in my best endeavors more inclined to self ends, then I ought;
and by seeking to preserve my Estate and Credit in the world, neglected
sometimes to perform my duty so as I should have done to GOD and to my Country;
and that also, I should not have so far forth discharged it, as I have
imperfectly done, if I had not been pursued with Storms heretofore, and cast as
it were into a Whales Belly as now I am: however, GOD's grace is sufficient for
me; and therefore, though I have many failings of mine own (hoping they shall
not make my endeavors altogether ineffectual) I will proceed to declare what
the chief cause of obstruction is, which must be taken away, before my
Expedient can be put in practice, by those Parties whom it will concern: and
that is, the not duly examining the true state of those Causes which they
prosecute; and their looking so much after each others failings, that they heed
not their own Prevarications. They are very sensible of wrongs done unto
themselves, but not sensible in the least degree of those injuries which they
themselves do to other men: and I having been an Observant by-stander, above
threescore years, without any prejudice or partial respect to any Party, think
it my duty, to declare in part, what I have observed in relation to them, and
their respective Causes now in controversy, since my remembrance; and by what
means I became informed of those Quarrels and Proceedings on both sides, which
occasioned the sad Consequences that have ensued.

I having (as is before intimated) no cause to prejudice either of those
Parties, out of hope any way to advantage my self thereby, or for any sinister
respect to either of them, (but loving and wishing them well, jointly and
apart) took such special notice, (as is aforesaid) both in the times of King
James and King Charles, how the Peoples Liberties were encroached upon, and
what farther Slaveries were likely to ensue, that I am well assured, the Peace
and Plenty, which is by many magnified as effects of their good Government, was
acquired by GOD's blessing upon the Peoples Industry in Queen Elizabeth's reign,
and during the time wherein those forenamed Kings, made use of those blessings
to get settlement of power upon themselves, rather then by their just and
prudent Government: For, I saw them wast and consume in vanities, so much of
the Public Lands and Treasures, to accomplish their ends, and fulfill their
lusts, as might (if employed as it ought) have made this one of the most happy
and renowned Empires in the world. I observed how they conferred their Titles
of honor, and part of the Public Revenues, with vast sums extorted out of
private men's Estates (by Monopolies, unlawful and base Projects) upon persons
of ignoble extract, and debauched manners, to make them instrumental in their
designs; and perhaps it might be ma^e probable (if not evident) that if a stop
had not been put to their proceedings, here might have been ere this, as
horrible a Massacre of Protestants, as was in Ireland. I perceived, (as
miscrable as we are now made) that, things were plotted, and in part executed,
which in likelihood would have brought us to a more miserable condition in
process of time, then we are now in; and into which we are plunged by their
occasioning that which we were lately enforced unto, for prevention of their
increasing Oppressions and Encroachments: and, though our present sufferings
have caused most of them, who lived before the late Wars, to forget what was
then imposed, attempted and purposed; I, and many other have not forgotten it.
Though likewise, King Charles deceased, is both by his own Party, and by those
among us, who are depraved (or, else were born too late to know what he was)
impudently magnified as a Martyr for Religion, and an Assertor of the Peoples
Freedoms; yet, they, and I, to whom the series of his transactions and
endeavors, is well known, cannot be deluded, by Fictions and Impostures, as
many now are, and as more may perhaps be hereafter, by those Books of Devotion
compiled by his flattering Clergy, and fathered upon him: though other of the
Royalists compile Volumns to deceive after-Ages, stuffed with Vanities; and
scatter seditious Pamphlets, and scurrilous Invectives (which, coming abroad
without names, no wise man regards) thereby to render those odious, who have
most faithfully endeavored to vindicate the Peoples Rights, and to make
ignorant persons esteem them Rebels, Traitors, Barbarous Murthere^s of their
King, and wilful Overthrowers of Government both in Church and Commonwealth:
which imputations, many are apt to believe, in regard of ill successes,
occasioned both by the Common Enemies default, and by those among our selves,
who were underhand their Abettors; yet, un^yassed men, do plainly enough see
their falsifications, and whereto they tend: Moreover, though the Adversaries
of Common Welfare, do scandalize the Parliament, as perfidious Breakers of
their Promises, Protestations and Engagements; and particularly for taking away
his Life, whom they pretended to make a glorious King, and in changing the
Government; Nevertheless, I conceive (though some individual persons among them
may be premeditately guilty of all this) that the Parliament is not justly
liable to these mis-imputations: For, upon good grounds, I do verily believe,
that the Parliament unfeignedly intended what they professed in that kind, and
would accordingly have performed their Engagements, if the King would have
accepted of those terms whereby he might have been a King and not a Tyrant; and
would have reigned in Righteousness, as by the Laws of GOD and Nature, he was
obliged to do: For, it cannot be reasonably imagined, but that those were the
implicit conditions of all their Protestations and Engagements. But, he so
obstinately persevered in his wilfulness, even when there was a Treaty for
Reconcilement, that he disobliged them from all their promises, and compelled
the prosecution of that which afterward ensued, and was not at first intended:
And, I do here to the Glory of GOD aver (though I know it may be to my personal
disadvantage) that GOD's doom was justly executed upon him for his own sins,
and the sins of his Fathers house, with what intent soever, and with what
juglings soever it was prosecuted by men; and, that, the Peoples Cause, was,
and is a Righteous Cause, though it was not so prudently and righteously
managed, as it might and ought to have been: and I believe it is too evident,
that some of both Parties, by seeking to screw in personal advantages to
themselves, at the Treaty, and at other times, were the Causers of all that
mis-befel both to the King and to the People.

I may rationally believe this, because I had opportunities to discover much of
their sinister actings on both sides, tending to the trapanning of each other,
(if I am not misinformed) which justly provoked GOD, and occasioned
Confusions, to the insnaring of many well-meaning men, to the involving them in
guiltiness, troubles and hazards, from which they will not easily be delivered.
I many times adventured (not without danger to my self) to inform the King what
I had observed; and when he was Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, signified by
what means he might then unquestionably have made his peace both with GOD and
Men, (as I have done without regard to his Successors) but, he adhered still
to his evil Counselors; or rather, to his own wilfulness (which was enough to
have depraved them, if they had been good) and instead of complying with his
Parliament, so endeavored even when he was their Prisoner, by corrupting the
Scots, and a great number of the Parliaments Members, with large Promises, that
he was likely, by plowing with their Oxen, either to have cheated them, of all
the Peoples Freedoms, or to have plunged the three Nations, into a new War: and
this caused the Armies first extraordinary attempt, at which the Royal Party
and their Confederates have so much railed, as a high breach of the Parliaments
Privileges, and of the Peoples Freedoms; whereas, they could not at that time
have been any other way preserved in humane understanding: And therefore, then,
and not before, that part of the Parliament, which was true to the trust
reposed in them by the People, did with the Assistance of their Army, seeing
(as I conceive) no way else but removing him out of the world, to prevent the
treacheries of their corrupt Members, and the Kings Destructive Designs,
carried on by their compliance; they outwitted him at his own game; and (
Stratagems being as lawful against an Enemy, as Force) got possession of his
person; brought him to a Legal Trial, and condemned him to death A Legal Trial
was it? (you will say perhaps) by what Law, or by what Authority? Truly, I was
heartily sorry for him, when he was condemned; and so far from having any hand
therein, or assenting thereto, that I drew a Petition to the Parliament to
forbear from executing the sentence of the Court, by reason the rarity of such
an Act, made me then abhor it: but no Member daring to present it; and I having
thereby opportunity to consider better of my intention, was satisfied in my
Conscience, that he was Legally condemned by that Law, which makes it Treason
for a Servant to seek the destruction of his Master who had trusted him; that
he was no more but a principal Servant to the People, justly questionable for
breach of his Trust; and that by the same Authority, whereby the People might
raise any one from among themselves, to be their Supreme Officer, they might
for his ingratitude, and violation of the trust reposed in him, judge, depose
or condemn him to death, as his Crime, and the necessity of preserving the
Common Peace or Safety, should require: and the Son of him whose Predecessors
had for many Generations been Steward of a Princes Family, and who was executed
for his Treason thereto, may as justly claim, that he and his Posterity should
be still Stewards thereof, because his said Predecessors had been injurious
and false unto it, for many Ages together, as Charles Stuart, may claim to be
King by inheritance over these Nations.

Upon these Considerations, it seems to me, and may appear to others, that
the Peoples Cause has been unjustly scandalized; and that a false opinion
derived unto the late King from his Progenitors, settled in him by long
Usurpation, and confirmed by the Flatteries of his Courtiers, Chaplains, and
other Parasites, made him believe that GOD had given him a right to all that
which he claimed: though it were contrary to the positive Law, whereby he had
commanded Kings to be regulated; and repugnant also to that Law which was
written in his heart, until he had blotted it out: For, none but they, who are
more worthy to be made Beasts then Men, can imagine that our ever-wise, just,
and most merciful GOD (except by permission, when a Nation depraved by their
own vanity, foolishness and slavish mind, desires it) would have constituted
such a destructive Monster as an unlimited Governor, and advance a few men in
every Generation (yea, and sometimes the vilest out of the vilest among them)
to subject all the rest to his lust and ambition upon a just Title; as if all
the residue of mankind had been created for the sake of Tyrants, Doubtless, no
reasonable Creature can imagine this; or think it impossible (as in appearance
many do) that, they cannot be well governed without such a gay Babble, as they
usually make of it; or that it is displeasing to GOD, that, when he has given
them power and opportunity so to do, a People should endeavor to shake off
their Fetters, and establish such a Government, as may preserve their Temporal
Rights and Freedoms, without admitting such Disturbers of humane society, for
the time to come. These, and such things as these, must be well considered by
Charles Stuart, to prepare his heart, before my Expedient will be pertinent and
profitable unto him.

As, I had means to be rightly informed of the Kings Cause, so I had of the
Parliaments also, by being thereby called to a Military Command in their first
Army; to the execution of Civil Magistracy in the Commonwealth, and by being
enforced to attend almost 18 years at the latter end of my life, in hope to
obtain Justice from them or their Interruptors: For, by these means I knew the
greatest part of them so far forth as Trees are known by their Fruits, which
may accidentally be made better or worse: Those three Employments, gave me
opportunity to observe how our Parliaments, our Protectors, our Councils, our
Armies, our Committees, our Ministers, and the People behaved themselves toward
GOD and each other in the management of their Cause. And to speak truth,
without lying for them, or against them; if I had been a stranger to their
Cause and the Kings, and must have judged whether had been most righteous, by
the manners and actings of the men, I should have given judgment against the
Peoples Cause: For, the Royal Party, whom we call Cavaliers, prosecuted their
Evil Cause like men, and like such men as they made show to be: But the
Parliament Party, (some few excepted, whose burdens and vexations were the
greater, and makes them worthy to be the more pitied and honored) managed
their Good Cause like -- like -- like -- (to tell you truly) like I know not
what; for I can devise nothing under heaven, and above ground, whereto I may
liken them: and it is no wonder that so many thousands fall off daily from
them, and that our Enemies judge of our Cause, and of Us, as I hear they do. I
should not have thought it possible, that men professing and pretending so much
good, should have been so evil, if GOD had permitted me to have lived so
obscurely in a Country Village, as I much desired, where I should have known no
more of the one Party, or of the other, then common Fame had informed, to whose
rumors I give little credit. And knowing me so well as many of those men do,
if they had not been infatuated, they would have done me Justice (though not
for Justice sake) to have sent me thither, (being resolved to do as they have
done) where I should not have had means to be a witness against them for that
injustice and partiality which I have observed. I engaged for the Parliament
out of conscience, else I might have had as good means to know experimentally,
the manners of the Kings Party, whereof I am informed, but by report only:
For, being by some of them, thought more considerable, then I am by those to
whom I voluntarily adhered, I was invited to that side by two Letters from the
Lord Butler (which I think are yet among my papers) who thereby engaged to
settle immediately upon me half his Estate, and that it should be but an
earnest of a far greater gratitude in future from the King, if I would come
unto him then at Oxford: yet I constantly adhered to the Parliament, and do not
repent it in this day of our confusion, though in requital of my faithfulness
in adventuring my Life, Credit, and all my Estate for it, they have exposed me
and my Family to scorn and poverty, as well by other injuries done, as by
neglect of Justice, and by not making good their Securities, and Engagements,
which occasioned my Engagements to other men.

I mention these things, that being some way brought to their Consideration, it
may prepare them to be capable of another extraordinary Mercy, in this their
greatest need; and not out of revenge: For, I know Vengeance belongs to GOD,
and that I shall but burn my own Fingers, by endeavoring to pull down hot
Coals upon the heads of mine Oppressors: Therefore, my smitings are but
friendly blows, and my corroding Expressions applied but to eat out the dead
flesh which may hinder the operation of a healing Balsame: and, it is very
needful: for by all those Parties before particularized, and even by us who
pretend to the best Cause, many things have been acted or connived at, which
were so imprudent, so unjust, so unmerciful, and indeed so barbarous, that we
are a plague to each other, and a laughing stock to all our Neighbors round
about us: and, instead of repenting, and endeavoring to amend what is amiss,
in a rational and possible way, we behave our selves like Whores in a
City-Alley: They first fall to scolding, railing, belying, impeaching and
abusing each other by all opprobrious words; then, to tear and scratch, and at
last to grow so mad, that they set each others houses on fire, to the undoing
of themselves and their neighbors. We, and our Enemies, instead of looking to
our own ways, and prosecuting that which might deliver us out of those
confusions and streights, whereinto our sins and follies have brought us, do
spend much of our time in sowing seeds of discord, and in scandalous
Imputations, as if that justified our several Causes. It is written, that
Michael the Archangel when he contended with the Devil, (as bad as the Devil
was) durst not bring a railing Accusation against him; but said only, The LORD
rebuke thee. Such Accusations, I confess, were even these of mine, as were not
allowable, if they were untrue; and no better, though they be true, if I
intended them maliciously to bring any one to destruction or shame, and not in
true Charity to save men from shame and destruction by repentance. We on both
sides cannot be contented to object matter of Fact, so far as we know or
believe it to be true, in justification of our Causes, but endeavor also to
make it seem good by doing that which is evil, and affirming that which is
untrue, or so doubtful that it ought not to be peremptorily averred: yea, we
sometimes make bold to intrude into GOD's secret Judgments to disparage our
Adversaries Cause, or to justify our own thereby; and often-abusively
mis-apply GOD's Word to our own wicked purpose.

Our Antagonists, think to justify their Cause by an Argument drawn from our
unstableness, boasting that they have not been so fickle and disobedient to
their Governor or Government, as we have been to ours; but that, they have in
all his, and in their own dangers and troubles continued constant both to their
first Principles and to their King: which is partly true, to our shame, but not
much to their honor, and no whit to the justifying of their Cause: For, man's
corruption makes him to adhere more firmly to that which is evil, then to that
which is good. And, it is not so much their virtue, as their necessity,
perhaps, which keeps them constant. They, have no other means of safety and
subsistence for the most part, else (as many of them have done, who had another
Resuge) they, it may be, who brag of their Constancy, would have deserted him
also, ere this day: Moreover, many of them are the persons whose evil Counsels
was the undoing of their King and of his Father, and of themselves. They had
gotten thereby great Estates and Titles of honor, which they could not else
have obtained; and which being now lost, cannot be re-possessed but by
adherence unto him, until his condition grows desperate, or until they can be
better provided for: so their faithfulness and perseverance does probably
proceed rather from self-respects, then from love to their King, or from the
justness of his Cause. But, indeed, the greatest stumbling block, and stone of
offense, which will obstruct my Expedient in taking good effect among the
Common People, are those Events which have ensued upon misunderstanding our
Cause, and upon our mis-proceeding therein; and those obstructive Objections,
are cast in, and raised partly by the Royalists, and partly by some ignorant
and malevolent persons among our selves, who perceive not from whence those
Events do more naturally proceed.

To make the Peoples Cause appear unjust, and therefore their prosecutions
thereof unpleasing to GOD, and to make the vulgar sort think the Kings claim to
be righteous, they object that therefore we can settle upon no Government
without him, and that we have no good and lawful Foundation to build upon; and
that therefore, GOD blasteth all our endeavors from time to time: whereas that
issues not from the evilness of our Cause, but from the imprudence or
self-mindedness of the Prosecutors. To fright ignorant persons into a belief or
suspicion of the goodness or lawfulness of our Claim, they tell them of one
Parliament Man that hanged himself; how these and these, came to such and such
Tragical ends, and what befell to some other eminent persons who were Patrons
thereof; as if that proved the Cause which they owned, to be unquestionably
evil; all which are but Childish Bug-bears, and Fanatic Hob-Goblins, which are
easily charmed into nothing. What a ridiculous Argument is it to prove the
unjustness of a Cause, to allege that one of the Prosecutors thereof hanged
himself! There were but twelve Apostles, and one of them hanged himself; does
that any whit disparage the Apostolic Faith? perhaps as these do, the
malicious Jews made use of it to the like purpose, though by his own
confession, they knew that Judgment fell upon Judas, not because he was one of
Christ's Followers, but for that he was a Traitor to his Master, and had
betrayed an Innocent into their hands. There were above 400 Parliament Men, of
which but one made away himself; and we knowing not upon what secret Motive,
what can be thereupon inferred? Indeed, if all the 400, or so many of them as
owned the peoples Cause, had banged themselves, except one, we might have
concluded as our Adversaries do. The Conjurers up of those delusive
Apparations, do not remember, that those 18 persons upon whom the Tower fell,
and they whose blood-Pilat mingled with their Sacrifices, were no greater
sinners then other men; and that they who conceived hardly of them, should also
perish unless they repented: nor do they take notice, that the like ends have
happened to as many, or to more of their own party; and that it would be as
valid an Argument against their Cause, as against ours. Nor, do they know, (or
else will not know) as we do, who have observed their actings and deportments,
that most, if not all of them, on our side, who have been particularized as men
pursued by Divine Vengeance, suffered not by the hand of Common Justice, or by
a secret Judgment, in outward probability, for their deserting the Kings Cause,
or for being instrumental in removing him; but, for that they were Traitors to
them by whom they were trusted, and false to the peoples Cause, which they
seemingly owned; and either betrayed it, or would have betrayed it, if they had
not been timely cut off. And, whereas the many extravagancies relating both to
Religion and the depravation of Manners in these times are objected, as effects
of our evil Cause; it is to be considered, that those are the usual products in
times of War, of that licentiousness which is in men of corrupt minds and
principles, who then discover that pravity which lay hid in them formerly; and
not from the Cause in Controversy.

For my part, I am not a whit out of heart, by the present distractions; by the
scandalizing of our Cause; by the Obstructions it has met withal; by the
hazards it is now in; by the multitude of powerful Adversaries; or, by the
failings of those that manage it: Nor do I judge the goodness of any man's
Cause, to be more or less by Events, whether prosperous, or unprosperous, at
the first, lest as David said, I may condemn the Generation of the Righteous,
or justify the Wicked: nor do I judge of any thing, by the outward pomp, or
base aspect, which it has in the eye of the world; nor by the continuance
which it can plead by Prescription: For, Tyranny, has been ever since Nimrods
reign. The Mahumetans Impostures, (which is an usurped Antichristian power
without the Pale of the Church) has tyrannized almost a thousand years. The
Roman Hierarchy, which is the Antichrist, in the visible Church of Christ, has
persecuted above six hundred years: our Norman bondage has continued above
five hundred. The Children of Israel, when they were brought out of Egypt,
where they had been enslaved above three hundred years, and then advanced in
hope to be made Possessors of a Country inhabited by powerful Nations, were
doubtless as much derided for that Attempt, as we are by our Neighbors, and by
some among our selves, who in derision and scorn call our, The Good Old Cause.
They, had as many longings and lookings back toward Egypt, as the greatest
part of this people has at this day to return to their old Taskmasters, to
their Garlic, Onyons, Fleshpots, and such other Carnal Accommodations, as
those which we prefer before our Birthrights, and value less then a Mess of
Porrage. They tempted GOD, and provoked him by their Idolatries, Fornications,
Murmurings, Rebellions, Avarice, Backslidings, and Self-seekings, as we do: So,
they mutined against their Superiors; so, they discouraged each other, by
mis-reporting that Good Land, to which GOD was carrying them; by representing
formidably the strength of the high-walled Cities, and the mighty Giants who
were therein; and those discouragements proceeded from some of the most eminent
persons among them, even from no less then six to one of those who were chosen
to spy out the Land: so, also, were they for their unfaithfulness, and other
sins, wasted and delayed as we have been, even forty years in the Deserts, as
we have been almost twenty years already, as it were in a Wilderness of
Confusions, for our prevarications and mis-belief: and our Faith and Patience,
is at this present exercised with many Fears, Doubts, Wants, Troubles, and
Powerful Adversaries in the Passage toward the recovery of our long-lost
Freedoms; and yet (as theirs was) our Cause is nevertheless that Good Old
Cause, of which we should neither be ashamed or distrustful.

If we may censure the Righteousness of a Cause, by the mean beginning, by the
outward despicableness, by the tedious and difficult progressions, by the
contemptibleness of the Prosecutors, or by the unprosperous successes during
many years; no Cause in the world, might be so^lyable to mis censure, as our
Christian profession, which for many Ages together, was the scorn not of the
base and foolish, but also of the noblest and wisest persons in the Worlds
esteem. The Professors of it, were no better thought of then as Fanatic
Dreamers, at best, and as Vagabonds, hunted through all Nations and Countries,
by ten signal bloody Persecutions, many hundreds of years, dispoiled every
where, of Livelihood, Liberty and Life, And, our Cause, being in the principal
scope thereof to be prosecuted for a Preparatory toward establishing that
Kingdom of CHRIST, for which the Saints have now waited in patience above six
hundred fifty and eight years, and arrived (as I believe) within forty years of
completing that six hundred sixty and six years, which numbers out the time
limiting the Kingdom of the Beast; it is no wonder that it meets with so much
delay, hardship and oppression, whilst the Soldiers of the LAMB are but raw,
undisciplined, not fully trained, listed, sealed, or formed into such a
well-ordered Body, as must fight his Battles. But, though our sufferings, and
the time of our warfare seems long, it is very short, considering the
perp^tuity of the Kingdom which we shall at last conquer, and wherein, we
shall individually reign with the Supreme Sovereign thereof: For, whereas all
the Kingdoms of the world have not lasted six thousand years; that Kingdom is
everlasting without end, and communicated not to a few, (making the rest
Slaves) but to every follower of the LAMB in that Expedition; who will make
them that overcome, Pillars in his house, never to be removed; yea, they shall
be Kings and Priests to GOD, sitting with him upon his Throne, subjecting the
Nations, and reigning with him for ever and ever.

Since I have mentioned that Kingdom whereto our Cause relates, and of which I
hope our future Government shall be an appurtenant, I would gladly, without
offense, though it seem a digression, hint somewhat in this place, since it now
comes into my mind, as not impertinent, to those who call themselves (or are
called by others) Fifth Monarchy Men, who I think call that Kingdom the Fisth
Monarchy, lest in some things they may be destructive thereunto, in prosecuting
the settlement of our Government. For, though I believe there are many of
those, and of other congregated Churches, who are truly zealous of advancing
the Kingdom of CHRIST, and that a Government should be modelized that might be
subservient thereunto; and whereby carnal men might be reduced to order as well
under a Spiritual, as under a Natural Government: yet, (if I have not been
misinformed concerning the Judgments and Opinions of some among them) there
are not a few who having a Zeal without Knowledge, do fancy such a Kingdom, as
neither consists with the Divinity of CHRIST, nor with the Humanity of men; and
that possibly some other (as in all Dispensations it has happened) who are
stirred up by the Devil, or by their own self-mindedness, to hinder the coming
of this Kingdom, by pretending in their m^de to advance it; and who, to
exercise the Faith and Patience of the Saints a little longer, will be making
Linsie Wolsie, and plowing with Oxen and Ass^s together, in hope thereby to
reduce us again to a mere earthly Foundation, or to build Castles in the Air,
as they would do, who understand not that the Dimensions, Materials, and other
Appurtenances of the New Jerusalem, mystically described in the Revelation, are
Evangelically, and not Literally to be understood. As for instance in
particular: The pavement shall be pure Gold, transparent as Glass; whereby, I
understand, the Citizens of that City, shall be free from Covetousness,
treading more precious Gold under their feet, then that whereof a varitious
Tyrants make their richest Ornaments for their heads; and that their walkings,
will be evidently pure to all beholders.

By what warrant they term the Kingdom of CHRIST the Fifth Monarchy, I know
not. It may be called the Fifth, in relation to those four Monarchies which are
mentioned as preceding it in the Prophecy of Daniel, if you reckon the Roman
Empire, and the Beast which sprung from it but for one; Alexander and his four
Captains, two Monarchies; and begin to reckon after the Babylonian Monarchy was
translated to the Medes and Persians. But, to say truth, whether we may call
the Kingdom of CHRIST upon Earth the Fifth, Sixth or Seventh Monarchy, it is to
me doubtful, when I consult with Daniels Prophecies: For, by Nebuchadnezzars
Image, which consisted of five parts, Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Iron mixed
with Clay, which last is the Kingdom of Antichrist, wherein were ten Kingdoms
there typified by the ten toes, and by ten horns in the Revelation; it seems
to be the sixth grand Monarchy in the world. If the Kingdom of the Beast, and
that of the Roman Empire, be to be accounted but one, and the Grecian Monarch
and his four Captains two Monarchies, then it will be the Fifth Monarchy, after
Daniels Vision of the four Beasts, leaving out the Babylonian Monarchy, which
was past at the time of the Vision, and but the fourth Monarchy from that time,
if Alexander and his Captains be reckoned but one Monarchy, as indeed they were
no more, in regard that of the Captains was a Tetrarchy, not a Monarchy, and
but the same Monarchy branched into four. But, if you make (as several
Expositors do) that of the Babylonians one, the Medes and Persians the second,
Alexander a third, his four Captains a fourth, the first Roman Empire a fifth
Monarchy, and the Clay and Iron Kingdom, which branched out of it, to be a
sixth; then the Kingdom of CHRIST must be the seventh Monarchy. Therefore, to
give it the most proper Attribute, it is the Alpha and Omega, the first and
last absolute Monarchy, that was, is, or shall be, though Tyrants have had for
many thousands of years the most visible power upon Earth: For GOD, and CHRIST
in him, (though not manifested to the world) have invisibly governed during
their usurpations, and concurred in governing during the Paternal Monarchies of
Adam and Noah, until Nimrods intrusions, and afterward; and after that, in
governing the Children of Israel by his Vicegerents, Moses, Joshua, and the
Judges, until the people rejecting his Government, desired a King like other
Nations: for which folly and sin, they were under a Tyrannical Government, even
when it was at best, until CHRIST came in the Flesh; and so shall we also, if
we admit of Charles Stuart, or of any other Governors upon the old Terms and
Constitutions, (after GOD upon trial has declared us free) until CHRIST comes
to Judgment; whose Government, if we embrace in the mean time, we may be happy
and free indeed; for his Yoke is easy, his Scepter a righteous Scepter, and
his Government whilst we are in the Flesh, will be such a Government as Flesh
and Blood (whose frailty he knows) may sustain, and be regulated by: For his
reign upon earth, will not be without Laws agreeable to the humane Nature, nor
without Magistrates empowered to govern under him; but, a Government resembling
in some respects, (but in an Evangelical and more excellent manner) that of the
Jews, governing his people, and by such humane Laws of their own as are not
repugnant thereto, as the Jews were governed by their Judges, and by their
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws, together with that Moral Law, which was
universally obliging. And as GOD and the People, had then a concurrence in the
Election of their Magistrates; so it will be, when the Kingdom of CHRIST, is
settled among us. LORD, Hasten the coming of it; and let not the many
struglings of thy people in these Nations, at this time, to make way for it, be
altogether in vain.

You must pardon my Immethodical Ramblings, to remove such Obstructions as I
conceive may hinder my Expedient; and bear with my sudden stepping aside
otherwhile from the matter in hand, to do that which I think pertinent to my
purpose, whilst it is in my remembrance: for the disorders of these times do
not afford me leisure to order my own musings; but having expressed as much as
I can at present think on by way of Preparative, I will now apply my Expedient
to those whom it may concern. I am grieved to perceive how witty most men are
to raise Arguments against Truth and their own Peace; and should be glad that
our greatest Enemies might be reducible to that happiness which they have lost;
and that they who are exposed to many Temptations by dwelling in Mesech, and
sojourning in the Tents of Kedar, might have a more comfortable habitation:
For, I believe some among them, who opposed our Cause, acted in their
understanding upon a principle of Justice or Honor, which they thought obliged
them unto what they did; which makes me much pity their misfortune. I never
heard any dishonorable mention of the two Brothers of Charles Stuart, or that
they acted against this Commonwealth maliciously; but were active only so far
forth as they thought themselves in Conscience, Allegiance, and Natural
Affection obliged to their Brother; and I wish they might enjoy the
Conveniences whereof they are deprived, with our safety: and though their
Brother has acted upon his own account, and yet prosecuteth such things as are
destructive to our Peace; and, though by that which we are informed of his
inclination, we have cause to be suspicious that those prejudices and
affections which are settled in him, will never be so clearly removed, as to
make him capable of any Expedient which may bring him hither in Peace, and to
the advantage of these Nations: yet, not knowing, how that GOD, who has all
men's hearts in his hand, may please to sanctify his afflictions, and thereby
prepare him to what seems else impossible; and considering that all the other
Parties aforementioned, are as unable as he to perform of themselves the
conditions of my Expedients, without special grace, they shall have a Latitude
as well to comprehend him respectively, as any other whom they may concern,
that he or they who shall first conform thereto, may first have benefit
thereby, without respect of persons. I have declared, what Prejudicacies must
be removed before they can be effectually entertained; and therefore now I come
to the Expedients themselves, which I communicate to you in private, rather
then by Publication; because what I have heretofore offered of that nature,
has been little regarded; and because I know that if any of the Parties
aforementioned shall be capable of them, GOD will either by you, or by some
other hand, cause them to be seasonably brought to their Cognizance, or direct
them thereunto by his immediate grace.

All those Parties in general, must resolve in the first place, to deny
themselves, and act more for GOD's Glory, and for the Public Welfare,
according to his revealed Will, and to the Dictates of a rectified Conscience;
so, must Patriots in particular more faithfully then they have done for the
most part heretofore: among which, I have less hope of them, who by their
deportment, words and actions, seem to call out as Jehu did to Jehonadab, Come
and see my zeal for the LORD, etc. Governors, by what Title soever they are
called, who desire to be at peace with their Neighbors and their Subjects over
whom they reign, or to recover that Dignity and Authority which they have lost,
(or to be made happy and contented without it) must consider, that GOD, the
LORD of HOSTS, who is Sovereign Paramount over all Kingdoms and Republics in
the world, beholds all their unrighteous Designs proceeding from Ambition,
Lust or Avarice; that notwithstanding all their hypocritical Pretendings to
Religion and Justice, he knows when they regard it no further then it may
advance their corrupt interests; that he heeds their bruitsh bustlings, and
dissembled complementings one with another; their barbarous and inhumane
devastations of their own and other Countries, to satiate their revenge, or to
uphold their pomp by Fire, Sword and Rapine, to the destroying of Humane
Society, and to the making millions of men miserable, who might have lived
comfortably, if they who were advanced for their Weal, had not made themselves
a plague to Mankind by tyrannizing no less over their Consciences, then their
Estates and Persons, under pretense of being GOD's Vicegerents, whereas they
do rather make true the Devils vaunt, who boasted that all the Kingdoms of this
world were at his dispose: which implies, that they are then his Viceroys and
Deputies. They must also consider, that GOD's Long-suffering permits their
extravagancies, not as prerogatives justly due unto them, but, that every thing
should for a time only manifest it self in its own nature, to be purged in its
own fire; that evil men, may be mutual Corrections for their own sins, that by
inter-wrangling Judgments and Mercies, he may bring them, if possible, to
timely repentance and amendment: and that if they bring not forth fruits at
last answerable to his expectation, he may be glorified in executing Justice;
call them to a strict account, and with his Iron Mace break them in pieces like
a Potters Vessel, which can never be set together again; as lately and often
heretofore he has done to other Tyrants and Oppressors. Having duly
considered these things, with such like, they must then resign to GOD, his
Throne in men's Consciences, and permit his People to enjoy the Liberties due to
them by the Laws of Grace and Nature, ruling for the future in Righteousness.
By practicing this Expeent, and continuing constant therein, they shall be
established in Power and Peace both at home and abroad, as Viceroys and
Vicegerents to the King of kings, and Lord of lords, with more honor then a
Tyrant can acquire by an Universal Monarchy, and unlimited Prerogatives: yea,
if they can but get hearts willing to embrace this Expedient, after they are
irrecoverably cast out of their Governments or Kingdoms, they shall be as happy
and as well contented, as if they were again restored.

This is my Expedient for all Governors in general, and it will be pertinent
to Charles Stuart in particular: But, there may somewhat more be added, which
will specially belong to him; and I could wish it might be to him so
seasonably, and respectively communicated, that not being entertained as a
jeering of him in his affliction, (which baseness my Soul abhors) he might at
least make some good use of it to fit him for a Celestial Kingdom, if it
cannot make way for his recovery of those which he has lost in this world. His
best Expedient will be, sincerely to humble himself to GOD (who to that end
has outwardly humbled him) for his own sins, and the sins of his Fathers
House, and for which his Father and He, were cast out of these Kingdoms. He
must bewail them heartily and voluntarily, not by compulsion and feignedly, as
perhaps he did in Scotland, and was thereupon actually thrown out of that
possession which he then had. He must seriously consider what Freedoms do
naturally and reasonably belong to Man kind, and to every man as a man, that he
may do as he would be done unto, being a private person. He must consider how
vain the promisings, pretended friendships, and help of Princes, and of all
degrees of men are; how little hope there will be for him by the assistance of
all his Allies and most powerful Confederates, to possess what he claims, if
upon the repentance of these Nations, GOD be still on their side; and how great
a plague (if they continue as they are) he and they would be to each other, if
he should obtain the Sovereignty over them; especially, if restored by a
Foreign Aid, whereby unspeakable calamities would ensue both to him and them.
He must take notice, that the two main Causes of the Quarrel betwixt his Father
and these Nations, being for his usurping a Negative Voice upon those Laws
which the people should choose; and his denying the Militia to belong to them in
chief, was injuriously given by his Fathers default, in regard the choosing what
Laws they pleased (not repugnant to the Law of GOD) is not only rationally and
naturally due unto them, but also by the Common Law of England long before the
Intrusion of Duke William of Normandy; and that they had also a right, by
continued Claim, and Practice, to choose the Sheriffs, who had Posse Comitatus,
which is the Militia, in every County; and therewith he shall do well to
consider, that such a Kingdom as his Predecessors had, and as he desires to
repossess, is one of the Horns of that Beast which must shortly be destroyed;
and, but one of the Kingdoms of this World, which the Devil claims to be in his
Gift; and usually bestows upon them, who will fall down and worship him,
apostatizing from GOD, to be his Vassals; that it is but such a Kingdom as
Fools and wicked men, may as well possess as wise and good men; and that it
neither makes the one wiser, or the other better, but oftentimes makes a wise
man a fool, and good men to be evil: that he, who had three such Kingdoms
yesterday, may not have the next day three foot of earth in them to rest upon:
That, it brings more trouble and danger, then peace and safety: That, it sets a
man upon a Throne in the morning, and brings him down to a Dungeon ere night;
and that the people who lie prostrare before him, adoring him as a god, this
moment, may soon after trample on him, and cut off his head with dishonor. All
these things being well considered, will make him a greater Conqueror by
conquering himself, and subduing his passions and inordinate desires, then if
he had subdued these Nations; make him a more glorious King then any of his
Predecessors; and constitute a better and a more absolute Empire in his little
Isle of Man, then he could have enjoyed by the recovery of all that he has
lost. His Courtiers, and perhaps he himself also, will deride this Expedient;
but, all their policy, cannot contrive him a better: For, if he will make proof
of it, and with patience under GOD's visitation, make use of the charity of his
Friends abroad, and live a peaceable private life, in performing as a
Probationer all Moral and Pious Duties, till GOD shall provide better for him,
as he did for Jehoiakim King of Judah (even by those who had cast him out of
his Kingdom) GOD, to whom nothing is impossible, whatsoever bars are set
against him, may bring him hither in mercy, both to him and to these Nations;
yea, and will, if he shall be humbled and qualified according to his
Expectation; and then the sooner he comes, the better welcome: nay, though he
be not so qualified, and shall come both to our destruction, and his own, GOD,
may probably bring him; for, we are at this time, preparing him a smoothe way,
paved in Checker-wise, with our sins and follies.

Thus much I have contemplated on the behalf of Charles Stuart; for whom,
whatsoever he shall think of it, if it comes to his hands, I have contrived no
worse an Expedient, then I my self would practice if I were in his case, and
knew the world so well as I do. Now I will offer an Expedient to the Nations in
general, who are enslaved by Tyrants, and left without all probable means to
infranchise themselves; which is briefly this: Let them wait patiently upon GOD
for Deliverance, until he providentially makes way for it; and then thankfully
take the opportunities offered, and constantly prosecute them: Let them
consider, that their Bondage and Oppressions are justly come upon them for
their sins, and that they can have do deliverance but by GOD, nor any perfect
deliverance by him, unless being reconciled to him, they break off from their
transgressions by Faith and Repentance fruitful in good works, and make him
their only Resuge. This if they do, or but heartily endeavourit, their lost
Freedoms, for recovery whereof, they have hitherto in vain wasted their
Treasure, endured many Frights, Troubles and Hardships; undergone many Changes;
spont their Blood; fought, prayed and fasted also, without Success, shall be
obtained by Prayers only; and then, they shall better see GOD's merciful
intentions, and their own former mis-understandings and failings; then their
Governors shall be as Fathers: then their Armies, if they need any, shall be
faithful; and then they shall enjoy their Temporal and Spiritual Freedoms fully
and so peaceably, that they may serve GOD comfortably, in holiness and
righteoufness. all the days of their lives.

Moreover, as for the Governors and people of these Nations in particular, it
will be their best Expedient, jointly and apart, to reconcile themselves as
aforesaid, to GOD and to each other, by the like hearty repentance of their
sins, and by laying aside their Animosities, whereby they daily infest and
exasperate each other; remembering who has said, that a kingdom divid^d cannot
stand: that being united, they may in true Charity, be active in such a Cause
as may rationally effect a perfect Settlement: And, if GOD shall again restore
the Parliameat, or empower other men permissively to endeavor it, let them who
shall be authorized be merciful as he is merciful, and once more oblige them by
forgiveness of their former Delinquencies, who shall acknowledge their faults,
and submit, with Engagements given, for the future, to be obedient and
conformable to those Constitutions which the visible power then in being, shall
resolve upon, with the assent of that part of the people, who heretofore
adventured their lives and estates to preserve and continue their natural
Freedoms. This mercy, (which the Covetousness of some will perhaps obstruct)
being with prudence dispensed to such as may be capable thereof, will doubtless
prevail much both with GOD and men, toward an Establishment of peace; and the
Provocations, which peradventure some have had to mis-lead them, will require
in justice, that this mercy should be vouchsafed to some among them. In order
hereunto, I would intimate thus much by way of Caution, (if I had opportunity
to make both Parties of our now divided Army, to take the same into
Consideration) even this; That, if they who think they were obliged in
Conscience, for advance of GOD's Glory, and the common Safety, to dissolve the
Parliament, engage against the rest of the Army and their Brethren, who
conceive themselves as much obliged in Conscience, to continue true to that
Trust which was reposed in them by the late Representative of the People, (as
not being satisfied with the warrantableness of that Fact) both Parties may
then if they contend to blood, be guilty of murder, according to the Laws, yet
vertually in force, as to the outward man; and that, they must depend upon that
Indepnity only which GOD will be pleased to vouchsafe to the inward man,
according as they have conscientiously acted or suffered; and, it will concern
them to heed, that, this (with some other consequences that may follow) will
require that there be a strict self-examination with what mind and secret
intentions they were transpotted; and also to what Expedients they ought in
prudence and justice, to submit on both sides for preservation of a good
Conscience, and of public safety for the future, lest they violate both. Yea,
it is with seriousness to be considered, whether they may not suspect the
integrity of their own Conscience (at least on one side) when they search
narrowly what self ends may lie at the bottom of that which was pretended for a
public advantage; and that they will not be clear from guilt therein, if they
shall not be willing to submit to the mercy of the present Power, or else to
suffer for what they have done irregularly, rather then the three Nations
should be involved again in blood, to the hazard of the whole Commonwealth.
For, as it is better, that one man, or a few men, should suffer, then that all
the people should perish; so, it is just that every one should submit to suffer
for his Country, who has occasioned the endangering of it, though he were
innocent: and, indeed, not only Innocence, but repented guiltiness also, shall
in such Cases, have a recompense, more then equivalent, for all that it can
suffer. Moreover, it is considerable by both the said Parties, whether there
may not be a Wolf or a Fox in a Lambs skin, active in the late Design, to
ensnare the Rams, and to bring the whole Flock within the Paws of the Lion.

The Governors, likewise, who shall hereafter, be therewith entrusted, must
not as heretofore, endeavor so to contrive a future Government, that, they may
hedge in peculiar advantages to themselves, disadvantagious to the Peoples
interest; or inconsistent with a righteous-Government; and, the People, without
murmuring at them, or withholding, or withdrawing necessary Supplies, must act
obediently, and with integrity, endeavor to further an Establishment to be
confirmed by a Free Parliament, justly constituted, rather then by patching up
that, which when they have done all they can, will be an imperfect and
qu^stionable Authority in some respects, dissatisfactory to many. This, they
may now do, (if they loose not the opportunity given) and make a more absolute
and Free Parliament by the Conquest which they lately made, then ever they had
heretofore. If any shall ask in derision (as probably they will) By what
Conquest? by a Conquest of themselves? I thereto answer, Yes; even by a
Conquest of themselves, which is the most noble Conquest that can be made: for,
to subdue the distempers of our own Persons, Passions and Factious Parties,
requires all the Virtues of Mind and Body, and more Stratagems, and more manly
Resolutions, then any other Conquest. This Conquest, by GOD's assistance, has
been made, by that part of the People, which was not infatuated by their own
Corruptions, or seduced and bewitched by the Tyrannies and Incantations of
their former Oppressive Governors, and their Instruments; yea, they have
conquered both those Usurpers, and that Giddy Party among themselves, which
have been Traitors to their Brethren and to Themselves; and those who were at
best, ignorant Obstructers of their own Freedoms and Rights, by a sortish
Neutrality: so that these Nations, if it be not their own fault, may be
governed by Laws of their own choosing, as men were after the Paternal
Government ceased, by the death of Noah; and, before the Tyrannies of Nimrod
and his Successors began.

That, which will be most expedient for the Army, is to abide contented with
their pay; to do no unlawful violence; to be unanimous; to avoid mutinous
suggestions, and attempting insolent imposings upon their Superiors; to be
valiant, and faithfully subservient to them, who are, or shall be called to
make up the present Breaches; and to trust in GOD only to be their defender,
and the finisher of the work desired: and it will concern us all in the mean
time, that special care be taken, by every one in power, who intends or
pretends Common Safety; that, timely provision be made to pay the Soldiery,
both of the standing Armies, and Auxiliary County-Troops, together with the
Mariners (as also, those in extreme want, who heretofore adventured their Lives
and Estates, when the Common Interest, was in greatest hazard) that, they may
not be exposed at this time to such temptations through poverty, as will make
it easy for the Common Enemy, to work upon their necessities. And it will be
expedient, (lest their wants make them dangerously tumultuous) that some
competent provision be made also for those poor indigent people, (especially
about this City) who by the failing of Trade, or otherwise, are likely to be
without means of subsistence during the present troubles. These works of
Justice and Mercy, will make our endeavors beneficial to our selves, and so
acceptable to GOD, that, though I have long been over-burthened, I had rather
confine my self to live on bread and water, until this Storm were past, then
that such provisions should be neglected. These, are those Expedients, which I
think fit to be now practiced: and, though I know many will deride them, I hope
some will make use of them, either toward a public, or for their private
settlements. OH GOD of my Salvation, if this Establishment shall not be in my
days, remember me in mercy, who desire more to have the light of thy
countenance to shine upon me, then that my corn, wine, or oil should be
increased; or then all the enjoyments which a temporal peace can afford: and if
it may please thee (to whose good pleasure I submit) let me before such a
dreadful visitation comes, as we are likely to deserve, (if thy grace prevent
it not) be laid asleep in my grave, dying in a firm belief that I shall be
vouchsafed a glorious Resurrection, at the second coming of my Redeemer: and,
let my dearest relation, and all they who shall sp^ing from us, to the end of
the world, (and who may perhaps be left behind me in this froward Generation)
meet me with joy at his Tribunal. To which place, bring them purified with his
blood, through whatsoever prosperities or adversities, length or shortness of
time in this life, shall be most for thy glory and their safety: and let this
Prayer, be everlastingly in remembrance before thee, when either I shall forget
to pray it, o^ not be able to pray any more for them. I believe^ it shall be
granted; and that makes me not to fear, what the wickedness of this age, or of
any other, shall produce. Excuse my digression in this Ejaculation: for they
who are near and dear to me, coming suddenly into my thought, I could not
forbear it.

I must stand or fall, according as I discharge my Conscience; and therefore,
do now (as usually heretofore) express what I think; and as one musing draws on
another, without fear of King, Parliament, Armies or People; or of any
disadvantage to my particular interests; or for any other partial respect: and,
you may hereby know as well as I, what may be probably conjectured of our
pablick Affairs. What our Armies, and their Associates intend, I yet hear not:
for, they have not declared it; and I have not of late been in so much esteem
either among those who have a Military or Civil Power, as to be made acquainted
with their intentions, or to be thought useful in their Public Transactions,
as heretofore, because I am not able to serve them any longer at my own charge.
And, perhaps by being only a By-stander, I do the better see how they play
their Games; and shall not be so great a looser, as I have been, because I
could not shuffle, cut and deal, as many did; and when I played and staked my
own money for them, who turned it more to my detriment, then all they have done
against whom I played. But, let that pass: for this, and such digressions, slip
in before I am aware. Whatsoever our Parliament, or any of their Adherers have
done amiss, I pray GOD forgive them, and restore it once more, if it may be for
his Glory and the Common Welfare: for the worst I wish them, is this, that the
worst men among them, may be better then the best have heretofore been.
Whatsoever the Armies, or their Confederates have intended, or shall prosecute,
I pray in like manner for them; and think it will most concern us to look to
our own actings and intentions; to beseech GOD, to set and keep them and us in
a Righteous Course; and to restrain both Parties now dissenting, from
bloodshed: For, if a Vein be opened, considering what Planets are in
Conjunction, what malevolent Aspects also some other Stars have, and in what an
evil Sign the Moon is at this present, it will be very hazardous both to those
Members of it, and to the whole Body of this Republic. That which you, and I,
and other private men of our quality, ought to do in such Imergencies, is
patiently to suffer what we cannot avoid; to submit to the visible Power in
being, whatsoever it be, or howsoever gotten, whilst GOD permits it to rule
over us, furnished with the most probable means to protect us in our obedience.
We are also obliged, to act faithfully under it, and with it, in all Civil
Trusts and Duties, whithout so much as speaking any thing in public or in
private, which may weaken their hands, or infringe the Common Peace: yea, we
must take as much care as possibly we can, not to permit our Consciences or
Judgments to be seduced by false appearances: which Grace we may obtain by
Prayer, and by examining all we hear, before we entertain it with belief: for
GOD has afforded means whereby every man may be rightly informed; and calls
no man to any undertakng, whom he leaves unfurnished with what may enable him
to effect it, so far forth as it shall be required, or may be prosecuted with a
good Conscience.

The Counsel which Gamaliel gave to the Jews, when deluded by a Zeal without
knowledge, they persecuted the Apostles, will be seasonable for us. We shall
discern in a short time, whether that which the Army has done and designed to
prosecute, be of GOD or not. If it be merely of Flesh and Blood, they, or their
Design, or both, will come to naught, as heretofore befell to those, who
prosecuted their carnal and politic ends, under color of Honesty and
Religion. If their Attempts be of GOD, they will prosper; and what shall we
then get by resisting his Providence, but guiltiness, and the just rewards
thereof? Whereas, we, who have neither calling, nor power to prevent it, when
wickedness is intended, may sit still without trouble to our Consciences, or
hazard to our Persons or Estates, except by that which we shall suffer by other
men's defaults, in the outward man. To conclude: whatsoever is intruded, or
shall be done; GOD, who is kind to Israel, and to all who have an upright
heart, will turn this, and every thing to their advantage at the last. I have
somewhat else to say; but men cannot yet bear it, nor are they humbled enough
to hear it; neither am I fully enabled to express it.

Consider well of what I have written, and communicate it, as in your
discretion, you find it useful to other men at this time, as not merely mine,
but as dictates for common good, from a better Spirit then mine own, perhaps,
not to be suppressed in your hands, till it be useless, though you gave the
occasion of writing it. It fared with me in writing this Epistolary Discourse,
(and at other times when I am extraordinarily moved to express my mind in
things of this nature) as it fares with persons accidentally entered into
Discourse, who when they began, neither knew what should be the subject of
their Communication, nor can well remember when they have done, on what several
matters they talked: For, when I first took Pen to write this Letter, I knew
not so much of the matter therein contained to be in my heart, with a purpose
to express it, as would have filled one of these Pages; and half a sheet will
hold as much as I remember of it now it is written, and as ever perhaps I
should remember thereof, unless by a review, or by putting my memory upon the
rack; or, as GOD shall occasionally bring the particulars to mind, when they
are needful. His Grace and Peace be with us. Farewell.

My Versifyings, thus, are turned to Prose;
For, out of fashion, Rhyme and Reason grows.
And, now, from public Charmings I refrain,
Because, Deaf-Adders, charmed are in vain.
Your true Friend, George Wither.
October 24. 1659.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Reader may please to take notice, that there is another Treatise extant,
lately written by this Author, entitled, Epistolium-Vagum-Prosa-Metricum: or,
An Epistle at random, in Prose and Meter. Wherein is discovered, that whereon
the Peace of these Nations depends; and, what is, and what will be their sad
condition; as also, what New Purgatories, and Fiery Trials they are like to
pass, if God in mercy prevent not. To be sold also by the Printer hereof.

FINIS.

