ENGLANDS WORTHIES The Lives of the Most Eminent Persons from CONSTANTINE the
Great to OLIVER CROMWELL Late Protector; Printed for N: Brook at the Angel in
Cornhill. 1660.
engraving featuring a crown and mitre sitting on two columns, and a crossed
olive branch and scepter, surrounded by portraits of the subjects of this book:
Emperor Constantine I, the Great; King Arthur; Saint Dunstan, Archbishop of
Canterbury; King Edmund the Second, Ironside; King Edward, the Confessor; King
William the First, the Conqueror; Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury; King
Richard the First; King Edward the Third; Edward, the Black Prince; Sir John
Hawkwood; Geoffrey Chaucer; King Henry the Fifth; John, Duke of Bedford;
Richard Neville, Sixteenth Earl of Warwick and Sixth Earl of Salisbury; King
Richard the Third; Thomas Howard, Second Duke of Norfolk; Cardinal Thomas
Wolsey, Archbishop of York; Sir Thomas More; Thomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex;
Sir Philip Sidney; Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester; William Cecil, First Baron
Burghley; Sir Francis Drake; Sir Francis Walsingham; Sir Nicholas Bacon; Robert
Devereux, Second Earl of Essex; Sir Robert Cecil, First Earl of Salisbury; Sir
Thomas Overbury; Sir Walter Raleigh; William Camden; Thomas Sutton; Sir Francis
Bacon, Viscount Saint Alban; Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Winchester; John
Done, Dean of Saint Paul's; George Villiers, First Duke of Buckingham; Sir
Henry Wotton; Thomas Wentworth, First Earl of Strafford; William Laud,
Archbishop of Canterbury; Robert Devereux, Third Earl of Essex; Sir Charles
Lucas; King Charles the First; Arthur Capel, First Baron Capel; James Graham,
First Marquess of Montrose; James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh; John Lilburne;
Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector 1 C

2 K A

3 St D

4 K I

5 Ed C

6 W th C

7 T B

8 R t 1

9 E t 3

10 B P

11 Sir J H

12 I C

13 H t 5

14 D B

15 E d W

16 R 3d

17 E d S

18 T W

19 T M

20 T C

21 Sr P S

22 E d L

23 W B

24 Sr F D

25 F W

26 N B

27 R E d E

28 R C

29 Sr T O

30 Sr W R

31 W C

32 T S

33 Sir F B

34 Bp A

35 I D

36 D B

37 Sr H W

38 E o S

39 Bp L

40 E d E

41 Sir C L

42 K C

43 Ld C

44 ma M

45 Bp V

46

47 O C



England's WORTHIES. Select LIVES of the most Eminent Persons from Constantine
the Great, to the death of Oliver Cromwell late Protector.

Polib. Historici est, ne quid falsi, audeat dicere; ne quid very, non audeat.
By WILLIAM WINSTANLEY, Gent.

printer's device of Nathaniel Brook, featuring an angel holding a large
feather or quill N B



London, Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill, 1660.

To the Right Honorable, Somerset, Lord Herbert of Ragland, Son and Heir of
Edward Marquess of Worcester, Earl of Glamorgan, etc. To the Right Honorable
William Seimor, Lord Beuchampe, Grandchild and Heir to the Right Honorable
the Marquess of Hertford. To the Right Honorable Charles Dormer, Lord Dormer
of Wing, Son and Heir to the Right Honorable the Earl of Canarvan.

My Lords,
I Have chosen to present you with this Volume, not only as it is worthy of
the Ages past, but also of your Lordships present view, the Affinity of your
Blood and Greatness, challenging from me no less then these prostrate respects,
as I could desire no firmer nor safer an Anchorage then in so proper a
Dedication, no despairing that my Pen has produced something worthy of your
entertainments; as I have set before your eyes forty seven Select Lives of our
English Heroes, the greatest Princes, the most Reverend Cleargy-men, eminent
Statesmen, and valiant Soldiers all deceast: As to History it self, a Modern
Writer expresses, it is the study of the Holy Scripture that becomes a
Gentleman; of the Ecclesiastical History, a Christian; and of the British
History, an English man; all which Qualifications in some measure meeting in
your Honors, as well as in this Work it self, gives me some assurance that
these my weak endeavors would not be unwelcome to you. My Lords, he that has
the Spirit and Blood of his Ancestors in his veins, cannot be so much turned
into a Statue as to stand still and admire the different Fortunes, this man's
greatness, and of that man's lowness, so as not only to reflect on the
tributary brooks of the former Matches of the Nobility, but also to look back
to matter of fact what our Predecessors have been, as well as what we our
selves at the present are, least falling short of the imitation of their
immortal actions, we so strangely degenerate, as not to understand what we our
selves ought to be. The clear Fountain flowing from the true Nobility of late
being so disturbed, it is the office of an honest and true Historian, if not
his duty, to have so much of the Herald, as to Register the Descents, Issues,
worthy Acts, Achievements, Mannagements of our of late so little imitated
Ancestors; of these several alterations in Nobility one observes, there are
three principle Actors on the Theater of great Families; the Beginner,
Advancer, and Ruiner; in all these our uncivil troublesome times we have heard
more of the latter then of the other two; one experiencst though unfortunate
good, amongst the many mischiefs, which a Civil War occasions, is that in the
ransacking of Studies, accidentally, though determined otherwise, the Togati
and the Armati meet; several Manuscripts which otherwise would have remained
useful only to private persons, have been by Divine Providence miraculously
preserved, contrary to the intentions of the Agents, whose Barbarismes had
snuft out the candle to the present Age, and deprived posterity of those
Illustrations from which they might know that truth, which otherwise they
should never have been acquainted with: as they endeavored that the most
remarkable Affairs of these times should have otherwise been hid under a
bushel. To your Honor, my Lord Herbert, I make this particular Address, though
this Dedication is joint, as in respect of your happy Assinities, as you are
Father-in-law to one of these youthful Branches of Honor, in respect of your
advantages of some years, so your grandeur and experience renders you a History
of your self, and in respect of their tender ages another to them. My Lord, I
know to your Honor it is no less then a Prodigy that our English Gentlemen
should be more exact and refined in knowing the Religion, Laws, Governments,
Strengths, Scites, Customs, and Fashions of Foreign Countries, then of their
own wherein themselves are Natives, which caused a deserving Historian, as it
were, to sigh out this expression, What pity is it for a proper Gentleman to
have such a crick in his neck, that he cannot look so much as over his shoulder
to know his own History; much less so far behind him, as to reflect on actions
long since performed. I have presumed to intimate thus much to your Honor, as
you are another Burleigh or Raleigh, to give better advice to your youthful
Kinsmen. My Lords, I have chosen you as out of the Caesar's, to affix your names
to this Epitome of Lives, that as Julius was his own History and Commentary, so
your Honors though yet but in the abstract of time, might pass it to
posterity; to which purpose, I have chosen your united protections. Since I
have been writing this History, there has been no less then three alterations,
Regal, Protectorship, and now a Commonwealth; I first undertook this enterprise
in the time of Monarchy, continued it in the short space of Protectorship, and
finished it in the immediate initiation of the Commonwealth: in all which
progressions, if the Liberty of the Subjects modest prospects are shut up, or
not allowed, if in these days that Lots little one of truth, by these present
times posterity must be deprived of, wise and honest men will be seriously
sensible of such obstructions; the maliciousness of such Machiavillians puts me
in mind of what elegant Mr. Fuller cites what Naturalists observe of the Toad,
who before she can be surprised by death, sucks up the supposed precious stone
in her head, which till then was but a jelly; thus some men are so cowardly
that they had rather have History buried with them, then that the least part of
civil truth should be writ whilst they live, as if they deserved no Chronicle,
or were only to be suffered in Libellous Pamphlets, which wise men scorn to
cast their eyes on. I confess we live in times of Jealousies, nevertheless
there is no danger in a Dedication that drives on a harmless design, which for
the Innocence of it, craves protection from such tender years. My Lords, I wish
that your Families may ever flourish, whose Charities like the expected showers
have refresht our parched English Earth, being nevertheless so undescernable as
the wind, the left hand not knowing what the right hand did; the so eminent
Noblesses of your Generous Blood has obliged our English world, and amongst
the rest of my Contrymen, commanded me to present these humble respects to
your Lordships. In the tender of these Lives, My Lords, I have turned the
Mirror of them to you, expecting that by your future Achievements you will get
up hill to these Worthies, not questioning but some other Pen when I am in my
silent grave will raise Pyramids to your Names, and affix you to this Volume:
If your Lordships in your inspect at my turning of this Mirror to you, still
perceive somewhat remaining of a sad representation, a once sable mourning
cloud, it is now so serene, so dispersed with the Beams and Splendors of Honor,
that you may safely be so loyal to Heaven, as with a correlative gratitude, to
acknowledge the remarks of that Hero. My Lords, as I designed you the Persons
of my Dedication, so you bear the Title of my Book in your promising Years and
Blood, there being none in England in whom there is a Nobler confluence of so
many Loyal Purple Rivelets of Honor, that a mean Herald by the guidance
thereof upwards, may be lead to the Fountain and Head-Spring of the English
Nobility. Be pleased to accept of these tenders of Service, as also of my best
wishes, that as you have met in your Affinities, so joint Virtues may be united
in your Natures, which shall be his request to Heaven, who is the meanest and
unworthiest of

Your Lordships Servants, William Winstanley.

To the Worthy Patron of Ingenuous Endeavors, the truly generous and nobly
minded Thomas Salisbury, Esquire;
SIR,
IT may make you the more to admire at my boldness, that in a midnight as not
known to you, I shall nevertheless present these more then ordinary respects; I
acknowledge till the Magi of those that rightly knew you had crowned my tenders
with the Laurels of your deserts, I had not laid down this Dedication
otherwise, then at the feet of your Eminent Qualifications, as of a proximity
to what still remains of the surviving Nobility. Sir, I have placed you in the
Front of my Hero's, not disputing after so confirmed a survey of you by your
Friends, that I could not choose a more fortunate Star to direct these my
services, then to your self; as I am informed with your own Pen you have begun
with the life of Adam, the creation of History, give me leave after your
Italian Victory, to entertain you with these British Triumphs, which take
their rise from the Christian Cross of Constantine the Great, and sit down
within the Herodian short-lived Protectorships. Sir, as to the undertakings of
History, you are not unacquainted that Judgment and a signalized Impartiality
eternizes an Historian. That oil is adjudged the best that has no taste; that
Author should be the most preferred that has the least tongue of interested
affections, a candor of course being due to him that waves the chiding of the
present times, in hopes that after Ages may excuse him. Seamen observe that the
waters are the more troubled the nearer they come to the Land, because broken
by repercussion from the shore; I am sensible (though that I cannot imagine
wherefore) of the same danger, the nearer I approach to the times, and the end
of this History, the more subject some will be to censure what they have so
little wit as to interpret to themselves. One writes, if he did not invent the
words himself, that Machiavel used to say, that he that undertakes to write a
History should have no Religion; if so (says he) glossing on his own wit,
Machiavel himself was the best qualified in his age to be an Historian; the
Gentleman is much mistaken, alas he was but a simple fellow to the Religious
Jesuits of our times, as he wanted the Holy Vestments, the Vizards of
Scripture to gild over his designs. Some entertain this position, that the
History of these present times must not be written by any one alive, which in
my opinion is disgraceful to an Historian, and very prejudicial to posterity;
as if they were to write at a distance, that obscurity might protect their
mistakes from discovery: others also say, the Truth is not ripe enough to be
writ in the Age we live in, which proves too rotten for the next generation
faithfully to report: these men are extremely mistaken, for when Impresses of
memorable matters are almost worn out, the History having more of the Authors
hand then footsteps of truth therein, must needs suffer; sure I am that the
most informative Histories to posterity, and such as are highly prized by the
Judicious, have been written by eyewitnesses; such Historians as live in the
Times, not by the Times; thus Thucidides reports impartially of the
Pelopenesian War. Indeed St. Peter followed Christ afar off, so Politicians
would not have the Historian to tread on the heels of the times, lest the times
tread on his heels; the truth is, we live in such a warlike tragical Age, best
to write of, but not to write in. Sir, if Wit be such a Plant that it scarce
receives heat enough to keep it alive in the Summer of our cold Climate, how
can it choose but wither in the so long and sharp a Winter of our Civil Uncivil
Discontents. If my endeavors meet with any acceptance in this our English
world, it must be from such understanding Persons as your self, as it will
remain a perpetual memorial to your name, as first brought forth under the
Sphere of your tuition and Goodness. Worthy Sir, together with the respects I
tender to your honored self, I have entertained it as a Case of Conscience to
transmit to the next Age some short Intimations of these times, as any wise
Historian may justly fear that Records are not so carefully kept in these so
many changes, as they have been in former Ages; as to the breviary of these
Lives, I can only apologize, that no wise man can expect to cut and pollish
Diamonds with so little pains as we do Marbles; the chiefest matters contained
in Gyant-like Volumes is to be found in this, like a little Watch showing the
time of the day as well as a great Clock. Sir, lest having written a Preface in
respect of these tedious Lines, you should mistake them for another, I shall
end with this short ejaculation, that as Fortune, whom the Poets have so long
feigned blind, has opened her eyes to look upon you as to your desires and
deserts, so I wish you may enjoy her favors as many more happy Years as there
are Lives in this Book. Thus Sir, at the high Altar of my Respects, I lay down
this Sacrifice, be pleased to accept the Oblation from the hands of

Yours really, both in Love and Service, WILLIAM WINSTANLEY.

The Preface.
To the still surviving Nobility and Gentry of England.
THere is no treasure so much enriches the mind of man as Learning; there is
no Learning so proper for the direction of the life of man as History; no
History that carries more weight of concernment with it, then that of our own
Country: In the undertaking of which great enterprise, not a word that the
Historian writes but should be laden with the truth of matter; as Tacitus says
of Galba, it ought to be Imperatoria brevitate. It has been critically
observed by some, that most Historians speak too much, and say too little; I
doubt others will think, I speak too little, and say too much, so that it will
be difficult to please all. My Method shall be, first to discourse of History
it self; next of the rules and directions that are to be observed in the study
of it; then of Epitomies what they are, the admirable use that may be made of
them several ways, more respectively as to the particular Lives of Persons;
afterward of the use, benefit, and advantages that accrue by the reading of
it; concluding with some other Addresses as to the right understanding of this
now at last published Work. History, as Sir Walter Raleigh writes, makes us
acquainted with our dead Ancestors, delivering us their memory and fame; out
of it we gather a policy, no less otherwise then eternal, by the comparison and
application of other men's forepast miseries with our own like errors and ill
deservirgs. History, as it were, thus shooting off a warning-piece, from which
we have the dear bought experience of former and of latter times; that in an
hour we know what our Predecessors were many years attaining to: It makes a
young man to be ancient without wrinkles or gray hairs, principling him with
the experiences, the infirmities and inconveniences of old age. Thus we clearly
perceive how Empires, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths every where have had their
periods, but the History of them remains and lives for the instructions of men,
and the glory of God, the chief intent and use of this study being to
acknowledge our Creator, who only is unchangeable, and to admire his Wisdom
and Providence in humane miscarriages. It Is undeniable that it has pleased the
Divine Disposer of all things to preserve the Arts of reading of men to
himself, yet as the fruits tell the name of the tree, so do the outward works
of men so far as their agitations are acted, give us to guess at the rest; no
man can lay continual masks, so counterfeit behaviors, the things that are
forced for pretenses having no ground of truth, cannot long dissemble their own
nature, so irresistible is the force of truth, the Divine Providence so
powerful, that howsoever the greatest diligence has been used to carry all in
secret, to act with colorable evasions and glosses, like Tumblers that are
squint-eyed, looking one way, and aiming another, yet in these our days, we
have known the closest of State secrets brought to light, the cunningest
consultations and contrivances discovered; thus we have seen wicked Politicians
seldom happy by their baseness, often losing all which either their subtleties,
fortune, or other men's labors had cast upon them; and if they retain their
ambitions for a life, non gaudet tertius Haeres. To this purpose one writes
excellently, History is the mirror for us to look in, which represents to us
things past as if they were present, and enables us to make a rational
conjecture of things to come. For this world affords no new accidents, but in
the same sense wherein we call a New Moon, which is the old one in another
shape, and yet no other then what has been formerly; old actions return again
furbusht over with some new and different circumstances. The Premises
considered, to all wise men History must bear up, be highly esteemed, only
what Pilot in so vaste a Sea is able to steer aright, except he have discovered
those Rocks on which others have split, so as to have first rightly poised
their errors; he that is not sufficiently knowing of the slips of some
Authors, and the trips that Writers cunningly give one another, will never be
so wise as to set up for himself. I acknowledge in these last instances I have
digressed, as I would as it were praeire, before I arrived at my directions for
the reading of History; to prepare the Student in the pursuit of which Subject
only, I shall throughout the whole thread of them interweave some unworthy
Observations of my own; yet so as for the main, endeavor to keep close to the
scope and sense of a late learned Author, whose remaining Manuscripts I could
wish for the future good of posterity were committed to the Press. The first
thing that is to be undertaken in this Enterprise, is to attain to some skill
both in Ancient and Modern Geography, without which History is nothing but a
Chaos of improbable and indigested tales, as Geography without History is a
blank paper; then to betake ones self to some little Chronicle, not forgetting
to shred it into an exact Chronology, for the series of the History, which will
both help the understanding and the memory, it being as it were the fractions
of time. Read Herodians Lives of the Emperors, Justin, which is a general
Compendium of all; then Plutarchs Lives, an exact Systome of the Greek and
Roman Affairs, which of all Nations were seasoned with the greatest wisdom;
extract Political Observations, without which History is little worth, and
Fables were as good as Histories; yet under the veil of Fables lies hid all the
Divinity and Philosophy of the wise Ancients. That common fault of reading for
pleasure, as the idle people do to pass away the time, is to be avoided; this
at the best is but a supine labor. Be diligent to collect from variety of
events experience and civil wisdom, by observing both Moral and Political
Actions; the parties, the causes, the state of them, and parallel them with
others of the like nature, for it may prove virtue to one, and vice to another;
the doing of an action, wisdom in one, and madness in another, and so
continually fortunate or unfortunate; which might be made good by several
examples, which for brevity I shall omit. Here also the Historian amongst other
difficulties will meet with these troublesome curiosities, and more then
niceties, as they are too usually mistakes; as touching sums of money, numbers
of Soldiers, Ships, the slain in Battle, computation of Time, differences of
Names, Titles, etc. wherein Authors agree not; and it were to be wished that
the assured Notes of such particulars were to be had. These things I insert
only as cautions. To proceed, the Student having first in his reading gained
forth his remarks, and gleaned his observations into heads, he is next to
commit them to paper; for though the memory be the treasure of knowledge, yet
we must not trust it too much, we so often finding our accounts fall short;
therefore the Student should be sure to rank his observations with all possible
order, otherwise they will be troublesome and less profitable. The Authority of
the Author is seriously to be regarded, it being the Basis of the whole
building; therefore before reading, the best information ought to be had how he
is esteemed, whether suspected of faith or no, whether disinterested in the
business he treats of, whether a Native or a Forreigner; these latter grossly
mistaking, as Polydor Virgil does too often in our History. Philip Comines
commonly mentions those from whom he had his relations, it being the way
whereby credit is extremely courted, learned men having had a great account of
his writings. In the next place those Authors are to be compared with others of
the same subject, that so if it may be possible to reconcile their differences,
or to incline to those that bring the most colorable reasons or best
authority, this will give you a great light to reading, and be an extraordinary
help to your judgment and memory; and take it for a general Cannon, never to
read a Translation if you can understand and procure the Original: translated
Books being like removed Plants, degenerating from their excellency and native
worth, because Translators though able, and furnished with the advantages of
language, are never able to attain to the Authors own genious: to them join the
choycest Commentators, that handle the customs, whether Tacticks or
Stratagemicks, few Classick Authors having not some, if not all; the
understanding of either of these will mightily augment the life of a Narration.

It Is now high time to descend to some particular directions; as for the
election of some Authors, begin with the shortest, I have already occasionally
cited Justin; I shall now amongst the Romans begin with Lucius Florus, an
elegant writer, though somewhat too panegerical: read Veleius Paterculus, an
excellent Author, who besides the purity of his style, slices the time with a
diligent calculation, who most accurately Annatomizes the minds of those great
persons who were the chief Authors of those Affairs he treats of. Then you may
give essays to Livy, and Plutarch, Dionyssus Halicarnassus, etc. For the
Emperors begin with Tacitus rather then Suetonius, both because he is not so
confused, as for the excellent Theorems of his policy, which he has almost in
every line, but alas his rents witness in him the wounds of Barbarism; but to
remedy that, procure in them what you can to succenturiate in the History
diligently, as I have already advised take the thread of time for conduct
through the laborynth; then set your mind to observe the customs and
alterations: there are some things (not to instance them they are so generally
known) that were in the free State of Rome that were not in the Empire; and on
the contrary, that in the latter which was not in the former; look also into
the manners of the people whose ghests you read, and pry as much as you can
into the secret humors of the Governors, the inclinations of the people, how
when wantonning with success, how when feeling the pinches of fortune;
observing also what nature they borrow from their climes, the Northern being
more fruitful, the Southern more subtle, of whom nevertheless the others have
gained ground, as the Goths of the Romans, the English of the French; as also
that mountainous people are ever more hardy then those of the Plains,
Husbandmen then Citizens: for the former the Switz may exemplify, without
whose Infantry the French who are excellent Horsemen dare hardly take the
Field; for the other, the Lord Verulam (in whose admiration I can never
satisfy my self,) giving the reason why we breed so good Foot, says, it is
because it depends on the yeomanry, the great joysts of a state as well in
peace as in War, so nature has infused into every Nation some particular
condition; in the Romans desire of Glory and Sovereignty, and a great
observation of their promises. The Spaniards are reservedly proud, zealous of
the honor of their Country. The French in the beginning of a Battle more then
men, in the prosecution less then women, hot, fiery, and Mercurial spirits,
etc. So Herodian observes the Antiochians, apt to any change. Comines, the
people of Gaunt in Flanders, loving their Lords before they come into the
Government, and then having them, inconstant, seditious, etc. these things will
speak themselves, and are commonly the History of the whole Nation epitomized.

To be brief, History has this preheminency above Oratory and Poetry, that
Oratory has been rejected by the Lacedaemonians; Poetry by Plato, Tertullian,
and others, as two pernicious instruments in a Commonwealth, to pervert men's
minds; but History was never yet rejected by any; for what can be more
profitable then to learn wisdom by other men's follies, to get experience by
other men's cost and labors, and to be safe by other men's dangers. History is
like a watchtower, on which we may see dangers afar off, and so avoid them;
and what can be more pleasant then to see a Tragedy acted to the life, which
only is to be seen in History; for here we shall see the whole world, but as a
Stage on which men of all sorts have acted their parts, Princes, Prelates,
Peasants of all ages acting the same things, on the same Stage; who after they
have laid aside their discriminating Vizards, and personating Garments, they
are all alike, as they were before they put them on: for Kings and Beggars have
the same way of coming in, and the same way of going out; Mors Sceptra
ligonibus aequat: Diogenes cannot distinguish King Philips Skull from the rest;
nor is there any difference in Charons boat, between the greatest and the
meanest, all must row there alike.

As for my other consideration of Epitomies, what they are, I acknowledge them
to be but lively Landskips, such as if naturally drawn, are ex pede Herculem,
not to reflect on those common saws, Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, that life is
short, and art is long; nor to retort at the prolixity and dullness of some
Historians, some of which like Tom. Coriat memorize where they last urined; to
instance one for all, Hollingshead, who discourses of tempests, of lightnings,
of thunders, and trifling passages, as the burning of Brewers Houses, etc. of
whom that learned Historian of our Nation Doctor Heylin writes thus, Volumnious
Hollingshead and Stow, full of confusion and commixture of unworthy relations.
Without question a great part of the perfection of a Historian consists in the
wisdom of epitomizing, in picking out the morrow of larger Histories, they
being so often fraught with impertinencies, saucy censures, and too partial
adorations; to read large Volumes young men in the heat of their youthful
diversions will not condescend, and Princes have not the leisure. Virgil (if we
may reflect on Tradition,) after he had written thirty verses in a morning,
spent the rest of the day to convert them into three good ones; like Ben.
Johnson, who to one that told him of his oil and his lamp, the pains he took
before his Births, those happy abstracts of the humors and manners of men;
gave this answer, That his were Works, the other printed things for the Stage
were but Plays. Dons and Cleavelands Poems, how have they whipped and pedantized
the other locusts of Poetry? thus a true Diamond is to be esteemed above heaps
of Bristol stones. To instance further, as to the writing of Lives, Historians
that are thus employed, are, or ought to be the most impartial of all other
Authors, except by their interests and flatteries they have resolved to render
themselves worse then Pimps to posterity; it being their determined employment
and proper duties to pull off the perriwigs and disguises of great men, and to
present them in their own colors, as a man's exterior actions are the best
indicia of his mind; some men in their public actions being mere mimicks,
whereas in private they put off their assumed habits and become themselves
again. A disinterressed Historian, for what next to God he can discover, paints
them to the life; the general complaint in this particular is of the scarcity
of the writers of lives: Indeed I know but few of the modern have labored this
way, for antiquity we have Laertius and Plutarch, you may happily pardon me if
I touch at either of them, there is a certain abundance of moral wisdom in
Laertius, he is rich in his examples of ancient Sages, is fraught almost in
every page with moral instructions. Plutarchs fortune is to have engaged with
warlike spirits, yet you may find in him counsels as well for the Gown as the
Sword. I conceive no reason why Bodin and some others should bark at him, and
say, his History may well be called Parallels, for they never meet; truly
considering their internal inclinations, by their leave, in my judgment they
are admirably well suited, nay, most of their actions concur; now if one had
not the same fortune, as another Country rose when the other fell, it makes
nothing against him, since chance may help the weak to the Victory.

But lest contrary to my own Intention I should enlarge my self too much, it
will now be high time for me to fall on my next particular, what is the use,
benefit, and advantages that accrue from the reading of History. From this
Study we learn the causes, rises, alterations, revolutions, characters of
diverse persons, the mutability of Councels, the remarkablenesse of actions, the
subtleties of pretensions, the drifts of interests, the secrets of State, the
deportments of Princes wisely dissimulating with their people, from whose
ambitious pretenses Politicians determine that nothing is unlawful to him that
has power, and nothing so unsafe to a Cedar of State, as to be securely
innocent. By the assistance of History we find out the especial Affairs of
their Kingdoms, their Treaties, Articles, Letters, Charts, Ordinances,
Entertainments, Provisions of Arms, Businesses of Commerce. It is indeed one of
the most profitable employments of a man's life to read Histories, which stirs
up men to virtue, and deterrs from vice, whilst they read how the one is
rewarded, and the other punished; it makes a man serviceable both to the Church
and State; it is a Study fit for Divines, to illustrate and confirm their
Doctrines, whilst they exhort to virtue, and dehort from vice; it shows them
also the increase and decrease of Religion, with the diverse concomitants
thereof; it is fit for the Lawyer, to show him the original, diversities, and
changes of Laws and Governments; for the same cause it is a fit Study for all
Princes, Magistrates, and Politicians, without which their Government will be
but lame: and no less necessary is it to Soldiers, especially to Commanders
and Captains, where they may see the the diverse causes, events, attendants, and
stratagems of War. Physicians also, Philosophers and Poets may reap no small
benefit by reading Histories. Alexander made himself so expert a Warrior as he
was, by reading the Life and Actions of Achilles; and Caesar was animated to
undertake his great exploits by reading the Life of Alexander. Plutarch
reports, that Paulus Aemilius who subdued Perses the Macedonian King, attained
to his expertness in Soldiery, by his indefatigable Study in History. Selymus
the Turk caused the actions of Julius Caesar to be translated (whereas his
Predecessors slighted all Histories as fabulous) and by reading of these, he
became so expert a Soldier, that in a short time he overrun a great part of
Africa and Asia-Charles the Great was so affected with Histories, that he
usually caused them to be read to him as he sat at dinner and supper. And
Alexander Severus never undertook any great action, till he had first consulted
with Historians. Innumerable other examples might be produced of the benefit
attained by reading of Histories; now as they received profit from, so were
they in ancient times as grateful to Historians. Polybius that wrote the Roman
History, and their Wars with the Carthaginians, was honored with a Statue on
high Pillar at Megalopolis. Pompey the Great honored Theophanes the Historian
with the Privileges of the City of Rome. The Emperor Tacitus commanded the
History of Tacitus to be placed in all Libraries, and least it should perish,
he caused it every year to be written ten times over. Titus Vespasian bestowed
great wealth and honors on Josephus the Jewish Historian, notwithstanding he
had before been his deadly enemy, and caused his Statue to be erected at Rome.
So did Julian the Apostate upon Aurelius Victor, the Roman Historiographer. We
read of Alphonsus King of Arragon, that he commanded the Musicians from his
presence, saying, He heard a better Harmony out of Livy. The Egyptians were so
careful to preserve their Histories and ancient Monuments, that they slighted
the Grecians, accounting them no better then children for their neglect herein.
History is the general treasury of times past, present, and a lively pattern of
things to come; and as one rightly terms it, the Work-Mistresse of Experience,
and Mother of Prudence: by Prudence we find that a good Prince that is
governed by evil Ministers is in as dangerous a posture of ruin, as if he were
evil himself; we discover by the ruins of some rash great men what Ambition
is, torrenti similis, which rises in an instant, and falls in a moment. In the
Calamities of a Civil War we may perceive how the Law lies asleep, and how the
opinions of the Church are traduced when all things are governed by the Sword,
to see one brought a pallio and crepedis from the greatest obscurity to the
Purple and Scepter; another once in the Meridian of Majesty, in a short time
set below in the Horizon of contempt; the sins of the Father visited in the
progeny of another Prince, of a Prince in a Nation; the hand of God guiding
this dance, like the Whitel of a Clock, which moving all the rest has not of
its self any sensible motion; or as we see the Circum-ambulation of the lower
Spheres, yet see not the primum mobile, whose Revolution whirles them round
about.

Lastly, to consider the great delight of this Study, then which what can be
greater then in History, as she reinforces Antiquity from her ruins; what can
be nobler then to make the gray head of time white again? what more pleasant
then to look back on that which is not, to see great Empires more unknown in
their Originals then the Fountain head of the Nile, break out with such violent
Cataracts that they have either overrun or terrified the amazed world, and
then in the height of their glory pulled down by some unexpected and improbable
means, and in a manner so annihilated, that they have kept no Tract of their
greatness, save what is found in a piece of paper.

To draw to a conclusion to my own Addresses, as to the right understanding of
this Volume: I must for my own part freely acknowledge, that it is more then
the Work of one man, were he of never so strong forces, to compose a passible
contexture of the whole History of England; indeed somewhat I might say for my
self, as it is well known I have spent some years in these Studies, but withal
I know quam sit magnum dare aliquid in manus hominum, especially in this kind,
where more is expected then has been delivered before; in respect of answering
the height of some insatiate curiosities, this I must write for my self, what I
may profess in singleness of heart, that the ambition of my design has been
to keep close to truth, which to me has seemed more amiable then all other
worldly Interests, to which purpose I have rendered her as she is pictured,
naked, without any unnecessary tires and advantages of Wit and Eloquence; it
having been my chiefest endeavor to set down things in an even and quiet
order, not quarrelling with the belief of Antiquity, nor obseuring the least
particle of truth, which I know needs not, though falsehood requires supporters.
Thus, as to the Authority of what I have writ, I have bound my self to the
truth of History only, retaining to my self the right of an Author, my own
liberty: As for the Method, Manner, and Phrase of writing, for my Authors I
have prefixed a Catologue of them, that my Reader may know that I have not
(like the men of the times) done things ex tempore; if every where I have not
charged my Book with them, it is because the History for the Impartiality of it
is Author to its self; only to avoid too often citations; where I could not
go abroad, as one writes, the rest I have taken in at the window. I acknowledge
I had many supplies besides my own some years continued studies, I have
conversed with the most knowing persons of unquestionable esteem, interested in
most of the late Actions, I have had the use of their Manuscripts, consulted
with Records, turned over many Volumes, so that my Reader as to the grand
composure of this Work shall find nothing so loose, though one Life sometimes
relates to another, but that with Lipsius his soder he may cement them together
in their main position, as they will lead him by the hand into the Escurial of
the History. One writes that our Historians are now adays not crook-back'd, as
is reported of the Jews, but crook-sided, warped, and bowed to the right or to
the left; for my part I have declared my self unbyassed, that posterity may
know that some durst still write Truth, whilst other men's fancies are more
light then their hands. As it is impossible for any man to ground a true
History upon the printed Pamphlets of these times, such things as pass the
Press without control, so lamentable is our condition, that in such a Harvest
of Printing we should have so few true Historians; on the one side being either
stifled with Pamphlets, or on the other oppressed with monstrous swelled
Volumes, able to wear out the eyes with reading, the hand in turning, or the
memory in receiving. I must beg pardon if I have imitated Tacitus, of whom one
may say without partiality, that he has written the most matter with the best
conceit, in the fewest words of any Historian. For my own part I am so greedy
of well doing, as that nothing suffices the appetite of my care herein; I had
rather be master of a small piece handsomely contrived, then of vast Rooms ill
proportioned and unfurnisht. As for this Piece which I have extracted out of
diverse Historians, and contracted into a brief Epitome, I have endeavored to
set down in it all remarkable passages in as little room as I could, the
Compendiousness whereof will be useful and acceptable to most sorts of men; as
first to those who by reason of their other studies and employments in the
world have no leisure to read over the many Volumes of Histories which have
been written; in reading of this they shall not need to spend much time, which
is but short, and every wise man will be willing to husband it as well as he
can. 2. To those who have no patience to dwell too long upon prolix and tedious
Histories, from reading of which many are deterred, as growing weary before
they be half way, despairing ever to attain the end of their journey. 3. To
these also (Quibus res angusta domi) who either cannot because of their narrow
means, or will not because of their narrow minds, part with too much money on
Books; in this, they that cannot reach to the price of a long Gown, may buy a
short Cloak. Lastly, the benefit will accrue to all men who read this History,
that they shall buy at a far cheaper rate the experiences of others recorded
here, then they can buy their own; for they that live long and travel far, pay
soundly for their experience; but they who read Histories enjoy the experience
of all that lived before, which is far greater and much cheaper. My only fear
is, lest by essaying or epitomizing, I should trespass too much on the soil of
other men's inventions or judgments, as to prejudice truth or the persons whose
mutual offsprings they are; but these things being but by the by, the Reader
will not much set by them. I shall therefore come to the main and most
important considerations; this History though it begins with a distance of
time, yet the discerning Reader shall find, that it is not so far off that the
footsteps of time are worn out; and for those passages that have come nearest
to our times, I have in my inquisitions gone betwixt the Bark and the Tree;
what I have mentioned in Letters I know from whose closet they came, they are
many of them never before printed, of the Caballa of State, of those of which
Sir Robert Naunton says, if they could have been procured, would have told
pretty tales of the times. If there be any persons living, who though they are
not named, will still reflect so far on themselves as to be concerned, such if
they rightly understand themselves, cannot be much displeased, since they may
imagine what will be said of them in plain truth hereafter: this I am certain
of; I have not intermixed any passion in my relations, to make my self a party,
in which some have showed themselves better Advocates then Historians; all that
I shall pretend to in this work, is no more then a bare narrative of matter of
fact, digested into order of time, interposing of my own opinion in the
interpretation of actions; all which traverses, as I have already expressed, I
have infused neither Vinegar nor Gall into my ink; if I mention a charge or
impeachment, it relates to the defense that was made by the accused. To be
brief, in this small Volume the Reader may see the prosperous and torn estates
of Princes and other persons, the declination of the Clergy, and the affairs
of the Soldiery; in all which transactions, one life will smooth the way for
another, that he that considers the one without the other, sees but with one
eye; indeed the chief materials this Volume is built up of, are of the exploits
and successes of my own Countrymen, as well in their foreign expeditions, as
what was transacted at home. In the composure of this Volume, amongst the lives
and draughts of the Worthies, I must acknowledge through the persuasions of
friends, who prevailed with my pen. I have inserted some few inferior Lives,
amongst the rest Master Lilburnes, which though not agreeing with the title of
my Book, may as I have in his strange life expressed, pass as a Wonder, for
some of the Royalists at the latter end of the Volume, except I would have
defaced my endeavors, and spoiled the intention of my design, I could not but
particularize them; as otherwise I must have made by themselves two little
Volumes of the late King and the Protector, to the improper alteration, if not
the spoiling the method of my designs; as they are successively placed, so
their enemies, if they love to read of their own sad triumphs of their former
actions, they will appear even to them as so many beauty spots in the face of
this Epitome of the English History. There are several other Lives which were
never before writ, these as I had no track in History to find out the series
of their transactions, cost me many hours of conversation with their friends
and such as best knew them, from whom I received such light, as that together
with their own so well known splendours, their more Heroic public
deportments, which to me as also to themselves were their own History, though
it has been my good fortune to represent them in their still surviving
pictures, which I question not but this present age as also posterity will be
very well pleased with. In the choice of these lives I have not so much tickled
my own fancy, as pursued our English History in no ordinary method, but such a
one as to my knowledge the like is not extant in our English tongue; the
general way of writing being of the Chronicles of the Kings, which path in my
opinion had been too vulgar, and too much trod in: the lives of particular
persons being in them either obscured or too lightly touched on; whereas giving
them their due luster, these Diamonds, as relating to the Crown, with their
splendour illumniate the several Reigns as they fall in their succession of
time; and though every Prince is not inserted as so vulgarly known,
nevertheless his story in these Heroes is for the main continued. I shall
excuse my omission of these late Princes, Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary, Queen, Elizabeth, and King James, as the people have from their
continued reading their transactions imprinted in their minds. For those that
are still behind hand, that are not versed in the English History, I thought
fit to give them this short advice for the election of their Authors; Speed may
be entertained though his Volume be large, he has fewer impertinencies then
some other more volumnious Historians. Sir Richard Baker is to be honored for
his handsome style and method; these two Authors the Student may make use of as
entire in themselves, though without dispute our English History has been
rendered best in parts; the writers having bestowed more pains, and have been
more intent upon the Reigns they have undertook. Thus the Readers best way will
be to take the admirable Daniel, the most succinct Author, and the most
judicious and notable for his censures, he writes from the beginning of our
Story to Richard the Second. Then he must make as good a shift as he can with
Trussel, who writes ad rem, though not with so acute a pen; he goes unto Henry
the Seventh, whose Reign above all others read the Lord Verulam. Thence proceed
to peruse Bishop Godwin, whose Annals contain Henry the Eighth, Edward the
Sixth, and Queen Mary; the incomparable Cambden goes on with Queen Elizabeth.
The parcel Historians that have done excellently in particular Lives, are Sir
John Heyward, Sir Robert Cotton, the Lord Herbert, Mr. Habington, Dr. Heylin,
Mr. Fuller, Mr. Le-Strange, Squire Sanderson, Mr. Rushworth, and others. But I
fear I have already been too tedious, I shall immediately conclude with this
request, that for the errors and failings of my pen, as it is a common saying,
Humanum est errare, so I submit my pen to the censures of the more learned,
entreating them in their better Judgments to correct my unwilling mistakes;
for the oversight of printing I shall only crave pardon of course, as it is a
fate common to Books and Book-men not to be avoided; whatsoever the faults are;
let them redound to my self, I wish the profit to others, but above all
attribute the Glory to God.

William Winstanley.

The Names of the Authors cited in this Book.
A.
ALluridus Rivallensis Mr. Ascham Mr. Charles Allen Alexander ab Alexandro
Ausonius.
B
Sir Richard Baker Bale Mr. Buckley Mr. Buck Sir John Beaumont Saint Bede Du
Bartus
C
Carton Cambden Chaucer Chronicum Chronicorum St. Chrysostom Comines Mr.
Chrashaw. Mr. Cleaveland Cattullus
D
Drayton Sir Simon D'ewes Sir Will. Davenant
E
Eusebiue Eutropius Enguerrant Erasmus
F
Mr. Fuller Mr. Fox Froysart Fabian
G
Geoffery of Monmouth Gower Bishop Godwyn Giraldus Cambreusis Grafton
H
Habington Dr. Hackwel Hall Sir John Harrington Lord Herbert Herodian Dr.
Heylin Hollingshead Hector Boethius Hoveden Horace Homer
I
Juvenal Joseph of Excester Isaacson
K
King James
L
Leiland Lucan Lidgate Lambert Mr. Le-strange
M
Matthew Paris Major Martin Sir Tho. Moor Marianus Scotus
N
Necham Ninius Mr. Alexander Nevil. Sir R. Naunton St. Nazzianzen
O
T. Occleve Ovid
P
Paulus Orosius. Platina Paradin Paulus Aemylius Plutarch Poggins Propertius
Paulus Diaconus Polychronicon Polydor Virgil Paulus Jovius Pindarus Petrarch
Q
Mr. Quarles
R
John Rouce Tho. Randolph Rushanger
S
Sandys Shakespeare Sleidan Speed Stow Sozomenus Sabellicus Stapleton Suetonius
Spenser Sir Philip Sidney Serres Seldom
T
Theodoritus Tibullus Tacitus Trussel Nicholas Trivet Tertullian
V
Victor Verstigan Virgil
W
Will. of Newberry Will. of Malmsbury Walsingham Weever Waller
X
Xenophon
Z
Zosimus
The Reader is desired to correct these Errata's with his Pen, the most
material being in Sir Walter Raleigh's Life; his Letter to the Duke of
Buckingham should have been placed after his Voyage to Guyana.

PAge 17. line 30. read fallen. p. 24. l. 25. for Danes read English. l. 32. r.
depart. p. 44 l. 17. r. Denmark. p. 80. l. 1. r. his. l. 11. r. sky. p. 92. l.
6. for himself r. him. p. 101. l 6. r. progress. p. 129. l. 18. after
enterprise, r. which they refused. p. 186. l. 8. r. the. p. 207. l. 12. r.
they. p. 228. l, 27. r. bait. p. 251. in the title r. Sir Walter Raleigh. p.
253. l. 17. r. Rams. l. 29. r. unfortunately. p. 255. l. 16. r. intercessor. p.
279. l. 18. r. Pallas. p. 329. l. 2. r. Strafford. p. 333. l. 19. r. Strafford.
p. 405. l. 3. r. Louden. p. 477. l. 29. r. fit. p. 520. l. last r. Ship. p.
562. l. 33. r. tail.

The Names of those whose Lives are written in this Book.
1 COnstantine the Great Folio 1 2 King Arthur Folio 8 3 Dunstan Folio 16 4
Edmond Ironside Folio 22 5 Edward the Confessor Folio 29 6 William the
Conqueror Folio 38 7 Thomas Becket Folio 49 8 Richard the First Folio 55 9
Edward the Third Folio 66 10 Edw. the Black Prince Folio 79 11 Sir John
Hawkwood Folio 88 12 Geoffery Chaucer Folio 91 13 Henry the Fifth Folio 98 14
John D. of Bedford Folio 115 15 Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick Folio 125 16
Richard the Third Folio 140 17 Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey Folio 145 18
Cardinal Wolsey Folio 151 19 Sir Thomas Moor Folio 155 20 Thomas Cromwell Earl
of Essex Folio 170 21 Sir Philip Sidney Folio 179 22 Robert E. of Leicester
Folio 186 23 The Lord Burleigh Folio 195 24 Sir Francis Drake Folio 205 25 Sir
Francis Walsingham Folio 215 26 Sir Nicholas Bacon Folio 219 27 Robert Devereux
Earl of Essex Folio 221 28 Sir Robert Cecil Folio 238 29 Sir Tho. Overbury
Folio 241 30 Sir Walter Rawleigh Folio 250 31 Mr. Will. Cambden Folio 261 32 Mr.
Tho. Sutton Folio 268 33 Sir Francis Bacon Folio 273 34 Lancelot Andrews Bishop
of Winchester Folio 289 35 Doctor Done Folio 298 36 George Villiers Duke of
Buckingham Folio 308 37 Sir Henry Wotton Folio 319 38 Tho. Wentworth Earl of
Strafford Folio 329 39 William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury Folio 343 40
Robert Devereux Earl of Essex, General of the Parliaments Forces Folio 350 41
Sir Charles Lucas Folio 356 42 King Charles Folio 363 43 The Lord Capel Folio
433 44 James Marquess of Montross. Folio 446 45 Bishop Usher Folio 469 46 John
Lilburne Folio 479 47 Oliver Cromwell Folio 525
Englands Worthies, Select Lives of the most Eminent PERSONS of the Three
Nations, from Constantine the Great, to the Death of the late Lord Protector,
Oliver Cromwell.
COnstantine (for his many Victories surnamed the Great) was Son to Constantius
Emperor of Rome; his Mother was named Hellena, being Daughter unto Caelus a
British Prince, though some Jews and Gentiles out of hatred to her Religion,
have reported her to be an Inholder or Hoastess: he was born in England, as all
Writers affirm, two petty Greek Authors only dissenting, who deserve to be
arraigned of felony for robbing our Country of its honor; Colchester was the
place where he first beheld the light, as the Ancient Poet Necham sung.

From Colchester there rose a Star,
The Rays whereof gave glorious light
Throughout the world in Climates far,
Great Constantine Romes Emperor bright.
At such time as he was Caesar under Constantius his Father, he was left at
Rome as Hostage with Galerius the Emperor; but perceiving his death to be by
him attempted, he posted to Britain in all haste to his father, who was newly
returned to the City of York from an expedition he had made against the Picts
and Caledonians.

Constantius at the time of his sons arrival was sick of the Plague, whereof he
died immediately afterward; the sight of his son at the present so revived his
spirits, that raising himself upon his bed, he set the Crown Imperial upon his
head, and in the presence of his Privy Councillors spoke to this effect.

Now is my death to me more welcome, and my departure hence more pleasant,
seeing I shall leave my unaccomplished actions to be performed by thee my Son;
in whose person I question not but that my memorial shall be retained as in a
monument of eternal fame. What I had intended, (but by death prevented) see
thou accomplish; let thine Empire be governed uprightly by Justice, protecting
the innocents from the tyranny of oppressors, wiping away all tears from the
eyes of Christians; for therein above all things have I esteemed my self happy:
to thee therefore I commend my Diadem, and their defense, taking my Faults
along with me to my grave, but leaving my Virtues to revive and live in thee.
With the conclusion of which words he concluded his life, leaving his Subjects
sorrowful for his departure; but the grief they received by the death of the
Father, was mittigated in the hopes they conceived of his Son, who so resembled
his Father in all virtuous conditions, that though the Emperor was changed,
yet his good government remained: For as one writes.

Sol occubuit, nox nulla secuta est.
The sun was gone,
but night was none.
Another writes thus of him.

Great Constantine preserved by Heavens decree,
Of mighty Rome the Emperor to be.
Constantine thus chosen Emperor in Britain, was confirmed Emperor by the
Senate of Rome, who (like the Persians) adored the rising Sun, giving
approbation to what they could not remedy; his first expedition was against the
Picts and Caledonians, which War his Father had begun, but death prevented him
to finish it, leaving the prosecution thereof to his son Constantine, that the
Fabric of so many victories by him achieved, might have the foundation
thereof laid in Britain: nor was his success contrary to his expectation,
subduing the inhabitants that were most remote witnesses (says one) of the
suns set, or going down.

Whilst Constantine was thus busied in Britain, Maxentius by the tumultuous
soldiers was proclaimed Emperor at Rome, whose sister Fausta, Constantine had
married; but his tyrannical usurpation grew so odious to the Senate, that they
sent to Constantine for his aid, who willingly hearkening to what they so
earnestly desired, prepared his forces against the new elected Emperor;
Maximianus the Father of the Tyrant, faining to abhor the outragiousness of his
son, but seeking indeed to uphold him in his tyranny, repaired to his Son in
law Constantine with an intent to murder him; but revealing his intentions to
his Daughter Fausta, was by her detected; and being taken, was served with the
same sauce he intended to serve another, verifying therein the ancient Proverb,

He that for others digs a pit,
Does often himself fall into it.
Having escaped this eminent danger, he makes Licinius Governor of Sclavonia,
Co-partner with him in the Empire; and to assure him to his side, gives him his
sister Constantia to wife, and then with an Army of 90000. Foot, and 8000
Horse, hastes toward Rome against Maxentius his enemy,

Constantine at the time of his setting forth of Britain, was (as appears by
Authors) unsettled in his Religion; for though he observed the adoration of
the Gods of the Gentiles to be altogether frivolous and deceitful, yet was he
not confirmed in the Christian Faith, but was then rather of no Religion, then
truly of any; the cause of his conversion, Eusebius and other Authors write,
was, that being in his march against Maxentius aforesaid, being then piously
affected to worship and to invocate the true God, he cast his eyes toward the
East part of the Heavens, and had presented unto him the sign of a Cross,
wherein were stars as letters so placed, that visibly might be read this
sentence, IN HOC VINCE; this sign being seconded by the voice of Angels,
confirmed him in that whereof before he was doubtful, so that changing the
Imperial Standard to the form of this vision, as one armed from Heaven, he
marched against his hellish Adversary.

Who thinking to overreach Constantine by a stratagem, framed a false bridge
over the River of Tybur, but the trap he set for another he fell into himself;
for joining battle with Constantine, and being by him overcome, either for
haste or forgetfulness, took over the same himself, which falling under him as
he passed, he with many more were drowned, escaping thereby a more cruel and
ignominious death.

Maximinus, who then governed the East part of the Empire, hearing of the
prosperous proceedings of Constantine, purposed the destruction of him and all
his partakers: but man proposes, and God disposes; for he who dreamt of
nothing less then a glorious victory, was himself overcome by Licinius at
Tarsus, where he shortly after died, being eaten up with lice.

Licinius hereupon growing insolent, his prosperous proceedings making him
ambitiously mad, was in conceit no less then Emperor of the whole world; so
that now he began to unvizard himself, and to show he was not what he
pretended; for though before he had outwardly suffered the Christian
profession, yet now he raised a bloody persecution against them in the East.
Constantine according to his Fathers commandment (which was to wipe away all
tears from the Christians eyes) prepared his forces against this bloody
persecutor, with whom he encountered in the Country of Hungary, his success
being answerable to the justness of his cause, Licinius and his Army being
overthrown; but he afterward recruting, in a battle at Byzantium was again
overthrown and taken prisoner; yet by the mediation of his wife Constantia, had
his life spared and confined within the City of Nicomedia: but he afterward
endeavoring to recover his former dignity, was for his treasons afterward put
to death, so that then (as Mr. Speed writes) the peace of Gods Saints
manifestly appeared, and the progress of the Gospel passed uncontrolled.

Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licinius being vanquished, Constantine remained sole
Emperor, under whom the Christians enjoyed Halcyon days, returning from the
deserts where before they were hidden; Churches were reedified, Temples
founded, and Festival Days celebrated in every place. And that this foundation
might have as glorious a building, he congregated 318 Christian Bishops in the
City of Nice, where diverse things were decreed for the godly government of the
Church in that primitive Age.

His next care was to demolish and pull down idolatrous Temples and Images, as
the Grove and Temple of Venus in Phenicia, which was a School of wickedness to
those which were addicted to lust; where men and women frequently committed
adulteries and fornications. Constantine thinking it unfit that the sun should
behold such villainy, sent a band of Soldiers to suppress it: as also the
Temple of Aesculapius, with the Image of Venus at Heliopolis, and many such
like in other places. Nor was his zeal more shown in suppressing Pagan Temples,
then in erecting structures for the advancing of Christianity, building a most
magnificent Temple in the very place where our Saviors Sepulcher was, though
some report it to have been built by his Mother Hellena; but we will not herein
set the Mother and Son at odds, it may be she built it at his cost, or that it
was built by him, and dedicated by her; as also those other two, the one on the
Mountain where our Savior Ascended, the other over the Cave where he was Born.
The Kingdom of Christ beginning to appear thus visibly resplendent, the Devil
envying the prosperity thereof, raised a new sedition in Antioch; the whole
City being divided into two factions about the choice of a Bishop: Constantine
well knowing that the War of the Church was the Infidels Peace, wrote
persuasive letters to them to maintain peace and concord among themselves;
which like lenitive Physic allayed and cooled the hot distempers of their
rage, who else had certainly killed and masacred one another.

Hitherto is Constantine's reign commended of most, but the latter part of his
life applauded of few. In the first beginning of his reign (says Stow) he was
worthy to have been compared with the chiefest Princes of the Romans; but for
the end thereof, to be resembled to such as were of the meaner sort. Eutropius
and Victor tax him of cruelty, for putting to death his wife Fausta and Crispus
his son, though he be thereof excused by Paulus Orosius and Zosimus, who
affirm the causes of there deaths were just. However, he is taxed by other
writers to have more prejudiced the Roman Empire then any of his predecessors;
first in removing the Imperial seat from Rome to Bizantium, adorning the same
with magnificent buildings, and commanding all the Princes of the Empire to
raise therein some memorable edifices. Likewise for transporting from Rome more
curious statues, and other costly monuments, then any twenty of his
predecessors had brought thither: as the Image of the Goddess Pallas, supposed
to be the same that Aeneas brought from Troy; the Image of Apollo, of an
unmeasurable higness, with the statues of Juno, Venus, and Minerva; where he
also built a famous Library, wherein were an hundred and twenty thousand Books:
changing the name to Constantinople, which it still retains unto this day.
Another error of this famous Prince, was his dividing the Empire between his
Children; for though (says our learned Dr. Heylin) it was quickly again
reunited, yet by his example others learned the same lesson, renting the Empire
into many pieces, which finally occasioned the loss of the whole. Another
defect was his translating the Legions from Britain, France, and Germany unto
the Eastern Country, for a Bulwark against the Persians, thereby opening a gap
for the barbarous Nations to enter, which they afterward soon did to the great
prejudice of the Empire; so that Zosimus (though in other of his writings
concerning this Emperor discovers his malice) yet he truly calls him the
first subverter of that flourishing Monarchy.

Concerning the time when he was baptized Authors only agree in disagreeing;
Eusebius writes, that he was baptized in the City of Nicomedia; Sozomenus and
Theodoritus, that it was a little before his death; others think he was
baptized with Crispus his Son, to which opinion accords Platina and Sabellicus,
who affirm the Font wherein they were baptized, to have remained unto their
times. In this diversity of Writers the Reader must not expect I should
satisfy him, seeing I cannot herein satisfy my self.

But of more certainty is the place of his death, wherein they all accord, that
it was in Nicomedia a City of Bythinia, where he died of a natural disease, a
thing to be taken notice of, since of 40. Emperors that reigned before him,
above 30. of them came to untimely ends, most of them being blood-thirsty
Tyrants, and Persecutours of Gods holy Saints, whose ends were answerable to
their lives, their bloody actions having bloody deaths: So true is that of the
Poet Juvenal.

Few Tyrants do to Pluto's Court descend
Without fierce slaughter, and a bloody end.
At his death he divided his Empire betwixt his three sons, Constantine,
Constantius, and Constance: To Constantine the eldest, he allotted the
Countries of Britain, France, Spain, and part of Germany; Constantius his
second son had Italy, Africa, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, and Greece; and Constance
the youngest possessed the Countries of Thracia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Egypt.

The Life of King ARTHUR.
BOth Poets and Historians out of the most famous Warriors that have lived in
the world, have extracted nine of the chiefest, whom they termed Worthies; of
these this famous Prince (whose life we now intend to relate) was accounted one.

Questionless he was a Prince of a matchless prowess, and pity it is the naked
truth of his actions has not been delivered to posterity without the
intermixture of ridiculous falsehoods; for Geffery of Monmouth is said to have
feigned many things for the increase of his fame, though he has thereby much
impaired his own; and although for the same he was bitterly inveighed at by
William of Newberry, and diverse others, yet was his follies followed by several
Authors, still adding to what he first had feigned, according to that of the
old Poet.

The thing at first invented great does grow,
And every one does something add thereto.
Thus their over-lavish pens in seeking to make him more then he was, have made
many suspect he was not at all.

But besides the testimonies of William of Malmesbury, Joseph of Excester,
Ninius, Leiland, and diverse others, for the truth of this Prince, a Charter
exemplified under the seal of King Edward the Third, does sufficiently
testify; wherein mention is made of King Arthur to have been a great
Benefactour to the Abbey of Glastenbury, and to this day his Arms (being an
Escochen, whereon a Cross with the Virgin Mary having Christ in her arms) cut
in stone, stands over the first gate of entrance into the Abbey, and is said
to be the Arms belonging to the same. Of his person we shall not need to doubt,
though we may justly suspect the verity of many things said to be achieved by
him. This by way of introduction I thought fit to insert, I shall now pursue
his History with truth and brevity.

He was base Son to Vter surnamed Pendragon, begotten of Igren Duchess of
Cornwall, her husband yet living: this Lady had often withstood his unlawful
desires, at last by the help of Merline (a renowned Welsh Enchanter) as some
Authors write, he was brought to her bed in the likeness of Gorlois her
husband, of whom that night he begat this Worthy, whom at his death he
appointed to be King of Britain, notwithstanding he had two Daughters lawfully
begotten, and as honorably married; the one to Lotho King of Picts, the other
to Gouran King of Scotland.

But scarcely was the Crown settled on his head, when the Saxons sought to
strike it off, who being called in by Vortigerne for an aid against the Scots
and Picts, like unmannerly guests sought to turn their host out of doors. To
the aid of these Saxons joined Lotho King of Picts, out of envy to the
Britains, for that they had denied him to be their King; and although Arthur
was his Kinsman, and professed Christianity, the other strangers and enemies to
true Religion, yet neither Christianity nor Consanguinity could keep him from
joining with them in amity, not caring who won, so Arthur did but lose. The
first battle they fought was in the Country of Northumberland, where Arthur
dyed his Sword in the Saxons blood, chasing them from thence to the City of
York, which notwithstanding he did straightly besiege, yet their Captain named
Colgerne escaped from thence, and got into Germany where he obtained aid of one
Cherdike a King of that Country, who came himself in person, with 70 sail of
ships, and having a prosperous Wind arrived in Scotland; which when Arthur
understood, he raised his siege, and marched toward London. And that the
multitude of his enemies might not daunt the courage of his Soldiers, he sent
for aid to his Nephew Howel, King of little Britain in France, who came
himself likewise in person to the aid of his uncle, doing, as old Authors
write, acts worthy to be eternized with a golden pen.

Their forces thus augmented, with undaunted resolutions they march to the City
of Lincoln, which Cherdike did then besiege, whom they forced from thence to
flee into a wood, but there being likewise compassed about with Arthurs
victorious Army, they yielded themselves with condition to depart the Land,
leaving the Britains their horse, armor, and other furniture: but see what
faith is to be expected from faithless people, for having their markets spoiled
at Lincoln, they thought to make them good in the West, ariving at Totnes, and
destroying all the Country till they came to Bathe; but the price of their
lives paid for their perjury, being encountered by Arthur, their Army was
overthrown, their three Captains Colgrine, Cherdike, and Bladulf being slain.

Howel King Arthurs Nephew was not at this last battle, being besieged at that
present in the Marches of Scotland, to whose rescue hasted Arthur, with the
flower of his Soldiers; and notwithstanding the Scots were aided by one
Guillomer King of Ireland, yet obtained he of them a glorious victory, chasing
Guillomer into Ireland, and bringing Scotland into subjection: like another
Caesar it might be writ of him, veni, vidi, vici, as one of our poets sings of
him.

Thus wheresoever he his course did bend,
Still victory did ox his sword attend.
Returning to York he instituted the celebration of the Nativity of our Lord,
with such feasts and sports as are commonly now used; an institution which the
Scottish writers do altogether condemn, comparing them to the feast of Bacchus
and Priapus of old, it being a time more fit for our devotion then mirth.

His wife was named Guinever, Daughter to the King of Biscay, and near
Kinswoman to Cador Duke or Earl of Cornwall; a Lady who for her beauty was the
miracle of her times, had it not been accompained with a vicious mind; not
only abusing her self by unlawfully accompanying with Mordred, son to Lotho
Kng of Picts, but also in her husbands absence consented to be his wife; so
rarely is beauty and chastity found to dwell in one body, that it has caused
many writers for the faults of some few to condemn the whole sex; amongst the
rest take these of an Epigramatist.

A woman is not to be credited,
If you will credit me, though she be dead.
And again in another place.

There is not one good woman to be found:
And if one were, she merits to be Crowned.
Together with the old Adage.

Falere, flere, nere:
Haec tria sunt muliere.
Thus some in their critic fancies think all women to be bad, and others again
as much contrary think them all to be good, certainly every man speaks as he
finds, and by the knowledge of one passes judgment of all the rest. That they
are all bad, I cannot think it: and that they are all good, I could never find
it: sure he that thought them all good; was too much feminine, and he that
concluded them all to be bad, had forgotten that ere he had a mother.

But to return to our History. King Arthur to increase the courage of his
Soldiers, instituted the Order of Knights of the Round Table, that he might
reward the well deserving with titles of Honor: none were admitted into this
order but such of the Nobility as were most renouned for virtue and Chevalry;
they were in all the number of 150 the chiefest of them being Sir Lancelot, Sir
Tristram, Sir Lamrock, Sir Gawine and others. These were all recorded for
Knights of great renown; and had not King Arthurs valor been most
transcendent, each of them might have passed for no less then a Worthy, though
they must fall short of the deeds of King Arthur, of whom it is written, that
in one battle against the Saxons, with his Sword named Callibourn, he slew
above 800 of them, so much his valor exceeded all others, if my Authors words
exceed not the truth.

In twelve set Battles (besides several Skirmishes) is he said to have returned
victor from the slaughter of the Saxons; the names of the places where these
battles were fought, take here out of Ninius.

The first was at the mouth of the River Gleyn.

The second, third, fourth, and fifth, nigh unto the River Douglass in Lineux.

The sixth upon the River Bassus.

The seventh in the wood Calidon.

The eighth besides the Castle called Guynien.

The ninth at Carlien in Wales.

The tenth by the Sea side, in a place called Trachenrith, or Rithowode.

The eleventh upon a hill named Agned Cathergonien.

The twelfth at Bathe or Bathen-hill.

King Arthur in these battles having broken the force of the Saxons, and not
only forced them to pay him tribute, but to receive Majestrates of his
appointment; yet thought the glory of his actions to suffer an eclipse, if his
victories were atcheived only in Great Britain; therefore with a well
selected Army he passes over into Norway, subduing the same with all the
Regions thereabouts; causing the people of those Countries to receive the
Chistian Religion, and obtained of the Pope to have Norway confirmed to the
Crown of this Realm, causing it to be called the Chamber of Britain. Then
sailing into France he put Frolo (Governor there for the Romans) to flight,
and afterward in combat manfully slew him.

But notwithstanding his wonderful achievements, yet Lucius Hiberus the Roman
Legate demanded of him a Tribute for Britain; which he not only denied, but
also threatened to have a tribute from Rome, as appears in his letters sent
unto the Senate, where I find it thus written in an old Manuscript. Understand
among you of Rome, that I am King Arthur of Britain, and freely it hold and
shall hold; and at Rome hastily will I be, not to give you truage, but to have
truage of you: for Constantine that was Hellens Son, and other of mine
Ancestors conquered Rome, and thereof were Emperors, and that they had and
held, I shall have yours Goddis grace; and accordingly he set forward against
Lucius Hiberus, who with great power and vain confidence came marching against
him; where after a long and bloody fight the Romans were discomfited, their
General killed, and his slain body sent to the Senate for the tribute of
Britain.

Whilst Arthur was thus busied in conquering Kingdoms abroad, he had well near
lost his kingdom at home; for in his absence his Cousen Mordred (confederating
himself with Cerdicus King of the West Saxons) usurped the kingdom: which when
Arthur understood, he returned into Britain, and at Cambula in Cornwall this
british Hector encountering with Mordred slew him; but himself being deadly
wounded, was conveyed to Glastenbury, where he dyed on the 21 day of May, in
the year of our salvation 542. when he had victoriously governed the Britains
the space of six and twenty years.

Here might we end his life, were he not further remembered by our Modern
Authors, viz. how in the last year of the reign of King Henry the Second, more
then 600. years after the time of his death, his body was found in the
Churchyard of Glastenbury, betwixt two Pyramides therein standing: he was laid
no less then sixteen foot deep in the ground, for fear (as Hollinshead writes)
the Saxons should have found him; and surely the searchers for his body would
have never dug so deep, had they not at seven foot depth found a mighty
broad stone, to which a leaden Cross was fastened, and in that side that lay
downwards, in barbarous Letters (according to the rudeness of that Age) this
Inscription was written upon that side of the lead that was toward the stone.

Hic jacet sepultus inclytus Rex Arturius.
In Insula Avolonia.
Here lies King Arthur buried in the Isle of Avalonia.

Nine foot deeper, in the trunk of a tree, was his body found buried: his bones
being of a mavelous bigness, the space of his forehead betwixt his two eyes
(if I could believe this Historians strange narration) was a span broad, and
his shin-bone being set in the ground, reached up to the middle thigh of a very
tall man; ten wounds appeared in his scull, one whereof was very great and
plain to be seen; his wife Queen Guinever lay buried likewise with him, the
tresses of whose hair, the last of our excrements that perish, finely platted,
and of color like the burnisht gold, seemed whole and perfect until it was
touched, but then (to show what all beauties are) it immediately fell to dust.
Henry de Bloys (then Abbot of that house) translated their bones into the great
new Church, (for the old one was burned not long before) and there interred
them in a sumptuous Tomb of Marble, laying the body of the King at the head of
the Tomb, and the body of the Queen at his feet toward the West part; which
noble monument (says Mr. Speed) among the fatal overthrows of infinite more,
was altogether razed at the dispose of some then in Commission, whose
overhasty actions in these behalfs, has left us a want of many truths which
otherwise we might have had.

Vain therefore is that which the Scottish Historians report, that Queen
Guinever was buried at Angus in Scotland; and that what woman soever chances
to tread upon her grave, shall remain for ever barren, without bringing forth
any issue, insomuch (as Hector Boethius a lying Author reports) no woman dares
not come near it her self, nor will suffer any of her daughters to come near
thereunto.

To conclude the Life of this famous Prince, we will shut up all with his
Epitaph made by John Leland, and tranflated into English by Mr. Nicholas
Roscarock.

Who vanquished Saxon Troops, with Battles bloody broils,
And purchased to himself a name with war like wealthy spoils,
Who has with shivering shining Sword the Picts so often dismayed,
And eke unweldy servile yoke on neck of Scots has laid:
Who Frenchmen puffed with pride, and who the Germans fierce in fight
Discomfited, and daunted Danes with main and martial might:
Who of that murdering Mordred did the vital breath expel,
That Monster griseley, loathsome, huge, that diresome Tyrant fell.
Here liveless Arthur lies entombed within this stately hearse
Of Chevalry the bright renown, and virtues nursling fierce;
Whose glory great now over all the world does compass fly,
And of the airy thunder scales the lofty building high.
Therefore you noble progeny of Britain line and race,
Arise unto your Emperor great of thrice renowned grace;
And cast upon his sacred Tomb the roseal Garlands gay,
That fragrant smell may witness well your duties you display.
The Life of DUNSTAN, Archbishop of Canterbury.
IN respect of this unusual Tract, as also of the strange variety of relations
I have found in Authors of this History; I thought fit from the Sword to come
to the Crosier, to select the Life of Dunstan, Archbishop of Canterbury, that
posterity may be acquainted with the successes as well of the Mitre as Crown.
He was born in West- Saxon, his Father was named Heorstan, and his Mother
Cinifride; they in his youth set him to school, where he so profitted, that he
excelled most then living of his age: in process of time he fell sick of an
Ague, which was so violent that he fell into a frenzy, (Physicians belike being
scarce in that age) he was, as my Author writes, under cure of a certain Woman;
but through her unskilfulness his disease increased upon him, and one day being
in a trance, he suddenly arose, and catching hold of a staff, laid about him,
as (indeed he was) mad; next night he got up on the roof of the Church, running
up and down on the same as if it had been on the ground, and coming safely down
without any hurt; these effects of frenzy were reputed by the superstitious men
of those times for miracles: hereupon his Father made him a Priest, and placed
him in the Abbey of Glastenbury, from whence he was soon advanced into the
service of King Ethelstone, and as soon banished the Court, being accused of
Necromancy; for entering one day into a Gentlewomans house, he hung his harp on
the wall whilst he shaped a Priests stoal, when to make him merry at his work
his harp began to play, which the common people concluded to be done by the
devil, though the subject of its song was said to be that Hymn, Gaudent in
coelis animae sanctorum, etc. Yea, the Virgin Mary her self is said to solace
him with her songs, Cantemus Domino sociae, etc.

Being thus expulsed the Court his Cousen Elfheagus Bishop of Winchester
persuaded him to become a Monk, that what preferment the Court denied, by means
of the Church he might obtain: but he loathing a single life, and having a
mind to marry some beautiful Damsel, refused so to do, but a sickness of his
body healed this disease of his mind; for being stricken with a swelling in
his belly, his body was brought into such state, as if he had been infected
with a Leprosy; whereupon no sooner was he recovered but he went to the
Bishop, who shore him a Monk: in which state of life he remined with such
opinion of holiness, that whereas before he was reported to be a Necromancer,
he was now reputed to be no less then a Saint: so variable are the opinions of
the people, being all in extremes, observing no medium, as the Poet has it:

This day with great Augustus they will mate thee,
Next day with false Sejanus they will hate thee.
Now whether his devotion were real or feigned, I do not know; but certain it
is, that for the opinion of his holiness, he was made Abbot of Glastenbury: nor
must we imagine him to be less then a Saint, (if we will believe the Monkish
relations of those times) since the devil and he was such great Antagonists;
for being on a time at his prayers before the Altar of Saint George, his body
fell asleep, though his devotion were waking, when the Devil coming to devour
him in the likeness of a rough Bear, he encountered him so fiercely with the
staff he used to walk with, that the Church rang with the sound thereof, to the
wonder of many. At another time the devil would have tempted him to uncleanness
in the likeness of a beautiful Damsel, but he having a pair of hot burning
pincers in his hand, caught hold of her with them by the nose, and so spoiled
the devils countenance; from whence is still the Proverb. But to leave these
fictions fit only for Monks to invent, and children to believe; certain it is,
he was in great favor with Edred King of the West Saxons, who not only
suffered his body in penance to be chastised by him; but also committed to his
keeping the greatest part of his treasure, who locked up the same in his
Monastery at Glastenbury, where it remained till the King fell sick of his last
sickness; at which time it was demanded, but never restored: for Dunstan being
on his journey with the same to the King, a voice from heaven spoke unto him,
and said, Behold King Edred is now departed in peace; at the hearing of which
words, his horse immediately fell down and died, whereupon he returned again to
his Monastery; and though he lost his horse, yet was he recompensed thereby
with the gain of the Kings Treasure and Jewels.

Edred being dead, his Nephew Edwy succeeded him in his Kingdom; altogether
unlike his uncle in conditions, young in years, but viceous in life; for the
very same day on which he was Crowned, he abused his Body with a Lady his near
Kinswoman; and after, adding murder to incest, slew her Husband, that he might
enjoy her as his Wife: for these and other notorious offenses being boldly
reprehended by Dunstan, he banished him the Realm; at whose departure the devil
is said to rejoice, and to laugh aloud at the West end of the Church; to whom
Dunstan (as it were by way of Prophecy) said, Well thou adversary, do not so
greatly rejoice at the matter, for thou do not now so much rejoice at my
departure, but by Gods grace thou shall be as sorrowful for my return.

All the time of King Edwy's reign, which was but short, (for Tyrants seldom
are long lived) he remained at the Monastery of Gaunt in Flanders, where he
received much friendship from the Governor of that Country; but Edwy dying,
his brother Edgar succeeded in the Kingdom, who unraveling the web his brother
had weaved, recalled Dunstan out of banishment; making him first Bishop of
Worcester, after of London; and last of all bestowed the Archbishopric of
Canterbury upon him. This Edgar had Dunstan in high estimation, by whose advice
(the English being given to excessive quaffing, he put down many Alehouses, and
would suffer but one to be in a Town: and the more to deterr them from this
swinish vice, he ordained certain cups with pins or nails; and made a law, that
whosoever drunk past that mark at one draught, should undergo a certain
penalty. No doubt this was an act acceptable unto God, and great need has
these times of another Edgar or Dunstan, to deterr people from this beastly
sin; and to put down the multiplicity of Alehouses, which now abound in every
corner; of which one of our modern Poets as follows:

The way to Churches is o'regrown with grass,
But to the Alehouse fair and plain to pass.
And what is it think you does cause it so?
But more to the Alehouse then to Church do go?
Then what may we expect of this same evil?
Some may to God, but most will to the devil.
Edgar dying, great troubles ensued about the election of one of his sons to
succeed him; most of the Nobles combining for young Ethelred; Dunstan and the
Monks standing as stiffly for Prince Edward: at last a Council being assembled
to argue the matter, the Archbishop came in with his Banner and Cross, and not
staying for further debating, presented Prince Edward for their lawful King;
and the assembly consisting most of Clergymen, drew the approbation of the
rest; and so he was Crowned King at Kingstone, by Archbishop Dunstan, the year
of our Lord 975.

These troubles thus quieted about the Crown, far greater arose concerning the
Church, for Alferus Duke of Mercia, favoring married Priests, would suffer no
Monks to live in his Province: on the other side Edelwyn Duke of East-Anglia,
and Brightnoth Earl of Essex, favoring the Monks, expulsed the married Priests
out of their jurisdictions. These sparks at last increast to such a flame, that
it was deemed naught but the blood of one side would quench the same; but upon
better advice they laid arms aside, and referred the matter to be debated in a
Council at Winchester, where the Monks cause (as being worsted) had undoubtedly
had the foyl, had they not referred the matter to be decided by the Rood where
the Council sat: to this Oracle Saint Dunstan desired them to pray, and to
give diligent ear to what it should speak, for the juggling Monks had placed a
Man behind a Wall, who through a trunck delivered these words to the beguiled
Priests, God forbid it should be so, God forbid it should be so; you judged
well once, but ye may not change well again.

But this deceit of the Monks being discerned by the Priests, another assembly
was held at Cleve in Wiltshire; where whilst they were arguing with bitter
invectives against each other, the joysts of the loft wherein they sat suddenly
brake, and down fell the floar with the people thereon; many were mained and
some slain, only Archbishop Dunstan remained unhurt, for the posts whereon his
chair was set (as it were by miracle) remained untouched. By this fall of the
Floar, fell the cause of the Priests and Dunstan deemed a demi God. To this
wooden miracle of his, popish writers add another of the same nature: namely,
how a huge beam of a house being sunk out of the frame, and like to ruinate the
whole building, with only making the sign of the Cross thereon with his
fingers, he made it return to his former place. All the time of King Edwards
reign was Dunstan had in high esteem; but he being too good a Prince to live in
so bad an age, was bereft of his life by the cruelty of his stepmother, that
her own son might succeed in the kingdom. Dunstan disallowing this act of the
Queens, refused to Crown her son King; at length against his will he was
compelled to solemnize his rights at Kingston on Thames, the 14. of April, 979.

This Ethelred favored not greatly the Monks, and therefore he was as little
respected of them in their writings; who report him to be sloathful person,
neither forward in action, nor fortunate in proceedings: at the time of his
Baptism he is said to defile the Fount with his ordure: whereupon Dunstan being
troubled in his mind, By the Lord (says he) and his blessed Mother, this
child shall prove to be a slothful person. But the greatest matter laid to his
charge was his making War upon the Bishop of Rochester, whose peace being it
would not be procured without the payment of a hundred pound in Gold; Dunstan
sent him word that since he made more account of Gold then of God, more of
money then of Saint Andrew Patron of the Church of Rochester, and more of
covetousness then of him being the Archbishop, the mischiefs which the Lord had
threatened should shortly come to pass, but the same should not chance whilst he
was alive; he is likewise said to have foreseen the invasions of the Danes, and
to have foretold the miseries that soon after fell upon the English Nation; as
that they should not be free from Blood and the Sword till there came a people
of an unknown tongue, that should bring them to thraldom; which predictions of
his, soon after his death came to pass, as appears in the following Life of
King Edmund; this Clergyman now waxing old, the thread of his life being spun
out to the last, he was forced to yield to that from which none are exempted,
to the tyranny of death; having tasted liberally in his time of the favors of
Fortune; which notwithstanding could not keep him from dying: so true is that
of the ancient Poet.

Each living Corpse must yield at last to death,
And every life must lose his vital breath:
The soul of man, that only lives on high,
And is an image of eternity.
He dyed on a Saturday the 25. of May, the Year of our Lord 989. Happy in this,
that he lived not to see the miseries of his Country, which happened presently
after his death.

The Life of EDMUND IRONSIDE.
THe learned Philosopher Plutarch reports, that Marcus Tullius that eloquent
Orator obtained the name of Cicero, by reason he had a thing upon the tip of
his nose, as it had beeen a rich pease; whereupon they surnamed him Cicero,
because Cicer in English signifies a rich pease. So likewise we read of Ovid,
that darling of the Muses, that he got the name of Nasonis, from the greatness
of his Nose; and in the perusual of our English Histories we shall meet with
many of the like examples, as of William the Second surnamed Rufus, from his
red face: Richard the First got the name of Cordelion, from his inexpugnable
and Lion like heart: even so this famous Prince whose life we now relate, was
surnamed Ironside, from his notable courage and strength of body, to endure all
such pains as is requisite for a Soldier: not so called, as some would have
it, for that he used to go always in armor. He was third son to Ethelred,
commonly called the unready, the eldest living at his Fathers death; his two
Brothers dying in defense of their Country, made way for him to succeed in the
Kingdom: which notwithstanding was with much opposition, as well of
Foreigners, as his natural Subjects; so that he inherited his Fathers troubles
as well as his Crown, and might be said to be a King without a Kingdom. The
most part of the Clergy, and many of the Nobility out of hatred to the Father,
rejected the Son; and at Southampton chose Canutus for their King: this Canutus
was King of the Danes, who for six and thirty years together had miserably
oppressed the English Nation, turning all into ruin wheresoever he came;
Churches and Monasteries were made subject to his desolations, and Churchmen
and Monks felt his cruel and merciless doings; Wife, Daughter, and Maid, these
cruel Danes abused at their pleasures; yea, they forced the chaste Nuns to
their filthy pollutions: insomuch that some of them to save their chastities
destroyed their beauties, deforming their bodies to keep their souls pure. To
redress these enormities, Edmund (like another Maccabeus) stood up for his
Country; and being Crowned at Kingstone by Levingus Archbishop of Canterbury,
he hasted to London being then besieged by Canutus; where he soon forced the
Danes to raise their siege, and winter themselves in the Isle of Sheepie. But
the Spring come, they suddenly assailed the West of England, and were as
suddenly themselves encountered by Edmund, who with great courage, though with
a small Army, gave them Battle at Penham in Dorcetshire, where many of these
destroyers were themselves destroyed; the rest for fafety flying toward
Salisbury. Edmund having recruited and refreshed his Army, hasted after them,
and at Sheorstan in Worcestershire a second Battle was fought, where Edmund
behaved himself most gallantly, executing the office both of a hardy Soldier,
and valiant Commander; and undoubtedly the Danes had received a great
overthrow, had not Duke Edrick (who for his many treasons was surnamed the
Traitor) cut off the head of a Soldier resembling Edmond, and holding it
aloft, thus cried to the English: Fly ye wretches, fly, and get away, for your
King is slain; behold here is his Head: but Edmond hearing of this treacherous
stratagem, hasted to show himself to his Soldiers, whose sight so revived
their drooping spirits; that had not the approaching night prevented them, they
had obtained that day a most glorious victory. Duke Edricks life had paid for
his treason, had he not presently fled to the enemy, who afterward excusing
the fact (as being mistaken in the countenance of the man, as he was willing to
save the lives of the English) he was afterward received into favor again.
There were slain on both sides by the report of writers no fewer then 20000
Soldiers, which may very well be true considering the Battle lasted two whole
days; and that of Canutus side were many English who fought with a most
furious and desperate hatred to the Danes: so true is that expression of the
Poets: The highest fury raigns in civil War,
And Country men in fight most cruel are.


The Danes by stealth breaking up their camp, in the night time hasted toward
London, which City they earnestly desired to conquer, and where their ships lay
in manner of a siege; but Edmonds coming forced them to discamne, who entered
the City in a triumphant manner; and two days after gave them Battle at
Brentford, where notwithstanding in passing the Thamesis he lost many of his
men, yet obtained he the victory, and forced them to their ships. But as if the
fable of Hydra had been turned to a verity, though they were suppressed in one
place, yet with double strength they increased in another; and though Edmond in
person obtained many a Victory, yet by his Subjects disloyalty, and Duke
Edricks treachery, what he got in one place he lost in another; so that
sometimes he, and sometimes Canutus were reputed as alternate Kings, as the
fate of War was either with or against them; as a Poet writes of the successes
of those times.

Now one side wins, anon does lose again,
This week does Edmond, next Canutus reign.
The Danes altogether minding mischief, and to make havoc of all wheresoever
they came, whilst Edmond was retired into the West, with great booties and
spoils returned to their ships; and sailing up the river of Medway, pitched
their tent near Oteford in Kent. Edmond as willing to save as they to destroy,
hasted after, and pitched not far from his enemies Camp; where he exhorted his
Soldiers to remember their former victories, and not to droop at the fight of
them whom so often they had vanquished; that the only way to victory was to
fight valiantly, whilst cowards were causers of their own overthrow; that those
whom they dealt with were their ancient enemies, accustomed to robberies,
enriched with rapines fatned with man-slaughters, and tainted with perjuries:
their cause being thus just, he desired them to fight valiantly, and God would
crown their endeavors with good success: the edge of their valors whetted
sharp by this oration, with a general shout, presaging victory, they fell upon
the Danes, whom they discomfitted, and slew of them to the number of four
thousand five hundred, and lost of their own only six hundred. This Victory
might have put a Period to the Wars, had not Duke Edrick dissuaded Edmond from
pursuing after them, alleging the danger of ambush, and the overwearied bodies
of his Soldiers, so that Canute thereby had leisure in safety to pass over
into Essex.

Where beginning again to rob and spoil the Country, many of the English for
fear submitted themselves unto him, but the restles Ironside hasted after them;
and at Ashdone, three miles from Saffron Walden, another Battle was fought;
where the Danes being at the point to have lost the day, the traitorous Edrick
revolted to their side; by which treachery the English were overthrown. In this
bloody Battle the flower of the English Nobility lost their lives, as Duke
Alfred, Duke Goodwyn, Duke Athelward, Duke Athelwyn, Earl Vrchill, Cadnoth,
Bishop of Lincoln, Wolsey Abbot of Ramsey, with many other of the Clergy, who
coming thither to pray for the preservation of the King and his Army, were by
the Danes inhumanely butchered: the remembrace of which battle is retained to
this day by certain small hills there remaining; whence have been dug the
Bones of men, Armor, and the Water-chains of Horse-bridles. Holinshead reports
that in his time there were of these hills to the number of seven or eight, now
only three remains at a place called Bartlow, which from them is called
Bartlow Hills.

Edmund thus discomfited, went almost alone on foot to Gloucester, where he
raised new forces to oppose his enemies. Canutus pursuing him, both Armies met
at Derehurst near unto the River Severne, where being ready to imbrue their
hands in one another bloods, a certain Captain stepped forth, and standing up
in such a place as he might be heard of both the Generals, boldly uttered his
mind in these or the like words:

We have already (worthy Chieftains) fought long enough one against another,
and too much blood has been spilt for the Sovereignty of this Land; the
valors of both Generals and Soldiers sufficiently tried; Fortune her self not
knowing whom to yield the palm of Victory unto: for if one Battle were won it
was not long kept; nor the loser so weakened but that he had both courage and
power to win the next. Thus to gain you airy Titles the common Soldiers lose
their lives. Worthy Chieftains, it is now high time to set a period to these
differences; let him that would wear the Diadem bear the hazard himself, and
either try the fortune of a single combat, who shall command, and who obey; or
divide betwixt them the Kingdom, which may suffice two, that has formerly
maintained seven.

These words were no sooner ended; but both Generals agreed to try it out by
single combat in sight of both Armies, they entered into a small Island called
Alney, adjoining unto the City of Gloucester, where first on horseback, and
after on foot, they encountered each other with invincible courage: but Canutus
having received a dangerous wound, and finding that Ironside overmatched him in
strength, desired a comprimise; and to that end thus spoke to Edmond with an
audible voice: What necessity thus should move us, most renowned Prince, that
for the obtaining of an airy title we should still put our lives into danger;
better it were to lay armor and malice aside, and condescend to some
reasonable agreement: let us therefore now become sworn brothers, and divide
the Kingdom between us, and that in such a league of amity, that each may use
the others part as his own. Edmond condescending to Canutus motion, they
unbuckled their Armours, and embraced each other; and on a firm agreement
afterward divided the Kingdom betwixt them: Edmond enjoying that part that
lay coasted upon France, and Canutus entered upon the rest.

But long enjoyed not the Ironside his part, for Duke Edrick a very compound of
treasons, contrived the end of renowned Edmond; who being retired to a place
for natures necessity, he thrust from under the draught a sharp spear into his
body: and having thus murdered him, he cut off his head, presenting it to
Canutus, with this fawning salutation. All hail thou now sole Monarch of
England, for here behold the head of thy Co-partner, which for thy sake I have
adventured to cut off.

Canutus, though ambitious enough of Sovereignty, yet abhorring in his heart so
detestable a murder, and knowing that he who was faithless to his natural
Sovereign, would never be faithful to him a Stranger; commanded his head to be
divided from his shoulders, and placed upon the highest Gate in London. Thus we
see how Duke Edrick was mistaken in his hopes, who for his treason expecting a
reward, received the merit due to treason: a worthy example in Canutus for
succeeding Monarchs to imitate, and in the Traitor Edrick for all false
Subjects to beware.

Thus this famous worthy, made his exit off of the stage of this world, having
reigned in all but the space of seven months; so that if we consider the
shortness of his time, we may wonder at the greatness of his actions, who had
not only to deal with foreign forces, but with false friends; who whilst he
lived was the only prop to uphold the tottering estate of his Country, and
whose death was the cause his Contrymen were forced to bow their necks to a
stranger.

He left behind him two Sons, named Edward and Edmond; and two Daughters,
named Christian and Margret; which Margret was married to Malcolme Canmore King
of Scotland; from which Princely bed, James the first, late Monarch of Great
Britain was lineally descended.

The Life of EDWARD the Confessor.
AS my learned Authors writes, to whom I am so much beholding for this
Narrative: to give you his own words, discoursing of Peace, None, says he, but
such as are of turbulent spirits, or ignorant what War is, love to play the
beasts, and inhumanely gore each other. Men were not made to act Tragedies, and
to make the world a shambles for humane slaughters Nulla salus bello, pacem te
possimus omnes. This perhaps it was made the Poet Tibullus exclaim against the
inventers of mankindes destruction.

Quis fuit, horrendus primus qui protulit enses?
Quam ferus, and vere ferreus ille fuit?
Tunc caedes hominum generi, tunc praelia nata,
Tunc brevior dirae mortis aperta via est.
Of killing swords who might first Author be?
Sure a steel mind, and bloody thought had he.
Mankindes destruction; Wars, were then made known,
And shorter ways to death with terror shown.
As contraries set off one another, white shows the more amiable compared with
its opposite black; so peace is most pleasant to them that have tasted the
miseries of War: we shall therefore now having shown the sad effects of the one
in the life of Edmond, relate the blessings that accompany the other in the
life of Edward.

He was son to King Ethelred by his wife Queen Emma, and born at Islip in the
County of Oxford; his mother (when the variable success of War doubtfully
depended betwixt Edmund and Canutus) sent him over into Normandy to Duke
Richard her Brother, there to be secured from all domestical stirs; where he
remained all the time of Canutus reign; who although he married his Mother, yet
thought it more safe to be there then in England.

Canutus dying, his son Harold surnamed Hare-foot, whom he had by a Concubine a
shoemakers daughter, usurped the Crown; but knowing others had better right to
the same then himself, he resolved to remove those rubs out of his way; yet not
daring to act his intentions openly, he thought to compass that by treachery,
which he could not by force: to this end he counterfeits a letter in Queen
Emma's name, unto her sons Edward and Alfred, to instigate them to attempt the
recovering of the Crown, the tenure of which letter we have inserted as
follows.

Emma tantum nomina Regina, filiis Edwardo and Alfrido, materna impertit
salutamina, etc. Emma in name only Queen, to Edward and Alfred, her sons,
sends motherly greetings: whilst we severally bewail the death of our
Sovereign, my Lord and your Father, and your selves (dear sons) still more and
more dispossessed from the Kingdom your lawful inheritance; I greatly marvel
what you determine to do, since you know, that the delay of attempts gives the
Usurper more leisure to lay his foundation, and more safety to set thereon his
intended buildings; never ceasing to post from Town to Town, and from City to
City, to make the Lords and Rulers of them his friends, by threats, prayers, or
rewards: but notwithstanding his policy, they privately signify that they had
rather have one of you their Natives should reign over them, then this Danish
usurper. Wherefore my advice is that either of you with all speed repair unto
me, that we may advise together what is best to be done in this so great an
enterprise: fail not therefore but send me word by this messenger what you
intend to do herein; and so fare ye well. Your affectionate Mother Emma. The
bait thus laid to catch these two Princes was greedily swallowed by Alfred the
youngest, who though the last born, had not the least hopes to wear the English
Diadem; and making Baldwine Earl of Flanders his, and some few Bullogners,
increasing his Fleet, he took the Seas for England; where for his welcome he
was betrayed by Earl Goodwin under the notion of friendship; and by the command
of King Harold inhumanely murdered: but Edward whether mistrusting the plot,
or rather liking a private life with safety, then a public with danger,
tarried behind, and so escaped those miseries that Alfred encountered. But as
it is commonly seen, that a sinful life is rewarded with a sudden death, so
King Harolds sweet beginning had a sour end; dying miserably after he had
reigned four years, and some few months; his speedy death cutting off the
infamy of a longer life: in whose room succeeded his brother in law,
Hardi-Canute, the son of Queen Emma by Canutus her last husband; who though
little differing from the other in conditions, yet is better reported of by
Writers of that age, because he lovingly entertained his half brother Edward,
and made Earl Goodwin purge himself for the death of Prince Alfred; so that we
may in part wonder at former writers, that they should conclude Earl Goodwin to
be guilty of that murder, and yet report he cleared himself of the same to
Hardi-Canute: but his oath, say some, was the lighter urged, and the easier
believed, by reason he had not long before presented to the king most bountiful
gifts, namely a ship, whose stern was of Gold, with fourscore Soldiers therein
placed, all uniformly and richly suited; on each of their arms were two
bracelets of Gold, with gilt Burgonets on their heads, and on their bodies a
triple gilt Habergion, a Sword with gilt Hilts guirded to their wastes, a
Battle Ax on their left shoulders, a Target with gilt Bosses borne in their
left hands, and a Dart in the right.

The King now wholly following his pleasures, or rather, to say more truly, his
vices delighting in nothing but swilling and Epicurisme; he soon received the
reward of his intemperance, for being at Lambeth at the celebration of a
Marriage, revelling and carousing, in the midst of his Cups he suddenly fell
down dead with the Pot in his hand, after he had reigned two years, and was
buried at Winchester. His death was so welcome unto his Subjects, that they
annually celebrated the day of his death with open pastimes in the streets,
which custom continued even to these our times; being called Hoctide, or
Huckstide, signifying a time of scorning or contempt. The Danish Line now clean
extinguished, (for Hardi-Canute left no issue behind him) the glory of the
Saxons, which had long lay buried in their own ashes, began again to revive and
flourish; for the English Lords weary of the insulting Tyranny of the Danes,
and willing one of their own Natives should rule, with a general consent chose
Prince Edward for their King; who being at that present with Duke William in
Normandy, they sent Ambassadors unto him to signify his Election: and that he
might be ascertained their intentions were real, they delivered him Pledges for
his more assurance. Edward accepting (as indeed who would deny) so honorable
an offer, with some few Normans repaired into Englad, where he was entertained
of the people with such acclamations of joy, as might well gain credence of
their hearty affections toward him.

The first thing he did after his Coronation, was his remitting the yearly
Tribute of forty thousand pounds, gathered by the name of Danegilt, imposed by
his Father; and for forty years together paid out of all men's Lands, except
only the Clergies, who were exempted from the same; Because the Kings reposed
more confidence in the Prayers of the Holy Church, then in the power of Armies.
It is reported the Kings clemency was moved to this compassion on this
following occasion; When the Collectors of this money had gotten a great
quantity of the same together, they brought it into his chamber, and laid it
all on one heap; the King being called to see this great heap of Treasure, was
at the first sight thereof much afraid, protesting he saw the Devil dancing
upon the same with exceeding great joy: whereupon he commanded it should be
restored again to the former owners, and released his Subjects of that Tribute
for ever. Many such like stories are of this King related, and perhaps more
then with safety of truth may be either believed or delivered; which we shall
the rather overpass, because that in stories of this nature they are less to be
blamed for omitting two verities, then relating one falsehood.

Diverse Laws being then used in several parts of the Kingdom, ( viz. the
Mercians, West Saxons, Danes, and Northumbrians) their multiplicity causing
much confusion, he extracted from them all the chiefest and best, and made of
them one universal and common Law throughout the Land; being in a manner the
fountain of those which at this day we term the Common Laws, though the forms
of pleading, and process therein, were afterward brought in by King William
the Conqueror.

His Wife was named Editha, the virtuous Daughter of an infamous Father, Earl
Godwin, a Lady incomparable for Beauty and Virtue, in whose Breast was a School
of all Liberal Sciences (says William of Malmesbury.) Her honorable
qualifications might have expiated to her Husband King Edward; her Fathers
former treachery to his Brother.

Unto to this Edward (as that ancient Writer has it in these following words)
was given to Wife the Daughter of Earl Godwin, a most beautiful Damosel, named
Editha, of excellent learning; and for behavior, a Virgin most chaste; and for
humility, most holy; no way savouring of her Father or Brethrens barbarousness,
but mild and modest, faithful and honest, enemy or hurtful to none; insomuch,
that this verse was rightly applied unto her.

Sicut spind Rosam,
Genuit Godwinus Egitham.
From prickled stalk as sweetest Rose:
So Egith fair from Godwin grows.
This Lady though accomplished with these endowments of mind and body, the
King notwithstanding refrained her bed, committing thereby the offense
forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.5. Or if at any time he admitted her his
bed, it was no otherwise then David with Abishag; for so much he himself on his
deathbed did declare, saying, That openly she was his Wife, but in secret
embracings as his own Sister: But whether it were for his debellity of body, or
love to Virginity, I determine not; certain it is he was content to hear her
accused of incontinency; whereof if she were guilty, he could not be innocent:
nor can this his chastity, though applauded by many, be accounted otherwise
then an injury, and too tyrannical a trial of his Wives Virtues.

The King having no issue of his own, and desirous to establish the Crown in
the English blood, sent into Hungary for his Nephew Edward, the Son of Edmund
Ironside, who by reason of his long absence out of England, was commonly called
by the name of the Outlaw; who coming over, brought with him his Wife Agatha,
and Edgar, Margret, and Christian his Children, in hope of the Kingdom; but his
hopes with himself soon dissolved into dust, for he lived but a while after: so
that Edward thereby was disappointed of his intentions, which was to have made
him his Successor in the Crown; whereupon without delay he pronounced Edgar
the Outlaws Son, and his great Nephew, Heir to the Crown, and gave him to
surname Adeling, a name appropriated to Princes of the blood, which were born
in hope and possibility of the Kingdom.

Whilst Edward was thus busied about settling a Successor, Eustace Earl of
Bulloigne who had married his Sister Goda, came over into England to visit him;
and returning homeward, at Canterbury his Harbinger dealing roughly with a
Burgess for Lodgings caused his own death; whereupon he in revenge killed the
said Burgess with eighteen other Citizens: the Canterburians herewith incensed,
in a great rage armed themselves, killed twenty of his retinue, and forced the
Earl himself to flight; who returning back again to the King, exhibited
grievous complaints against the Townsmen; whereupon Earl Godwin was commanded
to see execution done upon the offenders: but he not greatly affecting the
Earl, was not overhasty to execute his commission, but advised the King to
examine the matter further, before he proceeded against his true Subjects at
the instigation of Strangers; this Counsel though it gained him the love of the
Commons, procured the hatred of most of the Nobility; who so incensed the King
with his refusal, that a day of meeting was appointed at Gloucester, wherein
Earl Godwin should answer his contempt.

The day come and the estates assembled, Earl Godwin was sent for, but refused
to appear, alleging his present service against the Welsh then ready to enter
into Rebellion; but they by Ambassadors clearing themselves, the suspicions
increased, and great preparation for War was made on both sides. To the aid of
the King came Leofrick Earl of Chester, Siward Earl of Northumberland, and
Rodulf Earl of Hereford with competent forces; to Godwin repaired his people of
Kent and Surrey, his two sons Harold and Swain, bringing with them the men of
Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington, Somerset, Oxford, Hereford,
Gloucester, and Barkshires; so that his Army exceeding the Kings, made him so
much exceed in pride, as to demand Eustace Earl of Bulloign, with all his
French and Normans, to be delivered unto him; which being (as good reason was)
denied, each side prepared themselves to battle; but through the advice of some
then present, the matter was ended without bloodshed and referred to a
Parliament to be holden at London; so that now both sides seemed to be
indifferently well pacified; but under these ashes of dissimulation lay hidden
burning coals of fire, and revenge burst out into a flame; for Edward with a
strong guard entered London, and Earl Goodwin with his sons in warlike manner
came into Southwark to his own house, where his great army soon dissolyed into
nothing; his Soldiers for the most part returning home again: which when
Edward understood, he presently pronounced sentence of banishment upon him and
his five sons, without further proceeding by way of Parliament. And that his
wife, who was daughter to Earl Godwin, should have her sad share in the
afflictions of her Parents and brethren who were banished the realm; he
committed her Prisoner to the Monastery of Wilton, attended only with one
maid: an unjust act, unbefitting a King, to punish the Child for the Fathers
offenses, contrary to the prescript Rule of God, Ezekiel. 18.20. The soul that
sins, it shall dye: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father,
neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. Yea, it was the
observation of a Heathen man, It is mere injustice, if the father be a Rebel,
that the son should therefore be accounted a Traitor. Yet as the Poet has it,

Yet notwithstanding we see oftentimes
Children are punished for their fathers crimes.
But as things violent are not long permanent, so this storm of dissension
betwixt King Edward and Earl Goodwin was soon blown over; for the Nobles
interceding for him unto the King, a reconciliation was made, and Earl Goodwin
restored to his former Dignities; but though the King forgave him his Treasons,
the King of kings forgot not his Perjury: for he falsely swearing himself to be
clear of Prince Alfreds death; and wishing if he were guilty, he might never
swallow down one morsel of bread, God himself manifested the truth, and
according to his wish (though not his desire) it happened unto him. A fearful
example to all foresworn wretches of Gods heavy judgments on their perjury.

Another Act of this Kings was touching his Mother, which proclaimed him, if
not undutiful, yet very unnatural; he was troubled with an infirmity, his ears
were always opened to the complaints of strangers, and their mouths always
full with complaints against the English: Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, a
Norman by birth, accused Queen Emma, that under color of private devotions,
she had over familiarly accompanied with Alwine Bishop of Winchester. The King
crediting the Archbishops words, forced her (to wipe off this imputation) to
pass the trial of fire Ordeal, which was by passing barefooted, and
blinde-folded over nine Plow-shares, glowing red hot, and laid at unequal
distance; which she did without any hurt, to the great astonishment of all the
beholders: in memory whereof she gave nine Manors to the Minster of
Winchester, according to the number of the Plow-shares she had passed in her
trial: And Edward repenting the wrong he had done her, bestowed on the same
place the Island of Portland in Dorsetshire, being about seven miles in
compass: for so the chance in those days was set, that whosoever lost, the
Monks ever won.

Several superstitious Writers render this King in his life to be of that
holiness, that he received power from heaven to cure many diseases; amongst
others the swelling of the throat, commonly called the King's Evil; a
prerogative that continued hereditary to his Successors Kings of England;
which, as they affirm, was first derived from him.

Alluridus Rivallensis writing the life and death of this King, reports him
to be a man void of pride, a lover of peace, a contemner of covetousness,
abhorring wars and bloodshed; insomuch, as when he lived as a banished man in
Normandy, he would oftentimes say, That he had rather live a private life for
ever, then to attain the Kingdom by the death of any man. Indeed he was more
fitting to be ruled then to rule, being too much subject to his Subjects, his
familiarity causing their contempt; accounting his humility to be mere
simplicity, though otherwise adjudged by the Poet.

He Is soly wise, who is not selfly wise;
But humble in the judgment of his eyes.
His innocent and harmless Government continued his Reign in length twenty
three years, six months, and odd days; he died, and was buried in the Church
at Westminster, which he formerly had builded, being after his death canonized
for a Saint.

The Life of WILLIAM the Conqueror.
WIlliam the First, surnamed the Conqueror, was base son to Robert the first
of that name, the sixth Duke of Normandy, begotten on Arlet a Skinners
Daughter: (from whence our English word Harlot is thought to be derived) when
he was about seven years old, his Father intending a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
assembled all his Nobles together, and caused them to swear fealty to this his
son William, committing him to the governance of two of his Brothers, and the
defense of that Government to Henry the French King; a strange confidence in
the Duke, to commit the tuition of his son that was base born, to pretenders
that were legitimate, and a potent Monarch, who desired to reannex that Dukedom
to his Crown; but the proximity of blood in his brothers, and his former
services to the French King made him so confident, that in the eighth year of
his Dukedom he sets forward on his voyage; where entering Jewry, and not able to
travel, he was born in a Litter on Saracens shoulders; and near unto the City
meeting a returning Pilgrim, desired him to report in his Country, that he was
carried to heaven upon the devils back; but so far he went, that he never
returned, leaving his son a ball to be tossed about in Fortunes Tennis-Court.
First, one Roger de Tresny sought to toss him out of his Dukedom, pretending
the illegitimation of William; which fair pretense got him many accomplices, but
the Divine Providence raised him up friends, particularly Roger de Beamont, by
whose valor this Roger de Tresny was defeated and slain. These troubles were
scarce ended, but far greater arose; for William de Arques his base Uncle,
assisted by the King of France, lays claim to the Duchy; but William so
begirt his Castle with a strait siege, that the Earl was almost famished, was
forced to yield, and the French with disgrace returned home; yet could not
their ill success deter others from attempting the like, but Guy Earl of
Burgoyn Grand child to Richard the Second, would needs likewise try his chance
in Fortunes Lottery, which proved quite contrary to his expectation; for he
seeking to be made head of the Dukedom, was for his treason made shorter by the
head.

Duke William having thus vanquished his enemies, and now grown more potent
then he was before; (for every rebellion when it is suppressed makes the Prince
stronger, and the Subjects weaker) comes over into England to visit his Cosen
King Edward the Confessor, to whom (it is said) Edward (with the consents of
Stigandus Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earls Goodwin and Syward, and of Harold
son to Earl Goodwin) promised (if he dyed without issue) to leave the Crown;
which promise was afterward ratified by the corporal oath of Harold; who being
at his manor of Boseham in Suffolk, one day for his recreation in a fishers
boat launched forth to the Sea; but by a contrary wind was driven upon the
Coasts of Ponthieu in France, where being taken by Earl Guido, was presented to
Duke William, to whom he solemnly swore to assist him for obtaining the
Kingdom: but Edward dying, the splendor of his Crown so dazeled the eyes of
Harold, that forgetting his former promise and oath, he set the same upon his
own head. Duke William whose hopes were that England should be his, now seeing
his hopes frustrated by Harold, prepares his forces against the perjured King,
with whom joined many of the French Nobility; and to make their endeavors the
more successful, Pope Alexander the second sent him a consecrated Banner, an
Agnus Dei, and one of the hairs of Saint Peter the Apostle. Thus furnished on
all sides, with a Navy of 896. Ships, he cuts the briney face of Neptune, and
arrives at Pemsey near Hasteings in Sussex; from whence he sent a Monk on
Embassage to Harold, (who was newly returned from the slaughter of the
Norwegians) offering him three conditions; the first was, that he should
resign up the Crown, or hold it as a Tributary Prince under him; or else in
sight of both armies to defend his Title in Person against the Duke; if not, to
stand to the arbitrament of the Pope: but Harold instead of granting his
requests, threatens his ruin, except he forthwith returns into Normandy. Both
sides thus enraged, (the one seeking to get, the other to keep, that which by
right belonged to another) seven miles from Hasteings a bloody battle was
fought, wherein was slain of the English, if I may credit my Author 66654. King
Harold himself manfully fighting was likewise slain; a Prince, (had he attained
the Crown by right) worthy to have enjoyed it a longer time, but his pride and
ambition caused his destruction; so true is that which one observes.

Much have I seen, yet seldom seen I have
Ambition go gray headed to the Grave.
William having thus obtained the victory, of an old Duke was made a young King,
being Crowned at Westminster by Aldred Archbishop of York, the Year of our
Salvation 1066. And now the better to secure himself in his new state, he
endeavors to get into his possession the strongest forts in the Kingdom; and
to this end takes his journey toward Dover, (the Lock and Key of the Kingdom
as Matthew Paris calls it) that by the command of so strong a place, he might
the more easily keep under the Natives, and keep out strangers, if any excited
by his example should dare to attempt what he had done. But the Kentish-men
having notice of his intentions, assembled together; and at Swanscombe two
miles from Gravesend, met him in the form of a moving Wood; for seeing no way
lay open save only a front, they agreed to carry in their hands great Branches
of Trees, which not only kept them from being discovered, but induced him to
think all the Woods thereabout of the like nature; so that he willingly
consented to what they desired, which was the continuance of their former Laws,
and Pledges being given on both parts for performance, Kent yields up her
Earldome and Castle of Dover to King William.

Now what the Kentish-men attained by arms, the Citizens of London obtained by
art; for having to their Bishop one William a Norman, they so wrought with him,
and he with the King, that he granted them their first Charter, written in the
Saxon Tongue, and sealed with green wax; the copy whereof follows:

William Cyng, greit William Biscop, and Godfreges Portgerefan, and ealle tha
Burhwaren the on Lunden beon, etc. William King, greeteth William Bishop, and
Godfrey Portreeve, and all the Burgesses that in London be, French and English
friendly. And I do you to wit, that I will, that you enjoy all the Law which
you did in the days of Edward King. And I will that each Child be his Fathers
Inheritour after his Fathers days. And I will not suffer that any man you any
wrong offer. God you keep. The Lord Major and Aldermen to honor his memory
upon the Solemn Days of their resort to Paul's, do still use to walk to his
Gravestone, being in the midst of the great West Isle; and on the same have
affixed this Epitaph following.

Gulielmo viro sapientia and vita sanctitate claro, qui primum divo Edwardo
regi and Confessori familiaris, ruper in Episcopum Londinensem erectus, nec
multo post apud invictissimum principem Gulielmum Angliae Regem ejus nominis
primum, ob prudentiam fidemque singularem in consilium adhibitus, amplissima
huic urbi celeberrima privilegia ab eodem impetravit. Senatus populusque
Londinensis been merenti posuit. Sedic Episcopus Annos 20. Decessit anno a
Christo nato 1070.

Haec tibi, clare pater posuerunt marmora cives,
Praemia non meritis aequiparanda tuis:
Namque sibi populus, te Londoniensis amicum
Sensit, and huic urbi non been praesidium.
Reddita libertas duce te, donataque multis,
Te duce, res fuerat publica muneribus.
Divitias, genus, and formam brevis opprimat hora,
Haec tua sed pietas, and benfacta manent.
Thus turned into English by one of our modern Historians.

To William, a man famous in wisdom and holiness of life, who first with St.
Edward the King and Confessor being familiar, of late preferred to be Bishop
of London, and not long after for his prudency and sincere fidelity, admitted
to be of counsel with the most victorious Prince William King of England, of
that name the first, who obtained of the same great and large Privileges to
this famous City. The Senate and Citizens of London to him having well
deserved, have made this. He continued Bishop twenty years, and died in the
year after Christ his Nativity, 1070.

These Marble Monuments to thee thy Citizens assign,
Rewards (O Father) far unfit to those deserts of thine:
Thee unto them a faithful friend, thy London people found,
And to this Town, of no small weight, a stay both sure and found.
Their Liberties restored to them by means of thee have been,
Their Public Weal by means of thee large gifts have felt and seen.
Thy riches, stock, and beauty brave, one hour has them suppressed,
Yet these thy virtues and good deeds with us for ever rest.
The memories of this man, Sir William Walworth, Sir Thomas Gresham, and such
others deserve to be honored with statues advanced in the most conspicuous
places of the City, lest otherwise she be reputed ungrateful to them, from whom
she derives so honorable a splendor.

But to leave the City, and return unto the Court, new troubles in Normandy
arising in King Williams absence, he was forced suddenly to raise an Army to
suppress them, carrying along with him those whom he most suspected might take
the advantage of his troubles abroad, so as to raise any new broils at home,
pretending their aid against his Rebels in Normandy; but indeed fearing in his
absence they should raise a new rebellion in England, dealing therein as the
politic Captain Sextorius did with the Spaniards, whose children he kept
under pretense of learning them the Latin Tongue, but indeed as Hostages for
their Fathers loyalties. And because the common people are to be feared for
their number, as well as the Nobility for their greatness, he disarmed them;
that so being left naked, they might be incapable of Insurrections: yet
notwithstanding his policy, no sooner was he gone, but Edrick Sylvaticus (a man
of great spirit and power) aided by the Welsh-men made great spoils in
Herefordshire, wasting all to the mouth of Wye. These troubles made the
Englishmen so distasteful to King William, that returning out of Normandy, he
laid such heavy Taxes and Impositions upon them, that many of them preferring
penurious liberty before fetters of gold, left their habitations, and lived as
Outlaws in the woods and deserts. The chiefest of these Malcontents were
Edwyn and Morcar, (the two stout Earls of Yorkshire and Chester) Hereward,
Gospatria, and Syward, with many other Lords, to whom joined Stigand and
Aldred, Archbishops, with many of the Clergy; who having Edgar Atheling amongst
them, endeavored to recover that which for want of taking time by the foretop
they had improvidently lost. But their Forces being dissipated by Williams
conquering sword, every one sought how to save himself by flight; some fled
into Denmtrk, others into Hungary, most into Scotland, whilst William with
triumph returned to London; from whence he sent Ambassadors to Malcolme
Canmore, then King of Scotland, for the delivery of Edgar with the rest of his
enemies; which if he refused, he would denounce open War against Scotland. But
King Malcolme not only denied his request, but also took to Wife the Lady
Margret, sister unto Edgar, which occasioned bloody Wars on both sides; and
four several Armies were sent against the Scots. The first under the conduct of
one Roger a Norman, who entering hastily into Northumberland, was by the Scots
discomfited, and himself by his own Soldiers treacherously slain: to second
whose beginnings another Army was sent under the Command of Richard Earl of
Gloucester, whose fortunes being not answerable to Williams expectations. A
third Army was sent, led by Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and Earl of Kent; but he
being more used to the Church then the Camp, and fitter to handle a pen then a
sword, encountering with the Scots, upon the first onset was quite defeated:
but King William nothing discouraged with these overthrows, sent his son Robert
with a far greater power then he sent before; which notwithstanding did no far
greater service then the fortifying of Newcastle: at length a Peace was
concluded betwixt them, which though prejudicial to King Williams side, yet as
affairs then stood, he could not well have acted otherwise: which was, that
King Malcolme should enjoy that part of Northumberland which lies betwixt
Tweed, Cumberland, and Stanemore, doing homage to the Kings of England for the
same.

By this Peace was Edgar Atheling, and those other male-contented Lords
restored to the Kings favor; for William, although a Martial Prince, sought to
establish his Crown rather by Peace then by the Sword, which made him the more
apt to forget former injuries. And no doubt but this his too much lenity was
one principle cause of his continual troubles; for Edwin and Morcar (the two
stout Earls mentioned before) combining with Fretherick Abbot of St. Albanes,
fell into a new conspiracy, setting up Edgar Atheling once again their
General. William storming at these disloyal attempts, with a mighty power
hastneth against them, who desperately bent to maintain what they had begun,
resolved to make the Sword their Judge: but King William loath to lose that
with shame which he had gotten by the effusion of so much blood, prevailed so
far with them, that an Assembly was appointed to meet at Berkhamsted, where he
solemnly swear upon the Holy Evangelists, and the Relics of St. Albane the
Martyr, inviolably to observe the Ancient Laws of this Land, especially those
compiled by King Edward the Confessor, which so wrought him into their good
opinions, that they all forthwith laid down their weapons.

But the storm being past, the danger was soon forgotten; and these mountains
promises proved but molehill performances; for notwithstanding his oath, he
dealt more roughly with the English now then before, thrusting some into Exile,
and depriving others of their Lands, which he bestowed upon his Normans, whose
Charters were of a far other tenor, form, and brevity, then those tedious and
perplexed Conveyances, since in use, as may appear by this one, taken out of on
old Chronicle in the Library at Richmont.

I William King the third year of my reign,
Give to thee Norman Hunter, to me that are both leef and dear,
The hop and the hopton, and all the bounds up and down,
Under the Earth to Hell, above the earth to Heaven;
From me and mine, to thee and to thine,
As good and as fair, as ever they mine were.
To witness that this is sooth, I bite the white wax with my tooth,
Before Jug, Maud, and Marjery, and my youngest son Henry:
For a Bow and a broad Arrow, when I come to hunt upon Yarrow.
Nor need we wonder the King was so liberal to the Hunter, since he himself
loved hunting so well, that to maintain his game he depopulated above 30. miles
in Hampshire, where had been (says Carton) twenty six Towns, and eighty
Religious Houses: so that where before God was Worshipped, now wild Beasts
grazed; a sin which God punished in his posterity, his two sons William and
Richard, and his grandchilde Richard son to Duke Robert, coming there to
untimely ends; which place was then and is to this day called by the name of
the New Forest.

The more to enrich his Coffers he laid great Subsidies upon the Land, causing
a strict Survey to be taken of the whole Kingdom, exacting six shillings for
every hide of Land; to the so great impoverishing of the English Nation, that
they grievously groaned under their miserable estate: nor would he permit any
English man to bear any office of credit or countenance. The English to
ingratiate themselves with the Conqueror, being forced to leave off their
former customs and habits, conforming themselves to the fashions of the
Normans; so that England was now wholly become French, excepting Kent; which
retained their former Customs a long time after.

Toward the conclusion of his reign, dissentions betwixt Philip King of France
and him, drew him once more over into Normandy; where falling sick, and keeping
his bed more then he used to do, the French King hearing that his disease was
in his belly, scoffingly said, Our Cousin William is laid now in Childe-bed:
Oh! what a number of Candles must I offer at his going to Church? surely I
think a hundred thousand will not suffice. This French frump being told to King
William; he made this answer, Well, our Cousin of France I trust shall be at no
such cost: but after this my Childbirth, at my going to Church, I will find
him one thousand Candles, and light them my self. And accordingly toward
August following, he enters France with a mighty Army, spoiling all the West
parts thereof before him. And lastly set the City Meux on fire, wherein, he
consumed the fair Church of our Lady; in the Walls whereof were enclosed two
Anchorites, who might but would not escape, holding it a breach of their
Religious Vow to forsake their Cell, though in never such extremity, and so
became their own murderers. The King busied in these attempts, cheered his men
to feed the fire, and came himself so near the flames, that with the heat of
his harness he got a sickness, which was increased by the leap of his horse,
that burst the inward rim of his belly; that returning to Roan he shortly after
ended his life.

He was buried at Caen in Normandy, in the Abbey Church of Saint Stephen the
first Christian Martyr; to the Monks whereof he bequeathed two Manors in
Dorcetshire, one Manor in Devonshire, another in Essex, much Lands in
Barkshire, some in Norfolk, a Mansion house in Woodstreet of London, with many
Advowsions of Churches, as also his Crown, and Regal Ornaments thereto
belonging; which his son Henry afterward redeemed with the Manor of Brideton
in Dorcetshire; his Tomb was afterward opened by the Bishop of Bayeux. in
Anno. 1542. wherein was found a gilt Plate of Brass, and this Epitaph engraven
thereon.

Qui rexit rigidos Northmanos, atque Britanos,
Audacter vicit, fortiter obtinuit;
Et Caenomenses virtute coercuit enses,
Imperiique sui legibus applicuit.
Rex magnus parva jacet hac Gulielmus in urna:
Sufficit and magno parva domus domino,
Ter septem gradibus se volverat atque duobus,
Virginis in gremio Phoebus, and hic obiit.
In English.

He that the sturdy Normans ruled, and over English reigned,
And stoutly won, and strongly kept, what he so had obtained;
And did the swords of those of Mains, by force bring under awe,
And made them under his command live subject to his law.
This great King William lies here, entombed in little Grave,
So great a Lord, so small a house suffices him to have.
When Phoebus in the Virgins lap, his circled course applied,
And twenty three degrees had past, even at that time he dyed.
The Life of THOMAS BECKET, Archbishop of Canterbury.
THomas Becket was the Son of one Gilbert Becket, a Person of good Alliance and
Riches; who in his youth traveling to Jerusalem, as he returned, was taken
prisoner by a Saracen Admiral, with whom he remained a year and a half; during
which time the only Daughter of the Admiral was so taken with his carriage and
qualities, that (he having by flight obtained his liberty) she wounded with his
love, abandoned her Fathers House and Country, and followed him secretly into
England; where being instructed in the Christian Religion, and baptized in the
Church of St. Paul by the Bishop of London, with great Solemnity in the
presence of six Prelates, she was married to the aforesaid Gilbert; of whom he
had Issue this Thomas, whose Life we now relate; who (as his Legend recites)
was first brought up in a Religious House of Merton, afterward was instructed
in the Liberal Sciences, and then sent to study in the University of Paris;
from whence returning home, he was by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury made
his Archdeacon, a place in those days of high degree in the English Clergy,
next unto Lord Abbots and Bishops.

Much about that time Henry Duke of Aquitain and Normandy succeeded King
Stephen in the Crown of England, who in the very first year of his Reign
advanced Becket to be Lord Chancellor of England; in which high honor he
carried himself like another King. His retinue was great; his Followers men of
good account; his House keeping such as might compare with, if not surpass, the
greatest Earls of the Kingdom; his Clothes very costly full of bravery; his
Furniture mighty rich; his very Bridles of beaten silver. Yea, Fortune did seem
to have made him her Darling; and all things so flowed according to his desire,
that one would have judged him to have laid clean aside the very thought of a
Clergyman.

King Henry having Wars in France, he served him with a Band of 700. Soldiers
of his own Family, besides many others, with which, and some additional Forces
after the Kings departure he obtained a great victory. At another time he
himself in person unhorssed a Frenchman called Enguerranus de Creya, a most
hardy Soldier, renowned for deeds of Arms and Chevalry; for these valiant
acts, in reward, and in further hope of his faithful service, upon the death of
Theobald, the King made him Archbishop of Canterbury, though the Monks objected
against him, that neither a Courtier, nor a Soundier (as he was both) were fit
to succeed in so high and sacred a Function: But Thomas having obtained this
dignity, forgot the King who had raised him to the same. For as the Poet has
it;

A swelling spirit hates him by whom he climes,
As Ivy kills the tree whereon it twines:
So rising men, when they are mounted high,
Spurn at the means that first they mounted by.
For not long after began that great controversy between Regnum and
Sacerdotium, the Crown and the Mytre; the occasion whereof was, the King being
credibly informed, that some Clergymen had committed above an hundred murders
under his Reign, would have them tried and adjudged in his Temporal Courts, as
Laymen were, but this (as being contrary to the privileges of the Church) the
Archbishop withstood: This affront of a subject the King could not endure,
finding himself hereby to be but a demy-King. Wherefore having drawn to his
side most of the Bishops, in an Assembly at Westminster, he propounds these
Articles, peremptorily urging Becket to assent to them. 1. That none should
appeal to the Sea of Rome for any cause whatsoever without the Kings license.
2. That it should not be lawful for any Archbishop or Bishop to depart the
Realm, and repair to the Pope, upon his summons, without license from the King.
3. That it should not be lawful for any Bishop to excommunite any person that
holds in Capite of the King, without license of the King, nor grant any
interdict against his Lands, nor the Lands of any his officers. 4. That it
should not be lawful for any Bishop to punish perjured nor false witnesses. 5.
That Clarks crimonous should be tried before secular Judges. 6. That the King
and his secular Justices, should be Judges in matters of Tithes, and other like
causes Ecclesiastical. There points so nearly touched the Papal Sovereignty,
that Becket resolutely denied to sign them: but by the importunity of many
Lords and Prelates, at last he yields, subscribes the Ordinance, and sets his
hand unto it. The King hereupon supposing all contradiction ended, and that
Thomas would not waver in his faith, called an assembly of the States at
Clarendon in Wilsthire, to collect and enact these Laws; where John of
Oxenford sitting President, Becket relapsed, saying, He had grievously sinned
in that he had done, and that he would not sin therein any more. The King
herewith vehemently incensed, threatens banishment and destruction to him and
his; whereupon Becket once again persuaded, swears in verbo Sacerdotali, in the
word of a Priest, sincerely, that he would observe the Laws, which the King
entitled, Avitae; and all the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and whole Clergy, with
all the Earls, Barons, and Nobility, did promise and swear the same faithfully
and truly to observe and perform, to the King, and to his Heirs for ever. But
the King desiring him to affix his seal to an Instrument, wherein those Laws
(being sixteen) were contained; he refused, saying, He did promise it only to
do the King some honor, verbo tenus, in word only. Nor could the example of
his fellow Bishops, nor the persuasions of Rotrod the Popes messenger, move him
at all to compose these differences.

It may be thought a fable, yet is related by diverse superstitious Authors,
that one time during this contention, certain fellows cut off the Archbishops
horses tail; after which fact, all their children were born with Tails like
Horses; and that this continued long in their Posterity. For may own part,
though I confess God is able to do this, and much more; yet I reckon this
amongst other ridiculous miracles mentioned of him by those writers, as that of
Ailwardus, who for stealing a great whetstone (which the Author that writes it
best deserved) being deprived of his eyes and virilities, by sentence of Law;
upon prayer to Saint Thomas he had all restored again. Yea, even a Bird having
been taught to speak, flying out of her cage, and ready to be seized on by a
Sparrow Hawk, said only, St. Thomas help me, and her enemy fell presently
dead, and she escaped.

But slighting these follies, to return to our History, the King summoning a
Parliament at Northhampton, Becket was cited to appear before his Majesty:
which he refusing, upon his contempt, the Peers and Prelates judged his goods
confiscated to the Kings mercy. He making his appearance, the Parliament
demanded of him an account of 30000 pounds which he received when he was Lord
Chancellor to which he answered, that when he was chosen to be Archbishop, he
was by the Kings authority freed and acquitted of all Debts and Obligations of
Court and Exchequer, and so delivered over to the Church of England; and that
therefore at that time he would not answer as a Layman, having before had a
sufficient discharge. This answer of the Archbishop was like Oil cast on fire,
which instead of quenching increast the Kings anger; and the Prelates
perceiving the Kings displeasure to tend yet to some further severity,
premonished him to submit himself, for that otherwise the Kings Court intended
to adjudge him a perjured person, and also a traitor, for not yielding temporal
Allegiance to his temporal Sovereign, as himself had sworn to do: and
accordingly the Prelates themselves by joint consent adjudged him of perjury;
and by the mouth of the Bishop of Chichester, disclaimed thence forward all
obedience unto him as their Archbishop. But Becket herewith nothing daunted,
caused to be sung before him the next day at the Altar that Psalm, Principes
fedent. The Princes sit and speak against me, and the ungodly persecute me,
etc. and forthwith taking his Silver Crosier in his own hands, enters armed
therewith into the Kings Prefence; who more and more enraged at Beckets
insolency, commands his Peers to sit in judgment on him as on a traitor: and
the Courtiers like Echoes answering the King; the whole Court sounded nothing
but Treason: so that Becket afraid of being slain, hastes home; and changing
his costly Robes into course Rags, passes over into Flanders, calling himself
by the name of Dereman.

The Archbishop gone, the King banishes all his Kindred out of his Dominions;
and he on the other side excommunicates all such as had to do against him: at
length the King of France with entreaty, and the Pope with the terror of the
Churches censures, made a full atonement and reconciliation between them; the
Archbishop in great triumph returned to England, having been absent from his
native Country for the space of seven years.

All controversies seemed now fully to be ended, though the sequel thereof
proved far otherwise; for some excommunicated Bishops and other men of great
account, desiring to be absolved, he refused to do it, unless with this
caution, that they should stand to the judgment of the Church in those things
for which they were excommunicated: but they disdaining the pride of the
Archbishop, post over into Normandy, where the King was then, informing him,
that Thomas was now grown more haughty then before, that he went up and down
with great Troops of men, both Horse and Foot, that attended on him as upon the
Kings own Royal Person; that to be a King indeed he wanted but the name, and
setting the Crown upon his head. The King herewith highly incensed, in a great
rage said, And is it possible that I cannot peaceably enjoy neither Kingdom.
Dignity, nor Life; and all this for one only priest? Cursed be all such as eat
my bread, since none will revenge me of this fellow. These words being
overheard by four Knights. Sir Morvil. Sir William Tracy, Sir Hugh Brito, Sir
Richard Fitz-urse, they thinking to do the King a pleasure, (though as the
sequel of his reign proved, they could not have done him a greater injury)
hasted into England, and in his own Church of Canterbury most barbarously
murdered him, being then about 48. years of age; not long after he was
Canonized by Pope Alexander, and the day of his death, being the 29. of
December, kept annually holy. Many miracles are reported to have been done by
him, and his Shrine so enriched by Pilgrims, which from all places came thither
in devotion; that at the defacing thereof in the time of King Henry the Eighth,
the spoil thereof in Gold, and Precious Stones filled two great Chests, such as
six or eight strong men could do no more then convey one of them at once out of
the Church. Thus the Images of many men were richly clothed, when many poor
Christians (Gods Image) went almost naked; so full of charity were those empty
times of knowledge; a shame to us, who know more but practice less.

Draiton in his Polyolbion has these verses on him.

Concerning whom the world since then has spent much breath,
And many questions made both of his life and death;
If he were truly just he has his right, if no,
Those times were much to blame, that have him reckoned so.
Stapleton a Jesuit put forth a book entitled, Tres Thomas; Saint Thomas the
Apostle, Thomas of Becket, and of Sir Thomas Moor; he Canonizes the two last,
of either of which he writes six times as much as of St. Thomas the Apostle.

The Life of RICHARD the First.
THis reign, as it in part epitomizes the History of the holy War, without
being guilty of an omission of the most admired part of Chronical History, I
could not but insert Richard the first; who for his inexpugnable and Lion-like
heart, obtained the surname of Coeur de Lion: he was a most valiant and
magnanimous Prince, accustomed to Wars; he died in the fields of Mars, of whom
as a Prince we shall say nothing, having so much to relate of him after he came
to be King. This martial Prince, born in a martial age, was third son to King
Henry the Second, and succeeded him in the Crown after his Decease, his elder
Brothers dying before their Father. At his Coronation he commanded no Jews
should be present: but they desirous to see the solemnities, hasted thither in
great numbers; but the price of their lives paid for the pleasure of their
eyes; the common people falling upon them and slaying a great number: so
ominous to the enemies of Christ was the first day of this Kings reign,
presaging, says one, his following successes in the Jewish Countries.

For intending a journey to Jerusalem (not as a Pilgrim to see the City, but as
a Soldier to conquer the Country) he raises an Army of thirty thousand Foot,
and five thousand Horse; his next care was for money (the sinews of War) and
notwithstanding his Father had left him eleven hundred thousand pound, (a vast
sum for that age) yet was it no thought sufficient for so great a journey.
Therefore to the end he might be able to go through with his work, he sells the
Castles of Berwick and Roxborough to the Scottish King for ten thousand pounds,
the Priory of Coventry to Hugh Bishop of Chester for 300. marks, and the County
of Northumberland to Hugh Bishop of Duresme for his Life, jeasting he had made
a new Earl of an old Bishop; then feigning he had lost his old Seal, he made a
new one; proclaiming that whosoever would safely enjoy those things which
before time they had enrolled, should come to the new Seal; by which princely
skill (not to say cheat) he squeezed much money out of his Subjects purses.

Having proceeded thus far toward his journey, his next care was for securing
the Kingdom of England in his absence. On his Brother John (whom he knew to be
of an ambitious spirit, and apt to take fire on the least occasion) on him he
heaped both riches and honor, that by his liberality he might win him to
loyalty: but the chief Government of the Land he committed to William Longchamp
Bishop of Ely, Lord Chancellor of England, choosing him for his Viceroy rather
then any lay-Earl; because a Coronet perchance may swell into a Crown, but
never a Mitre: with him was joined in Commission, Hugh Bishop of Durham, for
the parts of England beyond Humber. Yet, as Suetonius reports of the Consulship
of Caesar and Bibulus; that nothing was reported of Bibulus, but all of Caesar;
so Longchamps Sun ecclipsed Durhams Candle, his great Bell making such a sound,
that the other Tantony could not be heard.

Having thus settled his affairs in England, he crosses the Sea to Philip King
of France, who according to appointment was to go along with him in this
journey; which after some stay (occasioned by the death of the French Queen)
they agreed on these Christian and friendly terms. 1. That each of them
preserve the others honor, and bear faith to him for life, and member; and
earthly dignity, 2. That neither of them shall fail the other in their Affairs;
but that the King of France shall help the King of England to defend his Land,
even as he would defend the City of Paris if it were besieged; and Richard King
of England, shall help the King of France to defend his Land, even as he would
defend his City Roan if it were besieged. These Articles agreed on, and sworn
to on both sides these two great Monarchs of the West, Richard the first, King
of England, and Philip the second, King of France, set forwards on their
journey; in the description of which, give me leave to light my Candle at Mr.
Fullers fire, and to borrow some of his expressions to enrich my style; who in
his History of the holy War has so eloquently described it: nor let me be
accused for a fellon, or a counterfeit, in mixing his Gold amongst my Alchymy,
since it may well pass for pay, which is stamped with so current language.

There attended King Richard in this journey Baldwine Archbishop of Canterbury,
Hubert Bishop of Salisbury, Robert Earl of Leicester, Ralph de Glanvile late
Chief Justice of England, Richard de Clare, Walter de Kime, etc. At Tours he
took his Pilgrims Scrip and Staff from the Archbishop; his Staff at the same
time casually brake in pieces; which some construed a token of ill success.
Likewise when he and the French King with their trains passed over the Bridge
at Lions, (which brake by reason of the throng of people) on the fall of the
Bride this conceit was built, that there would be a falling out betwixt these
two Kings, which accordingly happened: their intercourse and familiarity
breeding hatred and discontent betwixt them.

At Lions these two Kings parted company, Philip passing over the Alps in
Italy, and Richard to the Seaside to Marseillis, to meet with his Navy; which
being by tempest driven to other parts, after six weeks stay, he hireth
shipping for himself and his company; and passing forwards, upon occasion,
anchored in the Mouth of the River Tyber, within fifteen miles of the City of
Rome: yet notwithstanding he was so hot on his journey, his devotion was so
cold toward his Holiness, that he would not vouchsafe to give him a visit, but
plainly told Octavian Bishop of Ostia the Popes Confessor; that having better
objects to bestow his eyes upon, he would not stir a step to see the Pope;
laying to his charge many shameful matters, touching the Romish Simony and
Covetousness, with many other reproaches, alleging that they took 700. marks
for consecration of the Bishop of Mains 1500. marks for the Legative power of
William Bishop of Ely; and of the Archbishop of Bordeaux an infinite sum of
money; whereupon he refused to see Rome.

Yet notwithstanding this his disobedience to his spiritual Father, he arived
safe as Messana, where he met with the French King his most Christian brother;
and although he lost the Popes, yet found he the Almighties Blessing; his Navy
within few days after ariving safe in Cicily.

Tankred at this time was King of the Island, a Bastard born; and no wonder, if
climing up to the throne the wrong way, he shaked when he sat down: besides, he
was a tyrant, both detaining the Dowry and imprisoning the Person of Joan Wife
to William late King of Cicily, and Sister to King Richard. And therefore
though he showed him a fair countenance, his heart was full of poisonous
rancour: but King Richard perceived his hypocrisy, notwithstanding his vizard,
as dissembling goes not long invisible before a judicious eye; and being
offered some abuses by the Citizens of Messana, he assaults and takes the City,
demanding satisfaction for all wrongs done to him and his Sister. Tankred
seeing how the case stood, thought it his best thrift to be prodigal, and
bestows on King Richard many thousand ounces of Gold, purchasing that with his
purse, which by using justice he might have had for nothing,

King Phillip seemed nothing pleased at these dissentions, yet wisely covered
the fire of his anger with the ashes of discretion, till such time he might
show it with more advantage; and thinking to forestall the market of Honor,
and take up all for himself, he hasted presently to Ptolemais: which the
Christians had long besieged, and with them he joins, while King Richard taking
his Sister Joan, and Berengaria daughter to Sanctius King of Navarr, in 190.
Ships, and 50. Galleys, puts to Sea for the holy Land, but is by tempest cast
upon the Coast of Cyprus; where the Islanders under Cursac, or Isakius their
King, seek to impeach his landing. But King Richard speedily overran the
Island, and having taken Cursac, honors him with the magnificent Captivity of
silver Fetters, having given him his word not to put him in bonds of Iron. This
Island from all antiquity was celebrated for the seat of Venus according to the
Poet:

Venus feasts hallowed through all Cyprus came,
And Venus fair was present at the same.
And that it so might prove to King Richard, in the joyous month of May he
solemnly takes to Wife his beloved lady Berengaria, and pawning the Island to
the Templers for ready money, he passes on to Ptolemais.

Long time had this City been besieged by the Christians, and many were the
miseries that were underwent by both sides; the Famine raging within, and the
Pestilence reigning without: so that now upon King Richard arival, the Turks
despairing of succor, and their victuals wholly spent; they yielded up the
City on condition to be guarded out of it safely. To take possession for the
French, there was sent in Drogou de Merlou, and an 100. men at arms, and for
the English Hugo de Gurnay with the like number; who equally parted the City,
Goods, and People between them.

Here the English cast down the Ensigns of Leopoldus Duke of Austria, which he
had advanced in a principal place of the Wall, and threw them into the Jakes;
for which injury King Richard paid dearly afterward; so dangerous it is to
exasperate any though far inferior: for as the fable acquaints us, the Beetle
may anoy the Eagle, and the Mouse befriend the Lion:

Eighteen days after the taking of Ptolemais the French King returned home,
leaving Odo Duke of Burgundy to manage the Army in his absence, pretending the
air of the Country did not agree with his body; but more likely that the air
of King Richards too great honor could not down with his too great mind.
Hoveden reports he was bribed by Saladine; which if true, let him for ever
forfeit the surname of Augustus, and the style of the most Christian Prince.

King Richard goes on notwithstanding the French Kings departure, and fortifies
the Town of Joppa; where going one day a hawking to recreate himself, being
weary laid himself down upon the ground to fleep, when suddenly certain Turks
came upon him to take him; but he awakened with their noise, rises up, gets a
horseback, and drawing out his sword, assaults the Turks; who feigning to fly,
drew the King into an ambush where many Turks lay; who had certainly taken him
if they had known his person: but one of the Kings Servants called William de
Patrellis, crying out in the Saracen Tongue, that he was the King, they
presently lay hold upon him, and let the King escape.

At this time Guy of Lusignan was possessed of the City of Tire, and with it of
the right of the Kingdom of Jerusalem; King Richard more greedy of honor then
profit, exchangeth his Island of Cyprus with this hungry Prince, for his
Kingdom of Jerusalem; and upon this title the Kings of England were styled
Kings of Jerusalem a long time after. And now did King Richard long to be
possessed of his merchandise, whereupon it was determined then should presently
march toward the holy City. Richard led the vantguard of his English, Duke Odo
commanded in the main battle over his French, James of Avergne brought on the
Flemings and Brabanters in the rear; Saladine, Serpent-like, biting the heal,
assaulted the rear, not far from Bethlehem; when the French and English
wheeling about, charged the Turks most furiously: emulation, formerly poison,
was here a cordial; each Christian nation striving not only to conqer their
enemies, but to overcome their friends in the honor of the Conquest. King
Richard seeking to put his courage out of doubt, brought his judgment into
question, being more prodigal of his person then beseemed a General. A great
Victory they obtained of the Turks, with little loss to themselves, save only
of James of Avergne, who here died in the Bed of Honor.

And now they marched up within sight of Jerusalem, where King Richard
intercepted the Caravan of the Saladine, laden with many rich Eastern wares,
containing much in a little, and guarded with ten thousand men; whom King
Richard valiantly encountering, with 5000. selected Soldiers, put most of them
to the Sword, and took three thousand Camels and four thousand Horses and
Mules, besides all their rich treasure; and yet of all this, and all that he
gained in Cicily and Cyprus, he brought home nothing but one Gold Ring, all the
rest of his wealth melting away in this hot service.

And now King Richard being advertised of the King of France his invading
Normandy, contrary to his oath at his departure, enforced him, though much to
his grief, to conclude a peace with Saladine, and that upon conditions not very
honorable for the Christians; which was to demolish all places they had walled
since the taking of Ptolemais; which was in effect to undo what with much
charge they had done: but such was the tyranny of King Richards occasions,
forcing him to return, that he was glad to embrace those conditions he hated at
his heart; and so sending his Wife Berengaria, and his Sister Joan, with a
great part of his Army into Cicily; and from thence into England, he passes
himself with some few of his company by the way of Thrace, and on the Coasts of
Istria suffered shipwreck: wherefore he intended to pierce through Germany by
land, the next way home.

The better to pass undiscovered, he disguises himself to be one Hugo a
Merchant, whose only merchandise was himself; but in his journey near to
Vienna was unhappily discovered by the profuseness of his expenses: so that the
very policy of an Hoastess finding his Purse so far above his Clothes did
detect him. Leopoldus Duke of Austria hearing hereof, as being Lord of the
Soil, seized on this royal Hero, meaning now to ge his pennyworths out of him,
for the affront done unto him in Palestine. But this booty being too great for
a Duke, the Emperor got him into his Custody, meaning to coin much Gold and
Silver out of his most unjust affliction, by sharp imprisonment. Yet all the
weight of their cruelty did not bow him beneath a Princely carriage.

Fifteen months imprisonment did he endure, at last he was ransomed for an
hundred and forty thousand marks, Collen weight, and delivered to his Mother
Queen Elianor, by the Archbishops of Mentz, and Collen; which last named
Archbishop for joy of his deliverance, did celebrate divine service after this
manner; Deus missit angelum. Now I know that God has sent his Angel, and has
delivered thee out of the hand of Herod, and from the expectation of the
people, etc.

We must not here forget how Gods judgments overtook this Duke, punishing his
Dominions with Fire, Water, Barrenness, Worms, and Pestilence. The Fire
causually burning his Towns; the River of Danubius drowning then thousand of
his Subjects in an overflow: the Earth waxing dry and sear, the Worms
destroying such Fruit and Grain as grew, and the stroke of Pestilence killing
the principal Nobles and Gentlemen of his Dominions. The Duke himself in a
tilting for solemnity of his Birthday, fell off his horse, and broke his leg;
which turning to a Gangreen, he cut off with his own hands, and died thereof.

King Richard after his return into England, at the Abbey of Saint Edmunds,
offered up the rich Imperial Standard of Cursac Emperor of Cyprus, which he
took among the spoils of the Griffons Camp, and then marched to reduce such
Castles as the servants of his Brother John held against him; who ambitiously
and ungratefully during his Brothers absence, sought to wrest the helm of
Government into his own hands, fortifying the Castles of Marleborough,
Lancaster, St. Michaels Mount, Nottingham and Tichil, Henry de Pumeray Captain
of St. Michaels Mount, hearing for certain that King Richard was come, died for
very fear, and the rest of the Castles were reduced with some small resistance.
And now to show that he was an absolute King again, he caused himself to be
again Crowned at Winchester; the King of Scotland honoring the solemnity with
his presence, who bare a Sword before King Richard: between which two Princes
there followed great amity and tenderness of love all their days.

Not long after this the King being at dinner at Westminster, received
advertisement that the French had laid Siege to Vernoul, a strong Town of his
in Normandy; with which he was so moved that he swore a great oath, he would
never turn his head till he had confronted the French. For the performance of
which oath, he caused the wall-right before him to be presently beaten down,
that so he might pass forward without turning his face, never resting till with
an hundred great Ships he had crossed the Seas from Portsmouth into Normandy. But
King Richard made not so much haste to succor, but the French King made as
much haste to be gone; here Earl John submits himself to his Brother, who upon
his submission restores his possessions unto him, saying only, I wish you may
as well remember your fault, as I shall forget it.

King Richard following the French King, overtakes him at Vendome, who
affrighted at his approach, the second time flies without striking a stroke,
leaving behind him all his bag and baggage, Munition, Tents, and Treasure, to
a mavelous value; together with the Indentures of such as had left King
Richard, to serve King Philip. Much about that time one Philip Bishop of
Bevois, a Martial man, and who much annoyed the English borders, was
fortunately taken in a Skirmish by King Richards side, who put him in prison;
the Bishop hereupon complained to the Pope, who wrote in the behalf of his son,
as an ecclesiastical person, and a Shepherd of the Lords. The King sent unto
the Pope the Armor he was taken in, and engraved thereon the words which
Jacobs sons used when they sold their Brother Joseph, and presented their
Father with his Coat. Vide utrum filii tui tunica sit, vel non. See whether it
be thy Sons Coat or no. Whereupon the Pope replied, That he was neither his
Son, nor the Son of the Church, and therefore should be ransomed at the Kings
will, because he was rather judged to be a Servitor of Mars then a Soldier of
Christ.

I am now come to the last act of this Kings Life, which drew the black cloud
of death over this triumphal and bright shining star of Chevalry; one Widomare
Vicount of Limoges, having found a great hord of Gold and Silver, sent part
thereof to King Richard as chief Lord: but he over covetous would not be
contented without all, pretending that treasure was wholly his by virtue of his
Prerogative Royal. Thereupon marches with a great power to a Castle of the
Vicounts called Chaluz, where he supposed the riches were; the Garrison of
which place offered to yield the same, and all therein, if only their lives
and limbs might be saved: but he would not accept of any conditions, bidding
them defend themselves as they could, for he would enter by the Sword, and hang
them all; but in the assault he was slain by a shot from an Arbalist; the use
of which warlike engine he first showed unto the French. Whereupon a French
Poet made these verses in the person of Atropos.

Hoc volo non alia Richardum morte perire,
Vt qui Francigenis Balista primitus usum
Tradidit, ipse sui rem primitus experiatur:
Quamque aliis docuit in se vim sentiat artis.
It is decreed, thus must great Richard dye,
As he that first did teach the French to dart
An Arbalist; it is just he first should try
The strength, and taste the fruits of his own art.
The man which shot him was named Bertram de Gurdon, who being brought before
the King (who neglecting his wound, gave not over the assault till he had
mastered the place) boldly justified his action, as done in defense of his
Country; and to revenge the death of his Father and Brother, whom this King
had slain with his own hand. Which said, the King caused him to be set at
liberty, and gave him an hundred shillings sterling; but after the King was
dead, one Markadey, a Captain of Rutters, took him, flead him quick, and hanged
him up.

Concerning his issue, some report him to have none at all, others two, but
illegitimate; a Priest in Normandy is reported to have told him he had three
daughters, which he wished to bestow in marriage, or else Gods wrath would
attend him: the King denying he had any daughter; Yes (said the Priest) you
have three, Pride, Covetousness, and Leachery. The King apprehensive of the
Priests meaning, called his Lords there attending; and said, My Lords, this
Hypocrite has found that I have three daughters. viz. Pride, Covetousness, and
Leachery, which he would have me bestow in marriage: and therefore (if any such
I have) I have found out most fit husbands for them all: My Pride I bequeath to
to thee haughty Templers, and Hospitallers, who are as proud as Lucifer
himself: My Covetousness I give to the white Monks of the Cisteaux Order; for
they covet the Devil and all: But for my Leachery, I can bestow it no where
better then on the Priests and Prelates of our times, for therein have they
their most felicity. Doubtless (says Speed) these marriages proved so
fruitful, that their issue has now overflowed all Kingdoms of the earth.

In this Kings days, lived that famous Outlaw Robin Hood, accompanied with
one called little John, and a hundred stout fellows more; who (as Sir Richard
Baker says) molested all Passengers upon the High way; of whom it is reported,
that he was of Noble Blood, at least made Noble, no less then an Earl for some
deserving services: but having wasted his Estate in Riotous courses, very
penury forced him to take this course; in which yet it may be said he was
honestly dishonest, for he seldom hurt any man, never any woman, spared the
poor, and only made prey of the rich; till the King setting forth a
Proclamation to have him apprehened: it happened he fell sick at a certain
Nunnery called Brickleys in York shire; and desiring there to be let blood, was
betrayed, and made bleed to death. Of all Thieves (says Major) this same was
the Prince, and the most gentle Thief.

The Life of King EDWARD the Third.
HAving already as it were in a Land-scape discovered some part of the holy
War, I shall now with a careful brevity pass through the transactions of our
Wars with France, as they were managed with victorious success in the Reigns of
Edward the Third, and Henry the Fifth; to which to complete the History, I have
added the Life of John Earl of Bedford, with whose Life the Honor of our
English Gallantry in France expired.

Edward the Third surnamed of Windsor (his Birthplace) was eldest son to King
Edward the Second; who for some misgovernments during the time of his Reign was
by the factious Nobility deposed from the Crown, and not long after deprived of
his life by the procurement (as it is said) of his Wife Queen Isabel, Lord
Mortimer, and some others, and young Edward Crowned King, Anno. 1327. Who
though he thus rise by Fathers ruin, yet may in some sort be excused of the
same. First, in regard of his adolescency, for though he were then married, yet
had he not attained to 15. years of age, nor could he be induced to accept of
the Crown until he was certified by some of his Lords that his Father had
voluntary resigned it unto him; besides the exemplary punishment he took on the
Lord Mortimer, a chief actor in his Fathers Tragedy, may in part assure as of
his Innocence therein. In the mean time to divert the rumors of the people
concerning his Fathers death, a War is proclaimed against Scotland, to revenge
those overthrows the English had received from their valiant Chieftain King
Robert le Bruce; but by the treason of the Lord Mortimer (who is said to have
received bribes from the Scots) the journey proved unsuccessful, the young King
hardly escaping with life: for one Sir James Dowglass (a valiant Scot) with 200
light horses assailed the Kings own Pavilion, where the King was so near death,
that a Chaplain of his, who stoutly behaved himself, was slain in his masters
defense, and Sir James retired from thence with safety.

These treasons of the Lord Mortimer, together with his excessive pride, and
over much familiarity with the Queen Mother, made him so distasteful unto the
Lords, that notwithstanding his strong guard, consisting of no less then
ninescore Knights; he was by the young King and the confederate Lords surprised
on a sudden at Nottingham Castle; from thence removed to the City of London,
condemned of treason, and executed at the common Gallows.

And here may the King be said to begin his Reign, living before at the Queen
and the Lord Mortimers allowance; which was only the third part of the
Revenews of the Crown, which now he assumeth all to himself, putting the Queen
to a pension of a thousand pounds a year, and confining her to a Castle all the
days of her life: such was the miserable condition of this wretched Woman, the
Daughter, Sister, Wife, and Mother of a King, as one of our Moderns has it.

So true is that the wise man once did say,
That none are happy till their dying day.
King Edward having thus raised himself, would next out of Charity help his
Neighbor. Edward Baliol, Son to John Baliol, sometimes King of Scotland,
having remained in France two and thirty years; comes over into England, whom
King Edward aids against his Brother in Law King David; who at that time was
with the King of France at Hallidown-Hill, where he utterly defeats the whole
power of Scotland, slew of them 7. Earls, 90. Knights and Banerets, 400.
Esquires, and 32000. common Soldiers, causing Baliol to be Crowned King, doing
homage to King Edward as his superior Lord; for which though he had the Knees,
he had not the Hearts of his people, who would be subject to none that were
subject to another.

But these were but petty actions, scarce worth the rehearsal, considering what
he performed afterward; his endeavors for the French Crown, which that I may
in order describe, I will begin with the original cause of this invasion. King
Phillip of France dying without issue, the right of succession unto that Crown
belonged to King Edward, as nearest in blood, being his Sisters Son; but Philip
of Valois the Heir to Charles a former King, usurps the Crown, pretending a Law
which they call Salique, wherein Females are debarred from inheritance; or as
they term it the distaff from meddling with the Crown, according to that in the
6. of Matthew, Consider the Lillies (the arms of France) how they grow, they
toil not, neither do they spin. Philip hereupon summons Edward to do homage for
the Lands he held in France, which though prejudicial to his after claim; yet
in regard his Kingdom of England was scarce well settled, and himself but
young, he was contented to do; but this his Homage was exacted with such pride
on the French Kings part, that it left a rancour in his heart for ever after;
so that returning into England he studies revenge; nor long wants he an
instrument to spur him on; for one Robert of Arthois being banished out of
France, comes over into England, and becomes an incendiary betwixt the two
Kings: this fugitive King Edward entertains, makes him Earl of Richmond, and
one of his Council; then passing over into Flanders, by persuasion of the
Flemings he takes upon him the Style, Title, and Arms of the King of France;
who hereupon establish a League with him, accounting themselves disobliged of
the Bond of tweny hundred thousand Crowns, which they had entered into, never to
bear Arms against the King of France: confederating himself with them and many
other Princes, with a well selected army he enters France. King Philip on the
other side was not idle, but draws to his part the King of Bohemia, the Bishop
of Liege, Earl of Luxembourge, Henry Count Palatine, Aubut Bishop of Metz, Otho
Duke of Austria, Ame Earl of Geneva, with many other; and with a mighty Army
confronting King Edward near to Vermandeis, who notwithstanding part without
doing any thing worth the relating, unless we should relate what to some way
seem ridiculous: A Hare starting out before the head of the French Army, caused
a great shout to be made; whereupon they who saw not the Hare, but only heard
the shout, supposing it to be the onset to the Battle, disposed themselves to
fight; and fourteen Gentlemen for encouragements sake, as the custom is, were
Knighted; called afterward in merriment, Knights of the Hare.

King Edward returning into England, left the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk in
Flanders to oppose the French; who having performed many great exploits, in an
encounter near Lisle were both taken prisoners: King Edward to repair this loss
prepares again for France, to impeach whose landing King Philip had provided a
Navy of 200. sail; whereof when Edward was advertised, he prepares the like
number of ships to encounter with them, and sets out to Sea upon Midsummer-eve;
the next day Sir Robert Morley brings an addition to his Fleet, which joined
together, set upon the French in the Haven of Sluice, defeated their whole Navy,
took and sunk all their Ships, and slew thirty thousand of their men, as a Poet
versifies on those times:

Thus Salsburies and Suffolks loss, which they
Received on Land, at Sea was washed away.
Many of the French to escape killing drowned themselves, trusting to the mercy
of the Waves, rather then to the pity of the English; which made the French
Kings Jeaster set on to give him notice of this overthrow, to repeat often in
the Kings hearing, Cowardly English men, Dastardly English men, Faint-hearted
English men! and being by the King asked the reason why, Because (said he) they
durst not leap out of their Ships into the Sea, as our brave French men did; by
which speech the King came to have knowledge of their overthrow. The French lay
the blame of this defeat on one Buchet, who having a chief command in the Navy,
armed his ships with men of base condition (content with small pay) and refused
Gentlemen and sufficient Soldiers in regard they required greater wages
according to the old Law.

When covetous Chiefs are sparing of their Crowns,
Few Soldiers will be prodigal of wounds.
Edwards Wings thus plumed with Victory, he flies amain to the Siege of Tournay
with an Army of five and fifty thousand, where he is encountered by the Duke of
Burgandy and Earl of Armigniack, who slew four thousand of his men upon the
place: Edward notwithstanding continues his Siege; to the relief whereof King
Philip sends all the Forces he could make: But by the mediation of the Lady
Jane of Valois, who was Sister to King Philip, and Mother of King Edwards Wife,
a truce was concluded from Michaelmas till Midsummer, and both their Armies
again dissolved.

Edward hereupon puts out of pay his foreign aids, and returning into England
had notice that the Scots besieged the Castle of Striveling; for relief whereof
he makes all the haste he can: but being disappointed of his provision that was
to come by Sea, he makes a Truce with the Scots for four months, and returns
home; during this truce the Scots send to King David, who upon their message
leaves France, and returns into Scotland: and as soon as the truce was ended,
with a strong Army enters Northumberland, besieges New Castle upon Tyne; but
is valiantly resisted by John Nevile the Governor, who took the Earl of Murray
prisoner, and slew diverse of his men: from thence he passes into the
Bishopric of Durham, where he uses all kind of cruelty, killing men, women,
and children, burning and destroying Houses and Churches, until he came to the
Castle of Salisbury; but hearing of King Edwards approach (who certified of
these things made all the haste he could) he returns homewards. King Edward
pursues for three days together; at length a truce was concluded for two
years; and William Earl of Salisbury prisoner with the King of France, was set
at liberty in exchange for the Earl of Murray.

Whilst Edward was thus busied about the Scots, a new difference arose in
France; John Earl of Monfort claims the Duchy of Britain, and in pursuance of
his title is taken prisoner by the French King; his Wife solicites King Edward
for succor, who sends her aid under the conduct of Robert of Arthois, and not
long after follows himself. Philip sends aid to Monforts Competitor, and both
Armies encamp near to the City of Vannes, where was like to have been a cruel
Battle, had not Pope Clement the sixth interposed; two Cardinals from him
conclude a peace; Vannes is delivered up to the French King, and the Earl of
Montfort is set at liberty.

The murmuring Drum now silenced, and stern Mars for a while confined to
prison, least rusty idleness should entomb their worth, and want of exercise
make them forget their Arms, King Edward erects a round Table at Windsor, in
imitation of the Renowned Arthur, and to invite great men from foreign parts;
rich Salaries are the reward of high designs. King Philip fearing this
association would be to him of ill consequence, writes after Edwards copy, and
erects a round Table in his own Country, to allure the men of War of Germany
and Italy, and so to keep them from coming into England.

King Edward thus prevented in his design by the French King, institutes the
most honorable order of the Garter; the Original case whereof is dubious: some
conjecture that it arose for that in a Battle wherein he was victorious, he
gave the word Garter for the word or sign. Cambden says, King Edward the Third
founded this order, to adorn Martial virtue with honors, rewards, and
splendor. The Original Book of the Institution deduces the invention from King
Richard the First, and that King Edward adorned it, and brought it into
splendor; but the common received opinion is, that a Garter of his own Queen,
or (as some say) of Joan Countess of Salisbury, slipping off in a Dance, King
Edward stooped and took it up; where at some of the Nobles that were present
smiling, as an amorous action, he seriously said, It should not be long ere
Sovereign Honor were done to that Garter; whereupon he afterward added the
French Motto, Honi soit qui maly pense; therein checking his Lords sinister
suspicion: Nor need we with Polydor Virgil trouble our selves to make an
Apology for the courseness of this Original, since according to the Poet:

They swell with love, that are with valor filled,
And Venus Doves may in a Headpiece build.
The number of Knights in this order is six and twenty, whereof the King is
always president, so much accounted of in other Countries, that there have
been nigh twenty and six foreign Emperors and Kings of the same; the glory
whereof by a learned Poet is celebrated for to be such.

That now Burgundians scorn their fleece of Gold;
The French, the Escalopt Collar set with grace,
Their Crossed weeds, Rhodes, Elba, Alcala hold
As worthless: all matched with thy George are base.
King Edward whose Eye was fixed, upon France, as the mark of his Conquest,
having notice that King Philip had put many of his friends to death in
Normandy; namely, Clisson and Bacon, Knights of the best note, glad that the
truce was broken on King Philips part, prepares again for the invasion of
France; and taking along with him the young Prince of Wales, with an Army of
2500. Horse, and 30000. Foot, arives in Normandy, where he took and and sackd
many Towns of Importance; Clissons hands being nailed on the Gates of Carenton,
he turns it into Cinders, making a Funeral-pile thereof for his slain friend.
He takes also the populous and rich City of Caen, marching with his Army to the
very Walls of Paris; Philip awakened with Edwards Victories, raises one of the
greatest Armies that ever were seen in France; Edward laden with spoil is not
unwilling to retire, which Philip interprets a kind of flight, the River of
Some he passes with much danger, and defeats Gundentor du Foy, who was placed
there to hinder his passage. King Philip set on fire with his disaster,
resolves to give King Edward Battle, who was encamped nigh to a Vilage called
Crescy; his Army consisting of 30000. he divided into three Battalions: the
first whereof was led by Edward the Black Prince of Wales, having in his
company Beuchamp Earl of Warwick, Godfrey of Harecourt, the Lords, Stafford,
Laware, Bourchier, Clifford, Cobham, Holland, etc. together with the number of
800. men at Arms, 2000. Archers, and 1000. Welsh. In the second Battle were the
Earls of Northampton and Arundel; the Lords Ross, Willoughby; Basset, Saint
Albane, Malton, etc. with 800. men at Arms, and 1200. Archers. The third and
last Battle was commanded by the King: himself, having in it 700. men at Arms,
and 3000. Archers. The French Army was far greater, consisting of sixscore
thousand men, having in it the two Kings of Bohemia, and Majorica, and of
Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barrons, and Gentlemen bearing Arms about 3000. The
vantguard was led by the King of Bohemia, and the Earl of Allanson. The main
Battle King Philip commanded himself, and the Earl of Savoy the Rear. But since
in this Battle the Prince of Wales was the chief General, I shall refer the
further prosecution thereof to the description of his following life, and
proceed in our History of King Edward, who after the good success of this
Battle, marched directly to Calice, resolving not to stir until he had won it;
for which cause he fortifies his Camp on all sides, stopping all relief that
might come to them by Sea with his Navy.

The French King not able to raise the Siege, seeks to divert him by an
invasion in England. David the second King of Scots (a sure friend to the
French, though allied to the English) with an Army of threescore and two
thousand enters England, supposing (considering what great numbers were abroad)
there were none left at home but Priests and Shepherds; but he was utterly
deceived of his expectation, for at Nevils Cross in the Bishopric of Durham,
he was encountered by the Archbishop of York, with some Lords of the North, who
animated by the Queen (who was there in person) defeated this great Army, slew
the Earls of Murray and Strathern; the Constable, Marshall, Chamberlain, and
Chancellor of Scotland, with many other Nobles, and fifteen thousand common
Soldiers, took King David himself prisoner, together with the Earls of
Douglass, Fife, Southerland, Wigton, and Menteith. Thus France was not alone,
the stage of King Edwards Victories, nor the French alone the Nation over whom
he triumphed.

This loss of the Scots lost the French King the Town of Callis, which after
eleven months Siege was delivered up to King Edward, who made Governor of the
same, one Aymery of Pavia, and then with his Queen returned into England.

But good fortune attended not Edwards person alone, it was likewise available
in his Lievetenants, Sir Thomas Dagworth in Little Britain, overthrew and took
prisoner Charles de Bloys ( Monforts Competitor) and besides many Knights and
Esquires, slew 700. common Soldiers. Henry of Lancaster drove John Duke of
Normandy, King Philips eldest son, from the Siege of Aquillon, takes and sacks
the Towns of Xaintoigne, Poictou, and Poityers, and returns to Bordeaux with
more pillage then his Army could well tell what to do withal. Sir Walter
Bentley puts the Marshall of France to flight, with the slaughter of 13. Lords,
140. Knights, 100. Esquires, and store of common Soldiers: thus the English
prosper every where, and the French suffer. King Edward was at that time
elected King of the Romans, but refused the tender, as out of his way,
considering his French and other importunate affairs.

King Philip dying John his eldest son succeeds him, who creates his son
Charles Duke of Aquitain; Edward herewith incenst, bestows the same on the
Prince of Wales, commanding him to defend that right with his Sword against his
adversaries: hereupon an Army is raised for the Prince, consisting of 1000. men
at Arms, 2000. Archers, and a number of Welshmen, with which he arives in
Aquaitain; and in emulation of his Fathers glory, works wonders, recovering
multitudes of Towns and prisoners, and laden with booties returns to Bordeaux.

Winter being spent, he again sets forth, sacks, spoils, and destroys where
ever he goes; whom to oppose, King John with an Army of threescore thousand,
follows to Poicters, and enforces him to fight: the Princes army so small in
comparison of his, that he might say as Tygranes did of the paucity of the
Romans; if they come as Ambassadors, they are too many; if to fight, too few;
the French exceeding him six to one: but what was wanting in number was made up
in valor, for after a long conflict, they discomfitted their whole Army, took
King John and his Son Philip prisoners, with many other Lords, and about 2000.
Knights and Gentlemen bearing armories, slew 1700. Gentlemen, whereof 52 were
Bannerets, and about 6000. common Soldiers: of which victory a modern Poet
sings.

Such bloody lines the English here did write,
Might teach posterity how they should fight.
The Prince with his prisoners marches in triumph to Bordeaux, where resting a
while he sets sail for England. With what joy he was welcomed home, may be
easier immagined then expressed; his acts exceeding all expection, his
performances afterward as I referr to the description of his life: and return
again to his Father King Edward.

Who upon receipt of the French King, releases King David of his long
imprisonment, thinking it honor enough to have one King prisoner at once; he
had been here in durance the space of eleven years, and was at the incessant
suit of his Wife Queen Joan set at liberty, yet not without a ransom of a
hundred thousand marks, with condition to demolish and raze down several of
his Castles.

And now the third time on the behalf of the French, two Cardinals solicit
Edward for peace; to which he yields, but on such conditions, that the Council
of France will not condescend unto: whereupon in great displeasure, with a
mighty Army, he again enters France, destroying all wheresoever he came; and
notwithstanding great offers were made him by the French, yet would he not
desist, but concontinued inexarable. God (says mine Author) displeased
thereat, sent such a terrible storm of Hail, with Thunder and Lightning upon
his Host, that it killed many of his men and horses; whereupon wounded and
struck with a remorse, he vowed to make peace on reasonable conditions; and not
long after at a treaty at Bretagni, concluded the same. The chief Articles
whereof were, 1. That King Edward should have to his possession the Countries
of Gascoigne, Guyen, Poytiers, Limosin, Balevile, Exantes, Caleis, Guisness,
with diverse other Lordships, Castles, and Towns, without any dependancy but of
God. 2. That the two Edwards Father and Son should renounce all their right to
the Crown of France, the Duchy of Normandy, the Countries of Tourain, Anjou,
and Maine; as also to the homages of Britain, Armoricke, and the Earldome of
Flanders. 3. That the King of France should pay for his ransom there millions
of Crowns of Gold, six hundred thousand in hand, four hundred thousand the year
following, and the rest in two years after; for assurance whereof a certain
number of Hostages should remain in England. 4. That the French should not aid
nor assist the Scots against the English, nor the English the Flemings against
the French, etc. These Articles confirmed on both sides by seals and oaths,
King John is delivered from his imprisonment, and King Edward with his Hostages
returns into England.

But notwithstanding seals and oaths, it was not long ere these Articles were
broken, yet good correspondence was held, during the life of King John; who
coming over into England to visit King Edward, died of grief (as one writes)
that the Duke of Anjou, one of his pledges came not into England according as
he had sworn: after whom his son Charles, surnamed the Wise, succeeded; who
with loving letters and presents, works himself into the good opinion of King
Edward, whilst covertly he defrauds him of his interests in France: it
fortuned whilst his Ambassadors were in the Kngs presence, news was brought
him of the forcible invasion of the French in Poictow; which when the King
heard, he commanded the Ambassadors to get them home with their deceitful
presents to their treacherous Lord, whose mocks he would not long leave
unrevenged: but King Edwards fortunes having ascended their full height, began
to decline; for notwithstanding he sent over great forces under the Duke of
Lancaster and Earl of Hereford, no great matter thereof ensued. And now each
day brings news of some Towns revolt, or Commanders death; the Earl of Warwick
receives his death by a pestilential Dart, Sir John Chandoys an expert
Commander is unfortunately slain, Sir William Molineux who had long served in
the Wars of France, deceaseth in England; the Earl of Pembroke is taken
prisoner by the Spaniards, and the Noble Prince Edward dies at Canterbury,
with whom (says Walshingham died all the hopes of the English; during whose
life, they feared no invasion of the enemy abroad, nor any division at home;
for he assailed no nation which he overcome not, he besieged no City which he
took not, whose death lay so heavy on his heart that King Edward himself lived
not long after. A King (says Speed) whose name among the surviving splendors
of his actions is justly transmitted with honor to all posterity. He died at
his Manor of Sheene (near Richmond) the 21. of July, 1377. having lived 65.
years, and reigned 56. years, 4. months, and odd days; his body was solemnly
interred at Westminster Church, where he has his monument, with this Epitaph
engraven thereon, made by Geffery Chaucer the Poet.

Hic decus Anglorum, flos regum praeteritorum,
Forma futurorum, Rex clemens, pax populorum;
Tertius Edwardus, regni complens Jubilaeum,
Invictus Pardus, pollens bellis Machabaeum.
Here Englands Grace, the flower of Princes past,
Pattern of future, Edward the third is placed,
Mild Monarch, Subjects peace, Wars Machabee,
Victorious Pard, his reign a Jubilee.
In the eleventh year of this Kings reign my Author writes was so great plenty,
that a quarter of Wheat was sold at London for two shillings, a fat Ox for a
noble, a fat sheep for six pence, and six Pigeons for a penny, a fat Goose for
two pence, and a Pigg for a penny, and other things after that the same cheap
rate.

The Life of EDWARD the Black Prince.
IT may seem superfluous having writ the Reign of the Father in whose time he
died, to publish the life of this Prince; but as an eminent Author writes, as
heroic persons purchase their own honors, so they ought to inherit their own
praises, to wear their own laurels. This may apologize for my enterprise, more
especially, as I have endeavored to avoid whatsoever has been already
written, and to set down only his more particular Transactions.

Edward the Black Prince, so named of this dreaded acts, and not from his
complexion, was the eldest son of King Edward the Third; a Prince of an
undaunted spirit, so full of virtues, that he left no room for any nnworthy
vice, who, had he lived in the heroic times, might well have been numbered
amongst the nine Worthies. At 15. years of age his father takes him over with
him into France, to initiate him as it were in the School of War, as one of our
modern Poets has it.

In this fair heaven of magnanimity,
The Prince, the star of honor decks the fly,
Fixed here so soon by's Fathers band, who meant
He there should fall, or gild that firmament.
I will for the more brevity treat only of three special passages in this
Princes life; his Battle at Crescy, his Victory at Poityers, and his restoring
Don Pedro to his Crown of Castile; in the Battle at Crescy the French exceeded
the English nigh four for one; and by reason of their numbers, being confident
of Victory, would needs hasten the Fates to their own destruciton, and enforcd
the English to make their passage through, as they then determined, the red Sea
of their own blood; nor could the terrible peals of Thunder from heaven, nor
shoals of Ravens and ravenous birds, which came flying over their Host,
foreshewing the harvest of carcasses at hand, hinder their proceedings; but as
if ascertained of victory they did erect their banner called Oliflame, as a
sign of taking none to mercy, no more then fire is extinguished by Oil: against
which the English advance their Banner of the red Dragon, to signify no mercy
to them that would show none.

Both Armies divided into three Battalions, the sign of Battle being given by
King Philip, the horror of War began to show its self; the grass was soon
changed from green to red, and their glistering faucheons to a purple color,
Drums and Trumpets sounded, the knells of death, horror, and destruction
appeared every where. Amongst other Nations that assisted the French in this
sad War; were twelve thousand Genowayes, being all of them Gross-bow men; these
were to open a way for the French horse with their shot: but at the very
instant fell such a shower of rain, which for the present wet the Archers
strings, and made them less serviceable. The French King hereupon commanded
Count Alanson who commanded the Van, to beat them from the point, and to charge
the English: this was no sooner commanded then performed, and the poor
Genowayes trodden down by the horse; who now turn their fury against the
French, seeking to destroy whom they came to help. The English enemies unto
either having reinforced their Archery, liberally bestow their arrows amongst
them endeavoring the destruction of them both; who ever saw a Matachin dance
imitate fighting, might here see a fight imitate the Matachin dance. The French
way thus paved with Genoan bodies, half out of breath with headlong haste,
never stay till they came up to the English Battle, with whom encounters the
noble Prince of Wales, who commanded the English Voward that day; the fight
grew fierce and cruel, each side striving to exceed the other in valor. Who
had seen the Prince of Wales at that present, would have believed Pythagoras
doctrine of Transmigration, that the soul of great Hector had been infused into
him: what Poets have feigned of ancient Heroes, fell short of the truth of what
he performed that day. The King of Bohemia (whom age might have taught to have
expected death in his Chamber, and not to have sought him in the Fields of
Mars) seals his love to the French side with his dearest blood; his troop of
faithful followers with their slaughtered bodies covering him even in death;
whose plume of Ostrige feathers won then by valiant Edward, has every since
been the Cognizance of the Princes of Wales. Another trophey of the English
Chevalry was the King of Majorca, who in aid of the French was there likewise
slain, as a renowned Poet in his description of that victory.

One King's too much, but there two Kings must dye,
Leave two uncrown'd to Crown one victory.
It was now high time for King Philip to bring up the main Battle, whose
numbers threatened the destruction of the English; this onset threatening so much
danger, King Edward is sent for to come up with his power to aid the Prince;
whose answer was, Let them send no more to me for any adventure that may
befall, whilst my son is alive; but let him either vanquish or bravely dye,
because the honor of this brave day shall be his, if God suffer him to survive.

This answer would have wrought despair in cowards, but to these valiant Heroes
brought increase of courage, who now bestir themselves more then before,
sending such numbers to grisly Charon, that his leaking boat was ready to sink
under the pressure of their numerous weight. Twice was King Philip beat off his
horse, and twice by the Lord Beaumont mounted again; but being wounded in the
Neck and Thigh, was forced to retire himself out of the fight; upon whose
departure the French gave way, and staid not long but betook them to flight.
The French King with a small company flies to Bray, and being questioned by the
guard who he was, answered, The Fortune of France; whereupon being known, he
was received into the Town, with the tears and lamentations of the people. The
number of the slain are reported to be 30000. (the same number which King
Edward brought to the Battle) the chief whereof were, the two Kings of Bohemia
and Majorca, Charles Earl of Alanson, John Duke of Bourbon, Ralph Earl of
Lorrain, Lewis Earl of Flanders, the Dolphin of Viennois, the Earls of Sancerr,
Harecourt, Aumarl, Nevers, etc. Thus under the conduct of this valiant Prince,
the English obtained a glorious victory, whom King Edward the Father thus
congratulates, Son, God send you good perseverance to so prosperous beginnings;
you have nobly acquit your self, and are well worthy to have the governance of
a Kingdom entrusted unto you for your valor.

Wars greatest tempest now blown over, some little mists remained behind, like
to the gleanings after harvest, certain troops of French, under the command of
the Archbishop of Roan, and the Prior of France (ignorant of what had happened)
were coming from Abbevile, Roan, and some other Towns thereabouts, to the aid
of King Philip, and to enrich themselves by the spoil of the English: but that
they might be sensible of the ill fortune of a bad market, they found King
Philip discomfitted before they came, and they themselves must become the
English spoil.

From his victory at Crescy, I shall proceed to his conquest at Poytiers, as I
have already intimated in the Life of Edward the Third Philip King of France
dying, his son John succeeds him, who invests his Son Charles with the Duchy
of Aquitain. King Edward bestows the same on the Prince of Wales, commanding
him to defend that right with his Sword; hence grows the quarrel, and a small
matter, will cause a great difference where both parties wait for an occasion.
The Prince with an Army lands is Aquitain, conquering all where ever he comes,
unto whom Pope Clement the sixth sends a messenger with an overture to
intercede for a Peace: the Prince returns answer, that the message must be sent
to the King his Father, for he could not meddle without command from him. Mean
while he takes Cities and Towns at his pleasure; and without impeachment
returns to Bordeaux, where for that year he takes leave of Martial
Achievements.

The prince could not continue long without action, for no sooner had the Son
rid through his Winters stage, but with an uncontrouled march he advances
through Bruges, Perigort, and Limosin, intending to return to Bordeaux through
the Countries of Turain, Paictou. and Saintcin. But John King of France
(hasting to go beyond his Father in misfortunes) seeks to intercept his
passage; and with a mighty Army follows after, whom he overtakes about the City
of Poytiers. Both Armies preparing themselves for fight, two Cardinals from
Pope Clement labor to take up the quarrel; but King John whom the Destinies
drove headlong to destruction, would accept of no conditions; but that the
Prince should deliver him four Hostages, and as vanquished, render himself and
his Army to his discretion: but this being with just indignation rejected, it
came to a most bloody and fearful trial. The French Army exceeded the English
six to one, by reason the Prince had not long before sent a great part thereof
to defend Aquitain; wherefore that he might be able to deal with the French
numbers, he takes all the advantage he could of the ground, and providently got
the benefit of Vines, Shrubs, and Bushes, with iron Spikes, with other
encumbrances, on that part he was like to be assailed, to impester and entangle
the French horse, which he saw were to come furiously upon him: then dividing
his Army into three Battalions, he commits the vaward to the Earls of
Warwick and Oxford, the middle-ward was guided by himself, and the Reer-ward
led by the Earls of Salisbury and Suffolk. The Army thus marshalled, the noble
Prince standing conveniently to be heard, encouraged his Soldiers with this
following speech as I received it from an ancient Manuscript.

Your manhood (most noble companions in Arms) has been so often experimented
under my Father and me, that it proves you are not degenerate from true Sons of
English men, but to be descended from those whose lively couragiousness has
heretofore tamed the French, the Cyprians, the Siracusians, the Calabrians, and
the Palastines; brought under the stiff-necked Scots, unruly Irish, and
stubborn Welsh; unto whom no labor was painful, no place invincible, no
ground unpassable, no Hill (were it never so high) inaccessable, no Tower
unscaleable, no Army impenetrable, no armed Soldier or whole Hoasts
formidable. At this time, gallant Countrymen, the honor, love of our
Country, and the rich spoil of the French call upon us to be valiant; let not
their numerous Army affright you, since they are the same men who not long ago
were vanquished by a handful of us at the Battle of Crescy. Remember withal
that I am Edward your Leader, who will participate with you either in weal or
in woe; either sharing with you in the honor of their overthrow, or dying with
you if overthrown.

Scarcely could the Prince make an end of his Speech, when the French like an
impetuous torrent, slighting the petty numbers of the English, came furiously
on as to an assured victory; but upon their first assault were so wrapped in,
molested, and encombred amongst the Vines, that the Archers galled and anoyed
them at their pleasure: for the French King, to give the honor of the day to
his Cavallery, employed them only without his Infantry; so as they being
disordered and put to rout, his whole Army was soon utterly defeated: as
Drayton describes this Victory.

Here a hand severed, there an ear was cropped,
Here a chap fallen, and there an eye put out;
Here was an arm lopt off, there a nose dropped,
Here half a man, and there a less piece fought.
Like to dismembered statues they did stand,
Which had been mangled by times iron hand.
Few such lists of prisoners do we meet withal in any story as here were taken
at this Battle, viz. John King of France, Philip his Son, the Archbishop of
Sens, James of Burbon, Earl of Ponthieu, John of Artoyer, Earl of Eu, Charles
his Brother, Earl of Longuevile, Charles Earl of Vendosme, the Earls of
Tankervile, Salbruch, Nassaw, Dampmarlin, La Roch, with many other Lords,
besides two thousand Knights and Gentlemen; nor did the slain come far short of
the prisoners, the Chiefest whereof were Peter of Burbon, Duke of Athens, high
Constable of France, John Clermont Marshall, George of Charney Lord great
Chamberlain, the Bishop of Chalons, the Lords of Landas, Pons, and Chambly,
with others, to the number of 1700. Knights and Gentlemen. The Prince having
commended his Soldiers, needed not at that time reward them; giving them the
rich plunder of the Field, which did sufficiently recompense them for their
victory. This indeed whetteth a Soldiers valor, when desert is recompensed
with reward. The English whose valor was most conspicious, were the Earls of
Warwick, Suffolk, Salisbury, Oxford, and Stafford, the Lords, Cobham, Spenser,
Berkley, Basset, and Audley; which last named Lord for his valor, was rewarded
by the Prince with the gift of five hundred marks Fee simple in England, which
he presently gave to four of his Esquires: whereupon the Prince demanding
whether he accepted not his gift? he answered, that these men had deserved the
same as well as himself, and had more need of it: with which reply the Prince
was so well pleased, that he gave him five hundred marks more in the same
kind, an example worthy of immortal memory, where desert in the Subject, and
reward in the Prince, strive which should be greatest. Nor did the Prince use
less humanity toward his prisoners, whom he entertained in most honorable
manner; so that King John's Captivity was only restraint of his liberty, being
attended on like a King in the hands of his enemy; for noble spirits scorn to
insult over misery: it is Plebean rage that is merciless. Having refreshed his
Army, he marches with his prisoners to Bordeaux, where he tarried a while
longer to rest his Soldiers; from thence he sets sail for England ariving at
Plymouth. King Edward as soon as he had knowledge of the Victory, caused a
general Thanksgiving all over England eight days together, giving God the
thanks and glory, knowing him the Author, and his Son but the instrument of
this unparalled victory.

By reason of these his wonderful Achievements, his name grew famous all the
Christian world over, to whom for succor comes Peter King of Castile, driven
out of his kingdom by the French, with the assistance of the King of Arragon,
and his Bastard Brother Henry placed in his room. Prince Edward considering
what a dangerous president this might be against all lawful Kings, that any one
should be thus disthroned, having obtained leave of his Father, resolves to
aid him, and taking along with him an Army of thirty thousand men, makes his
way through the streights of Rouncevallux in Navarr, accompanied with the Kings
of Castile and Majorca, John Duke of Lancaster his Brother, with many other
Knights and Gentlemen. On the other side King Henry for defense of his Diadem
had assembled an Army of an hundred thousand, consisting of French, under
Glequin their famous Captain; as also of Castilians both Christians and
Saracens. On the borders of Castile, at a place called Nazers, it came to a
Battle, where the Prince obtained a glorious Victory, slew many thousands of
his enemies, and took above two thousand prisoners; nor left he off here, but
proceeded so far until he had set him in Burgus upon his Throne again.

The greater the benefit is of him that receives it, the more monstrous is his
ingratitude that does not acknowledge it: this ungrateful King, notwithstanding
the benefits he had received of the Prince, dismissed his without money to pay
his Army, which constrained him in his return to Bordeaux to coin his Plate;
but that not supplying his present necessities, he lays upon his Dominions in
Gascoigne a new taxation, which was the cause of a most dangerous revolt. But
this was not all the mischief that he accrewed by this journey, for the Prince
brought back with him such an indisposition of body, that he was never
thoroughly well after. Some report him to have been poisoned by King Peter, and
probable enough he might be guilty of such wickedness, whose whole course of
life was so full of vice. Duke John of Lancester was not freed from the
suspicion of hastening his death, though the heat of the Country and the
unfitness of the Season might be the principal cause. How ever it was, certain
it is he survived not long after, dying at Canterbury upon Trinity Sunday, Anno
1376. aged about six and forty years; a Prince excelling all the princes which
went before him, and surpassing in Martial deeds all the Heroes that have lived
after him. His body was buried at Christ-Church in Canterbury, where his
monument stands, leaving behind him only one Son, who was afterward King
of England, by the name of Richard the Second, unless we should reckon his
natural issue, Sir John Sounder, and Sir Roger Clarendon Knights, which latter
is thought to be Ancestour to the house of the Smiths in Essex.

The Life of Sir JOHN HAWKWOOD.
AMongst those many Worthies which this Martial age produced, that valiant
Knight Sir John Hawkwood deserves remembrance; who though of low birth, by his
Martial prowess purchased his own renown over the Christian world.

He was born at Sible Heningham in the County of Essex, and was in his youth
bound apprentice at London with a Tailor, from whence he was pressed in the
musters for service of King Edward the Third, and sent into France as a common
Soldier; where contrary to the Proverb, which says, Tailors are no men: he
behaved himself so valiantly that he was made a Captain over a Company of Foot
Soldiers, and not long after upon some further good service by him performed,
advanced unto the order of Knighthood: but a peace being concluded between the
French and English, and his estate not able to maintain his Title, he was loath
to return home again to follow his old occupation; it being something
preposterous from a Knight to turn Tailor again: wherefore he joined himself
with the Companies called the Late-comers, who being about five or six
thousand, made great spoil upon the East parts of France, passing through
Champain, Burgondy, and Damphin, even to the very Gates of Avignion in
Province. From thence he departed into Lumbardy, having the leading of that
part of the Companies, which was called the White Band, with whom he served
valiantly in the Wars of John Marquess of Montferrat; but Lionel Duke of
Clarence, Son to Edward the Third, King of England, coming over into Italy, to
marry with the Lady Violanta Daughter of Galeacio, Duke of Millain, he forsook
that service and attended the Duke to the marriage.

To omit their sumptuous entertainment, which by Paulus Jovius upon the life of
Galeacio is written at large, Barnaby the Brother of Galeacio, having at that
time great Wars with the State of Mantua, obtained of the Duke of Clarence,
that Sir John Hawkwood, being a Captain and principal man of his retinue, might
come to aid him in his Wars; for he himself being a warlike Prince, had a
desire to make some trial of the Discipline of the English. Sir John Hawkwood
hereupon undertaketh the service, behaving himself so valiantly in several
Assaults and Skirmishes, that the Lord Barnaby for his valor importuned him to
be his Son in Law, and gave him in marriage the Lady Dowager his Daughter, with
the value of ten thousand Florences of yearly revenue for her portion.

By reason of this alliance his pay was increased, and his name became famous
all over Italy, for it was judged his deserts were not small, that so great a
Prince as Barnaby would ally himself with him; yet notwithstanding all this,
upon some further hopes conceived, he revolteth from Barnaby, and joyneth
himself with his enemy: so true is that of Lucan.

Nulla fides pietasque viris qui castra sequntur,
Venalesque manus ibi fas, ubi maxima merces.
Nor faith, nor conscience common Soldiers carry,
Best pay's their right, their hands are mercenary.
By reason of this revolt many of the Towns of Lombardy came to be wasted, by
the outrageous spoils of the English men; amongst other they took the Towns of
Faera, and Banacanallo, whereof he sold one to the Marquess of East for twenty
thousand Crowns, and the other he kept. Having both his Forces and pay
increased, he determines to seek new adventures, going first to the aid of Pope
Gregory the twelfth, and having with great commendation recovered the Cities of
Province that had revolted from him, for his service therein, was worthily
rewarded with the dominion of five Towns. From him he went to the Florentine,
and not long after to the Pisans; from thence to the Florentines again, under
whom he served with such a number of our Nation, both horsemen and footmen,
that all Italy feared him, with that success and increase of his honor and
glorious renown, that he was reputed to be the best Soldier of that age; for
he had learned by his long experience in the Wars, having an exceeding ripe and
quick conceit to force occasions to frame his resolutions, and to make speedy
execution, being also as the opportunity required, both hot in his fight, and
notable for his delays; in so much as sundry great Captains, who were
afterward highly renowned, proceeded out of his School, as from an exact master
of Martial affairs. The exploits that he had achieved with good success, were
accounted for sure grounds and principles of Discipline, as well amongst his
very enemies, as also amongst his own followers.

After many Victories obtained, and an incomparable Renown amongst all men, he
deceased an aged man at Florence; the Senate in reward of his well deserving,
honored his ashes with a stately Tomb, and the Statue of a man at Arms, having
chiefly by his conduct, courage, and valor, preserved that City. The Italian
Writers both Poets and Historians highly celebrating his matchless Prowess,
enstile him,

-- Anglorum decus, and decus addite genti
Italicae, Italico praefidiumque solo.
Englands prime honor, Italy's renown.
Who held their honors up from sinking down.
His Friends and Executours here in England raised a Monument or Tomb for him
at Sible Heningham where he was born, arched over, and engraven to the likeness
of Hawks flying in a Wood, and founded (such was the Religion of those times) a
Chauntry there for the good of his soul.

The Life of GEOFFERY CHAUCER.
THis famous and learned Poet Groffery Chancer Esquire, was supposed by Leland,
to have been born in Oxfordshire or Barkshire; but as it is evident by his own
words he was born in the City of London, as we have it from him in his
Testament of Love. Also in the City of London, that is to me so dear and sweet,
in which I was forth grown; and more kindly love have I to that place then any
other in yerth, as every kindly creature has full appetite to that place of
his kindly ingendure, and to wilne rest and peace in that stead to adide)
thilke peace should thus there have been broken, which of all wise men is
commended and desired.

For his Parentage, although Bale, he terms himself Galfridus Chaucer nobili
loco natus, and summae spei juvenis, yet in the opinion of some Heralds
(otherwise then his virtues and learning commended him) he descended not of any
great House, which they gather by his Arms; and indeed both in respect of the
name which is French, as also by other conjectures it may be gathered, that his
Progenitors were Strangers; but whether they were Merchants, (for that in
places where they have dwelled, the Arms of the Merchants of the Staple have
been seen in the glass windows) or whether they were of other callings, it is
not much necessary to search: but wealthy no doubt they were, and of good
account in the Commonwealth, who brought up their son in such sort, that both
he was thought fit for the Court at home, and to be employed for matters of
State in Foreign Countries.

His Education, as Leland writes, was in both the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, as appears by his own words in his Book entitled, The Court of
Love; and in Oxford by all likelihood in Canterbury, or in Merton College,
with John Wickliffe, whose opinions in Religion he much affected: For who shall
read his Works, will find him not covertly, but with full mouth to cry out
against the vices and enormities of the Priests in those times. Hear him in the
Plough-mans tale.

Men's Wives they woollen hold,
And though that they been right sorry;
To speak they shall not be so bold
For sompning to the Consistorey,
And make hem say mouth I lie,
Though they it saw with her eye.
His lemman holden oppenly,
No man so hardy to ask why.
Improving his time in the University, he became a witty Logician, a sweet
Rhetorician, a grave Philosopher, a Holy Divine, a skilful Mathematician, and a
pleasant Poet; of whom for the sweetness of his Poetry may be said, that which
is reported of Stesichorus; and as Cethegus was termed Suadae Medulla, so may
Chaucer be rightly called the pith and sinnews of Eloquence, and the very life
it self of all mirth and pleasant writing: besides, one gift he had above other
Authors; and that is, by the excellencies of his descriptions to possess his
Readers with a stronger imagination of seeing that done before their eyes which
they read, then any other that ever writ in any tongue.

By his travel also in France and Flanders, where he spent much time in his
young years, but more in the latter end of the Reign of King Richard the
second, he attained to a great perfection in all kind of learning, as Bale and
Leland report of him. Circa postremos Richardi secundi annos in Galliis
floruit, magnamque illic ex assidua in literis exercitatione gloriam sibi
comparavit. Domum reversus forum Londinense, and Collegia Leguleiorum, qui
ibidem patria jura interpretantur, frequentavit, etc. About the Latter end of
King Richard the Seconds days, he flourished in France, and got himself into
high esteem there by his diligent exercise in learning. After his return home,
he frequented the Court at London, and the Colleges of the Lawyers, which
there interpretted the Laws of the Land; and among them he had a familiar
Friend called John Gower, a Yorkshire man born, a Knight, as Bale writes of
him. This Gower in a Book of his entitled Confessio Amantis, terms Chaucer
a worthy Poet, and makes him as it were the judge of his works.

He married a Knights Daughter of Henault, called Paon de Ruel, King of Arms,
by whom he had issue his Son Thomas, to whom King Edward the Third (in
recompense of his Fathers services in France) gave him in marriage the Daughter
and Heir of Sir John Burgershe Knight. This Thomas Chaucer had only one
Daughter named Alice, married thrice, first to Sir John Philip Knight, then to
Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, and the third time to William de la Pole
Earl and after Duke of Suffolk; who for love of his Wife, and the convenient
seat of her estate, he removed into Oxfordshire, and Barkshire where his Wives
Lands lay.

This Alice had a Daughter by her second Husband Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, named after her Mother Alice, married to Richard Nevill, Son to
Ralph Earl of Westmerland; by whom she had Richard, John, and George: Richard
espoused Anne, sister and sole heir to the Lord Beauchamp, and after Duke of
Warwick, in whose right he was created Earl of Warwick.

But to return to our ancient Poet Geffery Chaucer, he had always an earnest
desire to enrich and beautify our English Tongue, which in those days was
very rude and barren; and this he did, following the example of Dantes and
Petrarch, who had done the same for the Italian Tongue; Alanus for the French,
and Johannes Mena for the Spanish: neither was Chaucer inferior to any of them
in the performance hereof; and England in this respect is much beholding to
him, as Leland well notes.

Anglia Chaucerum veneratur nostra Poetam,
Cui veneres debet patria lingua suos.
Our England honors Chaucer Poet, as principal,
To whom her Country tongue does owe her beauties all.
He departed out of this world the 25. day of October, 1400. after he had lived
about 72. years. Thus writes Bale out of Leland: Chaucerus ad canos devenit,
sensitque senectutem morbum esse; and dum causas suas, Londini curaret, etc.
Chaucer lived till he was an old man, and found old age to be grievous; and
whilst he followed his causes at London, he died, and was buried at
Westminster.

The old Verses which were written on his Grave at the first, were these.

Galfridus Chaucer vates and famae poesis,
Maternae haec sacra sum tumulatus humo.
But since, Mr. Nicholas Brigham did at his own cost and charges erect a
Monument for him, with these Verses.

Qui fuit Anglorum vates ter maximus olim,
Gaufredus Chaucer conditur hoc tumulo,
Annum si quaeras Domini, si tempora vitae,
Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi cuncta notant.
Anno Domini 1400. die mensis October. 25.

It will not be amiss to these Epitaphs, to add the judgments and reports of
some learned men of this worthy and famous Poet. And first of all Thomas
Occleve, who lived in his days, writes thus of him in his Book, De regimine
Principis.

But welaway is mine heart woe,
That the honor of English Tongue is dead,
Of which I wont was confaile have and reed,
O master dear, and fadre reverent:
My master Chaucer flower of Eloquence,
Mirror of fructuous entendement.
O universal fadre of science:
Alas that thou thine excellent prudence
In thy bed mortal might not bequeath.
What eyld death, alas why would she thee fie:
O death thou did not harm tingler in slaughter of him;
But all the Land it smerteth.
But natheless yet have thou no power his name sle,
H^^ hie virtue asterteth
Vnslain fro thee, which ay us lifely herteth,
With Books of his ornat enditing
That is to all this land enlumining.
John Lidgaete likewise in his Prologue of Bocchas, of the fall of Princes, by
him translated, says thus in his commendation.

My Master Chaucer with his fresh comedies,
Is dead, alas! chief Poet of Britain;
That Whilom made full pitteous Tragedies,
The faule also of Princes he did complain;
As he that was of making sovereign,
Whom all this Land should of right prefer,
Since of our language he was the Loadsterr.
Also in his Book which he writes of the Birth of the Virgin Mary, he has
these verses.

And eke my Master Chaucer now is in Grave,
The noble Rethore Poet of Britain,
That worthy was the laurel to have
Of Poetry, and the Palm attain
That made first to distill and rain
The Gold dew drops of speech and eloquence,
Into our Tongue through his eloquence.
And as for men of latter time, Mr. Ascham and Mr. Spenser have delivered most
worthy testimonies of their approving of him. Mr. Ascham in one place calls
him English Homer, and makes no doubt to say, that he valueth his Authority of
as high estimation, as ever he did either Sophocles or Euripides in Greek. And
in another place, where he declares his opinion of English versifying, he
uses these words: Chaucer and Petrark, those two worthy wits, deserve just
praise. And last of all, in his discourse of Germany, he puts him nothing
behind either Thucidides or Homer, for his lively descriptions of site of
places, and nature of persons, both in outward shape of body, and inward
disposition of mind; adding this withal, that not the proudest that has
written in any Tongue whatsoever, for his time, have outstript him.

Mr. Spenser in his first Eglogue of his Shepards Kallender, calls him
Tityrus, the god of Shepards, comparing him to the worthiness of the Roman
Tityrus Virgil: in his Faerie Queen, in his Discourse of Friendship, as
thinking himself most worthy to be Chaucers friend, for his like natural
disposition that Chaucer had; he writes, that none that lived with him, nor
none that came after him durst presume to revive Chaucers lost Labors in that
unperfect tale of the Squire, but only himself: which he had not done, had he
not felt (as he says) the infusion of Chaucers own sweet spirit, surviving
within him. And a little before he calls him the most renowned and Heroical
Poet, and his writings, the works of heavenly wit; concluding his commendation
in this manner.

Dan Chaucer, well of English undefiled,
On fames eternal Bead-roll worthy to be filed;
I follow here the footing of thy feet,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meet.
Mr. Cambden reaching one hand to Mr. Ascham, and the other to Mr. Spenser, and
so drawing them together, utters of him these words. De Homero nostro Anglico
illud vere asseram, quod de Homero eruditus ille Italus dixit.

-- Hic ille est, cujus de gurgite facro,
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.
The deservingly honored Sir Philip Sidney in his defense of Poesy, thus
writes of him. Chaucer undoubtedly did excellently in his Troylus and Crescid,
of whom truly I know not, whether to marvail more; either that he in that misty
time could see so clearly, or that we in this clear age walk so stumblingly
after him. And Doctor Heylin in his elabourate Description of the World,
ranketh him in the first place of our chiefest Poets. Seeing therefore that
both old and new Writers have carried this reverend conceit of him, and openly
declared the same by writing, let us conclude with Horace in the eighth Ode of
his fourth Book.

Dignum Laud causa vet at mori. Gower and Chaucer were both of the Inner
Temple. Mr. Buckley a learned Gentlemen of those times gives an account of a
Record he read in the same Inner Temple, wherein Geofery Chaucer, no friend to
the covetous and leacherous Cleargy-men of those times, was fined two shillings
for beating of a Franciscan Friar in Fleet Street: a considerable sum, money
was so scarce in those days.

I intended to have presented the world with the lives of three more of the
most eminent of our modern Poets, viz. Mr. Edmond Spenser, Michael Drayton
Esquire, and Mr. Benjamin Johnson, (not that I could thereby imagine to add
unto their fames, they having built themselves everlasting Monuments in their
never dying Works) but out of a desire to imitate foreign writers, who have
ever done their Worthies that right. I have not been wanting of a most diligent
inquiry, but as yet I cannot meet with any of their friends and honorers that
are able to render me so full and happy an account of them, as that I might
have registered them in this volumne to Posterity.

The Life of HENRY the Fifth.
HEnry the fifth was born at Monmouth in Wales 1388. Of whom several Authors
write, that he was the most dissolute Prince; but all agree that he was
afterward the most Martial King that England ever bred. For during his Father
Henry the Fourths Reign, his chief associates were men of evil fame, wicked
life, dissolute carriage, Robbers and Thieves, by whose instigation he struck
the Lord Chief Justice of England; for which offense he was imprisoned and
dismissed of the Presidentship of the Kings Council. With these Fratres in malo
he committed many insolent pranks; but having attained unto the Crown, he
summoned these his companions before him; and instead of preferring them as
they expected, he banished them for ever from his presence: yet least they
should pretend want of maintenance to be a cause of their taking ill courses he
gave to every one of them competent means whereby to subsist. Having thus
reformed himself; his next care was to reform his Kingdom; and to this end he
assembleth a Parliament, as best able to inform him for his more discreet
grievances of his Subjects, and best able to counsel him for their redress. In
this Parliament was a Bill preferred by the Commons against the Clergy, whose
Temporalities they affirmed would maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred
Knights, six thousand two hundred Esquires, an hundred Almshouses more then
before, and unto the Kings Coffers twenty thousand pounds by year. The Clergy
nettled with the Commons Bill, being loath to have their Estates looked into,
as men who were fuller of goods then of goodness, exceeding in riches more then
in righteousness, and preaching for Gold more then for God, to divert the Kings
mind another way, by the mouth of Chicholy Archbishop of Canterbury, propound
the recovering of his Rights in France. Henry as he affected nothing more then
true glory, so in nothing more then in Warlike action, condescends to the
motion, sends Ambassadors to the French King to surrender him his Land,
threatening Fire and Sword upon his refusal: but a Crown though accompanied with
a great many troubles is not so easily parted withal; yet the French King
propounds him fair, if he would desist from his intended War, though the
Dolphin in derision sent him a tun of Paris Balls, as fitter for him to
exercise, then to attempt the recovery of the French Crown; which King Henry
took in such scorn, that he swore it should not be long ere he would send such
London Balls amongst them, that should beat down their houses upon their heads.
And to make good his promise, he raises an Army of 6000. Spears, and 24000.
Foot, besides Engineers and Laborers: but being about to put forth to Sea, a
treason was discovered against his person, plotted by Richard Earl of
Cambriage, Henry Scroop Lord Treasurer, and Thomas Gray Earl of Northamberland:
These men for a million of Gold were procured by the French Agents to kill the
King, but were discovered by Edmond Earl of March, whom they would have drawn
into the same Conspiracy. Upon their examination they confessed the Treason, as
likewise the receipt of the money, and were for the same immediately put to
death. For as Mr. Charles Allen writes.

Man and Money a mutual falsehood show;
Man makes false money, Money makes man so.
This execution done, and the wind blowing fair, he puts forth to Sea,
accompanied with his two Brothers, the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, his
Uncles, the Duke of York, and Earl of Dorset, the Earls of Kent, Cornwall, and
Huntington, with many other Lords, Barons, and men at Arms; and on our Lady-Eve
landeth at Caen in Normandy, where falling devoutly upon his knees, desired
Gods assistance to recover his right; making Proclamation, That no man upon
pain of death should rob any Church, or offer violence to any that were found
unarmed. From thence with his Army he marches to Harflew, which after a few
days was surrendered unto him; where he leaves Sir John Falstaff with fifteen
hundred men, and takes his way toward Callis through the Counties of Caux and
Eu.

Charles the sixth was then King of France, a weak brainsick King, his Nobles
divided, and the whole Court swarming with Factions; yet the common enemy
endangering all, they unite in Counsel, and agree the English should be fought
with ere they got to Callis: wherefore to impede his process, they brake down
the Bridges, plashed the Woods, entrenched the ways, struck stakes in Fords,
and conveyed all victual out of the Countries through which he should go. Then
having raised a mighty Army, they sent Montjoy the French King at Arms to defy
him, and to let him know he should be fougt with: King Henry notwithstanding
his Soldiers were faint and weary, having spent their provisions some twelve
days before, being forced in the mean time to feed upon nuts, roots, and
berries, and drink only water, yet accepted the Challenge, and rewarded the
Herald for his message: then passing the River of Soam, he came to a Village
called Agen-Court, encamping from the French Host not above two hundred and
fifty paces.

Their power (says Paradin) consisted of an hundred and fifty thousand Horse,
(besides them for carriages which were innumerable) the Vantguard was led by
the Constable of France, the Dukes of Orleance and Bourbon, the Earls of Ewe,
Richmond, and Vandosme, the Lord Dempier, the Lord Admiral of France, the
Marshal Bouciquale, and others. The main Battle by the Dukes of Bar and
Alanson, the Earls of Vawinont Salings, Blamont, Grantpee, and Russy. And the
Reer-guard by the Earls of Marle, Dampmarlin, Fauconbridge, and Monsieur de
Lorney Captain of Ardy. King Henry desirous to know the numbers of the French,
sent forth one Captain Gam for discovery; who brought word that there were of
them enough to kill, and enough to take, and enough to runaway. The French were so
confident of victory, that they sent to King Henry to know what Ransom he
would give: but they who reckon without their Host (we say) must reckon twice:
they might better have sent to know what Ransom he would rake, who as full of
courage, though not so full of bravery, was busied in the mean time about
marshalling his Army, The Vantguard he committed to the conduct of the Duke of
York, the main Battle he commanded himself, and the Reer-guard was led by the
Duke of Exeter. Then to prevent the fury of the French Horse, he commanded two
hundred Bowmen to lodge in a low Meddow, being provided with sharp stakes
studded with Iron at both ends, to guard them from danger, and to endamage the
French Horse. The Battles thus ranged, the most valiant King gallantly mounted
with a cheerful countenance, and words full of courage, thus animated his
followers, somewhat as I have it from other Historians to this purpose.

My most faithful Companions, and worthy Soldiers, we now are marching into
the Field of Honor, which your great valors so long have expected and prayed
for; lo the day is now come, your enterprise is the noblest in the world; pour
now therefore forth your undaunted valors, that ages to come may know what the
Lance, the Axe, the Sword, and the Bow can do in the hands of Englishmen:
Whosoever therefore desires riches, honor, and rewards, here he shall find
them. Nimirum haec medio posuit Deus omnia campo. Having this said, his Army
fell prostrate on the ground and committing themselves to God, their devotions
ended, the Drums and Trumpets summoned them to action: the French Vant-guard
being exquisitely appointed, intended with their Horse to have burst through the
Archers with a violent course, who counterfeiting flight, brought the
overhasty French into the jaws of destruction; for having left their sharp
pointed stakes sticking in the ground, they miserably goared the foremost of
their Enemies Horses, being pressed on forward by the following Troops; and
then turning head, sent such tempests of Arrows on the French, that many
thousands their knells were rung out that dreadful day.

The main Battles join together, the Dukes of Gloucester and Alanzon like
enraged Lions encounter each other; but Gloucester is wounded and overthrown,
whose body his Brother Henry bestriding, delivered from further danger, and
with redoubled strokes brought the French Gallant himself to the ground; with
whose fall fell the courages of the French, who for all their former bravadoes,
they turned their backs shamefully and fled, with whom the Reer-guard ran for
company, not having struck one stroke all this while. In all this fight, which
continued three hours, were none taken Prisoners, but the Sword now made weary,
and drunk with blood, all danger past, and humanity retired, Prisoners were
taken, and lives spared, which hitherto was neglected, lest mercy to others
might have proved destruction to themselves.

Whilst these things were thus acting, certain of the French Troops led on by
Robert Bondile, and the Captain of Agencourt, fell to rifeling the Kings
carriages, being guarded only by Lackies and Laundresses, whose terrible
shreeks made King Henry to think some fresh Forces were come; certain Troops
also of the King of Sicills appearing in the Field, made him give present
order, that every man should kill his Prisoner, certain principal men only
excepted: then setting his men in order, he sends to the assembled Troops,
either to come to Battle, or depart the Field; but they fearing to drink of the
same cup their fellows had done, with shame and dishonor depart away. The field
thus cleared, and the King by his Scouts satisfied that no more enemy was to be
seen, be caused the whole Army in their array as they were, to give thanks unto
God, the Clergy then present singing the Psalm of David, In exitu Israel de
Egypto, the Footmen kneeling down, and the Horse men bowing their bodies at
this verse, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam: Then
singing; Te Deum, with other Hymns and Anthems, he divides the rich spoil of
the enemies Camp among his Soldiers.

There were slain of the French in this Battle above ten thousand, whereof a
hundred twenty and six were of the Nobility, bearing Banners; of Knights and
Gentlemen of Coat Armor, seven thousand eight hundred and seventy four; and of
common Soldiers about sixteen hundred. On the English side the account falls
far short, some reckon but sixteen slain in all, other six and twenty, the most
not six hundred, whereof the Duke of York, and the Earl of Suffolk were chief,
whose slain bodies King Henry brought over with him into England. The Duke was
buried at Fodringhey in Northamptonshire, and the Earl at New-elme in
Oxfordshire.

Great was the joy of the English for the Kings return, the City of London
receiving him with Triumph as at a Coronation, whilst France lamenteth the loss
of her Nobles. To unite the differences betwixt these two Kingdoms, Sigismond
the Emperor, having been with the French King, comes over into England, and
with him the Archbishop of Rheimes, as Ambassador from France, to treat of
peace. Henry willingly hearkeneth unto them, and sends the Bishop of Norwich,
and Sir Thomas Erpingham, with Commission to Beauvois, to treat further of the
matter; but hearing the French in the mean time had besieged Harflew, he
recalleth his Amabssadours, and would hear no further of peace, but sends his
Brother the Duke of Bedford, with the Earls of March, Oxford, Warwick,
Huntington, Salisbury, Arundel, Devonshire, and diverse others, with two hundred
sail of Ships, to the rescue of Harflew; who entering the mouth of the River of
Seyne, encountered with the French Fleet, commanded by Viscount Narbon, where
after a sharp fight the Victory fell to the English, who took and sunk most of
their Navy, chasing the residue into Britain, and relieved Harflew with men
and victuals. The Emperor hereupon leaves mediating any further for peace with
France, and concludes a League offensive and defensive with King Henry, the
pope only excepted, who was the master Be that then lead the swarm.

His affairs finished he returns homeward, whom King Henry accompanies as
far as Callis, whither (upon hostages given for his safe return) repaireth the
Duke of Burgundy, who does homage to the Emperor, and takes a truce with King
Henry for his Counties of Flanders and Arthois. These business ended, Burgundy
returns to Graveling, Henry into England, and the Emperor to Germany.

But long did not Henry remain in England, for having raised a puissant Army,
he makes his second expedition into France, accompanied with many Earls and
Lords, and an Army of 25527. Soldiers, constituting his Brother John Duke of
Bedford Protector of England in his absence; and on the first of August arives
in Normandy, near to the Castle of Tonque, which he presently besieged; and
after eight days had it yielded unto him; at which time the Earl of Salisbury
took the Castle of Albervilliers which the King gave to him and his Heirs,
being the first Land given by the King in France.

He afterward marched with his Army to Caen, who trusting unto the strength of
the place refuse to render upon the Kings summons; whereupon having taken it by
assault, he adjudgeth some of the most stubborn refusers to death, and
distributeth the spoil of the Town amongst his Sou^diers, according to the old
Law.

Those who when that they may refuse to have it,
Shall afterward have nay although they crave it.
He next takes in the Castle of Corfye, the Town and Castle of Argenton,
Allenson, Fallais, with many other Towns and places of importance; his uncle
the Duke of Exeter bringing him a supply of fifteen thousand men out England,
he takes the City of Eureux, and then encampeth with his Army before the great
City of Roan.

Within the City were a thousand selected Soldiers sent by the Duke of
Burgogne, besides fifteen thousand Citizens well trained and furnished, and
stored with provision for a ten months siege; the City of Lovies being an
impediment to his passage, he assaults and takes, as also a stone bridge
strongly guarded; the City is summoned by Windsor the Herald; who scorning to
yield, make a sally forth, but are beaten in with loss. The King, the Dukes of
Clarence and Exeter, with many other Lords, encompass it on the East, West, and
North; on the South were encamped the Earls of Warren and Huntington, the River
of Seine running betwixt them, over which was built a bridge for enter course
the one unto the other. The Kings Cousin-Germane the King of Portingale sent
likewise a Navy of Ships to the mouth of the River Seine, which stopped all
passage of succor up the River. The siege thus continuing from June unto
December, the Citizens were brought unto that extremity that they eat Cats and
Dogs, Rats and Mice, and had nothing to drink but Vinegar and Water; so that
fifty thousand being miserably famished, they desired a parley: yet
notwithstanding their wants, stand upon such high terms, that nothing was
concluded but a truce for eight days, which being ended and nothing agreed
upon, they crave one day longer, and that being ended four days more; at the
end of which time by the importunity of the common people, the City was
surrendered upon these Articles following. 1. That the Burgesses should give
unto Henry toward his expense in the siege, three hundred fifty six thousand
Crowns of Gold. 2. That Robert Liner Vicar General to the Archbishop of Roan,
Jehan Jourdan, who commanded the Canoniers, and Alen Blanchart Captain of the
common people should be left to his mercy without condition, 3. That all the
people should swear faith and loyalty to Henry and his successors. 4. That
Henry should protect and defend them against all men, and confirm unto them
their privileges, franchises, and liberties, which they had enjoyed ever since
the time of St. Lewis King of France. 5. That all such as had desire to leave
the Town, might freely depart with his garments only upon his back, and his
goods to be confiscated unto King Henry. 6. That the Soldiers should bring all
their Arms to a place assigned, and should depart out of the Town unarmed, with
a Cudgel in their hands; first taking their Oath not to bear Arms against Henry
for a twelve month next ensuing.

Roan the chief City of Normandy thus rendered, sundry other places of note
yielded themselves, as Caudebec, Monstraillier, Diepe, Fesohamp, Arques,
Neufchastel, Deincourt, Moncheaux, Eu, Vernon, Mante, Gorney, Harflewr,
Ponteur-de-mer, Mollineaux, le Treict, Tancarvile Abrechier, Mauleurier,
Valemont, Neufuille, Bellaucombre, Fontaines, Le boure, Logempree, Preaux,
Nougonder-ville, Saint German, Sur Cuylly, Baudemont, Bray, Villiterre,
Charles, Maisniel, Les boules Guillon-court Fanifontaines, Le Becy, Crepin,
Backeville, and diverse other places, wherein King Henry placed Garrisons.

Those great successes of King Henry caused the Duke of Burgundy, who bare all
the sway with the French King, to mediate a peace; for which end he sent his
Ambassadors to Henry, desiring a personal conference; to which he assented,
and assigned the place, which was at Melun, whither at the time appointed he
goes, accompanied with the Dukes of Clarence, Gloucester, and Exeter, his uncle
Beaufort the Bishop of Winchester, with the Earls of March and Salisbury, and a
thousand men at Arms, where he found the French King, Queen Isabel, the Lady
Katherine their Daughter, the Duke of Burgundy, the Count St. Paul, with a
great train attending his coming; many things were propounded, but nothing
concluded: whereupon King Henry not well pleased, said to Burgogne, Cousin, I
cannot well digest this refusal; but be you assured, that either I will have
your Kings daughter, and all my demands, or I will banish both you and them out
of France. You speak your pleasure, said the Duke, but before you shall thrust
the King, them, and me out of the Kingdom, you will be weary of the enterprise.
The treaty thus broken up in discontent, King Charles repaired unto Paris,
whilst King Henry quickneth his thoughts for revenge; his first enterprise was
on the Town of Ponthois, a place of great riches, which was surprised by the
Earl of Longuevyle, and the Duke of Clarence; and from thence marching on, took
in the Castles of Vangon Villeirs, Gysors, Galyard, and Dumal, so that now all
Normandy, except Mount St. Michael, was reduced to the possession of the King
of England.

Charles the Dolphin in the mean time being bare of money, and by that means
having no great store of Soldiers, seizes upon his Mothers money, Plate, and
Jewels: she in a womanish spleen studies revenge; but he to make good what he
had done, inveagles the Kings head, that her designs were dangerous, and bent
altogether for the alienation of the Crown. Whereupon she is sent prisoner to
Eours; but soliciting Burgogne for her deliverance, she is by an ambush taken
from her keepers, and by his means made regent of France, and her Picture
stamped upon the Seal of that State.

These doings of Burgogne displeased the Daulphin, yet still he carried fair
weather in his countenance, notwithstanding he had storms of revenge in his
heart; so warily, not to say wickedly, could he cover his passions, until he
had performed what he did intend. The Duke doubting no danger, being sent for
by the Dolphin unto the Town of Mountstrew, repaired unto him; where kneeling
upon his knee, he was by the Dolphin charged with several misdemeanors and by
the company there present most barbarously murdered, before he could arise
from his knee, or get out his Sword.

This more and more exasperateth Queeen Isabel, who now thinks of nothing but
disheriting the Dolphin; and joining in confederacy with Philip the new Duke of
Burgogne, incites him to revenge his Fathers death: Philip as forward as she
was willing, they send Ambassadors to King Henry to entreat a Peace, which was
concluded from the Epiphany to mid March following, during which time both
sides meeting at Troys in Champagne, a final conclusion was agreed upon;
whereof the chief Articles were as follows.

1. That King Henry should take Lady Katherine to wife.

2. That Charles and Isabel should retain the name of King and Queen; and
should hold all their Dignities, Rents, and Possessions belonging to the Crown
of France, during their natural lives,

3. That the Lady Katherine should have her Dowry in England twenty thousand
Nobles, and if she out lived Henry, twenty thousand Franks yearly out of the
Lands, Places, and Lordships that Blanch, sometime wife to Philip Beavisal,
held and enjoyed.

4. That after the death of Charles, the Crown and Realm of France should
remain unto Henry and to his Heirs for ever.

5. That during the Life of King Charles, the faculties and exercise of the
Government, and disposition of the Public utility of the Realm of France,
shall remain to Henry, admitting to his Council and Assistance such of the
English Nobility as he shall please.

6. That Henry of his own power shall cause the Court of France to be kept and
observed in as full Authority, and in all manner of places, that now, or in
time coming, is, or shall be subject to King Charles.

7. Also that Henry to his power shall defend and help all, and every of the
Peers, Nobles, Cities, Towns, Commonalties, and singular persons, now, or in
time to come Subjects to King Charles, in their Rights, Customs, Privileges,
Freedoms, Franchises, belonging, or due unto them, in all manner of places,
now, or in time coming, subject to King Charles.

8. That Henry during the life of King Charles, shall not call, nor write
himself King of France, but shall abstain from that name so long as King
Charles lives.

9. That King Charles during his life, shall name, write, and call King Henry
in French in this manner; Nostre treschier Filz Henry Roy d'Engleterre heretere
de France: and in Latin in this manner, Praeclarissimus filius noster,
Henricus Rex Angliae, and Haeres Franciae.

10. That King Henry shall put no impositions or exactions to charge the
Subjects of France, without cause reasonable and necessary, etc.

Many other Articles were concluded on, Sealed, and Sworn to on both sides,
which for brevity I omit. King Henry not long after affianced the Lady
Katherine, and thereupon was proclaimed Regent and Heir apparent to the Crown
of France; from thence both Kings with their Peers rode to Paris, wherein a
Parliament of the three Estates assembled, all such as were guilty of the Duke
of Burgundy's death were justiced. The disherizing of the Dolphin confirmed,
and Wars against those Towns which held for him prepared; and thereupon on the
fourth day of June, the two Kings of France and England, James King of Scots,
who was newly arived, the Duke of Burgoigne, the Prince of Orange, one and
twenty Earls, five and forty Barons, with many Knights and Gentlemen, and an
Army consisting of French, English, Scottish, Irish and Dutch, to the number of
six hundred thousand, besiege Seins; which after twelve days was rendered, upon
composition of life, those only excepted that were guilty of the Duke of
Burgundy's death. The Duke of Bedford bringing a fresh supply of men out of
England, they march to Monstreau, which by force was entered; where the body of
the Duke of Burgundy undecently buried, was taken up, and in great Pomp
interred at Dijon; the Town being taken, the Castle held out still, during
which Siege, King Henry instituted Garter principal King at Arms, whom he sent
with offers of mercy to the Castle, but was by Guiley Captain thereof
reproachfully answered; which so incensed Henry that he caused twelve of his
principle friends to be executed: at length the Castle was enforced to yield
upon composition of life. Those that were guilty of Burgundy's death were only
excepted.

From Monstreau the Army marched to Melun, the Captain whereof was Signieur
Barbason, an absolute Soldier, who countermined some, and stopped other Mines
made by the English, and fought hand to hand with King Henry in the Barriers;
at length through famine he was forced to yield: but being suspected to have
had a hand in the murder of the Duke of Burgandy, he was sent Prisoner to
Paris, where upon King Henry's return he was sentenced to death, and had
suffered, had he not appealed to the Officers at Arms; the Law Military
forbidding; That any man, having his Brother in Arms within his danger, should
afterward put him to death for any cause or quarrel, and proved himself to be
the Kings Brother in Arms; for that in the Countermine he had coaped with him
in Combat, whereupon the sentence of death was revoked, yet was he still
retained in prison; but at the winning of Castle Galliard nine years after, he
was delivered, to the great joy of the French.

Yet notwithstanding by this quirk of Heraldry Barbason escaped so well, others
as little guilty had not so good luck; namely, Bertrand de Charmont a
Gascoigne, and two Monks, who were all three put to death. Charles the Dolphin
was cited to appear at the Marble Table at Paris, but not appearing, he was
judged guilty of Burgognes death, and by sentence of Parliament banished the
Realm. King Henry caused a new Coin to be made called a Salute, whereon the
Arms of France and England were quarterly stamped; then appointing his Brother
Clarence the Lieutenant General of France, he with his Wife Queen Katherine
returned into England, being received of his Subjects (says Speed) as an Angel
from Heaven, or another victorious Caesar on earth.

During King Henry's abode in England, a sad accident befell him in France,
namely, the loss of his Brother Clarence, who making a road into Anjou, upon
his return was slain, together with many Lords and Gentlemen, and the Earls of
Suffolk and Somorset taken Prisoners: King Henry having notice of this
overthrow, was much perplexed; yet considering, that nothing is more certain
then that the chance of War is uncertain, he leaves off womanish tears, and
prepares again for manly actions; a Subsidy being demanded and denied in
Parliament, he pawns his Crown to his Uncle Beaufort Bishop of Winchester for
twenty thousand pound, (a strange humor in the King, to pawn a Crown in
possession to purchase one in hope) and being thus furnished with money, he
soon was furnished with Soldiers, to the number (says Engnerrant) of thirty
thousand, with whom he returns again into France.

No sooner was he arrived, but he sends the Earl of Dorset and the Lord
Clifford with twelve hundred Horse and Foot unto Paris, to relieve the Duke of
Excester, who was straightned of Victuals by the Dolphinois, whilst he with
the rest of the Army hastes to relieve Chartiers, besieged by the Dolphin with
seven thousand Soldiers; but hearing of King Henry's coming, he packed up his
pipes and retired to Tours, though before he had given out that he would meet
him in the Field. Chartiers relieved, Henry marches to Dreux, which agreed to
surrender, if not relieved by a certain day; the time expired, and no relief
come, the Town was delivered, the Soldiers permitted to depart upon their
Oaths, not to bear Arms against Henry for one whole year after; then takes he
in the Towns of Baugency and Rougemont, where all that craved he took to mercy,
and supplying his Army with fresh Forces, he lays siege to the Town of Meanx
in Brie.

During the time of this Siege, news was brought him that his Wife Queen
Katherine was delivered of a Son named Henry, at the Castle of Windsor; whereat
he rejoiced, though he liked nor the place of her delivery, having before
commanded the contrary; prophesying, That what Henry of Monmouth should get,
Henry of Windsor would lose. Queen Katherine for her disobedience to her
Husband herein, commanded at her death, that her Coffin should be left open to
be seen and handled of any that would. Should the Coffins of all the women that
have disobeyed their Husbands in our days be left open, I fear we should have
but few closed, so much is the Apostle Paul's Precept forgotten, Ephesians. 5.24.

The Town of Nans holding out long without relief, made their conditions the
harder, upon the surrender; the Captain Vaurus having hanged many English and
Burgundians upon a tree which he named Vaurus, was now on the same hanged
himself, and his head fixed upon a pole on the top of the same tree. Meaux
being taken, Crespi, the Castle of Pierrepont, Offemont, Merlau, and sundry
other places submitted themselves, so that now Henry had in possession all the
Fortresses in the Isle of France, Champagne, Piccardy, Brie, and Normandy.

Yet though Henry's part in France was great, all was not reduced unto his
obedience, many places holding out for the Dolphin; who with an Army of twenty
thousand besieged Cosney, a Town of the Duke of Burgundies upon the River Loir;
Henry hasting to raise the Siege, at Senlis fell sick of a burning Fever and
Flux, whereupon the command of the Army was committed to the Duke of Bedford,
who with Queen Katherine was lately come out of England, whereof he was Regent,
to visit King Henry. Upon the Dukes approach the Dolphin retired into Berry,
whereof in mockage he was after called King of Berry: King Henry's sickness
increasing more and more, he was removed to Boys de Vencennois, and finding
himself not able long to continue, he appointed his Brother John Duke of
Bedford Regent of France, and his Brother Humprey Duke of Gloucester, Protector
of England, till his son came of age: Then exhorting them to unity amongst
themselves, to be true and faithful to the Duke of Burgoigne, loyal to their
young Prince, and serviceable to his Queen, in a right mind, hope, and found
memory, he rendted his soul to his Creator, after he had reigned nine years,
five months, and fourteen days.

His Body with Pomp and Solemnity conveyed into England, it was interred in the
Abbey of Saint Peter at Westminster; upon whose Tomb Queen Katherine caused a
royal Picture, to be laid, covered all over with silver Plate gilt, the head
thereof altogether of massy silver; all which at that Abbeys suppression in the
time of King Henry the Eighth, were sacrilegiously broken off, and by
purloyning transferred to far prophaner uses; where at this day the headless
Monument is to be seen with these Verses inscribed upon his Tomb.

Dux Normanorum, verus Conquestor eorum,
Haeres Francorum, decessit and Hector eorum.
Here Normans Duke, so styled by Conquest just,
True Heir of France, great Hector lies in dust.
We will end our Discourse of this renowned King, with the commendations given
him by Walsingham a learned Historian. He was godly in heart, sober in speech,
sparing of words, resolute in deeds, provident in counsel, prudent in
judgment, modest in countenance, magnanimous in action, constant in
undertaking, a great Alms-giver, devout to Godward, a renowned Soldier,
fortunate in Field, from whence he never returned without victory.

Martin writes of this Prince, that his Father King Henry the Fourth being
seized on by a deadly Appolexy, being near his last end, he caused his Crown to
be placed by him on his Pillow, least peradventure in the extremity of his
sickness it might be delivered to some other who had better right to it then he
had: but when his attendants verily supposed that he was dead, this Martial
Prince seized on the Crown; whereat the King started up, raised himself upon
his arms, and demanded who it was that had taken away his Crown; the Prince
answered, that it was he. Henry the Fourth fetching a deep sigh, said, My Son,
my Son, what right I had unto this Crown, and how I have enjoyed it, God knows
and the World has seen. Comfort your self in God, says the Prince, my good
Father; the Crown you have, and if you dye I will have it, and keep it with the
Sword as you have done; which his successful Reign, and has been declared to
his greatest honors, afterward made good.

The Life of JOHN Duke of Bedford.
JOhn Duke of Bedford was third Son to King Henry the Fourth; a valiant
Captain, and a great help to his Son Henry in the Conquest of France. I shall
not therefore (like the idle Levites of our times) rehearse any of the former
Transactions, but begin with the pursuit of his life where we ended; having
chose the rather to write the History of this honorable person, as with the
exit of his life, our English Affairs ceased to have any further footing in
France. He being Regent there, to proceed, his care was to preserve the same
for his Nephew; and knowing that what was won by the Sword must be kept by the
Sword, he strengthens the confines of his government with Garrisons, assembleth
his powers, and labors to retain the hearts of his own party; his chief
assistants were the two French Dukes of Burgoignt and Britain, and those two
terrors of France, Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, and John Lord Talbot,
to whom after the Death of King Henry the Fifth, he being then Regent, made
averation, exhorting them to be true and faithful to their young King Henry,
friend to his friends, and enemy to his enemies; that seeing the hatreds and
enmities began now to dye between the French and English names, it was too late
for the French to be again renowned by their fraudulent practices. With many
other words to the like effect, which wrought so in the auditors, that Henry is
proclaimed King of England and France; such French Lords as were present taking
their oaths to be true unto him.

And great need had the Regent to bestir himself, for Charles the French King
surviving King Henry but 53. days, died at St. Denis, whose imbecillities were
a great help to the English, as the Infancy of King Henry was now an advantage
to the Dolphin; who upon his Fathers Death proclaims himself King by the name
of Charles the Seventh: and making all the force he could, marches to relieve
Crepan besieged by the English; but his enterprise proved very unfortunate,
being routed with the loss of two thousand men: yet nothing daunted at this
disaster, he resolves to encounter adverse fortune with increase of courage;
and hearing that many of the English had pillaged the Countries of Nugion and
Main, upon their return into Normandy he sets upon them, recovers their booty,
and slayes fifteen hundred of them; then speedily takes he Meulan upon the
River of Sein, putting all the English therein to the Sword, but the possession
was short, and the revenge speedy, being recovered by Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, who to quit scores with the Dolphin, killed all the French were
found there.

About this time, the three great pillars of the English Monarchy in France,
the Dukes of Bedford, Burgundy, and Britain, met at the City of Amiens in
Picardy, to consult of the whole course and sum of Affairs, adding to the old
league this addition, that it should be offensive and defensive respectively;
and to make the friendship the more firm, the Duke of Bedford married Anne
Sister to Philip Duke of Burgundy; a Lady whose beauty surpassed the blush that
glorified Luna when she kissed the Shepherd on the Hills of Latmos. But whilst
the Regent was thus busied in promoting the English cause, the Parisians had a
design to destroy it, which was by delivering their City up to the French King;
but treason being seldom true to its self, it came to the Regents ear, which
cost the chief conspirators their lives: and now fresh forces coming out of
England, his Army augmented, be takes from Charles the Towns and Fortresses of
Crotoy, Baside, Riol, Rula, Gyrond, Basile, Mermound, Milbam, Femil, Seintace,
and many other.

The French finding themselves too weak to deal with the English by force, work
by policy; and allure from their sides, the Duke of Richmond and his Brother
Arthur, who deliver up to the Dolphin the Castles of Crotoye and Yerney; the
Duke of Bedford hating their perfidiousness, assaults and takes Crotoye, and
besieges Yerney, who agree to surrender if not relieved by a certain time: the
Duke of Allanson with sixteen thousand French undertakes the rescue; but
finding the English numbers to surmount his Arithmetic, he wheeleth about to
Vernoyle in Perch, whom the Regent overtaking a cruel Battle ensued, which for
two hours together was maintained with equal courage on both sides: the Regent
himself with a Battel-ax fought most fiercely, winning immortal honor in that
bloody journey. At length the Victory fell to the English, though with the loss
of above two thousand of their men; on the French side were slain 5. Earls, 2.
Viscounts, 20. Barrons, and above 7000. common Soldiers, besides 2700. Scots
lately arrived; there were taken prisoners the Duke of Allanson himself, the
Lord of Herneys, Sir John Towrnebull, 200. Gentlemen, and many common
Soldiers. This Battle was fought the 7. of August, 1425. That which follows
till the siege of Orleance, I have set down out of Paulus Aemytius, as Speed
has done before me. The fierce Conqueror besieges Mantz in Main, and with
Ordnance beats down part of the Walls: it yields, an English Garrison is left
there; after the taking which, not being sufficient to keep the Town in due
subjection, is compelled to fly to a Tower for their safety; the enemies which
were admitted into it by the Burgers enjoying the rest. The Lord Talbot (that
most noble Captain of the English) with whose name Talbot is coming, the French
used to fright their children, presently arrives to the rescue, and puts the
Malefactors to death. The English Empire then extented it self at which time,
as bath been observed, to the River of Loire. Charles was called King of Berry.

Hitherto the English fortunes in France received no check, their serene Sky
was without Clouds, so long as a good correspondence was held betwixt the
Burgundian and the English; but this knot of friendship was like to have been
broken by occasion of the Duke of Gloucester, who married Jaqueline Countess of
Haynoult, Holland, and Zealand, notwithstanding John Duke of Brabant her
husband were yet living. The Duke of Burgundy his Cousin was greatly offended
hereat; insomuch that the controversy grew to be so great, that the Duke of
Gloucester sent him a challenge: but the Regent well knowing that the discord of
the English might prove the union of the French, so wrought betwixt them that
the sore seemed indifferently well healed. Much about that time likewise be
compounded a difference between the Protector and Cardinal Beaufort Bishop of
Winchester, though to effect the same he was fain to come over into England,
substituting the Earl of Warwick Lieutenant General in his absence. But France
wanting his company he quickly returned, carrying a great number of fresh men
over with him. During his abode in England, Arthur Earl of Richmond made
Constable of France by King Charles, raises an Army of twenty thousand men,
and with them suddenly besieges St. Jean, a Town in Normandy; the Garrison
were at first dismayed with their sudden arrival, but upon better advice they
valliantly sallied out, crying aloud, a Salisbury, a Suffolk, whose names
struck such a terror into the besiegers, that with loss of their Artillery,
and 800. of their Company, they betook themselves to flight.

To rehearse each particular would make our discourse prove too prolix; to come
to the siege of Orleance, Undertaken by these matchless Worthies, the Earl of
Salisbury and the Lord Talbot, with a puissant Army; the Citizens hearing of
their intentions prepared to withstand them: their Suburbs equal in bigness to
a good City, they level with the ground; choosing rather to destroy a part then
hazard the whole: the English encompass it on every side, and the Citizens
begin to feel the misery of want; God when man's help fails, interposeth his
hand, the Earl of Salisbury looking out at a Window to take a view for a
general assault, is unfortunately slain, a sad loss for the English; for upon
the death of this man (says Polydor Virgil) the fortune of the War changed.
The Regent to repair this loss sends Sir John Falstaff with fresh supplies,
who arrived there safe in despite of the Lord De la Brets, who with nine
thousand men endeavored to intercept him; hereupon the City would yield, but
to the Burgundian, not to the English; a cunning plot to divide their
affections: the Regent and his Council being sent unto, thought it not
reasonable, that the English having been at all the cost should not reap the
profit; the Burgundian on the other side resented this repulse ill, as thinking
the English too nice in resentments of Honor. Whilst matters stood thus
betwixt the French and English, there was presented unto King Charles at Chinon
a young Maid about eighten years of age, named Joan of Arc, who pretended she
was sent from God to deliver France from the English yoke: whereupon she was
called La pucelle de Dieu, or the Maiden of God, though many judged her but a
mere imposter; however, credit is given to her words; and she being armed like
a man, she rides to Bloyes, where Forces and Victuals lay for the relief of
Orleance; her first attempt was successful, she with the Admiral and Marshall
of France enters safe, bringing fresh courage to the dying hopes of the
Townsmen, who upon her encouragements sally forth, slew 600. of the English,
and adventured upon the Bastile where the Lord Talbot commanded, who repelled
them with great slaughter of their men: but yet the next day the Earl of
Suffolk gave over his Siege and dispersed his Army into their Garrisons. In
memory of this admirable deliverance they of that City erected a Monument,
where Charles the Seventh King of France, and Joan the Martial Maid were
represented, kneeling in Armor, elevating their eyes and hands to heaven, in
sign of thanks and acknowledgement.

At this time the success of War began to be various on both sides, the Lord
Talbot took the Town of Laval with the Castle, but this gains was small in
respect of the loss they received at that time; the Duke of Allanson with Joan
and other great Captains take by assault the Town of Jargeux, and in it the
Earl of Suffolk, with one of his Brothers, slew another of his Brothers, and
200. Soldiers, and having his numbers augmented, encounters the Lord Talbot at
a village called Patay, whom he discomfits, and slew of the English above a
thousand. The Lords, Talbot, the glory of the English, Scales, Hungerford, and
Sir Thomas Rampestone were taken prisoners; these losses shook the whole
fabric of the English greatness in France, and caused the revolt of many Towns
to King Charles; who encouraged by these successes marches into Champaigne,
where by composition he takes the Cities of Troys and Auxerre, Chalous and
Rheimes yield themselves; in which last, according to the Maids direction, he
was solemnly Crowned King.

The Duke of Bedford upon the upleasant tidings of Orleance rescued, and Talbot
taken, opposes himself; and having an Army of ten thousand English, besides
Normans, marches out of Paris, sending letter of defiance to the French King,
affirming, that deceitfully and by unjust means he had stolen many Cities and
places of importance belonging to the Crown of England, which he was come to
justify by Battle, if he would appoint a time and place, who returned answer
by the Herald, that he would sooner seek the Duke, then the Duke should need to
pursue him: yet notwithstanding his brags, upon the Dukes approach he marches
away; the Regent follows and overtakes him at Senlys, there both the Armies
encamped and embattelled, yet only some light Skirmishes passed between them;
for the French King either through sear, or policy, or both, in the night time
fled to Bray: the English Soldiers deeming it fear, would have pursued him,
but the Regent judging it to be his policy to draw him further from the City of
Paris (of whose fidelity he had no great assurance) refused to follow him any
further. The Bishop of Winchester Cardinal Beaufort, having at that present
raised four thousand men in aid of the Pope, to suppress the Bohemians, who
began to slight his Pontifical pomp, at the request of the Duke of Gloucester
went over with them to the Regent, for a present expedition against King
Charles, who by the subtle working of the Pucelle was received into Campaigne,
and had many Towns of importance rendered unto him. Yet notwithstanding his
numbers exceeded twice the Regents, yet by no provocations could he be drawn to
Battle, but secretly fled to Crispis; whereupon the Regent also returned to
Paris, where he staid but a while, but passes into Normandy, to provide for a
safe retreat there, if the English (by the inevitable will of God) should be
driven out of their other Dominions, exhorting them as their ancestors had
always been, to be true and faithful to the Crown of England.

In the mean while the French King was not idle, but gets by practice the Town
of St. Denis, from whence he sends the Duke of Allanson, and Joan the Martial
Maid, to try their Friends and Fortunes at Paris; but Joans good Fortune having
ascended the Meridian, began now to decline; for the English gave them so rough
an encounter, that Joan her self was wounded, and the rest with much slaughter
forced to fly: the Regent hearing of these attempts returns to Paris,
commending the Soldiers for their vigilance and valor in resisting the
French; and having fresh supplies out of England, marches to reduce Champaign
to his obedience. The French under the conduct of their Martial Virago attempt
to raise the siege, and enter in despite of the English and Burgundians that
besieged it; but afterward sallying forth, their troops were beaten, and Joan
her self taken prisoner by John of Luxemburgh, a Burgundian Knight; who for the
value of ten thousand pounds Turnoyes, and three hundred crowns yearly rent,
delivered her to the Regent, and he to the Bishop of Beauvois, in whose Diocese
she was taken; who judicially proceeding against her as a Sorceress, and
deceiver of the King and his Subjects, she was condemned, and afterward burnt
to death at Roan.

Many sundry opinions were conceived of this Woman, some judging her
miraculously raised up by God for the good of France, others that she was but a
mere Imposter: we will suspend our judgment herein, and refer you to the
Epitaph which we find thus written on her.

Here lies Joan of Arc, the which
Some count Saint, and some count Witch;
Some count Man, and something more;
Some count Maid, and some a Whore:
Her life's in question, wrong or right,
Her death's in doubt, by laws, or might;
Oh innocence take heed of it,
How thou too near to guilt do sit.
(Mean time France a wonder saw,
A woman rule against Salique Law.)
But, Reader, be content to stay
Thy censure, till the judgment day:
Then shall thou know, and not before,
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore.
And now the Regent seeing the great success that had attended King Charles
ever since his Coronation, would needs have King Henry Crowned in France, to
see if the like effects would follow the English; whereupon he is sent for
over, and by the Bishop of Winchester solemnly Crowned in the City of Paris,
such of the French Nobility as were present doing their Homage: and now was
France a Monster with two heads, the misery of which Nation by occasion of
these Wars is thus described by Polydor Virgil. While the English and French
(quoth he) contend for Dominion, Sovereignty, and life if self, men's goods in
France were violently taken by the License of War, Churches spoiled, men every
where murdered, put to death, or tortured; Matrons ravished, Maids forcibly
drawn from out their Parents arms to be deflowred, Towns daily taken, defaced,
spoiled; the riches of the Inhabitants carried whither the Conquerours thought
good; Houses and Villages round about set on fire; no kind of cruelty left
unpractised upon the miserable French; omitting many other kinds of other
calamities, which all at once oppressed them. I shall only add, that the
Commonwealth being destitute of the help of Laws, (which for the most part are
mute in times of War and Tumults) floated up and down without any anchorage of
right or justice. Neither was England her self void of these mischiefs, who by
reason of her Civil Wars, every day heard the news of her valiant Childrens
Funerals, slain in perpetual Skirmishes and Bickerings, her general wealth
continually decreasing, so that their evils seemed almost equal, and the whole
Western World ecchoed the groans and sighs of either Nations quarrels, being
the common argument of the discourse and compassion of all Christendom.

The Regent having lately buried his Wife, Sister to the Duke of Burgandy, did
now without his privity marry the Earl of St. Paul's Daughter, no friend to the
Burgundian, which drove him into a discontentent; and that discontent did King
Charles so work upon, that at length he seduced him from the English side;
though to effect the same, he was fain to stoop so low, as to send him a blank,
and bid him set down his own conditions, which were both many and unreasonable,
says Serres; yet worth his cost: For as Aemylius says, The end of that War
did redeem the French from a Foreign Government, as the first assuming thereof
had made the English Lords over France. The Regent outlived this revolt not
long, but died at Paris, with whom died all the English men's good fortune in
France; his body was with all Funeral Solemnities buried in the Cathedral
Church of our Lady at Roan, on the North side of the high Altar, under a
sumptuous and costly Monument; which Tomb certain Courtiers would have
persuaded King Lewis the Eleventh to have demolisht, to whom he answered, God
forbid I should disturb him dead, who living would have disturbed us all; no,
let his bones rest in peace, well worthy to have a more stately Monument.

How mighty a Prince he was, this his style shows; Regent of France, Duke of
Bedford, Alanzon, and Anjon, Earl of Main, Richmond, and Kendale, and Constable
of England. But (which excels his greatness, as my Author writes, was that)
he was one of the best Patriots and Generals that ever blossomed out of the
Royal Rosiar of England. He died the 14. of September 1435.

The Life of RICHARD NEVIL Earl of WARWICK.
THis undaunted Hero, whose Life we now relate, was he who in those times made
and marred Kings, and handled their Fortunes at his pleasure; and was himself a
great part of those famous Civil Wars between the Houses of York and Lancaster:
he was the eldest Son of Richard Nevill Earl of Salisbury, and by Marriage with
Anne the Sister and Heir of Henry Beauchampe, Earl, and after Duke of Warwick,
was in her right created Earl of Warwick. His Grandfather was Ralph Nevill Earl
of Westmerland, whose Daughter the Duke of York had married, which might be one
cause of his adhering so much to that side, and the effusion of so much blood
as ensued thereon.

For the Wars being now ended in France, which we have declared unto you in the
Lives of Edward the Third, Edward the Black Prince, Henry the Fifth, and John
Duke of Bedford, those uncivil Civil Wars soon after brake forth betwixt the
two Houses of York and Lancaster: For though during our Foreign Wars, these
dissentions appeared not so much as in the Embrio, both sides spending their
stock of valor against the common enemy; these Wars being ended, these Martial
minds difused to peace, would still be acting, though against themselves. The
two chief Heads of these Factions was Richard Duke of York, and Henry the Sixth
King of England, if we may call him a head who had so faint an heart, and not
rather the Queen, who acted all though under his name. The Duke of York
claiming the Crown, as Heir to the third Son of Edward the Third, the Line of
whose eldest Son Edward the Black Prince extinguished in the deposition and
paracide of Richard the second, procured by Henry of Bullingbrooke the first
King of the house of Lancaster, Edward the Thirds second Son dying without
issue. Henry pleaded the advantage of a long Reign, an interrupted descent in
Majesty for threescore years; a Sovereignty acknowledged abroad by by all
Christian Princes, and obeyed at home by all Englishmen without dispute: a
title according to the Law Salique undubitable; and which had been confirmed at
the first entry of his Grandfather Henry the Fourth into the Kingdom, not only
by resignation of Richard the Second, but even by approbation; nay, particular
negotiation of Edmond Duke of York, Edward Duke of Aumerle, and Richard Earl of
Cambridge, Father, Uncle, and Grandfather to the said Duke of York.

This weighty business being not the work of one day, the Duke of York draws to
his side the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick; and the better to prepare his way,
he practices all means to draw the King into the hatred of the people, as one
insufficient to supply the room which he held: but Henry's piety having placed
him so high in the affections of the people, he seeks to undermine him in the
downfall of his friends, pretending not against the King, but his evil
Counselors, (a pretense that has been made use of in latter times.) The King
at that present lying very sick, he neglects no advantage, but by the help of
his friends wrought so effectually, that the Duke of Somerset was sent to the
Tower: this man was exceedingly hated of the Commons, conceiving him the chief
cause that all Normandy was surrendered into the hands of the French; of which
their malice the Duke of York made good use, though his intentions for the
removing him out of the way, was the hinderance he knew he would prove to his
after claim of the Crown: but when the King had recovered his strength again,
and resumed to him his Princely Government, he caused the Duke of Somerset to
be set at liberty, and preferred him to be Captain of Calice; wherewith, not
only the Commons, but many of the Nobility which favored the Duke of York,
were greatly offended, saying, that he had lost Normandy already, and would
also lose Calice.

Hereupon the Duke of York with his adherents, the Earls of Warwick, Norfolk,
and Salisbury, the Lords, Cobham and Fawconbridge, with many other Knights and
Esquires, raised an Army about the edge of Wales, and marched with the same
toward London. King Henry being informed thereof, assembled likewise an host
to resist them; and being accompanied with the Dukes of Buckingham and
Somerset, the Earls of Northumberland, Stafford, Wiltshire, Dorset, Pembroke,
and Devonshire, the Lords, Clifford, Sudley, Barnes, Rose, and many others,
marched against him: at Saint Albons both Armies met, where betwixt them was
fought a sore Battle; which continuing doubtful for a time, the Earl of
Warwick with great courage breaking in upon them, and crying, a Warwick, a
Warwick, discomfitted the Kings side with a great slaughter, no less then five
thousand losing their lives; among whom the chiefest was the Duke of Somerset,
the Earls of Northumberland and Stafford, the old Lord Clifford, with many
other Knights and Gentlemen; the King himself being wounded, was taken
prisoner, and the next day carried to London.

Soon after began a Parliament at Westminster, wherein the Duke of York was
made Protector of the Realm, the Earl of Salisbury Lord Chancellor, and the
Earl of Warwick Captain of Calice, and the Territories of the same; and thus
the rule of the Realm rested in the Duke and Chancellor, and all the Warlike
Affairs in the Earl of Warwick: the Kings authority consisting only in name,
which they made use of for their own ends upon every occasion.

But the Queen stomacking these high indignities done to the King, studies
revenge; and making sure to her side many of the Lords, under a pretense of
hunting, conveyes the King to Coventry: whither in a friendly way she sends for
the Duke of York, and the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury; to which place the
said Lords resort: but having secret intelligence that mischief was intended
against them, they privately departed from the Court, with minds enraged
against the Queen and her party; but through the mediation of some Lords,
together with the Archbishop of Canterbury, all parties meeting together at
London, a reconciliation was concluded on, with many outward ceremonious shows
of friendship.

But this calm lasted not long, the Earl of Warwick upon some debate betwixt
him and the Kings servants, was by them assaulted, and for safety of his life
forced to fly unto Calice in a Barge: this affront done unto him was seconded
by another, a Privy Seal being directed to him for the discharging of him of
the Captainship of Calice, the young Duke of Buckingham (his enemy) being
constituted Captain in his room. But for as much as he had his Commission from
Parliament, he would not obey the Privy Seal; and to show his abilities fit for
the mannagement of any design, he with fourteen sail of Ships, sets forth to
scowre the Seas, bringing home in little space, prizes to the value of ten
thousand pound; a considerable sum in that age, before the Indies wealth
overflowed Europe.

In the mean time the Duke of York and Earl of Salisbury assemble an Army to
revenge the injuries done to the Earl of Warwick; to oppose whom, the Queen
sent James Twichet Lord Audley: at Blore-heath near Mucklestone both Armies
met, where the Lord Audley was overthrown himself, and 2400. of his men slain.

And now the Conquerours resolve to unvizard themselves, and to raise what
forces they could for the obtaining of their purposes. The Earl of Warwick
bringing to them a very great power from Calice; the King on the other side
raises a mighty great Army, and having marched as far as Worcester, to fave the
effusion of blood, sent unto them Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, with a
general Pardon, if they would give over their enterprise: yet upon further
advice, having sent an excusatory Letter to the King, they withdrew themselves
into diverse parts beyond the Seas.

Soon after was a Parliament holden at Coventry, wherein the Duke of York,
Edward Earl of March, his Son and Heir, the Earls of Warwick, Rutland, and
Salisbury, with many other Lord and Gentlemen, were attainted of Treason. One
Sir Baldwine Fulford undertook on pain of losing his head that he would destroy
the Earl of Warwick; but having spent the King a thousand marks, returned
without effecting his purpose. On the other side the Earl of Warwick sent some
of his men, who by night coming to Sandwich, carried away the Lord Rivers and
Sir Anthony VVoodvile his Son, with many great Ships.

And now the Earls of March, Warwick and Salisbury, being invited by the
Kentishmen, crossed the Sea, and landed at Sandwich; where they were met by
Thomas Bourchier Archbiship of Canterbury, and many others, who conducted them
to London, in most solemn manner; where having convocated the Clergy in Saint
Paul's Church, the Earl of Warwick in name of the rest took his oath upon the
Cross of Canterbury, that they had ever borne true faith and allegiance to King
Henry. Having by this oath gained credence of the Citizens, they leave the Earl
of Salisbury Governor thereof, and with their Forces march down to Northampton
where the King then lay, with a strong power; and first they affay to get him
into their hands by fair means, but that not prevailing, they resolve force:
whereupon both Hosts encountered each other; but the Lord Edmond Gray of Ruthen
who commanded the Kings Voward, forsaking his side and joining with the Earl,
by that means set a palm of Victory upon his head, and a Character of Treachery
upon his own, for betraying the trust reposed in him. There were slain on the
Kings part th Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lords Beaumont,
and Egremont, with many Knights and Esquires; the King himself was taken
prisoner, and with seeming liberty conveyed to London.

And now to authorize their actions the better, a Parliament is called, wherein
it was agreed, that King Henry in (relation to a long succession) should enjoy
the Crown during his natrual life, which afterward should devolve to Richard
and his Heirs, in whom it was then apparently proved that the Title to the
Kingdom did remain; in which agreement was likewise manifested, that Henry
should make immediate forfeiture, whenever either he or any of his Party
should attempt to disanul this act.

But the Queen with many of the Lords, not being at the bargain making, thought
themselves not tied to the Conditions; whereupon, she having in her company the
Prince her Son, the Dukes of Exeter and Somerset, the Earl of Devonshire, the
Lord Clifford, and in effect all the Lords of the North, with an Army of 18000.
men marched from York to Wakefield, with whom joined the Lord Nevill Brother to
the Earl of Westmorland; who having gotten a Commission from the Duke of York,
under his name raised 8000. men, but brought them all to the adverse party.

But the Duke of York whom fortune had hitherto waited on as his handmaid,
nothing daunted at their number, leaving the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of
Warwick to attend the King, he with the Earl of Salisbury, and his Son the
Earl of Rutland, with about some five thousand men marched against them: and
although his numbers was nothing competent to his enemies, yet would he not be
advised but gave them Battle; so that being encompassed on all sides, through
his own rashness was himself slain, and his whole Army discomfitted; his Son
the Earl of Rutland (being but twelve years old) stabbed by the Lord Clifford,
his trusty friend the Earl of Salisbury beheaded by the common people, and his
own head fixed on a pole, with a paper Crown, was set on the Walls of York, for
the barbarous mirth of the uncivil multitude.

The unwelcome news of the Dukes overthrow coming to the Ears of Warwick, to
stop the torrent of the Queens proceedings, he musters all the men he could,
and taking King Henry along with him, marches from London to oppose the Queen;
at St. Albans both Armies met, where Warwick lost the day, with the slaughter
of two thousand of his men: King Henry also, (whom fortune neither favored
amongst friends nor foe;) was again taken. This Victory of the Queens had it
been discreetly managed; might have turned the scales on the Lancastarian
side, but she wanton with success, vainly imagined a security from future
competition, and either wanted power to restrain her Soldiers, or licensed
them to a free spoil; by which unruly violence she untied the affections of the
Commons, who by their quiet and profit, measure the virtues of their Princes.
So that the Citizens of London fearing to be plundered, hearing of their
approach, shut up their Gates, and armed for resistance. The Queen hereupon
with her plundering Army retires Northwards, where we will leave her for a
time, and look back upon the Earl of March.

Who being at Gloucester at such time as he heard news of his Fathers death,
spent not his time in womanish lamentation; but considering how dangerous
leisure in to increase the apprehension of misfortune, having increased his
Army with some additional forces, he marches against the Earls of Pembroke and
Ormand, who had raised a great power with purpose to surprise him. Near
Mortimers Cross on Candlemass-day they encountered each other, where the two
Earls and their whole Army were put to flight with the slaughter of there
thousand eight hundred on the place.

Edward having obtained this Victory, with his Triumphant forces directs his
march toward London; in the way at Chipping-Norton he met the Earl of Warwick,
nothing daunted at his late misfortune, and coveting nothing more then by the
trial of a new day to persuade, or else to force back victory to his side: then
enter they London in a triumphant manner, the Citizens receiving them with
great acclamations of joy, the Earl of March which a joint consent of them all
is chosen King, and accordingly proclaimed throughout the City, by the name of
Edward the Fourth.

This was done at London; in the mean time the Queen and the Lords of her side
were daring and vigilant in the North; and having raised threescore thousand
fighting men, they resolved with expense of their blood, to buy back that
Majesty, which the House of Lancaster by evil fate had lost. Edward choosing
rather to provoke then expect an enemy, having mustered what Forces he could,
with his trusty friend the Earl of Warwick, marches against them; and
notwithstanding his Army came far short of the others in number, yet by his
Captains good conduct, and his Soldiers valor, joining battle between Caxton
and Towton, he gave his enemies a mighty great overthrow. In no one battle was
ever poured froth so much English blood, six and thirty thousand, seven hundred
seventy six persons, all of one Nation, many near in alliance, some in blood;
fatally divided by faction, were now united in death. On the Lancastrian side
were slain the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland, the Lords, Clifford,
Beaumont, D'acres, Gray, and Wells, John Lord Nevill Son to the Earl of
Westmorland, with diverse others. On King Edwards side, the Lord Fitz-VValter,
and the Bastard of Salisbury, with many others of great reputation and courage.
King Henry with the poor remains of his party flees into Scotland, whilst
Edward in triumph returns to London.

But notwithstanding this great overthrow, yet did not the indefatigable Queen
lose any thing from her spirit or endeavors, but makes addresses to all
Princes abroad, whom alliance, reason of state, or compassion of so great a
disaster, might move to her assistance; and notwithstanding all her endeavors,
she gathered together but five hundred French; yet adding hope to her small
number, she crosses the Sea with them into Scotland. Here some thin Regiments
of Scots resorted to her, in whose company, taking her Husband King Henry along
with her, she enters England; but this small number (scarcely deserving the
name of an Army) were soon overthrown by the Lord Mountague; most of the Lords
of her side taken and beheaded. King Henry escaped from the Battle, but was
soon after apprehended as he sat at dinner at VVaddington-Hall in Lancashire,
and by the Earl of Warwick brought prisoner to London, and committed to the
Tower.

These great services done by Warwick and his Brother Mountague for King
Edward, made them set so high a price upon their merits, that the greatest
benefits he could bestow upon them, were received in the degree of a debt, not
a gift; and thereupon their expectations being not answered according to their
imaginations, they begin to look upon Edward with a rancorous eye; and
certainly this was the main cause of their falling off from Edwards side,
though for a while they dissembled the same, until they should meet with a
more plausible occasion, which soon after was offered unto them: for the Earl
of Warwick being sent over into France, to negotiate a marriage betwixt King
Edward, and the Lady Bona Sister to the French Queen; whilst he was busy in
courting this Lady, Edward following more his fancy then reasons of State,
falls in love, and marries the Lady Elizabeth daughter to the Duchess of
Bedford, and widow of Sir John Gray, slain on King Henry's part at the Battle
of St. Albans. But when the Earl of Warwick understood how mighty an affront by
this was given to his employment, he entertained none but disdainful thoughts
against his Prince. And expressed so bold a discontent, that Lewis of France, who
was quick to perceive, and careful to foment any displeasure, which might tend
to the disturbance of another Kingdom, began to enter into private
communication with him; for ever after this common injury, (so they called the
error of love in the King) the Earl held a dangerous intelligence in France,
which after occasioned so many confusions to our Kingdom. Nevertheless upon his
return he dissembled all discontent, and in every circumstance of respect
applied himself to applaud the Marriage: and in particular, the excellent
personage of the Queen.

But long did not the fire of his revenge lie hid under the ashes of
dissimulation; for King Edward grown secure by an over-bold presumption, the
daughter of a long prosperity, gave himself over to all licentiousness, whilst
Warwick had made his faction not only mighty, but monstrous, being compacted
of several natures: for into conspiracy of this great enterprise he had drawn
off the Clergy and the Laity, and most of them of affections most opposite.
The Archbishop of York was the principal mover, because he moved upon the soul,
and made treason an act of Religion: the easy multitude who build their faith
upon the man, not the Doctrine, thinking it meritorious to rebel, in regard
his function seemed to give authority to the action. With him a greed the
Marquess Mountague, and many eminent persons of King Edwards Court, whom either
desire of War, having never lived but in the troubled Sea of discord, or want
of expected recompense, rendered discontented.

All the partakers in the calamity of the house of Lancaster, most passionately
at first overture embraced this motion; amongst whom was Henry Holland Duke of
Exeter, who after his ruin with the fall of Henry the Sixth, was reduced to
such extremity, that ragged and barefooted he begged for his meat in the
Low Countries. But the wonder of the world then was at the powerful sorcery of
those persuasions, which bewitched the Duke of Clarence, the Kings Brother to
this conspiracy, to whom the Earl of Warwick (to tie him the faster to his
side) gave him in marriage the Lady Isabel his daughter, and coheire to the
rich Earldom of Warwick; for consummation whereof they sailed over to Calice,
of which Town the Earl of Warwick was Captain, and in which the young Lady then
remained with her Mother. Soon was the Ceremony past, and soon did the Earl
invite his Son-in-law from the softness of the Nuptial Dalliance, as who had
contrived this marriage for business, not for pleasure; and designed the first
issue of their embraces to be a monster, and the most unnatural one; War
between Brothers.

Warwick having thus politickly ordered things, that he left little or nothing
to fortune, with his Son-in-law returns to England; where against his return,
the Archbishop of York, with some other of his friends, had raised a potent
Army; to oppose whom, on Edwards side assembles a mighty power, under the
conduct of the Earls of Pembroke and Devonshire: but they falling out at
Banbury upon a trivial occasion, made way for the enemy to conquer them both.
This overthrow was seconded with a great loss at Grafton in Northamptonshire,
wherein the Earl Rivers and the Lord Widdevil. Father and Brother to the Queen,
were taken, and barbarously beheaded. Edward nettled with these losses, raises
what power he could, and marches against Warwick; whose pretense being that of
all Rebels, The good of the Kingdom; yet to avoid effusion of blood, seemingly
is very desirous of peace; but when with several overtures he had lulled the
King in security, in the dead of the night, he sets upon his Army, kills the
watch, and surpriseth his person, buried in a careless sleep.

Warwick having thus gotten the prey into his hand he so long desired, sends
him prisoner to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, there to be kept by his Brother
the Archbishop of that Sea; but King Edward being of another temper then his
predecessor Henry, not enduring Captivity, soon found a way for his own
liberty: for having gotten license to hunt in the adjoining Park, he so
contrived with Sir William Stanley, and Sir Thomas Burgh, that with a selected
number they came to his rescue, and took him away from his weak guard; the Lord
Hastings joining to them with some forces he had raised about Lancaster, they
march directly to London, where they were entertained with great expressions of
joy.

The Earl of Warwick (who upon the taking of the King had disbanded his Army)
hearing of his escape, was almost distracted with a thousand several
imaginations; but soon by letters to the Lords of his faction, he reassembles
his forces, and marches against the King: but through the solicitation of some
persons inclinable to peace, an enterveiw was agreed on in Westminster Hall;
and oaths for safety being past on both sides, accordingly they met; but such
intemperance of Language past at their meeting, as rather aggravated then
allayed their anger; so that now they resolved the Sword alone should decide
the controversy. The Earl of Warwick leaving his Army under the command of Sir
Robert Wells whilst he himself went to raise more men; King Edward neglecting
not the opportunity, whilst they were thus disjoined, gives them battle, and
overthrows them, with the loss of ten thousand of their men. Sir Robert Wells
was taken prisoner, and soon after beheaded. This overthrow struck Warwick to
the heart; so that having not sufficient force to withstand the King, he with
the Duke of Clarence sail over into France, with which King, as also with Queen
Margret, who then remained in the French Court, they entered into a combination
for the deposing of King Edward, and setting up again King Henry. And that
there might not be left any tract of former discontent, or path to future
jealousy, a marriage was concluded and celebrated between Prince Edward the
Queens Son, and the Lady Anne younger daughter to the Earl; and for want of
issue of these two, the Crown to come to Clarence and his posterity.

Matters thus concluded, and the French King supplying them with money, they
return into England to whom flocked almost all the Lords; the Commonalty also
(desirous of innovation) adhered unto them: so that King Edward seeing himself
in a manner wholly abandoned, was forced to quit the Land, and sail into
Holland.

And now notwithstanding his former hostility with him, Warwick restores King
Henry to all his former dignity and honor; a Parliament is called, wherein
nothing is denied which the prevailing party thought fit to be authorized: King
Edward condemned for a Tyranous Usurper, and all his adherents attainted of
high treason; the Crown is entailed upon King Henry and his Heirs Males, for
default of which, to George Duke of Clarence, and his Heirs for ever. The
Earls of Oxford and Pembroke, and many others, restored to their estates and
titles; the Duke of Clarence put in possession of the Duchy of York; and
lastly the Government of the King and Kingdom committed to the Duke of
Clarence, and Earl of Warwick; so that King Henry possessed no more then the name
of King, and seemed not to be set at liberty, but to have changed his keeper.

King Edward in the mean time, having hired four great Holland Ships, and
fourteen Easterling men of War, transports his Army over into England, which
consisted of two thousand Dutch men, and such English as accompanied him in his
flight, or had escaped over after him; at Ravenspur in Yorkshire he landed,
from thence he marched to York, but finding in every place where he came the
people generally devoted to the House of Lancaster, he fashioned his behavior
to a new art, and solemnly took his oath that his intentions was not for the
recovering of the Crown, but regaining the Duchy of York, wrongfully conferred
on his Brother Clarence by the last Parliament. Hereupon many of note joined
themselves with him, so that whom they refused to serve as King, which had been
an act of loyalty, they condescend to aid as Duke of York, which was absolute
rebellion: it being high treason in a Subject, though never so apparently
injured, to seek his remedy by Arms. Having thus increast his Army he marches
toward London; and although the Marquess Mountague, Warwicks Brother, with a
far superior power lay then at Pomfret to impeach his journey, yet let he him
quietly pass, not permitting any act of hostillity to be showed, or advantage
taken; by which gross oversight he ruined himself and Warwick too: for no
sooner was Edward past this danger, but many of the Nobility with mighty Forces
repaired to him. Whereupon forgetting his oath, he takes upon him the title of
King, and marched directly to Coventry, fierce in his desire to give Warwick
battle, who lay there encampt; and now his Brother Clarence with all his Forces
forsakes his Father-in-law the Earl of Warwick, and joins with his Brother.
Hereupon uniting their Forces they march up to London, which after some show of
resistance, submitted its self. Warwick having now joined with his Brother
Mountague, follows after him; whom to oppose, King Edward having settled the
Town to his obedience, led forth his Army; at St. Albans they both met, where
betwixt them was fought a most bloody battle, in which the Earl of Warwick and
his Brother Mountague valiantly fighting were both slain, and their whole Army
totally routed.

To this violent end came the Earl of Warwick, and indeed how was it possible
such a stormy life could expect a calmer death; he was questionless valiant,
for a Coward durst not have thought those dangers into which he entered upon the
slightest quarrels. His soul was never quiet, distasted still with the present;
and his pride like a foolish builder, so delighted to pull down and set up,
that at length part of the frame that himself had raised, fell upon him and
crushed him to death. His varying so in approving contrary Titles, showed either
a strange levity in judgment, or else that ambition, not conscience, ruled his
actions. In sum, that greatness he so violently labored to confirm in his
posterity, came all to nothing; Almighty God ruining their designs, who think
by policy (though contrary to Religion) to perpetuate their posterity.

The Life of King RICHARD the Third.
FRom the pen of so credible an Author as Sir Tho. Moor was (to other
Historians) chiefly derived the History of this King; they so admiring and
trusting to what he delivered, that without any alteration of his words (an
unusual respect) we have hitherto (except two or three other Modern differing
Writers) received all from the Knights Tradition. He was a person indeed of
unquestioned integrity, but how carefully and honestly his Works by others
might be published after his death is not yet well determined. Sir Simon D'ewes
Mr. Seldom, and other eminent Antiquaries of our times, being in their learned
discourses often too sensible of some abuses offered to the Chronicle of this
Richard. The truth is, if as in respect of our own times, we have known the
best of men so traduce, certainly where there has been some more then ordinary
failings, envious persons will think they cannot render him odious, or ugly
enough.

Richard the Third vulgarly known by the name of Crook-Backt, and so delivered
by some Historians and Poets, with what truth I know not, since his Picture
drawn in his life, and as it is said to be to the life, still preserved and
suffered by his great enemy Henry the Seventh in the Long Gallery in
White Hall, denotes the contrary, and shows him him to be of a sweet and
gracious aspect. And John Stow, who always took great pains in his inquiry of
the relations of the persons of Princes, says, That he had spoken with some
ancient men, who from their own sight and knowledge affirm that he was of body
and shape comely. Neither did John Rouce who knew him, and wrote much in his
description, observes any otherwise. But whether crooked or no, if his actions
were straight, posterity has the less to censure him.

He was the youngest Son of Richard Plantagenet, the fourth Duke of York of
that Royal Family; born at the Castle of Fotheringham, or as some write, the
Castle of Berkhamsteed, about the year of our Lord 1450. a dutiful Son to his
Father, and a Loyal Subject to his Brother, who stood always firm to his side
in that great defection of the Duke of Clarence, and Earl of Warwick, as we
have declared in the preceding life. At the death of his Brother King Edward,
he was chosen Lord Protector; and afterward by the importunity of the people
(knowing his Abilities) forced to take upon him the Regal Power, and confirmed
by Act of Parliament. Therefore their cavils are vain, and discover an extreme
malice and envy unto him, that report him to have obtained the Sovereignty by
indirect means. As for his abillities for government, hear Reverend Cambden, an
Author without exception, Fuit dignissimus regno, etc, non inter malos sed
bonos Principes, commemorandus. That he was most worthy to Reign, and to be
numbered amongst the good, not bad Princes. And indeed those many and good Laws
enacted in his time demonstrate him a good King, though some have reported him
to be a bad Man.

He was Crowned at Westminster with great solemnity, most of the Peers of the
Land being present; soon after his Coronation, he sent to the French King for
his Tribute, formerly paid to his Brother Edward, in leiu of the Duchy and
Countries of Aquitain, Normandy, Poictou, and Maine, etc. and now detained by
the French King; and doubtless King Richard had still compelled him to continue
it, had not eruptions of State and tumultary practices fatally diverted his
Sword.

Soon after was a Parliament called, wherein was attainted of High Treason,
Henry Earl of Richmond, John Earl of Oxford, Thomas Marquis of Dorset, Jasper
Earl of Pembroke, Lionel Bishop of Salisbury, Pierce Bishop of Exeter, the Lady
Margaret Countess of Richmond, Thomas Morton Bishop of Ely, with many others.
King Edwards Children, for whom the world so much censures him, were adjudged
incapable of Government, and the Crown by a Parliament in those days confirmed
to King Richard, in these words. It is declared, pronounced, decreed,
confirmed; and established, by the authority of this present assembly of
Parliament, that King Richard the Third is the true and undoubted King of this
Realm, as well by right of Consanguinity and Heritage, as by lawful Election
and Coronation, etc. So that here to tax so general an assent, were to say,
there were not one honest nor just man in that High Court; and what greater
scandal to the whole Kingdom, and to those that have since succeeded them.

But as Honor is always attended on by Envy, so has this worthy Princes fame
been blasted by malicious traducers, who like Shakespeare in his Play of him,
render him dreadfully black in his actions, a monster of nature rather then a
man of admirable parts, whose slanders having been examined by wise and
moderate men, they have only found malice and ignorance to have been his
greatest accusers, persons who can only lay suspicion to his charge; and
suspicion in Law is no more guilt then imagination, as the divine Father
Chrysostom faith, A good man hardly suspecteth another to be evil; but an
evil man scarcely supposes any to be good. King Richard had three great
Favorites, as Princes are seldom without some, and those according to the
constant custom of the World must be envied; Catesby, Ratcliffe, and Lovel:
King Richards own Arms being the Bore, upon which one Collingborne of the West
fancied this Libel, which in those times was received for excellent Wit.

The Cat, the Rat, and Lovel the Dog,
Rule all England under a Hog.
But leaving such trifles, to return to King Richard. Henry Earl of Richmond
ambitious of Sovereignty, envying his prosperity, practices with foreign
Princes, and confederates with the English Nobles, for Assistance and Forces
against King Richard. The chief abettor in England he had on his side was the
Duke of Buckingham, one who had formerly constantly adhered to King Richards
side; but being by him denied the Earldome of Hereford, and Constableship of
England, grew discontented, took up Arms, was defeated, and afterward by
Marshall Law put to death.

Yet did not this break the neck of Henry's design, but having by his fair
deportment gained Force; from the Duke of Britain, and some other Princes
envious of the prosperity of the House of York, Richmond puts forth to Sea, and
lands at Milford-Haven in Wales; after some refreshing he marches to a Town
called Haverford-West, where the people (who flocked to him in great number)
welcomed him as a Prince, descended from their ancient Princes of Wales: the
people generally being very noble, and loving to their British Kindred. Hither
came to him with great Forces, the Earl of Salop, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir
Walter Herbert, Sir John Savage, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and many others. His Army
thus strong and united, he passes the Severne, and marches to Leichfield. King
Richard hearing of his arrival prepares against him, but though he thought
the Nobility generally cemented to his side, yet found he a general defluxion
from them to the other side; the Earl of Surrey, the Earl of Westmerland,
Viscount Lovel, and John Duke of Norfolk being the principal that stuck to
him; which last, was much importuned to have fallen off from him: the night
before the Battle one writing this Rhyme upon his Gate.

Jack of Norfolk be not too bold,
For Dicken thy master is bought and sold.
But he regarding more his fidelity, then any danger that could befall him,
doubles his care and diligence on the behalf of his Sovereign. The Earl of
Northumberland, who had received great favors from the King, and who had in
his Name raised vaste Forces, being sent for by him, refused to come;
pretending for his disobedience, certain dreams, wherein he was forewarned by
his Father for to fight on King Richards side. But the greatest defection was
in the Lord Stanley, who notwithstanding he had left his Son George Stanley
as a Pledge of his faith with the King, yet revolted to the other side. King
Richard notwithstanding all these disadvantages, having encouraged his Army,
gives Richmond a Battle; where valiantly fighting, after he had with his own
hands slain Sir Charles Brandon the Earls Standard Bearer, and unhorsed Sir John
Cheny, and showed himself a most Heroic Person, being overpowered with
multitude, he was slain on the place. With him died the Duke of Norfolk, the
Earl of Surrey was taken Prisoner, and the whole Army quite defeated. This
Battle was fought at a Village called Bosworth near to Leicester. The Victor
was crowned in the Field by Sir William Stanley with King Richards Crown,
which he as a valiant and confident Master of his right had worn that day. King
Richards dead body after it was most barbarously mangled and wounded, was
thrown behind one upon a lean Jade, and so conveyed to Leicester; where at
last it obtained a bed of earth, honorably appointed by the order of King
Henry the Seventh, in the chief Church of Leicester, called Saint Mary's,
belonging to the Order and Society of Gray Friars, the King in short time after
causing a fair Tomb of mingled colored Marble, adorned with his Statue, to be
erected thereupon.

And notwithstanding the times were such when this great Prince lived, that he
had scarcely time to sheath his sword, yet left he behind him many Monuments
of his Piety. He founded a Collegiate Church of Priests in Middleham in
Yorkshire; another College of Priests in London in Tower-street, near to the
Church called our Lady Barking; he built a Church or Chapel in Towton in
Glocestershire; he founded a College in York convenient for the entertainment
of an hundred Priests; he built the high stone Tower at Westminster, and when
he had repaired and fortified the Castle of Carlisle, he founded and built the
Castle of Perrith in Cumberland.

He began many other good Works, which his sudden fatt prevented, as Polidor
Virgil witnesses: which Works and Monuments of Piety, show not the Acts of a
Tyrant. I shall end all with this Eulogy, which a learned Writer gives him.
King Richard was a stout valiant person, ever indulgent to his People, careful
to have their Laws duly observed, his making so many good ones, if they
signified not some goodness in himself, were evident arguments of his more then
ordinary love to Law and Justice.

The Life of THOMAS HOWARD Earl of SURREY.
THomas Howard Earl of Surrey; in his time the Ornament of Mars and the Muses,
was Son to Sir. John Howard Knight, first made Barron by King Edward the
Fourth, and afterward Duke of Norfolk by King Richard the Third, in whose
quarrel he was slain. This noble Earl his Son having been well educated, and
afterward trained up in Court, his Martial mind hating those silken pleasures
admired of Courtiers, he with diverse other young Gentlemen, went over to
Charles Duke of Burgundy, who then had Wars with Lewis King of France, in whose
quarrel he behaved himself so gallantly, that he won the honor and reputation
of a most expert Commander.

At his return King Edward for his valor bestowed on him the Order of
Knighthood, to whose side he constantly adhered in that great difference
betwixt him and the House of Lancaster. That quarrel being ended by the
overthrow of Warwick, he afterward did excellent service in the Wars betwixt
him and Lewis the French King. King Edward being dead, and the Crown (by joint
consent both of Peers and People) placed on King Richards head, and after
confirmed by Act of Parliament, he with his Father the Duke of Norfolk held
firm to his side, notwithstanding the many solicitations he had from Henry
Earl of Richmond, and the Lords of his faction; who to draw them off from
Richards side, that morning in which Bosworth Field was fought, was found a
world of papers strowed before Norfolks door.

Yet notwithstanding all this, he regarding more his oath, his honor, and
promise made to King Richard, like a faithful Subject absented not himself from
his Master; but as he faithfully lived under him, so he manfully died with him.

But to return to his Son the Earl of Surrey: in this Battle he had the leading
of the Archers, which King Richard had placed in the forefront as a Bulwark to
defend the rest; the undaunted courage of this Earl, and his resolute brave
carriage being taken prisoner, are delineated to the life by the renowned Sir
John Beaumont, in his ever-living Poem of Bosworth Field; which if to some it
may seem a long Quotation, the goodness of the lines will recompense the
tediousness of reading them.

Courageous Talbot had with Surrey met,
And after many blows begins to fret;
That one so young in Arms should thus unmoved,
Resist his strength so often in war approved.
And now the Earl beholds his Fathers fall,
Whose death like horrid darkness frighted all:
Some give themselves as Captives, others fly;
But this young Lion casts his generous eye
On Mowbray's Lion, painted in his shield,
And with that King of Beasts repines to yield:
The Field (says he) in which the Lion stands
Is blood, and blood I offer to the hands
Of daring foes; but never shall my flight
Die black my Lion, which as yet is white.
His Enemies (like cunning Huntsmen) strive
In binding snares to take their prey alive,
While he desires to expose his naked breast,
And thinks the sword that deepest strikes is best.
Young Howard single with an Army fights,
When moved with pity, two renowned Knights,
Strong Clarindon, and valiant Coniers try
To rescue him, in which attempt they die.
Now Surrey fainting, scarce his Sword can hold;
Which made a common Soldier grow so bold,
To lay rude hands upon that noble Flower,
Which he disdaining, (anger gives him power)
Erects his weapon with a nimble round,
And sends the Peasants Arm to kiss the ground.
This done, to Talbot he presents his Blade,
And says, It is not hope of life has made
This my submission, but my strength is spent;
And some perhaps of villain blood will vent
My weary soul: this favor I demand,
That I may die by your victorious hand.
Nay God forbid, that any of my name,
(Quoth Talbot) should put out so bright a flame,
As burns in thee (brave Youth) where thou have erred;
It was thy Fathers fault, since he preferred
A Tyrants Crown before the juster side.
The Earl still mindeful of his birth replied,
I wonder Talbot, that thy noble heart
Insults on ruins of the vanquished part:
We had the right, if now to you it flow,
The fortune of your Swords has made it so:
I never will my luckless choice repent,
Nor can it stain mine honor or descent.
Set Englands Royal Wreath upon a stake,
There will I fight, and not the place forsake.
And if the will of God has so disposed,
That Richmonds Brow be with the Crown enclosed,
I shall to him or his give doubtless signs,
That duty in my thoughts, not faction shines.
Which he proved to be most true in the whole course of his life; for having
continued prisoner in the Tower three years and a half, the Earl of Lincoln,
confederating with one Lambert Simnel, raised an Army against the King: the
Lieutenant of the Tower favoring their enterprise, freely offered the Earl
license to depart out at his pleasure; which he refused, saying, That he that
commanded him thither, should command him out again. The King understanding of
his fidelity, not only released him of his imprisonment. but took him into a
more specal regard, and soon had he an occasion to make trial of him: a great
insurrection happening in the North, wherein the Rebels were grown so potent,
that they slew the Earl of Northumberland in the field, and took the City of
York by assault; against these King Henry assembles a great power making the
Earl of Surrey Chief Captain of his Voward; who so behaved himself, that the
Rebels forces were dissipated, their chief Leaders taken, and soon after
executed. The King noting his great prudence and magnanimity, made him
Lieutenant General from Trent Northward, had Warden of the East and middle
Marches, and Justice of the Forests from Trent Northwards: in which offices he
continued the space of ten years; during which time, the Scots having committed
some outrages upon the Borders, he made a road into Tivydale, where he burnt
and destroyed all before him: returning with great spoils and honor, Not long
after he made another road into Scotland, returning with like success; James
the fifth, then King of Scotland, raised a great power to withstand him, and
sent to the Earl a challenge to fight with him hand to hand, which he accepted;
but the King into his demands, would have the Country or Lands then in
Controversy, to be made Brabium Victoris, which was without the Earls power to
engage, being the inheritance of the King his Master; but he proffers better
Lands of his own upon the Combat, which was not accepted, and so nothing was
concluded.

A peace being concluded with the Scots, he was called home, and made Lord
Treasurer of England, and of the Privy Council, living in great Honor and
reputation all the days of King Henry; who dying, his Son Henry that succeeded
him, added to his other dignities, the high Marshallship of England; and going
in person with an Army into France, left him Lieutenant General from Trent
Northward, to defend the Realm against the Scots: for James the Fifth, King of
Scotland, notwithstanding he were King Henry's Brother-in-law, yet did so
firmly adhere to the French, that to divert King Henry's proceedings, in his
own person, with a mighty Army he invades England. The Earl of Surrey to oppose
him raises what Forces he could, and at a place called Flodden it came to a
pitched field, which was fought with great courage and valor; but God who owned
the just cause of the English, crowned them with success, and set the Palm of
Victory on the Earl of Surrey's head. The Scottish King being slain, and with
him two Bishops, eleven Earls, seventeen Barrons, four hundred Knights, besides
other Gentlemen, and seventeen thousand common Soldiers.

The Earl for these services was by the King at his return home, highly
rewarded, and restored to the Dukedom of Norfolk, his Fathers Dignity. Soon
after was he sent chief Commissioner with the Lady Mary, the Kings sister, to
be married unto Lewis the French King; and after his return home, the King and
Queen going to Guines to visit the French King, he was made Protector of the
Realm in his absence. Old age seizing on him, he obtained leave of the King to
spend the remainder of his days at Framlingham Castle, an honorable Mansion
of his own; where he continued, and kept a bounteful house to the time of his
death, which happened in the fourscore and sixth year of his age. He was buried
at Thetford Abbey in Norfolk, dying after a most generous life, worth a large
estate; so clear from debt, that at his death he owed not one groat to any
person whatsoever: an unusual happiness to attend so great a Soldier and
Courtier as he was.

From this famous Duke is descended the Right Honorable James Earl of Suffolk,
whose great Grandfather Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk married Margret sole
Daughter and Heir to Sir Thomas Audley, Lord Chancellor of England; by whom he
had issue, Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, and Earl of Suffolk, who built that
magnificent Structure at Audley-end, who left the same to his Son and Heir
Theophilus, a worthy Gentleman, the Father of James Earl of Suffolk now living,
Anno 1659. To whom with his most virtuous Lady, I wish all increase of true
honor and felicity. To the greater honor of these Progenies, this Heroic
Earl died so much a Laureat, that his Songs and Sonnets by all those that
rightly understand Poetry, are looked upon as in those days to have been the
Muses Parnassus: so that for his Epitaph there needed no more to be writ, but
that here lies interred. The greatest Courtier, the most valiant Soldier, and
the most accomplished Poet of those times.

The Life of CARDINAL WOLSEY.
Fortunae variantis opus Wolsaeus ad alta,
Scandit iter dubium, certa minitante ruina.
CArdinal Wolsey the Tennis-ball, of Fortune was born at Ipswich in Suffolk,
of so poor and despicable Parents, that were his story of an ancient date, and
not delivered by Authentic Historians, it might pass for a fiction; his
Father being no more but a poor Butcher: from so low a beginning did he rise to
the highest pitch of honor.

His Education in youth was at Oxford, in Maudlin College, from thence he was
preferred to be Schoolmaster to the Marquess of Dorsets Children, where he
first learned to be imperious over noble blood: the Marquess dying, Wolsey went
into France to seek his Fortune, and coming to Callis, became servant to Sir
John Naphant then Treasurer of the Town; where he behaved himself with so great
discretion, that his Master shortly preferred him to King Henry the Seventh.

Having thus cast Anchor at Court, the Haven of hope, and Port of Promotion, he
was more then double diligent in the Kings eye, and very serviceable to Doctor
Fox Bishop of Wincheter, Secretary, and Lord Privy Seal, as also to Sir Thomas
Lovel Master of the Wards, and Constable of the Tower, who persuaded King Henry
having urgent business with Maximilian the Emperor, to send Wolsey in
Embassage unto him, being at that present in the Country of Flanders; who
returned again before he was thought to be gone, and withal concluded some
Points forgot in his directions, to the hight contentment of King Henry; for
the which he bestowed upon him the Deanery of Lincoln, and not long after made
him his Almoner. But King Henry's day now drawing toward night, he adores the
rising Sun Prince Henry; and having found the length of his foot, fitteth him
with an easy shoe, well knowing there could be no loss to humor him, who was
so able to give: nor was he deceived in his expectation, for Henry afterward
coming to be King, and having conquered the City of Tourney in France, bestowed
the Bishopric of the same upon Wolsey; and not long after made him Bishop of
Lincoln, and Archbishop of York.

And now being Primas Anglia, carried himself accordingly, by erecting his
Cross in the Kings Court, although within the Jurisdiction of Canterbury; which
high presumption William Archbishop of Canterbury greatly checked. But Wolsey
not abiding any Superious, obtained to be made Priest, Cardinal, and Legatus de
Latere, unto whom the Pope sent a Cardinals Hat, with certain Bulls for his
Authority in that behalf. And now remembering the taunts he had received from
Canterbury, found means with the King, that he was made Lord Chancellor of
England, and Canterbury which was Chancellor dismissed who had continued in
that place long since before the death of King Henry the Seventh.

Wolsey now sitting at the Helm of Church and State, had two Crosses and two
Pillars born ever before him (the one of his Archbishopric, the other of his
Legacy) by two of the tallest Priests that were to be found in the Realm. To
the better maintenance of which chargeable estate, the King bestowed on him the
Bishopric of Winchester; and in Commendam, the Abbey of St. Albans; and with
them he held in Farm the Bishoprics of Bathe, Worcester, and Hereford,
enjoyed by strangers incumbents, not residing in the Realm; so that now being
Bishop of Tourney, Lincoln, York, Winchester, Bathe, Worcester, and
Hereford, he seemed a Monster with seven heads, and each of them crowned with
the Mitre of a Bishop; far different from the state of his Lord and Master
Christ, who had not a hole wherein to hide his head.

Yet his ambition rests not here, next he aspires to the Triple Crown, he
only wants Holiness, and must be Pope; to the attaining of which Dignity he
makes means to the Romish Cardinals, as also to the Emperor Charles the Fifth:
Gold he gave to the Cardinals, and they gave him golden promises, although they
proved but empty performances; nor did the Emperor serve him any better,
promising much, but performing nothing. Wolsey hereat enraged, studies
revenge, and by his instruments seeks to make a divorce betwixt Queen Katherine
Dowager, the Emperors Aunt, and King Henry the Eighth his Master, thereby to
advance a Marriage betwixt him and the King of France's sister. But though he
effected the one, he failed in the other; for contrary to his expectation, King
Henry fell in love with Anna Bullen, a Gentlewoman nothing favorable to his
Pontificial Pomp nor no great follower of the Rites of those times; which moved
the Cardinal (the Pope having assumed the sentence of Queen Katherines cause
unto himself) to write unto his Holiness to defer the judgment of Divorce till
he had wrought the Kings mind in another mould. But though this was done
secretly, it came to the Kings ear, and wrought his mind quite off from the
Cardinal, which finally was the cause of his confusion: for upon the Kings
dislike, the Counsel articled against him, and the Law found him in a
Praemunire, for procuring to be Legatus de latere, and advancing the Popes Power
against the Laws of the Realm; for which resentment the Kings displeasure was
so incenst, that the Broad Seal was taken from him, and most of his other
Spiritual Preferments, his house and furniture seized on to the Kings use, and
himself removed to Cawood Castle in Yorkshire. Yet was he still left Bishop of
Winchester, and Archbishop of York, to which last, providing for his installing
state equivalent to a Kings Coronation, he was arrested of high treason by the
Earl of Northumberland; (for words importing a desire of revenge says Sleidan)
from thence he was conveyed toward London by the Lieutenant of the Tower; in
which journey, at Leicester Abbey he ended his life, breathing out his soul
with speeches to his effect. Had I been as careful to serve the God of Heaven
as I have been to comply to the will of my earthly King, God would not have
left me in my old age as the other has done.

Some have imagined he poisoned himself, as not willing to survive his great
glory; and some have thought he was poisoned by others, that with his feathers
they might build themselves nests. Surely the fall of this stately oak caused
the growth of much underwood; many rising by his ruin, raising themselves
great estates out of the fragments of his fall. He left behind him these
glorious monuments of fame, the buildings of Christ-Church White Hall,
Hampton Court, Windsor. His Master King Henry lived in the two first, his Tomb
being erected in the last. Some Historians write that his body swelled after
his death, as his mind when he was living, with his Ego et Rex meus, On which
ambition of the Cardinal, one wrote these verses.

Dicere Gramatices ratio permittit, Ego and Rex;
Ethica te jubet ars dicere, Rex and Ego.
Haec est nimirum vivendi ars, illa loquendi,
Principis haec Aulae serviat, illa Scholae.
The Life of Sir THOMAS MOOR.
Hic est ille Thomas plebis de pulvere magnus,
Qui tulit incanum Principis ira caput.
SIr Thomas Moor, one of the greatest Ornaments of his time, was a man of those
high employments, and of so great parts to go through them, that he is
deservedly placed amongst our English Worthies. He was the Son of Sir John Moor
Knight, and one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, a man singular for his many
rare perfections. His Birth place was at Milk-street in London, the year of our
Lord 1480. Having attained some skill in the Latin Tongue, Cardinal Moorton
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord High Chancellor of England, took him into
his house, where his wit and admirable deportment appeared to be such, that the
Cardinal would often say of him to the Nobles that several times dined with
him, This Child here waiting at the Table, whosoever shall live to see it,
will prove the miracle of men.

For his better proficiency in learning, the Cardinal placed him in Canterbury
College in Oxford (now called Christ-Church,) where when he was both in the
Greek and Latin Tongue sufficiently instructed, he was then for the study of
the Law put into one of the Innes of Chancery, called New Inn; where for his
time he highly improved: from thence he removed to Lincolns-Inne, where he was
made an Utter-Barrister, where for some time he read a Public Lecture of St.
Austine, de Civitate Dei, in the Church of St. Laurence in the Old Jury.
Afterward he was made Reader of Furnivalls-Inne, where he continued for the
space of above three years; after which time he gave himself up to his
devotions in the Charter House of London, living religiously there for the
space of four years.

Soon after he married the Daughter of Mr. John Colt of New Hall in Essex, by
whom he had one Son and three Daughters; whom from their youth he brought up in
virtue and learning. About this time his rare endowments began to be looked
upon with a public eye, which caused him to be called to the Bench, and soon
after chosen a Burgess of Parliament, which happenned in the latter end of King
Henry the Sevenths Reign; who demanding one Subsidy and three fifteens for the
Marriage of his eldest Daughter the Lady Margret, unto the King of the Scots;
Sir Thomas making a grave Speech, argued so strongly why these exactions were
not to be granted, that thereby the Kings demands were frustrated, and his
request denied: by which occasion he fell so deeply into the Kings displeasure,
that for his own safeguard he was determined to have gone over Sea, had not the
King soon after dyed, which somewhat mittigated his fear, and altered his
resolution.

After this he was made one of the under Sheriffs of London, by which office
and his practice in Law, he gained an estate of four hundred pounds per annum.
Now his learning wisdom, knowledge, and experience was grown into such note,
behaving himself so admirably, that he gained a general applause from all men;
and fell into such an estimation with King Henry the Eighth, that he made him
master of the Requests, soon after Knight, and one of his Privy Council; and so
from time to time advanced him; continuing still in his singular favor and
trusty service twenty years and above: his pleasant disposition and readiness
of wit so gaining him into King Henry's favor, that upon the death of Mr.
Weston, Treasurer of the Exchequer, the King bestowed on him the office of
Treasurer; and not long after made him Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

To render his History the more pleasant, take these few tastes of the
sharpness of his Wit Cambden reports of him that he used to compare the great
number of women to be chosen for Wives, unto a bag full of Snakes having
amongst them but one Eel; now if a man puts his hand into this bag, he may
chance to light on the Eel, but it is a hundred to one if he be not stung with a
Snake.

Being in company where the master of the house commended his Beer for the well
relish of the Hop, Sir Thomas replied, but had it hopped a little further, it
had hopped into the Thames.

A supposed bribe being put upon Sir Thomas, a great gilt Cup presented to him;
he being called before the Kings Council to answer this accusation, Sir Thomas
acknowledged that he did receive the Cup for a New-years-gift; after some
importunities he received it, but immediately he caused his Butler to fill it
with Wine, and therein drank to the Gentlewoman that presented it, and when
that she had pledged him, he as freely gave it her again for a New Years gift
for her Husband. This great Mountain of his accusation being brought scarcely
to a little Mosehill.

When he was Justice of Peace he used to go to the Sessions at New Gate, where
one of the Ancientest Justice of Peace of the Bench was used to chide persons
when their Purses had been cut, for not being more careful; telling them, that
their negligence was the cause that so many Cut-purses were brought thirther.
Sir Thomas obs rving him to repeat this caution so often, sent for one of the
chiefest Cutpurses that was in prison, and promised him to save him harmless if
he would but cut the said Justices Purse the next day as he sat on the Bench,
and when he had done to make a sign of it to him. The day after when they sat
again, the Thief was called one of the first; who being accused of the fact,
said, he did not doubt but that he could sufficiently excuse himself, if he
were permitted to speak to some of the Bench in private: Being bid to choose
whom he would, he choose the grave old Justice, who then had his pouch at his
girdle, as they wore them in those days; and whilst that he whispers him in
the ear, he slily cuts his purse. Sir Thomas knowing by the sign that the
business was dispatched, presently took occasion to move the Bench to distribute
some alms upon a poor needy fellow that was there, and for example sake began
first himself; the old Justice when he looked for his purse found it cut away;
and much wondering, said, He was confident he brought it with him. Sir Thomas
Moor replied pleasantly, What will you charge any of us with Felony? The
Justice's color rising (as he was ashamed) he calls the Cutpurse, and bids
him give him his purse again; and withal advised the good old Justice hereafter
not to be so bitter a censurer of other innocent men's negligences, when as
himself could not secure his purse in that open Assembly.

It chanced another time, that a Beggars little Dog which she had lost was sent
to the Lady Moor for a present, she kept it a week being much pleased and
delighted with it; but at last the Beggar having notice where her Dog was, came
and complained to Sir Thomas, as he was sitting in his Hall at Chelsey, that
his Lady kept her Dog from her: presently my Lady was sent for, and the Dog
brought with her; which Sir Thomas taking in his arms, he caused his Wife to
stand at the upper end of the Hall, and the Beggar at the lower end. Then
saying that he sat there to do every one justice, he bad each of them call the
Dog; which when they did, the Dog ran presently to the Beggar, forsaking his
Wife; which when he saw, he desired her to be contented, for it was none of
hers: yet she repining at the sentence, he agreed with the Beggar, and gave her
a piece of Gold. All parties being satisfied, every one smiling at this strange
discovery of truth.

Sir Thomas Moor demanding his money of one that was in his debt, spoke this
sentence in Latin to Sir Thomas Moor, Memento morieris; to which Sir Thomas
presently replied, What say you, Sir, Memento Mori aeris, Remember Mores money.

It is also storied of him, that whereas upon Holy Days during his High
Chancellourship, one of his Gentlemen when Service was done at Church used to
come to his Ladies Pew, and say, Madam, my Lord is gone. The next Holy Day
after his surrender of his office of Chancellourship, and putting off his
former retinue of Gentlemen, he came to his Wives Pew himself, and making a low
congee, said, Madam, my Lord is gone.

It is further reported of him, that when he was sent by his Master Henry the
Eighth into Germany, that a little before he delivered his Embassage to the
Emperor, he bid one of his servants to fill him a Beer-glasse of wine, which
he drunk off twice, commanding his servant to bring him a third; he knowing Sir
Thomas Moors temperance, that he was not used to drink, at the first refused to
fill him another, as he told Sir Thomas of the weight of his employment: But
his servant not daring to deny his Master the third glass, Sir Thomas made his
immediate address to the Emperor, and spoke his Oration in Latin, to the
admiration of all the Auditors. Afterward Sir Thomas merrily asking his man
what he thought of his speech, he said, that he deserved to govern three parts
of the World, and he believed if he had drunk the other glass, the Elegancy of
his Language might have purchased the other part of the World.

Another time a certain Friend of his presented him with a Book which he
intended to publish, (being well conceited of his own Wit, which no body else
thought worth the reading) because he would Sir Thomas should oversee it ere it
were printed, he brought it to him; who perusing it, and finding nothing
therein worthy the Press, said with a grave countenance, If it were in Verse,
it would deserve better. Upon which words he went and turned it into verse, and
then brought it again to Sir Thomas, who looking thereon said soberly, Yea
marry, now it is somewhat; for it is Rhyme now, before it was neither Rhyme nor
Reason. Infinite are the conceited expressions that continually fell from him.

But to return from whence we have digrest, during the time he was Chancellor
of the Duchy, he was twice made Ambassador, joined in Commission with
Cardinal Wolsey, once to the Emperor Charles into Flanders, the other time to
the French King into France. Being once at Bruges in Flanders, where an
arrogant fellow had set up a Thesis, that he would answer any question could be
propounded unto him in what Art soever: Of whom when Sir Tho. Moor heard, he
laughed, and made this Question to be put up for him to answer, Whether Averia
capta in Withernamia sunt irreplegebilia: adding, that there was one of the
English Ambassadors Retinue that would thereof dispute with him. This bragging
Thraso, not so much as understanding those Terms of our Common Law, knew not
what to answer to it; and so he became ridiculous to the whole City for his
presumptuous bragging.

The Sea of Rome being now void, Cardinal Wolsey ambitiously seeks for the
place, but by means of the Emperor Charles the First was disappointed;
whereupn the Cardinal (as we have recorded in his Life) to be revenged on the
Emperor, and to ingratiate himself with the French King, endeavors a Divorce
betwixt King Henry and Queen Katherine, Aunt to the Emperor, thereby to
procure him to match with the French Kings sister. And for the better
accomplishing thereof, he requested Longland Bishop of London, and Ghostly
Father to the King, to put a scruple into the Kings head, that it was not
lawful for him to marry his Brothers Wife: which the King not sorry to hear of,
opened it first to Sir Thomas Moor, whose counsel he required therein, of
purpose quoting certain places of Scripture that seemed to serve his turn.

Sir Thomas Moor unwilling to displease the King by discovering his opinion,
began to excuse himself (as one that had never professed the study of Divinity)
to be every way unfit to meddle with such matters; the King not satisfied with
this answer, still pressed upon him so sore for it, that in conclusion he
condescended to his request. And further, because the business was of such
weight and importance, as required advisement, and good deliberation, he
besought his Grace that he would give him sufficient time seriously to consider
it; wherewith the King very well contented, told him that Tunstal and Clark,
Bishops of Durham and Bathe, with others the most learned of his privy Council,
should also confer with him therein.

Sir Thomas Moor departing, compared those places of Scripture with the
Expositions of diverse of the old Doctors; and at his next coming to the Court,
discoursing to his Majesty his opinion of the foresaid matter, he said, To be
plain with your Grace, neither my Lord of Durham, nor my Lord of Bathe, (though
I know them both to be wise, virtuous, learned and honorable Prelates) nor my
self with the rest of your Council, (being all of us your Majesty's own
Servants, so much bound unto your Highness for your great favors daily
bestowed upon us) be, in my judgment, meet Counselors for your Grace herein;
but if your Highness please to understand the very truth, you may have such
Counselors elected, as neither for respect of their own worldly profit, nor
for fear of your Princely displeasure, will be inclined to partiality. He then
quoted Saint Hierome, Saint Austine, and diverse other Fathers and Holy
Doctors, both Greek and Latin, showing what authority he had gathered out of
them for what he said; which although it was against the grain, not so pleasant
to the King, as not agreeing to his desires; yet Sir Thomas Moor (had in all
his communication with the King in this business) so discreetly demeaned
himself, that at that present the King did not distaste what he said, and often
afterward had conference with him about the same case of Conscience.

For the further trial and examination of this Matrimony scruple, a Commission
was sent from Rome, in which Cardinal Campeius and Cardinal Wolsey were joined
Commissioners; who for the determination thereof sat at Black Friars in
London: the King and Queen being cited to appear before them. In the
prosecution of which busisiness, the King took such distaste at Wolsey, that he
displaced him of his office of Lord Chancellor, and bestowed the same on Sir
Thomas Moor, the better to draw him to his side; but he valuing more the quiet
of his Conscience then any Princes honor in the world, fell down on his knees,
desiring his Majesty's favor to employ him in any Affair, in which with
integrity of his Conscience he might truly serve God and him: to which the King
courteously answered, that if he could not therein with his Conscients serve, he
was content to accept of his service otherwise, and take the advice of other
his learned Council, whose consciences would well enough dispense with it; yet
that he would nevertheless continue his wonted favor toward him, and no more
molest or trouble his mind with that business.

Upon Sir Thomas Moors entrance into this last honorable preferment, every one
might perceive a very strange alteration: for whereas the precedent Chancellor
Wolsey would scarce look or speak to any, into whose only presence none could
be admitted unless his fingers were tipp'd with Gold; on the contrary, this
Chancellor, the poorer and meaner the Suppliant was, the more affable he was
to him, and the more attentively he would hearken to his cause, and with speedy
trial dispatch him; for which purpose he used commonly every afternoon to fit
in his Hall, that if any person whatsoever had any suit unto him, they might
the more boldly come to his presence, and open their complaints before him, and
find sudden redress. It is reported of him that whereas our pick pocket Lawyers
with longwinded Chancery Demurrs, to the undoing of thousands; keep off
business, his practice was, if it were to be done with convenience, to dispatch
a Cause at the first hearing; for which reason a Writer wittily calls him Sir
Thomas Plus; because before he rose off from the Bench, he always used to ask
if there were any more Causes. Thus the greatness of honor, the change of his
place altered him not; Sir Themas remained still the same good man that he was,
his humility was the same. It being observed of him, that every day as he
passed through the Hall to his place in the Chancery, by the Court of the Kings
Bench, where his Father was one of the Judges, that he would go into the Court,
and there reverently kneeling down, in the fight of them all, duly ask his
Father Blessing.

I shall only add one story more concerning his humility in the height of his
honor; the Duke of Norfolk coming on a time to Chelsey to dine with him,
happened to find him in the Church singing in the Quire, with a surplice on his
back; to whom after Service as they went homeward hand in hand together, the
Duke said, Gods Body, my Lord Chancellor, what a Parish Clerk a Parish Clerk;
you dishonor the King and his Office: nay, said Sir Thomas, smiling upon the
Duke, Your Grace may not think your master and mine will be offended with me
for serving of God his Master, of thereby count his office dishonored.

To proceed, King Henry determining to marry the Lady Anne Cleve, for his
better proceeding in this affair called a Parliament, where he with the Bishops
and Nobles of the upper House, were commanded by the King to go down to the
Commons, to show unto them both what the Universities as well of other parts
beyond the Seas, as at Oxford and Cambridge, had done therein; their Seals also
testifying the same; all which at the Kings request (not showing of what
judgment himself was therein) he declared unto the lower House: yet doubting
least further attempts should after follow, which contrary to his Conscience
(by reason of his office) he was likely to be put unto, he made suit unto the
Duke of Norfolk, his singular dear friend, to be a means to the King, that he
might with his Majesty's favor be discharged of that chargeable office of
Chancellourship; wherein for certain infirmities of his body, he pretended
himself unable any longer to serve. To which purpose the Duke soliciting the
King, obtained of him a clear discharge from the same, with thanks and praise
for his worthy service herein. And not underservedly, his integrity, nobleness,
and charity being so great that notwithstanding he had gone through so many
offices for almost twenty years, he was not able to purchase more then one
hundred pounds a year.

Touching his troubles, they began first by occasion of a certain Nun dwelling
in Canterbury, who affirmed that she had revelations from God to give the King
warning of his wicked life, and of the abuse of the Sword and Authority
committed to him. This Nun conferring with Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas Moor
about the same, they advised her to go to the King her self, and to let him
understand the whole circumstance thereof: whereupon at the Parliament
following, there was a Bill put into the lower House, to attache the Nun with
diverse other Religious persons of High Treason, and the Bishop of Rochester,
Sir Thowas Moor, and some others of misprision of Treason. Diverse other
accusations came thick and threefold upon him; and doubtless had he not been
one of a singular integrity, and free from all corruption of wrong doing, or
bribes taking, these accusations had overwhelmed him: but they all falling
short of the mischievous design that was on foot against him, a trick was found
not to take him off, which those that contrived it were certain could not but
take, as they knew that he was of so tender a conscience as that they could not
fail of their project; he was cited to appear at Lambeth before the Bishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, and Secretary Cromwell, to take the oath of
Supremacy, and Succession; which he refusing, he was committed to the custody
of the Abbot of Westminster for four days, and afterward, by the importunity
of Queen Anne, to the Tower.

Whereat his landing, Mr. Lieutenant was ready to receive him, the Porter of
the Tower demanded of him his upper Garment, Mr. Porter, said he, here it is;
and took off his Cap and gave it him, saying, I am sorry it is no better for
thee: no Sir, said the Porter, I must have your Gown, which he gave him. This
his pleasantness certainly argued a confidence he had in the justness of his
cause.

After many endeavors during his abode in the Tower, to get his consent to the
taking of the Oath, all which proving fruitless, after a years imprisonment, he
was called to his arraignment at the Kings Bench Bar, where his Indictment
being read, he pleaded not guilty; and to the admiration of the hearers, so
quitted himself, that he put the Bench to a stand; until at the last one Mr.
Rich the Kings Solliciter deposited against him, that he should say, The
Parliament could make the King no more Supreme Head of Church, then they could
make a Law that God should not be God. To which Sir Thomas answered, If I were
a man my Lords, that did not regard an oath, I need not at this time in this
place (as it is well known to you all) stand as an accused person. And if this
oath (Mr. Rich) which you have taken be true, then I pray that I may never see
God in the Face, which I would not say were it otherwise to gain the whole
world.

Yet notwithstanding his oath, and the exceptions he took against the witness,
the Lord Chancellor proceeded to sentence, That he should be brought back to
the Tower of London, by the help of William Bringston Sheriff, and from thence
drawn on a Hurdle through the City of London to Tyburne, there to be hanged
till he be half dead, after that cut down yet alive, his Privy Parts cut off,
his Belly ripped, his Bowels burnt, and his four quarters set up over four
Gates of the City, and his head upon London Bridge.

This Sentence was by the Kings pardon changed afterward into only beheading,
because he had borne the highest Office in the Kingdom. Of which mercy of the
Kings, word being brought to Sir Thomas, he answered merrily, God forbid the
King should use any more such mercies to any of my posterity or friends.

During the time he remained in the Tower after Sentence passed on him, one of
the Court came to visit him, whose whole discourse was nothing else, but urging
Sir Thomas to change his mind; who at last being wearied with his importunity,
answered him, That he had changed it. Whreupon presently he went and told the
King; and being by him commanded to know wherein his mind was changed, Sir
Thomas rebuked him for his inconsiderate rashness, that he should tell the King
those words that he spoke in jest, only to be rid of his impertinency;
meaning a while after this merry expression came from him, that whereas he
intended to be shaved, (for which he was said so much to resembled Erasmus)
that he might appear to the people as before, he now resolved that his beard
should undergo the same tribulation he did; which made the Courtier blank and
the King very angry. The day appointed for his execution being come, about nine
of the Clock he was brought out of the Tower, ascending the Scaffold, it seemed
so weak that it was ready to fall; whereupon he said merrily to the Lieutenant,
I pray you Mr. Lieutenant see me safe up, and for my coming down let me shift
for my self. Then desired he all the people to pray for him, and to bear
witness with him, that he should then suffer death, in, and for the Faith of
the Holy Catholic Church, a faithful servant both of God and the King. Which
done, he kneeled down, and after his prayers ended, he turned to the
Executioner, and with a cheerful countenance, said, Pluck up thy spirits man,
and be not afraid to do thine Office, my neck is very short, take heed
therefore thou strike not awry for saving thine honesty: then laying his head
upon the Block, he bad the Executioner stay until he had removed aside his
Beard, saying, That that had never committed any Treason. So with much
cheerfulness he received the Fatal blow of the Ax, which at once severed his
head from his body. This jest at his death the Catholics so much distasted,
that at so serious a time he should be so airy and light, that he had almost
been scratched out of their Canonization for a Saint. He was executed the sixth
day of July, following the decollation of Bishop Fisher, who was for the same
Cause beheaded on Tower Hill. The Life of this Bishop is extant, incomparable
well done by Doctor Bailie.

Thus died Sir Thomas Moor, a man admirable in all kind of learning, Latin,
Greek, Profane, Divine: his Vtopia is admired over the world; his Richard the
Third, till of late years, of so much credit with Historians, that they have
placed it in their Works without the alteration of a word. He was of such
excellency of Wit and Wisdom, that he was able to make his fortune good in what
place soever he lived; who wanted no skill either for the mannaging of private
or public businesses, being experienced both in Country and City Affairs; in
giving solid and sound counsel in doubtful cases, none more prudent; to tell
the truth without fear, none more free; as from all flatteries he was open and
pleasant, full of grace in delivering his judgment. And to conclude, one,
whose integrity made him a miracle of nature, whist he was living, and whose
Books have made him an everlasting Monument now he is dead. He was behead in
the year 1535. his Monument is in Chelsey Church, where it is reported Bishop
Fisher lies buried with him in the same Grave; that as they suffered for one
Opinion, it was thought fit they should not be parted.

Epitaphium Thomae Mori quod paulo post abdicatum munus Cancellarii ipse sibi
composuit, and Sepulchro suo affixit.

Thomas Morus, Vrbe Londinensi, familia non celebri, sed honesta natus, in
literis utcunque versatus, quum ut causas aliquot juvenis egisset in foro, and
in urbe, suo pro Shyrevo jus dixisset, ab invictissimo Rege Henrico Octavo (cui
uni regum omnium gloria prius inaudita contigit, and fidei defensor, qualem and
gladio se, and calamo vere praestitit, merito vocaretur) aa scitus in aulam
est, delectusque in concilium, and creatus eques, proquaestor primum, post
Cancellarius Lancastriae, tandem Angliae miro principis favore factus est. Sed
interim in publico regni senatulectus est orator populi praeterea legatus regis
nonnunquam fuit, alias alibi; postremo vero Cameraci, Comes and collega junctus
Principi Legationis Cuthberto Tonstallo, tum Londinensi, mox Dunelmensi
Episcopo; quo viro vix habet orbis hodie quicquam eruditius, prudentius,
melius. Ibiinter summos Christiani orbis Monarchas rursus refecta faedera,
redditamque mundo diu desideratam pacem, and laetisimus videt, and Legatus
interfuit.

Quam superi pacem firment, faxintque perennem. In hoc officiorum vel honorum
cursu quum ita versaretur, ut neque Princeps optimus operam ejus improbaret,
neque nobilibus esset invisus, neque injucundus populo; furibus autem,
homicidis, haereticisque molestus: Pater ejus tandem Joannes Morus Eques, and
in eum Judicum ordinem a Principe cooptatus, qui regius consessus vocatur; homo
civilis, innocens, mitis, misericors, equus and integer, annis quidem gravis,
sed corpore plus quam pro aetate vivido, postquam eo productam sibi vidit
vitam, ut filium videret Angliae Cancellarium, satis in terra jam se moratum
ratus, lubens migravit in coelum. At filius defancto patre, cui, quamdiu
supererat comparatus, and juvenis vocari consueverat, and ipse quoque sibi
videbatur, amissum jam patrem requirens, and editos ex se libros IV. at Nepotes
XI. respiciens caepit apud animum persenescere. Auxit hunc affectum animi
subsequuta statim velut ad petentis senii signum, pectoris valetudo deterior.
Itaque mortalium harum rerum satur, quam rem a puero semper, optaverat, ut
ultimos aliquot vitae suae annos obtineret liberos, quibus hujus vitae negotiis
paulatim se subducens, futuram posset immortalitatem meditari, eam rem tandem
(si coeptis annuat Deus) indulgentissimi principis incomparabili beneficio
resignatis honoribus impetravit, atque hoc sepulchrum sibi, quod mortis eum
nunquam cessantis adrepere quotidie commonefaceret, translatis huc prioris
uxoris ossibus, extruendum curavit. Quod ne superstes frustra sibi fecerit,
neve ingruentem trepidus horreat, sed desiderio Christi lubens oppetat,
mortemque ut sibi non omnino mortem, sed januam vitae felicioris inveniat,
precibus eum, Lector optime, spirantem, precor, defunctumque prosequere;

Pro Vxoribus suis, Chara Thomae jacet, etc.

Sub quo haec quoque subjuncta Carmina occurrunt.
Chara Thomae jacet hic Joanna Vxorcula mori,
Qui tumulum Aliciae, hunc destino quique mihi.
Vna mihi dedit hoc conjuncta virentibus annis,
Me vocet ut puer and trina puella patrem.
Altera privignis (quae gloria rara novercae est)
Tam pia quam gnatis vix fuit ulla suis.
Altera si mecum vixit sic altera vivit,
Charior incertum est, haec sit an haec fuerit.
O simul o juncti poteramus vivere nos tres,
Quam been si factum religioque sinant.
Et societ tumulus, societ nos obsecro Coelum,
Sic mors non potuit quod dare vita dabit.
The Life of THOMAS CROMWELL Earl of Essex.
Fortunae speculum Cromwellus scandit ad alta,
Vt casu graviore ruat, Regisque favore
Tollitur hincque cadit livore oppressus inique.
THomas Cromwell, from so low a beginning, as from the Forge, attained to so
high a pitch of honor, as to be raised to a Pillar of State.

His Father, as our Chronicles report, was a Blacksmith, to whom may be applied
what Juvenal said of Demosthenes.

Whom his poor Father, blear-eye'd with the soot
Of sparks, which from the burning Iron did shoot,
From Coals, Tongs, Anvil, and such Black-smiths tools,
And dirty Forge sent to the Rhetrick Schools.
He was born at Putney in Surrey, four miles from London, being endued with a
singular excellency of Wit. His first advancement was under Cardinal Wolsey,
who made him his Solliciter, employing him for the suppression of forty
Monasteries, to the erection of his Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich. At the
fall of the Cardinal he got him to Court, where he was by King Henry first
advanced to be Master of his Jewel-house, then Barron of Oakham in
Rutlandshire, then Knight of the Garter; ere long he was created Earl of Essex,
then made Lord great Chamberlain, and lastly ordained the Kings Vicar General
over the Spirituality; by virtue of which Office he sat in the
Convocation-house, as Head over the Bishops: an Honor so great, that never any
subject enjoyed the like in England. Drayton thus epitomizes his Honors,

First by my Knighthood, rising by degree,
The Office of a Jewel-house my lot;
After the Robes he frankly gave to me,
From whence to Privy Counselor I got:
Then of the Garter, and then Earl to be
Of Essex: yet sufficient these were not,
But to the great Vicegerency I drew,
Being a Title as supreme as new,
And now finding by Wolsey's predicting fall, that the foundations of
Monasteries were not unmovable; he puts it into the King head to have them all
suppressed, who being not long before declared supreme Head of the Church,
thought his state in danger, so long as the Pope had such Pillars to uphold his
Power. Another main thing was their excessive Riches, which was valued at the
yearly sum of 1865 12. pounds, 8. shillings, 1. d. o. q. besides the two
Universities, and diverse Monasteries, which were unvalued. And no wonder that
Bell sounded so sweetly in the Kings ear, when so much profit pulled the rope:
what ever was the true cause, the pretended cause was the gain that was got by
ignorant devotion, and gadding on Pilgrimage; as likewise that they were the
receptacles of all traitorous attempts against the peace of the Land, and
Supremacy of the Crown. Besides the Whoredoms, Adulteries, Incests, and filthy
Sodomies of the Monks, Friars, and Priests, which put together weighed so
heavy, that by Act of Parliament they were granted all to the Kings use, and
Injunctions sent forth for the Bible in English to be read in all Churches, and
Register-books of Weddings, Christenings, and Burials in every of them to be
kept.

These Actions of the King exasperated many, especially the Pope, who feared
his Dagon would down, if the King should be acknowledged supreme Head of the
Church; whereupon he pronounces him an Heretic, and seduceth (amongst others)
James the Fifth King of Scotland against him. Cromwell that his Master might be
able to bandy with the Pope, counsels him to allie himself with some
Protestant Princess; the King then a widdower entertained the motion, and a
marriage is concluded betwixt him and the Lady Anne, Sister to William Duke of
Cleve, whose other Sister Fredrick Duke of Saxony had espoused, a great
favourer of the Gospel, and maintainer of Martin Luther, the promulgator and
professor thereof. But the Lady sent into England, and married to King Henry,
found but little affection from him, which Stephen Gardener then Bishop of
Winchester perceiving, thought it a fit subject for him to work upon against
the Lord Cromwell, the first contriver of the match; for being in his heart a
great stickler for the Pope, he resolved to make use of the times. He
acknowledged the Kings supremacy, he persuaded the King that his reformation of
Religion would set all the Princes of Christendom against him; and at last
prevailed so far with him, that he consented to have six Articles enacted by
Parliament, which according as we find them, we have here transcribed to
posterity.

1. That after the words of confirmation spoken by the Priest, the real and
natural body and blood of Christ, as he was Conceived and Crucified, was in the
Sacrament, and no other substance consisting in the form of Bread and Wine,
besides the substance of Christ, God, and man.

2. That the communion in both kinds was not necessary unto salvation, the
flesh only in the form of Bread sufficient for the Laity.

3. That Priests after they had received Orders might not marry by the Law of
God.

4. That the vows of Chastity either in man or Woman, ought by Gods Law to be
observed, and by which they are exempted from other Liberties of Christian
people.

5. That private Masses was necessary for the people, and agreeable to the Law
of God.

6. That Auricular Confession was expedient to be retained and continued in the
Church of God.

By this we see the King left the sting of Popery still remaining, though the
teeth were knocked out by abolishing the Popes supremacy; the effect of which
bloody Articles the Lord Cromwell soon felt, for the King having by him
attained his ends, and filled his Coffers with the Abbeys wealth, left him to
the malice of his inveterate enemies. Whereupon a Parliament being summoned,
Cromwell being in the Council Chamber was suddenly apprehended, and committed
prisoner to the Tower: the Crimes objected against him were these. First, he
was accused of Heresy, and a supporter of Heretics Secondly, that he had
dispersed amongst the Kings Subjects many Books containing much Heresy in
them. Thirdly, that he had caused many Books to be Translated into English,
comprizing matter against the Sacrament of the Altar, and that he had commended
it a good and Christian Doctrine. Fourthly, that he had spoken words against
the King. Whilst he remained in the Tower, some Commissioners coming to
examine him, he answered them with such discretion, as showed him to be of a
sound judgment, and as able to defend, as they to accuse. Amongst the
Commissioners there was one whom the Lord Cromwell desired to carry from him a
Letter to the King, which he refused, saying, That he would carry no Letter to
the King from a Traitor: then he desired him at the least to carry a message
from him to the King, which request he assemted to, so it were not against his
Allegiance; then the Lord Cromwell taking witness of the other Lords what he
had promised, You shall (said he) commend me to the King, and tell him, by that
time he has tried and proved you as I have done, he shall find you as false a
man as ever came about him. But his enemies knowing his innocence, and
abilities, durst not bring him to his answer, nor try him by his Peers, but
procured an Act of Attaindure, whereby he was condemned before he was heard.
For the better illustration of his History, before I shall acquaint you with
his exit, I thought it not improper to insert an example of his Generosity and
Gratitude, as I have it from Doctor Hackwell in his Apology, in these words.

In those glorious days, when the English young Gentry endeavored to outvie
their elder Brothers, by undertaking far and dangerous journies into Foreign
Parts, to acquire glory by feats of Arms, and experiencing themselves in the
Military Discipline, Thomas Cromwell a younger Brother, to better his knowledge
in Warlike Affairs, passed into France, and there trailed a Pike, accompanying
the French Forces into Italy, where they were defeated at Gattellion; whereupon
our English Volantier betook himself to Florence, designing to pass thence home
again into England: but having lost all his equipage, and being in a
necessitated condition, he was enforced to address himself to one Signior
Francisco Frescobald an Italian Merchant, who corresponded at London; and
making his case known unto him, Frescobald observing something remarkable, and
a certain promising greatness in the Features, Actions, and Deportment of
Thomas Cromwell, who gave an account of himself with so candid an ingenuity, and
in such terms as beseemed his Birth, and the Profession he then was of: whereby
he gained so much upon Frescobald, as inviting him home to his house, he caused
him to be accommodated with new Linen and Clothes, and other suitable
necessaries; kindly entertaining him, till such time as he testified a desire
to return for England; when as to complete his Generosity and Kindeness, he
gave Mr. Tho. Cromwell a Horse, and 16. duccats in gold, to prosecute his
journey homewards.

In process of time, several Disasters and Bankrupts befalling Signior
Frescobald, his Trading and Credit was not a little thereby impaired; and
reflecting on the Moneys which were due unto him by his Correspondents in
England, to the value of 15000. Duccats he resolved to pass thither, and try
whether he could happily procure payment.

During which interval of time, Mr. Thomas Cromwell being a person endowed with
a great deal of Courage, of a transcendent Wit, hardy in his undertakings, and
a great Politician, had by these his good qualities gotten himself entrance and
credit at Court, and highly ingratiated himself with King Henry the Eighth;
having advanced himself to almost as high a pitch of Honor, in as short a
time, in a manner, as his late Highness did.

The Lord Thomas Cromwell therefore riding one day with a great Train of Noble
Men toward the Kings Palace, chanced to espy on foot in the streets Signior
Frescocobald, the Italian Merchant, in an ill plight: however, he immediately
alighting from his Horse, embraced him before all the world, to the great
astonishment of the beholders, and chid him, that at his very arrival he came
not to visit him. Frescobald being astonished at so unexpected an encounter,
and receiving so signal a favor from a Personage he could not call to mind he
had ever known, was quite surprised; and my Lord Cromwells pressing Affairs at
Court not permitting him the while to acquaint him further who he was, only
engaged him to come and dine with him that day. Frescobald full of amazement,
enquired of the Attendants who that great Personage might be? And hearing his
name, he began to call the Feature of his Face, and the Idea of his Person to
mind; and so by degrees conceiving with himself it might happily be the same
Mr. Thomas Cromwell whom he had harbored at Florence; he enquired out his
Lordships habitation, and attended his coming at Noontide, walking in his
Courtyard. No sooner was the Lord Thomas Cromwell entered the same (attended by
several persons of Quality, and Officers of the Crown) but speedily alighting
from his Horse, he embraced his Friend Frescobald in the same manner he had
done in the morning; and perceiving that the Lords which accompanied him were
amazed at such a disproportioned familiarity, he told them that he was more
obliged to Frescobald, then to all the men in the world, owing unto him the
making of his Fortune; and so proceeded to relate unto them the whole story
which had befallen him at Florence. So great a delight do generous minds take
to recount their foregoing Misfortunes, when their Grandor has elevated them
to such a pitch, as that they triumph over shame, and are incapable of
Ingratitude.

Frescobald was treated at Dinner with all the tenderness he could expect from
so great a Personage, and so great a Friend, after which being carried up by
the Lord Thomas Cromwell into his Closet, he was there presented with four Bags
of Gold, each containing four hundred Duccats, in return of his former
Civilities: which Frescobald (being of a gallant spirit) at first refused, but
after several contestations was constrained to accept, as an acknowledgement
from the Lord Cromwell; who, moreover enquiring of him concerning his coming
over, and Affairs in England; and understanding his Losses, and that there were
Moneys due to him, caused him to write down his Debtors names; and by his
Secretary summoned the several Merchants which were indebted to Frescobald
(upon pain of his displeasure) to clear their Accounts with him, and to pay him
within the space of fifteen days; which was accordingly performed: only
Frescobald freely forgave them the use.

Over and above all which, the Lord Thomas Cromwell endeavored to persuade his
Friend Frescobald to have remained in England the rest of his days, proferring
to lend him a Stock of 60000. Duccats, to trade withal: But Frescobald being
overcharged with all those grand Obligations which the Lord Cromwell had
conferred on him; having by his Lordships Generosity acquired enough to keep
him from being necessitated all his life time; and deeming that the trading in
good Works was incomparably more sure and gainful then in the richest Wares and
Merchandises, being resolved to quit Trading, and to end the rest of his days
peaceably and quietly, he obtained leave of the Lord Thomas Cromwell to depart
to his own Country, freighted with so great obligations as caused in him a
generous shame. He afterward arrived safe in his own Country, where with great
reputation he dyed in a good old age.

Having done him this honor to eternize the noble deportments of his life, I
shall now end with a short account of what he said at his death.

When he came upon the Scaffold on Tower Hill he delivered his mind to the
people; I am come hither to die, and not to purge my self, as some perhaps may
expect that I should, and will; for if I should so do, I were a very wretch: I
am by the Law condemned to die, and I thank my Lord God that has appointed me
this death for mine offense; for I have always lived a sinner, and offended my
Lord God, for which I ask him hearty forgiveness. Its not unknown to many of
you, that I was a great Traveller, and being but of mean Parentage, was called
to high honors, and now I have offended my Prince, for which I heartily ask
him forgiveness, beseeching you to pray with me to almighty God, that he will
forgive me, etc. Then kneeling down on his knees, he made a long and pithy
prayer, which being ended, after a godly exhortation to those on the Scaffold,
he commended his Spirit into the hands of his Maker: his head being dissevered
from his body, July 28 1540. The King not long after his death, clapping his
hands on his breast, repented this haste, wishing that he had his Cromwell
alive again. With him was beheaded the Lord Hungerford of Heitesbury, who
suffered death, a just death for buggery. Without question Cromwell was a
person of singular qualifications, unfortunate in nothing more then that he
lived in the days of Henry the Eighth; of whom, if it could be possible, one
writes, that for the time he Reigned, he was guilty of more Tyranny then any of
the Roman Emperors. This great Statesman was condemned to death, and yet never
came to his answer, by an act (as it is said) which he himself caused to be
made; of which Mr. Michael Drayton thus writes.

Those Laws I made alone my self to please,
To give me power more freely to my will,
Even to my equals hurtful several ways,
Forced to things that most do essay were ill;
Upon me now as violently seize,
By which I lastly perished by my skill,
On mine own neck returning as my due,
That heavy yoke wherein by me they drew:
Thus whilst we strive too suddenly to rise,
By flattering Princes with a servile Tongue;
And being soothers to their tyrannies,
Work our much woes by what does many wrong:
And unto others tending injuries,
Unto our selves producing our own wrong;
In our own snares unluckily thus caught,
Whilst our attempts fall instantly to naught.
Questionless he was a man of an active and forward ripeness of nature, ready
and pregnant of wit, discreet and well advised in judgment, eloquent of
tongue, faithful and diligent in service, of an incomparable memory, of a
reaching pollitick head, and of a most undaunted spirit.

The Life of the great King Henry the Eighth, with the other Reigns of his
Posterity, I have omitted, because they are so excellently penned by several
Historians, and so Vulgarly known to the people.
The Life of Sir PHILIP SIDNEY
Carmen Apollo dedit, belli Mars contulit arts,
Sed Juveni vitam Mors rapit ante diem.
AMongst the rest of our Worthies, there is none of more precious memory then
that famous and Heroic Knight Sir Philip Sidney, in whom the Graces and Muses
had their domestical habitations; whose Life as it was admirable, so his Lines
have not been excelled, though the French of late in imitation have endeavored
to address them. He was born of honorable parentage, his Father Sir Henry
Sidney was thrice Lord Deputy of Ireland, a place of great honor and trust,
having power of themselves to call Parliaments and enact Laws; nor comes there
any Vicegerent in Europe, more near the Majesty and prerogative of a King. His
Mother was Daughter to Sir John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and Sister to
the Earls of Warwick and Leicester; so that his descent was apparently noble of
both sides. Verstigan says the Sidney's are of a French extraction, that they
came over into England in Henry the Thirds days. In his very childe-hood there
appeared in him such excellent parts and endowments of nature, as showed him
born for high enterprises; having been educated in the principles of learning
at home, he was sent to the University of Oxford, Cambridge being nevertheless
so happy to have a College of his name, where he so profited in the Arts and
Sciences, that after an incredible proficiency in all the species of Learning,
he left the Accademical life, for that of the Court; whither he came by the
invitation of his Uncle, the Earl of Leicester, of whose faction he was; a
great favorite of Queen Elizabeth: he was of a comely presence, framed by a
natural propension to arms, and Warlike achievements; so that he soon
attracted the good opinion of all men, especially of the Queen, fame having
already blazed abroad his admirable parts; she thought him fit for the greatest
employments, sent him upon an Embassy to the Emperor of Germany at Vienna,
which he discharged to his own honor, and her approbation. Yea, his fame was
so renowned throughout all Christendom, that he was in election for the Kingdom
of Poland, and elective Kingdom: but the Queen refused to further his
advancement, not out of emulation, but for the loss of his company at Court. He
married Sir Francis Walsingams Daughter, who impoverished himself to enrich the
State; from whom he expected no more then what was above all portions, a
Beautiful Wife, and a Virtuous Daughter.

During his abode at the Court, at his spare hours he composed that
incomparable Romance, entitled, The Arcadia, which he ded icated to his Sister
the Countess of Pembroke. A Book, which considering his so Youthful Years, and
Martial Employments, it was a wonder that he had leisure for to write such a
Volumn: which as Dr. Heylin the Learned Ornament of our Nation in his exquisite
Cosmography writes thus of. Sir Philip Sidney, of whom says he, I cannot make
too honorable a mention, and of his Arcadia, a Book which besides its
excellent Language, rare Contrivance, and delectable Stories, has in it all
the strains of Poesy, comprehends the whole Art of Speaking, and to them who
can descern and will observe, affords notable Rules of Demeanor, both
private and public. One writes that Sir Philip Sidney in the extreme agony of
his wounds, so terrible the sense of Death is, that he requested the dearest
Friend he had living to burn his Arcadia. On which one Epigrammatist writes
thus.

Ipse tuam moriens sede conjuge test jubebas,
Arcadium faevis ignibus esse cibum;
Sic meruit mortem quia flammam accendit amoris,
Mergi, non uri debuit iste liber.
In librum quaecunque cadat sententia nulla,
Debuit ingenium morte perire tuum.
In serious thoughts of death 'twas thy desire
This sportful Book should be condemned with fire:
If so because it does intend Love matters,
It rather should be quenched then drowned in the waters.
Which were it damned, the Book, the Memory
Of thy immortal name shall never dye.
To make amends to such precise persons that think all that is not Divinity to
be vain and lascivious, he translated part of that excellent Treatise of Philip
Morney de Plessis, of the truth of Religion. To pass by the follies of such
supercillious Enthusiasts, he wrote also several other Works; namely, a
defense of Poesy, a Book entitled, Astrophel and Stella, with diverse Songs
and Sonnets in praise of his Lady, whom he celebrated under that bright name;
so excellently and elegantly penned, that as it is in a Poem:

'Twould make one think (so sweet of Love he sings)
His Pens were Quills plucked off from Cupids Wings.
So great were the Lamentations of his Funerals, that a face might be sooner
found without eyes then without tears; no Persons of Honor at that time but
thought it a dishonor not to mourn for him.

To recite the Commendations given him by several Authors, would of its self
require a Volumn; to rehearse some few not unpleasing to the Reader, Heylin in
his Cosmography, calls him that gallant Gentleman, of whom he cannot but make
honorable mention. Another in his Annals, a most valiant and towardly
Gentleman. Speed in his Chronicle, that worthy Gentleman, in whom were complete
all virtues and valors that could be expected to reside in man. Sir Richard
Baker gives him this Character, A man of so many excellent Parts of Art and
Nature, of Valor and Learning, of Wit and Magnanimity, that as he had equalled
all those of former Ages, so the future will hardly be able to equal him.

Nor was this Poet forgotten by the Poets, who offered whole Hecatombs of
Verses in his praise. First hear the British Epigrammatist.

Thou writ'st things worthy reading, and did do
Things worthy writing too.
Thy Acts thy Valor show,
And by thy Works we do thy Learning know.
Divine Du Bartas speaking of the most Learned of the English Nation, reckons
him as one of the Chief in these words.

And (world mourned) Sidney, warbling to the Thames
His Swan-like tunes, so courts her coy proud streams,
That (all with child with fame) his fame they bear
To Thetis Lap, and Thetis every were.
The Renowned Poet Spenser in his Ruins of Time, thus writes of him.

Yet will I sing, but who can better sing
Then thou thy self, thine own self's valiance?
That whilst thou livedst thou made the Forests ring,
And Fields resoun'd, and Flocks to leap and dance,
And Shepherds leave their Lambs unto mischance,
To run thy shrill Arcadian Pipe to hear:
O happy were those days, thrice happy were.
Sir John Harrington in his Epigrams thus,

If that be true the latter Proverb says,
Laudari a laudatis is most praise;
Sidney thy Works in Fames Books are enrolled
By Princes Pens that have thy Works extolled,
Whereby thy Name shall dure to endless days.
Joining with the rest, that Kingly Poet King James the First, late Monarch of
Great Britain amongst others, writes thus.

When Venus saw the noble Sidney dying,
She thought it her beloved Mars had been;
And with the thought thereat she fell a crying.
And cast away her Rings and Carknets clean.
He that in death a Goddess mocked and grieved,
What had he done (trow you) if he had lived.
These Commendations given him by so Learned a Prince, made Mr. Alexander Nevil
thus to write.

Harps others praise, a Scepter his does sing,
Of Crowned Poets, and of Laureat King.
To conclude, the Lord Burleigh, the Nestor of those Times, though otherwise an
enemy to the Leicestrian Party, both loved and admired him.

Yet was he not altogether addicted to Arts, but given as much to the Exercise
of Arms, being a follower of Mars as well as a Friend to the Muses; and
although he himself used to say, That Ease was the Nurse of Poesy, yet his
Life made it manifest, that the Muses inhabited the Fields of Mars, as well as
the flowery Lawns of Arcadia; that Sonnets were sung in the Tents of War, as
well as in the Courts of Peace; the Muses Lays being warbled forth by a
Warlike Sidney in as high a tune, as ever they were sung by a peaceable Spenser.

And although the lamp of his life was extinguished too soon, yet left he a
sufficient testimony to the world what he would have been, had the Fates
allowed him a longer life. Witness such time when the French Ambassadors came
over into Englad, to negotiate a Marriage between the Duke of Anjou and Queen
Elizabeth; when for their entertainment a solemn Justs was proclaimed, where
the Earl of Arundel, Frederick Lord Windsor, Sir Foulk Grivel, and he, were
chief Challengers against all comers; in which challenge he behaved himself so
gallantly, that he wan the reputation of a most valiant Knight.

Not long after, the Netherlanders oppressed with the tyanny of the Duke D'
Alva, under the King of Spain, implored the assistance of Queen Elizabeth;
which matter being debated in Council, she condescended to become their
Defendress; and thereupon Articles being drawn, five thousand Foot, and a
thousand Horsemen were sent under the command of Sir John Norris, a renowned
Soldier, all retained at her Majesty's pay, which monthly amounted to twelve
thousand five hundred twenty six pound Sterling, accounting fifty six days to
the month. For which Moneys so disbursed, the Towns of Flushing and Brill,
with two Sconces, and the Castle of Ramekins in Holland were delivered as
Pledges till the Money was repaid. Over Flushing and the Castle of Ramekins was
Sir Philip Sidney appointed Governor: His Motto was, Vix ea nostra voco, who
during those Wars behaved himself, being entered into the Cockpit of War, most
gallantly. At the taking of a certain great Town named Axell, where within an
English mile of the Town calling so many of his Soldiers together as could
conveniently hear him, he expressed himself to this effect, That all such of
his Countrymen that exposed their lives to the hazard of Battle, ought to be
advised of three things. First, the justness of the cause. Secondly, for whom
they fight. Thirdly, against whom they fight. For the first, the justness of
the cause, were it only for the defense of the Gospel it were sufficient; but
the malice of the Spaniards did most evidently appear in their late attempts
for Ireland; and should they seat themselves in these Nertherland Provinces,
they might expect the same tyranny for England. Then next, the people for whom
they drew their Swords, were their Neighbors, always Friends, and
Well-will^^^ to the English; as contrarily those against whom they were to
fight, men of another Religion, enemies to God and his Church, a people whose
unkindeness both in nature and life does so excel, that God would not leave
them unpunished. Furthermore he persuaded them that they were Englishmen, whose
valor the world both feared and admired; and therefore now they should acquit
themselves like Englishmen, for their own credit, and honor of their
Country. Which oration wrought in them such resolutions, that they all vowed
to live and die in that Service. How the Dutch have since deserved their then
assistance of the Queen, or the blood of a Sidney, as they have since demeaned
themselves, the world may judge. Amongst other of his successes he also took in
the strong Town of Dorpe: But in the full career of his Victories encountering
with the Spaniards near to a place called Zutphen, when the triumphant Laurells
were ready to crown his Brows, he was unfortunately shot in the thigh, which is
the rendezvous of nerves and sinnews, which caused a Fever, that proved so
mortal, that twenty five days after he died of the same; the night of whose
death was the noon of his age, and the loss of Christendom.

His Body was conveyed into England, and most honorably interred in the Church
of St. Paul in London; over which was fixed this Epitaph.

England, Netherland, the Heavens, and the Arts,
All Soldiers, and the world, have made six Parts
Of the noble Sidney; for none will suppose
That a small heap of stones can Sidney enclose:
England has his body, for she defense shed;
The Heavens his Soul, the Arts his Fame,
All Soldiers his grief, the World his good name.
Certain it is (says one) that he was a noble and matchless Gentleman, of whom
may be justly written without Hyperbole, or fiction, as it was of Cato
Vticensis; that he seemed to be born to do that only which he went about. To
speak more of him were to speak less.

The Life of ROBERT EARL of LEICESTER.
Ingenio gravis, art potens, magnusque favore
Principis; incertam liquit post funera famam.
THe Earl of Leicester the Grand Politician and Proteus of those times, was one
of Queen Elizabeth's early favorites; the first whom she made Master of the
Horse: he was the youngest Son then living of the Duke of Northumberland,
beheaded primo Mariae, and his Father was that Dudley, which our Histories
couple with Empson: and so much infamed for the Catterpillers of the
Commonwealth, during the Reign of Henry the Seventh; who being a noble extract,
was executed the first year of Henry the Eighth: but not thereby so extinct,
but that he left a plentiful estate, and such a Son, who as the Vulgar speaks
it, could live without the teat; for out of the ashes of his Fathers infamy he
rose to be a Duke, and as high, as subjection could permit, or Sovereignty
endure; and though he could not find out any appellation to assure the Crown
in his own person, yet he projected and very nearly affected it for his Son
Gilbert, by intermarriage with the Lady Jane Gray, and so by that way to bring
it about into his Loins. Observations which though they lie behind us, and
seem impertinent to the Text, yet are they not extravigant; for they must lead,
and show us how the after passages were brought about with the dependances, and
on the hinges of a collatterall workmanship: and truly it may amaze a well
settled Judgment to look into those times, and to consider how this Duke could
attain to such a pitch of greatness. His Father dying in ignomy and at the
Gallows, his estate confiscate, and that for pilling and polling, by the
clamor and crusifige of the people; but when we better think upon it, we find
that he was given up but as a Sacrifice to please the people, not for any
offense committed against the person of the King; so that upon the matter he
was a Martyr of the Prerogative, and the King in Honor could do do less, then
give back to his Son the privileges of his blood, with the acquirings of his
Fathers Profession, for he was a Lawyer and of the Kings Council at Law, before
he came to be ex interioribus consiliis, where besides the licking of his own
fingers, he got the King a mass of Riches, and that not with the hazard, but
the loss, of his fame and life for the Kings fathers sake. Certain it is, that
his son was left rich in purse and brain, which are good foundations, and fall
to ambition; and it may be supposed, he was on all occasions well heard of the
King, as a person of mark and compassion in his eye, but I find not that he did
put up for advancement, during Henry the Eights time, although a yast aspirer
and provident storer. It seems he thought the Kings Reign was given to the
falling sicknesas; but espying his time fitting, and his Sovereignty in the
hands of a Pupil Prince, he thought he might as well then put up for it as the
best: for having then possession of blood, and a purse, with a head piece of a
vast extent, he soon got honor; and no sooner there, but he began to side it
with the best, even with the Protector; and in conclusion got his, and his
Brothers heads; still aspiring, till he expired in the loss of his own: so that
Posterity may by reading the Father and Grandfather, make Judgment of the Son;
for we shall find that this Robert (whose original we have now traced, the
better to present him) was inheritour of the genius and craft of his Father,
and Ambrose of the estate, of whom hereafter we shall make some short mention.

We take him now as he was admitted into the Court and Queen Elizabeth's favor;
where he was not to seek to play his part well, and dexterously, but his play
was chiefly at the fore-game, not that he was a learner at the latter, but he
loved not the after wit: for they report (and not untruly) that he was seldom
behind hand with his gamesters, and that they always went away with the loss.

To accomplish his direful designs, it is reported that Doctor Dee and Allen
were his magical instruments; his Physicians that waited upon him were
admirable poisoners, that could dispatch at the time appointed, and not before.
At Cumner four or five miles from Oxford, his first Wife fell down a pair of
stairs and brake her neck, he was also suspected for the death of Cardinal
Castillian his great enemy; after him he sent the Lord Sheffield, as it was
thought, by an artificial Catarrhe. Mounsieur Simers Ambassador to the French
King, he forced to fly this Kingdom for his too early prattling to the Queen of
this his Marriage with the Lady Lettice. He poisoned Sir Nicholas Throgmorton
with a Saller. The Earl of Sussex that called him the Son of a Traitor, he sent
out of the world with an Italian trick. He employed his servant Killegray to
slay the Earl of Ormond, but he fell short of that design, as the Poet has it.

When Hanniball did not prevail by blows,
He used stratagems to kill his soes.
His servant Doughty that knew too much of his secrets he shipped away, so as
never to hear of him again. Mr. Gates the Pandor of his leachery, for contrived
gilt of felony was hanged; whom he pretended to reprieve on the Gallows, but
never sent any to cut the rope, for he knew he was then past telling of tales.
Thus he served one Salvatore an Italian, who being more conversant of his
privacies then he thought fit, caused him to watch with him till midnight, but
the next morning he was found dead in his bed in his house.

He was otherwise for his outside of a very goodly person, and singular well
featured, and all his youth well favored, and of a sweet aspect, but high
foreheaded, which as I should take it, was of no discommendation; but toward
his latter end (which with old men was but a middleage) he grew high colloured
and red faced: so that the Queen in this had much of her Father, for (excepting
some of her kindred, and some few that had handsome wits in crooked bodies) she
always took personage in the way of her election: for the people has it this
day in Proverb, King Henry loved a man. He had all advantages of the Queens
grace, she called to mind the sufferings of his Ancestors, both in her
Fathers and Sisters Reigns, and restored his and his Brothers blood, creating
Ambrose the elder Earl of Warwick and himself Earl of Leicester, etc, and he
was ex prioribus, or of her first choice; for he rested not there, but long
enjoyed her favor, and there with much what he listed, till time and emulation
(the companions of great ones) had resolved on his period. And to cover him at
his setting in a cloud at Cornbury, not by so violent a death, as that of his
Fathers and Grandfathers was, but as it is suggested, by that poison, which he
had prepared for others. I am not bound to give credit to all vulgar relations,
or to the libels of the times, which are commonly forced, and falsified
suitable to the moods and humors of men in passion and discontent. His actions
were so foul that I cannot think him to be an honest man, as amongst others of
known truth, some already mentioned; that of the Earl of Essex death in
Ireland, and the marriage of his Lady does strongly asperse him, questionless
his deeds were good and bad as the times required. He being such a Statesman as
knew how to temporize. He was wonderful popular. To gain himself a good opinion
of Religion, he was free of his promises to the Clergy. Being Chancellor to
the University of Oxford, to raise himself a reputation of the Learned, he was
the more liberal. And when he had a purpose to do a courtefie, he had such
power with the Queen as to do what he pleased, either to bestow his favors or
injuries as he could do, good or wrong to others, but not be wronged himself.
Those he placed about the Queen he had the wisdom to keep firm to himself. The
best of the Nobility being either linkt to him by alliance of else his friends.
In Wales he had the Earl of Pembroke. Sir Henry Sidney, a potent person, was
his friend in Ireland. In Barwick, the Lord Archbishop Hunsden. He had a
princely train, another Mortimer for gallantry, insomuch that he was called the
heart of the Court. He was a not able dissembler, without which as Machiavel
will have it, he could not be rendered so grand a Politician. Lascivious he was
at any rate rather then fail, he would Jupiter-like descend in a golden shower;
to which purpose he had as graceful a carriage as if he meant civilly, and
only carried the Reigns of honor in his hand. There is a Book written of him
called his Commonwealth, in which there is more said of him then is true. One
of our modern Poets in two lines more truly determines of him.

Of him it may be said, and censured well,
His Virtues and his Vices did excel.
To take him in the observations of his Letters and Writings (which should best
set him off) for such as fell into my hands, I never yet saw a style or phrase
more seeming religious, and fuller of the streams of Devotion, then some that I
have seen are; and he was too well seen in the Aphorisms, and Principles of
Nicholas the Florentine, and in the reaches of Caesar Borgia. I shall only
discover his Pen to two of the greatest Head-pieces of his time.

To my very Loving Friend Sir Francis Walsingham, Ambassador, Resident for the
Queens Majesty in France.
My Lord, since my last Letter unto you, I have litttle new matter worth the
writing, saving now we are much troubled with the Scottish Cause; the
Commissioners of both Parties are now here, and to write unto you that the end
will be certainly, as yet I cannot. We find both Parties very stiff, and
hitherto the Kings Party very resolute for the maintenance of his Authority;
her Majesty's scrupulosity touching his Title and Government; we partly know
the unworthiness of their Queen to rule; she grants but the Instances of
their Cause, to depose her from her Dignity she can hardly be persuaded in: so
yet she remains much perplexed. On the one side she is loath to set her up, or
to restore her to her estate again. On the other side she is loath to defend
that which she is not well persuaded to have justice with it; between these her
Council chiefly seek for these two things, that her self may be preserved in
safety, and the true Religion maintained. Assuredly, for as the state of the
world stands, and upon through examination of this Cause, it appears that
both the ways be dangerous touching the Queen of Scots; for there is danger in
delivering her to Government, so is there danger in retaining her in prison;
her friends begin to speak proudly for her. We were wont always to have a
friend on our side, if need were; but as far as I can see there is none of that
side of the Sea to be found that be Princes absolute. Well, our case is the
harder, and we must say, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos.

Touching this matter, as soon as it shall grow to any likelihood either of the
one side, or of the other, I will advertise you, and withal send you the
reasons of the Advice. In the mean time whatsoever you may hear, believe me
there is no man in England can tell you which way it will go: Yet in respect of
the King there, and his continual dealing for the said Queen, her Majesty
rather gives in words more favorable that way then the other. Mr. Norris is
arrived here yesterday, being Shrove-Sunday; after Mr. Secretary was created
Baronet Burleigh, and I think ere it be long he shall have the Office of the
Privy Seal, but as yet remains Secretary still; and within a day or two Sir
Thomas Smith is like to be called to assist him. The Parliament is to begin the
second of April next. The Queens Majesty thanks be to God is in good health,
and all your Friends as you lest them, save Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, our good
Friend. Your Wise was here lately to take her leave of her Majesty, who used
her very well and graciously. I pray you let us hear as often as you can
conveniently. I would gladly understand of some good for the poor Cardinal
Castillian. I desire and also long to hear of the Queens Majesty's Present how
it is liked. Thus with my hearty Commendations I bid you heartily farewell.

Your assured Friend R. Leicester.
The 26 of March, 1570

To my very Friend Sir Francis Walsingham Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
France.
I have upon the Receipt of your Letter, written by Sir E. Gilbert, dealt with
her Majesty touching your chargeable dwelling there; I trust her Majesty will
have due consideration thereof.

Your shall perceive by her Majesty's Letters her further pleasure touching
Monsieur, whose cause has been broken to her by my Lord of Buck. from the
Queens Mother. We perceive they deal very daintily, and doubt much her
Majesty's Intention to Marriage; at least, that she had rather hear of it then
perform it. But assuredly I do verily believe her Majesty's mind herein is
otherwise then it has been, and more resolutely determined then ever yet at
any time before; yet do they mean to deal so secretly on that side, as though
they will not yet believe it; and accordingly her Majesty minds not to deal
but as privately as may be devised, that if that should not take effect, the
less reproach to either party. Her Majesty has broken this matter with my Lord
of Burleigh and me, and I think will not use any more till some appearance fall
out what is like to become of the matter. The person of Monsieur is very well
liked of, his conversation is harder to know. I see her Majesty misliketh not
of his estate; for she is o mind to marry with the Gretest, and he is left
almost above the greatest to be had; the conditions will be all wherein I am
right glad and we are bound to thank God to see her Majesty so well to stand to
the maintenance of the cause of Religion; for their will be no great difficulty
in respect of his person and estate to cause a Marriage between them: So yet I
perceive with the impeachment any way of the true Religion here now
established, she will for no cause deal with him, as you may perceive by her
Majesty's own Letters to you, albeit she does not mean in respect of his policy
to drive him in open show in the mean time to renounce his own profession, but
conditionally if they should match, then wholly to maintain this as well
privately as publicly. God send her Majesty always during her life so to
stand to the defense of so just a cause, and withal his blessings upon her for
us all, that we may live and see her bring forth of her own body, as may
hereafter succeed her as well in that happiness, as in the enjoying of her
Kingdom. So not doubting but we shall shortyly hear from you, I commit you to
God

Your assured Friend R. Leicester.
The 23. of March, 1571.

These two Letters sufficiently evidence that he dived to the bottom of the
State Affairs of those times.

Hitherto I have touched him in his Courtship, I conclude him in his Lance. He
was sent Governor by the Queen to the united States of Holland, where we read
not of his wonders; for they say, that he had more of Mercury then of Mars; and
that his device might have been without prejudice to the great Caesar, Veni,
vidi redii. Having remained there two yeats, and made a peace with the
Provinces, he died in his way to Kenelworth Castle; his body lies enterred in
the Temple of the Blessed Virgin in Warwick shire, with this Inscription.

Spe certa resurgendi in Christo, Hic situs est Illustrissimus Robertus
Dudleius (Joannis Ducis Northumbriae, Comitis Warwici, Vicecomitis Insulae,
etc. filius quintus) Comes Lecestriae, Baro Denbighiae, Ordinis tam sancti
Georgii quam sancti Michaelis Eques auratus: Reginae Elizabethae (apud quam
singulari gratia florebat) Hippocomus, Regiae aulae subinde Seneschallus, ab
intimis Consiliis Forestarum, Chacearum, Parcorum, etc. citra Trentum, Summus
Justiciarius: Exercitus Angliae, a dicta Regina Elizabetha missus in Belgio ab
anno 1585. ad annum 1587. Locum-tenens, and Capitaneus Generalis Provinciarum
Confoederatarum, ibidem Gubernator Generalis and Praefectus: Regnique Angliae
Locum-tenens, contra Philippum secundum Hispanum numerosa class and exercitu
Angliam 1588. invadentem: Animam Deo Servatori reddidit, anno salutis 1588. die
4. Septembris.

Optimo and charissimo marito moestissima uxor Letitia Francisci Knollis,
Ordinis Sancti Georgii Equitis Aurati, and Reginae Thesaurii Filia, amoris and
conjugalis fidei ergo posuit.

The Life of the Lord BURLEIGH.
Cecilius fidei cultor patriaeque Thesauri
Custos, spes miseris unica pauperibus.
THe exit of one Statesman occasions the entrance of another. Secretary William
Cecill on the death of the old Marquess of Winchester rise up in his room; a
person of a most subtle and active spirit, though he stood not altogether by
the way of constellation and the making up of a part and faction; for he was
wholly intentive to the service of his Mistress Queen Elizabeth; and his
dexterity, experience, and merit, challenged a room in her favor, which
ecclipsed the others over-seeming greatness, and made it appear that there
were others that steered and stood at the helm besides himself, and more stars
in the firmament of her Grace then Vrsa major, or the Bear with the ragged
staff.

He was born, as some say, at Bourn in Lincolnshire; but as others upon
knowledge aver, of a younger Brother of the Setsils or Cecils of
Hereford-shire, a Family of no mean Antiquity, derived as some think from the
Roman Cicilii. Who being exposed and sent to the City, as poor Gentlemen use to
do their younger sons, he came to be a rich man on London Bridge; and purchased
Land in Lincolnshire, where this man was born. He was sent to Cambridge to St.
John's College, then to the Innes of Court, to Grayes-Inne, where he attained
to a great knowledge of the Law, though in all his life time he never sued, nor
was sued by any. And so he came by degrees to serve the Duke of Somerset, in
the time of his Protectourship, as Secretary; and having a pregnancy to great
Inclinations, he came to rise to a higher conversation with the chiefest
Affairs at State and Councels, to be Master of the Requests, the first that
ever bore that Office: But on the fall of the Duke he stood some years in
umbrage, and without employment, till the State wanted his abilities; and
though we find not that he was taken into any place, during Queen Mary's
Reigh, unless (as some have said) toward the last; yet the Council on several
occasions have made use of him, and at Queen Elizabeth's entrance he was
admitted Secretary of State; the Queen, as her Titles were sparing, rendering
them the more substantial: afterward he was made Master of the Court of Wards,
then Lord Treasurer. A Person of most exquisite abilities, and indeed the Queen
began then to need, and to seek out for men of both garbs.

Though our Burleigh lived in an age wherein it was present drowning, not to
swim with the stream, yet whatsoever others write of him, he opposed that act
and unnatural will of King Edward the Sixth; wherein the King passing by his
Sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, entailed the Crown on Queen Jane.

This great Instrument of State was rankt amongst the Togati of state, as by
these following Letters may be perceived.

To the Right Honorable my very good Friend, Sir Francis Walsingham, Resident
for the Queens Majesty in France.
Sir, My hard case is such as either by business in health, or by dolor in
sickness, I cannot account my self a free man, but a slave to serve, or an
offender to suffer torment: the will of God be fulfilled in me to his honor,
for otherwise I find no comfort in this world: of this enough. I am forced to
write this in my bed with my hand, whilst I groan for pain in my knee and
foot; and therefore I must be short. I could no sooner get answer to your
Letters brought by Rogers.

Your Lordships brought yesterday by Harcourt, were I think welcome, and well
interpreted by her Majesty; for I sent them with my own sentence aforehand, of
my good allowance of your discretion in your choice of taking and leaving.

The Queen of Scots you see is deferred, whereof that portion which is written,
was for my ease indicted by Sir Thomas Smith; you must make the best of it, and
seek out reasons to satisfy them there that will mislike the delay. Indeed it
has been only devised to win delay. I thank you for your private Letter.

Even now we have very good news from the Borders that Dun-Brittain Castle was
taken on Monday last in the night by cunning, where was taken the Archbishop of
St. Andrews and the Lord Flemming; the manner how it was taken is not
signified, but it is of a greater importance then Edenborough Castle,
considering it was the Receptaculum to all the Scottish Queens Foreign Aid.

From Westminster out of my Bed this Saturday at five of the Clock, the seventh
of March, 1571. Your assured Friend, W. Burleigh.


To my very loving Friend Mr. Francis Walsingham Esquire; the Queens Majesty's
Ambassador in France.
Sir, I have received your Letters both by Mr. Wigmore and Beal as by Harcourt
I did late advertise you; and having made her Majesty partaker both by hearing
them read and by her own reading, I am in this sort directed to answer you to
the First of the Second, that is, to that of the 13. of February, brought by
Beal. Her Majesty makes good account of the person of him; I mean the 36 ts 4
tio 30-0 uf I u'c 62 by the Intelligence which he gave you, but it breeds
some doubt in her, that the certainty can be no otherwise understood, in that
it is informed you, that the practice continues by late dispatching of an
Englishman of high stature and lean of visage; wherein is such incertainty, as
no man can thereby attain either to discover the practice, or withstand it by
apprehending the party. And surely Sir, her majesty wishes you to endeavor
your self with such as you shall think good to come to the knowledge of some
persons, by stay of whom such a matter might be deciphered; for my own part, I
think it likely that these practices are devised, but without more appearance,
I see no evident reason to move me; that in time when the Queen of Scots her
self and her factors are in hope to be delivered by treaty, and with the favor
of our Queen, there should be any attempt otherwise for her escape.

Wherein how cunning soever men be in device, yet the execution stands upon
many adventures, and any mischance happening might breed ruin to the whole
enterprise. I have been acquainted with many of these like advertisement, but
surely I never found any substance in them in the event; but yet with them and
without them I ever find it good to be circumspect. I write not to have you
forbear from hearing and reporting of any the like, but my experience serves
to move you to procure the givers of such things to discover the matters more
certainly, and so they are of more value.

The message sent you from Rochell of some dangerous intent upon Ireland from
Spain, has more appearance, for that we also hear it from Spain confirmed, and
it is the same that before I advertsed you concerning Stukelie.

I also smell some purpose of the Count Lodowicks coming with Ships toward the
Low Countries, to accompany the design for his brother the Prince of Orange;
whereof I would look for some better success, if I had not understanding
thereof so many ways; for the force of that enterprise should consist in
suddenness and secrecy which are not like to take place. Thus much for your
first Letter.

Now to the second, brought by Wigmore.

The Queens Majesty likes well of your proceedings with the Spanish Ambassador
there, and marvelleth that he should be so coy with you, considering the
reports of his former courtesies; but by likelihood some other accident moved
it, which by your next speech will be better discovered. The cause why that
Ambassador could not be answered sooner of the matter whereof he advertised
her Majesty from the Duke of Alva, was, for that her Majesty could not sooner
hear thereof from the Duke If you shall find it convenient to impart matters
to the said Ambassador, you may let him know of these things following, one
Monsieur Senegew a Low Countreyman, is coming to end the treaty for restitution
on both sides of the Merchants goods. There are lately come into the Ports of
the West certain Hulks laden from Spain and Portugal, driven by tempest; and
because they should be well used, the Ambassador here for the King, though in
other things he be not used, has been dealt withal to name certain strangers.
Merchants to resort to the Ports, and they have special Authority from us to
put the same in all good safety and that no dealing shall be by any to the
impairing of the said goods; and this special favor is showed because the time
of restitution is at hand.

And therefore we mean not to give any cause of quarreling. There were also
certain other Ships of War that came from Spain, being of the company which
conducted the Queen of Spain into Spain, which being furnished with Soldiers,
were favorably entertained, and permitted to depart at their pleasure; of
these things you may give him knowledge, to make him have a better taste in his
mouth: he may perchance contrariwise complain of spoil of his Masters Subjects
by pirates haunting the Narrow Seas, and especially about the Isle of Weight;
and I cannot deny the spoils, but surely they are committed by one Lubrest and
others, belonging to the Prince of Orange, which we cannot remedy: and yet Mr.
Horsey is presently dispatched with Authority to set forth certain Ships,
either to take them or drive them from our Coast. I confess to you privately
they are too much favored (Lucri Causa) but you may know truly that the Queens
Majesty does in no wise favor them. Thus much to the second Letter.

Now to some credit given by Mr. Beal, concerning) (a few words shall suffice
it. I cannot judge any thing in a 2 3 4 6 8. the matter is much liked, and all
furtherers thereof allowed, and all disswaders not liked; I am commanded thus
to write, that if any mention should be made to you thereof, you should show
your self willing to advertise, and so you shall do well.

The retardation used herein by H. is not liked by A. and the good will of L.
in the furtherance is allowed; by this you may perceive how to order your self;
and surely this principle I hold, that no one thing shall warrant more surety
and quietness to the Queens Majesty the 3 5 7 in; but the manner and
circumstance are of the substance of my principals and not accidents: herein I
deal boldly with you, I find nothing in your writing or doing, but allowable;
if otherwise I did, I would advertise you for friendship to your self, and for
good will to the Office you bear.

Although I cannot advertise you certainly as I would of the Grant of your
Leases, yet I am in the forwardness as I trust by next writing to send you
knowledge thereof. You must hereby be acquainted with the delays of the Court.
From Greenwich the third of May 1570 Sir Thomas Smith I trust shall be admitted
to the Council to morrow, and shortly after to be Secretary. I pray you Sir
commend me to Mr. Cavalcant.

Yours assuredly, William Burleigh.


I have the rather word for word inserted the familiar passages of these two
Letters, that the vigilance of this great Statesman might be the more clearly
and plainly discovered.

To proceed; he had not to do with the Sword more then as the great Play Master
and Contriver of War, which shortly followed; wherein he acomplished much
through his theoricall knowledge at home, and intelligence abroad, by unlocking
the Counsels of the Queens enemies; he being withal so careful a Steward of
her Treasure, that her Exchequer had money or credit when the King of Spain
wanted both. In that great Faction betwixt Leicester and Sussex, he meddled not
openly with, though it is easy to tell whom he wished best too: the Earl of
Leicester gave him several rubs, and he some neat State trips; but still in the
dark they would not take notice of what one acted against another. We must now
take (and that of truth) into observation, that until the tenth year of her
Reigh, her times were calm and serene, though sometimes a little overcast, as
the most glorious sun-risings are subject to shaddowings and droppings; for the
clouds of Spain, and vapors of the Holy League began then to disperse and
threaten her Serenity: moreover she was then to provide against some intestine
storms, which began to gather in the very heart of her Kingdom; all which had a
relation and correspondency each with other to dethrone her, and disturb the
public tranquillity, and therewithal (as a principal work) the established
Religion; for the name of Recusant began then, and first to be known to the
world; and till then the Catholics were no more then Church Papists, but were
commanded by the Popes express Letters to appear, and forbear Church-going, as
they tender their Holy Father, and the Holy Catholic Church their Mother. So
that it seems the Pope had then his aim to take a true muster of his Children;
but the Queen had the greater advantage, for she likewise took tale of her
Apostate Subjects, their strength, and how many they were that had given up
their names. He then by the hands of some of his Proselytes fixed his Bulls on
the gates of Paul's, which discharged her Subjects of all fidelity, and laid
siege to the received Faith, and so under the vail of the next Successor, to
replant the Catholic Religion; so that then the Queen had a new task and work
in hand, that might well awake her best providence; and required a Muster of
Men and Arms, as well as Courtships and Councels: for the times began to be
very quick and active, and fitter for stronger motions then those of the
Carpet. And it will be a true note of her magnanimity, that she loved a
Soldier, and had a propension in her nature to regard and always to grace
them: which the Courtiers taking into observation, took it as an invitation to
win Honor, together with her Majesty's favor, by exposing themselves to the
Wars; especially when the Queens and the Affairs of the Kingdom stood in some
necessity of a Soldier. For we have many instances of the Sallies of the
Nobility and Gentry; yea, and out of the Court, and her privy Favorites, (that
had any touch or tincture of Mars in their Inclinations) and to steal away
without license, and the Queens privity, which had like to have cost some of
them dear. So predominant were their thoughts and hopes of honor growing in
them, as we may truly observe in the dispositions of Sir Philip Sidney, Essex,
Mountjoy, and diverse others, whose absence, and the manner of their eruptions,
was very distasteful to her. Whereof I can add a true and no impertinent
story, and that of the last, Mountjoy; who having twice or thrice stolen away
into Britain, (where under Sir John Norris he had then a Company) without the
Queens leave and privity; she sent a messenger unto him, with a strict charge
to the General to see him sent home. When he came into the Queens presence, she
fell into a kind of reviling, demanding how he durst go over without her
leave; Serve me so (quoth she) once more, and I will lay you fast enough for
running: you will never leave it, until you are knocked on the head, as that
inconsiderate fellow Sidney was: you shall go when I send you, in the mean time
see that you lodge in the Court, (which was then at White Hall) where you may
follow your Book, read, and discourse of the Wars.

But to our purpose it fell out happily to these, and (as I may say) to those
times, that the Queen during the calm of her Reign was not idle, nor rockt
asleep with security: for she had been very provident in the reparation and
augmentation of her Shipping and Ammunition: and I know not whether by a
foresight of Policy, or an instinct it came about, or whether it was an act of
her Compassion; but it is most certain, that she sent Levies, and no small
troops to the assistance of the revolted States of Holland, before she had
received any affront from the King of Spain, that might deserve or tend to a
Breach in Hostility: which the Papists this day maintain, was the provocation
and cause of the after Wars. Which act of hers, though some applaud as done in
defense of those poor afflicted Protestants, yet she did not only therein
countenance Rebellion, (by consequence since disable her successors) but also
drew on her self a chargeable and dangerous War with the Spaniard. But omitting
what might be said to this point, these Netherland Wars were the Queens
Seminaries, and the Nurseries of many brave Soldiers; and so were likewise the
Civil Wars of France (whither she sent five several Armies) the Fence Schools
that inured the youth and gallantry of the Kingdom; and it was a Militia
wherein they were daily in acquaintance with the discipline of the Spaniards,
who were then turned the Queens inveterate enemies. In the management of which
politicial Affairs our Burleigh was a great assistant. The Swordmen of those
times complain that he was too much addicted to peace; indeed he would never
engage the State in a War, except necessity, or her Majesty's Honor required
it. To conclude, he was the Column or rather Atlas of the State, who after he
had served his Royal Mistress forty years, dyed at London in the seventy
seventh yaar of his age 1598. His body was butied with his Ancestors in
Stanford-Church. A monument for his perpetual honor being erected for him in
Westminster Abbey, which bears this following inscription.

Si quaeratur quis sit hic vir senex genua flectens, canitie venerabilis, toga
Parliamentaria amictus; est

Honoratissimus and clarissimus Dominus Guilielmus Cecilius, Baro de Burghley,
summus Angliae Thesaurarius, Serenissimae Reginae Elisabethae a consillijs
sanctioribus, Ordinis Georgiani Eques Auratus etc. qui hoc monumentum uxori and
filiae posuit; placide ex his terris in coelestem patriam anno salutis 1598. 4.
die Augusti demigravit. Cujus Exequiae magno apparatu and tanto viro
dignissimae, hic sunt celebratae die 29. ejusdem mensis. Corpusque quod in hac
Ecclesia sex dies requievit; Stanfordiam in Ecclesiam Sancti Martini translatum
fuit, ubi secundum Christi adventum expectat.

Cor unum: via una.

Epigramma De Gulielmo Cecilio nuper Angliae Thesaur. Anno 1596.
Per parvi sunt Arma foris, strataegemata parvi,
Sit nisi consilium, Caeciliusque domi.
Caecilius velut alter Atlas divinitus ortus:
Hic humeris Coelum sustinet; ille statum.
The Life of Sir FRANCIS DRAKE.
Quem timuit soevis etiam Neptunus in undis,
Et rediit toto victor ab Oceano,
Faedifragos bellens pelago prostravit Iberos,
Drakius huic tumulus aequoris unda fuit.
THis famous Sea Captain Sir Francis Drake one of the first that put a Sea
Girdle about the world, was born nigh South Davestock in the County of
Devonshire, and received his name Francis from Sir Francis Russel (afterward
Earl of Bedford) being his Godfather; he was brought up in Kent, his Father was
a Minister, who for fear of six Articles in the time of King Henry the Eighth
fled into Kent, where he lived privately till the death of the King. He got a
place to read Prayers amongst the Mariners of the Queens Navy, and bound his
Son Francis Apprentice to a Shipmaster, who traded with Commodities into France
and Zealand; with whom he underwent a hard service, by which means he was
trained up to pains and skill at Sea; his Master dying, bequeathed him his
Bark, with which he a while followed his Masters profession. But the Narrow
Seas being too narrow for his spacious spirit, he sold his Bark, venturing
himself and most of his estate with Captain John Hawkins into the West Indies;
but his journey proved unfortunate, for at St. John de Vlva, his goods were
taken by the Spaniards, himself hardly escaping with life. This loss so
exasperated the spirit of Drake, that he vowed the Spaniards should repay him
with advantage; and to make his word good, after two or three several voyages
into the West Indies, to gain intelligence, at last he effectually set forward
from Plymouth with two ships, and seventy three men and boys, sailing with all
speed and secrecy to Nombre de Dios, the Granary of the West Indies, where the
Spanish Treasure lay, intending to surprise it, being an unwalled Town; but in
the assault being dangerously wounded, he was forced to retire again to his
Ships, when he had well near conquered the Town: thus victory sometimes slips
through their fingers who have caught it in their hands.

Yet notwithstanding this disaster, enough to have daunted a coward from
prosecuting his design any further, he resolves not to give over the project;
but whilst he was determining what to do, a golden opportunity courted him
with success; certain Negroes called Symerons, advertised him of many Mules
laden with Gold and Silver which was to be brought from Panama over the
Mountains. Drake who had plowed long Furrows in the Ocean, expecting to have a
Golden Harvest, leaves competent numbers to man his Ships, and with the rest of
his men goes on Land, intercepts the prize, being weakly guarded, and carries
away an infinite mass of Gold, hiding the Silver under ground, as not portable
over so high hills. Then burnt he a great place of Traffic called the Cross,
and in it two hundred thousand pounds worth of Spanish Merchandise; which done,
he returned with great Honor and Riches into England.

This his so lucky beginning gave him more hopes of prosperous proceeding;
wherefore in Anno 1577. he again sets forth from Plymouth, with a Fleet of five
Ships, and sixteen hundred and four men in them, and within twenty five days
came to Canline a Cape in Barbery; in his passage he took Nuno-da-Silva a
Spanish Pilate, whose directions he afterward much used. Hence he took their
course to the Island of Brava, being much troubled with tempestuous winds,
which in one hour vary all the points of the Compass; nor was their rain less
strange poured (not as in other places, as it were out of sieves, but) as out
of spots, so that a Butt of water falls down in a place: which notwithstanding
was but a friendly in jury, helping them to fresh water, which otherwise in that
hot Climate far from Land is not so easily come by. Then cutting the Line, he
let every one in his ships blood; there saw they that face of Heaven which the
Earth hides from our sight, but therein only three stars of the first
magnitude, the rest few and small compared to our Hemisphere; as if God (says
Mr. Fuller) had on purpurpose set up the best and biggest Candles in that room
wherein his civillest Guests are entertained.

The 16. of April he entered the River Plate, in which place John Doughty, the
next to Drake in Authority, was questioned for raising sedition in the Navy;
who being found guilty, was beheaded. Some report Leicester had given Drake in
charge to make him away, for words be had said against him touching the Earl of
Essex. The twentieth of August he passed the Magellan Straits with three ships,
having cast off the other two as Impediments; and then entering the Pacifique
Sea, his ships by tempests were dispersed from each one, the one whereof was
never more seen, the other returned home through the Straits. Drake himself
held on his course to Chily, Coquimbo, Cinnano, Palma, Lima, upon the West of
America, passing the Line the first of March, till he came to the Latitude 47.
intending to have come by those North Seas, but unseasonable weather made him
alter his determination, and bend his Course South-West from thence, coming to
Anchor 38. degrees from the Line, where the King of that Country presented
unto him his Network Crown of many colored feathers, and resigned therewith
his Scepter of Government unto his Devotion; his people so admiring our men,
that they sacrificed unto them, as to their gods. This place for the glory of
England, he named Nova Albion, and at his departure erected a Structure, as a
Monument, to witness what there had been done. From thence the fourteenth of
November he fell with Ternate one of the Isles of Molucco, the King whereof
entertained him courteously, telling them, they and he were all of one Religion
in this respect, that they believed not in Gods of stocks and stones, as did
the Portugals. Here he took in certain tun of Cloves, with some necessaries
which they wanted.

But in relating the honor, we must not omit the riches he got in this
journey, his Prizes being many, and of great value, which by Sir Richard Baker
are thus summarily delivered. Loosing from the Isle Moucha, he lighted upon a
fellow fishing in a little Boat, who showed him where a Spanish ship laden with
Treasure lay; Drake making toward it, the Spaniards thought him to be their
own Countreyman, and thereupon invited him to come on; but he getting aboard,
presently shut the Spaniards (being not above eight) under hatches and took the
ship, in which was four hundred pound weight of Gold. At Taurapasa, going again
on shore, he found a Spaniard sleeping by the sea side, who had lying by him
twenty bars of massy silver, to the value of four thousand Duccats, which he
bid his followers take amongst them, the Spaniard still sleeping. After this
going into the Port of Africa, he found there three Vessels without any
Mariners in them: wherein, besides other wares, were seven and fifty silver
Bricks, each of which weighed twenty pound. Tiding it to Lime, he found twelve
ships in one road, and in them great store of silks, and a chest full of money
coined, but not so much as a ship-boy abroad, (such security there was in that
Coast.) Then putting to sea with those ships, he followed the rich ship called
Cacofaga; and by the way met with a small ship, without Ordnance or other Arms,
out of which he took fourscore pound weight of Gold, a golden Crucifix, and
some Emralds of a fingers length. And overtaking the Cacofaga, set upon her,
and took her; and in her, besides Jewels, fourscore pound weight of Gold,
thirteen Chests of Silver, and (as one writes) as much silver as would ballast
a ship.

And now having fraughted his ship with so much wealth that a Miser would not
desire any more, he resolves to return home; and having a large wind, and a
smooth sea, ran aground on a dangerous shole, where his ship stuck twenty
hours, having ground too much, and yet too little to land on; and water too
much, and yet too little to sail in. Expecting now no other then death, they
betook themselves to prayer, the best lever at such a dead lift; afterward
they received the Communion, dining on Christ's in the Sacrament, expecting no
other then to sup with him in Heaven. Driven to this strait, they were forced
to cast out of their ship six great Pieces of Ordnance, threw overboard as much
wealth as would break the heart of a Miser to think on, with much sugar and
packs of spices, making a caudle of the sea round about. At last it pleased God
that the wind, formerly their mortal enemy, became their friend, which
changing from the Starboard to the Larboard of the ship, and rising by degrees,
cleared them off to the sea again; for which they returned unfeigned thanks
unto Almighty God.

Having escaped this eminent danger, they bent their Course South-West, to the
Cape of Bone Speranco, and by the West of Africa returned safe into England,
and landed at Plymouth November 3. 1580. The next year he feasted the Queen in
his ship at Dartford, who knighted him for his service; his Arms were given
him, The World in a Ship. Which ship by the Queens command was drawn on shore
near Dartford, for a Monumant to all posterity. Concerning this his famous
Voyage, a Poet then living directed to him this Epigram.

Drake, pererrati novit quem terimus orbis,
Quemque semel mundi vidit uterque polus:
Si taceant homines, facient te sydera notum;
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.
Drake, whom the encompassed earth so fully knew,
And whom at once both Poles of Heaven did view:
Should men forget thee, Sol could not forbear
To Chronicle his fellow-traveller.
Anno 1585. he again set sail from Plymouth, with two and twenty ships and
pinnesses, and two thousand three hundred soldiers and sailers, and passing by
the Isles of Bayon and the Canaries, arrived at St. Jago, (the chief City of
Cuba in America) which they took and burned: after they sailed to St. Domingo
in Hispaniola, which they spoiled and ransackt: from thence to Carthagena,
which they also surprised, and took in it (besides inestimable sums of money)
240. Pieces of Ordnance. And returning homewards razed and burnt the Fort and
City of Saint Augustine in Terra Florida, arriving safe at Plymouth the 27. of
July 1586.

In this Voyage some Writers not taking notice of Sir Walter Raleigh, will
needs have Tobacco first brought over into England; which though (says one) in
some respect, being moderately taken, may be Physical, yet besides the
consumption of the purse, and imparing of our inward parts, the immoderate,
vain, and fantastical abuse of the hellish Weed, corrupts the natural
sweetness of the breath, stupifieth the brain; and indeed is so prejudicial to
the general esteem of our Countrymen, that as one says of them, Anglorum
corpora qui huic plantae tontopere indulgent, in Barbarorum naturam degenerasse
videntur. The two chief virtues ascribed to it, are, that it is good against
Lues Venerea, that loathsome disease, the Pox; and that it voideth Rheum. For
the first, like enough it is that similes habent labra lactueas; so unclean a
disease may be fitted with so unwholesome a medicine. For the second good
quality attributed unto it, I think it rather to consist in opinion then truth:
the Rheum which it voideth, being only that which it engenders. But Tobacco
it self is by few taken now as medicinal, it is grown a good fellow, and fallen
from a Physician to a Complement. For as one of our Modern Poets has it.

He Is no good fellow that is without the Pox,
Burnt Pipes, Tobacco, and his Tinder Box.
A folly which certainly had never spread so far, if here had been the same
means of prevention used with us, as was in Turkey by Morat Bassa, who commanded
a pipe to be thrust through the nose of a Turk which was found taking Tobacco,
and so in derision to be led about Constantinople. Take his farewell to it, who
once much doted on this Heathenish Weed.

Farewell thou Indian smoke, Barbarian vapor,
An enemy to life, foe to waste paper.
Thou do diseases in the body breed,
And like a Vulter on the purse do feed.
Changing sweet breaths into a stinking loathing,
And with three pipes turns two pence into nothing.
Grim Pluto first invented it, I think
To poison all the world with hellish stink:
Base heathenish weed, how common is it grown,
That but a few years past was scarcely known!
When for to see one take it was a riddle,
As strange as a Baboon to tune a fiddle.
Were it confined only to Gentlemen,
'Twere some repute to take Tobacco then,
But Bedlams, Tinkers, Cobblers, Water-bearers,
Your common drunkards, and most horrid swearers.
If man's flesh be like hogs, as it is said,
Then sure by smoking thus its Bacon made.
Farewell foul smoke, good for such things as these,
Against lice, sore heads, scabs, mange, or French disease.
But to leave this unworthy subject, and to return to our History, in Anno
1588. when all England stood in fear of a Spanish invasion (though it proved
but a Morris Dance upon our Waves) he was made Vice Admiral of the English
Navy; where what he performed toward the waining of that half Moon, the
Chronicles report to his eternal honor: his very name being so terrible to the
Spaniards, that Don Pedro de Valdes, Vasques de Silva, Alonzo de Sayas, and
other Noblemen, hearing it was the fiery Drake that had them in chase, yielded
themselves and came aboard his ship; protesting they were resolved to dye in
defense, had they not fallen under his power; whose valor and felicity was so
great, that Mars and Neptune seemed to wait on his Attempts. Afterward in the
year 1589. Don Antonio pretending a right to the Crown of Portugal, sued to
Queen Elizabeth for succor against the King of Spain, who detained it from
him; she in pursuance of his Title sent him aid under the command of those
renowned Generals, Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Norris; who with eleven
thousand Soldiers, and tweney five hundred Mariners set fail from Plymouth,
and arrived at the Groyne, a Haven in Galacia, took the lower Town by assault,
and in it great store of ordinance, victuals, cables, ropes, and other
furniture for shipping. From thence sailing toward Portugal, in their passage
they met with Robert Earl of Essex, who without the Queens leave had put forth
to Sea, accompanied with his Brother Walter Devereux, Sir Philip Butler, Sir
Roger Williams, Sir Edward Wingfield, and others. After two days they arrived
at Penycha a Town in Portingal, which they took, leaving the Castle to Don
Antonio. Here left they their sick and wounded, with seven Companies of Foot
for their guard. The main Army under the command of Sir John Norris marched to
Lisbon, whom Drake promised to follow with the Fleet; but by reason of the
Flats which he must pass, and the Castle of Saint Julian fortified with fifty
pieces of great Ordinance, his purpose was disappointed; yet surprised he the
Town of Cascais, to which place not long after came the whole Army, being
nessitated for want of victuals, and no aid coming in as was expected.
Whereupon having taking threescore Hulks laden with Corn, and pillaged many
Towns and Villages, they returned back again into England.

This journey producing not that wished effect which was desired, another more
likely was thought upon; Queen Elizabeth well knowing that the Spaniards
chiefest strength consisted in the Treasure which he yearly received out of the
West Indies, furnished Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins, with ships and
soldiers to bring this golden Harvest into the English Barn. These on the last
of August set sail from Plymouth, and seven and twenty days after, came upon
the Coast of the great Canarie; in assaulting of which they wasted much time,
to the great grief of Sir John Hawkins, who would have presently sailed to
America; and this grief say some occasioned his death, though others impute it
to the loss of his Bark, called the Francis, which five Spanish ships
intercepted at the Isle of Saint Dominick; but when the same heart has two
deadly wounds given it together, it is hard to say which of them kills.

Drake notwithstanding continued his course to Port-Rico in St. John's Island,
and casting anchor within the road, a shot from the Castle entered the steerege
of his ship, took away the stool from under him, wounded Sir Nicholas Clifford,
and Brute Brown to death, as they sat at supper: whereupon the English enraged,
fired five Spanish ships of two hundred Tuns a piece in revenge of the Castle.

The intention of the English was to have marched with their Land Forces from
Port-Rico to Panama, (being an Istmus which joyneth together Mexicana and
Peruana) where the Spanish Treasure lay. Sir Thomas Baskervile with seven
hundred and fifty men undertook the charge; but the Spaniard having notice of
their intentions, had built their Fortresses to impeach their passage: in
assaulting of which first, the English had such welcome that they had no mind
to try the second; so that fearing their Gold would be dear bought, as well as
far fetched, they returned again unto their ships.

Drake afterward forced Nombre de Dios, and many other petty Towns; but though
herein he did the Spaniard much hurt, he did the English little good: and now
thinking with himself that according to his preparations, the expectation of
his performances would be greater then before; the consideration thereof
accompanied, if not occasioned the flux, which wrought his sudden death.
January 28. 1595. who as he lived by the Sea, died on it, and was buried in it.
A man no doubt of admirable parts, and one who had done many worthy services
for his Country; and yet it is questionable whether those rich prizes he
brought into England did us more good, then Tobacco supposed first brought
hither by his followers, has since done us hurt. One bestowed this Latin
Epitaph upon him.

EPITAPHIUM.
Religio quamvis Romana resurgeret olim,
Effoderet tumulum non puto, Drake, tuum.
Non est quod metuas, ne te combusserit ulla
Posterit as: in aqua tutus ab igne jaces.
The Life of Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM.
Te Francisce pio patriam cum deseris exul
Pectore, pro meritis praemia digna capis.
SIR Francis Walsingham the great manager of the Queens pretended match with
the Mounsieur of France, had the honor to be Sir Philip Sidney's
Father-in-law. He was a Gentleman (at first) of a good House, but a better
Education; and from the University traveled for the rest of his Learning. He
was doubtless the best Linguist of those times, but knew best how to use his
own Tongue; whereby he came to be employed in the chiefest Affairs of State. He
was sent Ambassador into France, and stayed there a Leiger long in the heat of
the Civil Wars, and at the same time that Mounsieur was here a Suitor to the
Queen; and if I be not mistaken, he played the very same part there, as since
Gundamore did here. At his return, he was taken principal Secretary, and was
one of the great Engines of State and of the Times, high in Queen Elizabeth's
favor, and a matchful servant over the safety of his Mistress.

He is noted to have had certain curious, and secret ways of Intelligence
above the rest: but I must confess I am to seek wherefore he suffered Parry to
be so long on the hook before he hoysed him up; and I have been a little
curious in the search thereof, though I have not to do with the Arcana Imperii.
For to know is sometimes a burden: and I remember that it was Ovids, crimen
aut error, that he saw too much. But I hope these are Collaterals of no danger.
But that Parry intending to kill the Queen, made the way of his access by
betraying of others, and impeaching the Priests of his own Correspondency, and
thereby had access and conference with the Queen, and also oftentimes familiar
and private conference with Walsingham, will not be the Quaere of the Mystery;
for the Secretary might have had ends of discovery on a further maturity of
Treason: but that after the Queen knew Parry's intent, why she should then
admit him to private discourse, and Walsingham to suffer it, considering the
conditions of all assailings, and permit him to go where and whither he listed,
and only on the security of a dark sentinel set over him, was a piece of reach
and hazard beyond my apprehension.

I must again profess, that having read many of his Letters, (for they were
commonly sent to Leicester and Burleigh out of France) containing many fine
passages and secrets; yet if I might have been beholding to his Ciphers,
whereof they are full, they would have told pretty tales of the times.

He was ranked amongst the Togati, chief of those that laid the foundation of
the Dutch and French Wars, which was another piece of his fineness, and of the
times. I shall conclude with one observation more, that he was one of the great
Allies of the Austrian embracements; for both himself and Stafford that
preceded him, might well have been compared to the Feind in the Gospel, that
sowed his tares in the night; so did they their seeds of division in the dark:
and it is a likely report that the father on him at his return, that he said
unto the Queen with some sensibility of the Spanish designs in France, Madam, I
beseech you be content not to fear; the Spaniard has a great appetite, and an
excellent digestion; but I have fitted him with a bone for this twenty years,
that your Majesty shall have no cause to doubt him; provided that if the fire
chance to slack which I have kindled, you will be ruled by me, and now and then
cast in some English Fuel, which will revive the flame.

That the discerning Reader may the better scent this Fox, I have presented to
his perusual one of his Letters.

A Copy of the Letter sent to Mr. Secretary touching the negotiation had with
the King the 28. of August, 1570.
SIR,
May it please your Honor to advertise her Majesty, that the King accepted in
very good part her congratulation, as from his good Sister and Neighbor, who
has always wished his well-doing (for these were his words.) After
congratulation done to the King, the Queen Mother having enquired of me of the
well-doing of her Majesty, asked me how the Queen of Scots did; I answered her
that at my departure, for any thing I knew to the contrary, she did very well.
Then she proceeded to enquire of me, touching her present estate: I answered
according to the tenor of my instructions, in what state she stood at my
departure; wherewith she seemed to rest very well satisfied. And then she fell
to protestations, that for her own part she was so well persuaded of the Queens
Majesty's merciful disposition, as she knew right well, that if she did deal
any thing hardly with the Queen of Scots, it rather proceeded from some of her
Ministers, then from her Majesty's self. I replied that I was glad to
understand that she conceived so well of the Queen my Mistris's good
disposition, so was I sorry that she should think she would be by any of her
Ministers or Counselors drawn to any thing, either toward her, or any other,
that might not stand, with her honor; for that her skill and years was now to
direct, and not to be directed. I desired her therefore in her Majesty's name
that she would evermore reserve an ear for her: (A thing that would not in
equity be denied to the meanest person in France) who in all her actions
hitherto toward the Queen of Scots, had dealt with that regard to her honor
as she was right able to justify her self, both toward the King, her good
brother, as also toward all other Princes. Then she made great protestations
of her indifferency, and that she is no less affected in good will toward her
Majesty, whom it pleases, says she, to do me the honor as to call me by the
name of a Mother, then to the Queen of Scots her daughter-in-law; and therefore
in wishing her liberty, I do it, says she, as much as for the Queen your
Mistress quietness sake, as for any other respect; which without her liberty
can hardly grow unto her. This Sir in effect was the whole course of the Speech
that passed from her in that behalf which she had then with me apart. The King
being then in talk with my Lord Ambassador, then she caused the King to deal
with me in that behalf, to whom I showed the state of her cause, according to
the contents of my instructions, wherewith he seemed to be satisfied, He told
me that he wished that the Queen his good Sister according to the inclination,
would have some compassion of her cause, and grow to some speedy conclusion in
that behalf. I told him that I doubted not but that her Majesty would for his
sake do that which should be to his contentation, so far forth as might stand
with her honor and safety. Then he professed that otherwise he would not
desire it. Thus having imparted to your honor the effect of my negotiation, to
the end you may advertise her Majesty, I most humbly take my leave.

From Paris the 29. of August, 1570. Your Honors to command F. Walsingham.


To conclude, he was sent twice Ambassador into France, once into Scotland,
once into the Low Countries, so that he was most intimately acquainted with the
deepest counsels and secrets of Princes; that he rightly understood how to
preserve his Country, and how to manage affairs either for Peace or War. He
died the sixth day of April, in the year of our Lord 1590. He lies entombed in
St. Paul's, being in respect of the debts he had contracted for his faithful
service to the Crown, forced to be buried privately in that Cathedral. One
bestowed this Latin Epitaph on his Memory.

Sic reticenda domi fido secreta recondis
Pectore, sic discis discutienda foris:
Vt tua sitne fides dubitem, an prudentia major.
Virtute indubio hac, magnus utraque vir es.
The Life of Sir NICHOLAS BACON.
Ingenio Bacon magnus custosque sigilli firmavit justas posteritis opes. SIR
Nicholas Bacon, a person inferior to none of his predecessors, as arch a
piece of wit and wisdom as any of them all. He was a Gentleman, and a man of
Law, of great knowledge therein; whereby together with his other parts of
Learning and dexterity, he was promoted to be Keeper of the great Seal; and
being of kin to the Treasurer Burleigh, had also the help of his hand to bring
him into the Queens favor; for he was abundantly factious, which took much
with Queen Elizabeth when it was suited with the season, as he was well able to
judge of his times. He had a very quaint saying, and he used it often to good
purpose; that he loved the jest well, but not the loss of his friend. He would
say, that though he knew unusquisque suae fortunae faber, was a true and good
principle, yet the most in number were those that marred themselves. But I will
never forgive that man that loses himself to be rid of his jest.

He was Father to that refined Wit, which afterward acted a disasterous part
on the public Stage, and afterward sat in his Fathers room as Lord
Chancellor. Those that lived in his age, and from whence I have taken this
little Modle of him, give him a lively Character; and they decypher him for
another Solon, and the Synon of those times, such a one as Oedipus was in
dissolving of Riddles. Doubtless he was as able an instrument, and it was his
commendation, that his head was the mawl (for it was a great one) and therein
he kept the wedge that entered the knotty pieces that came to his table.

He was of the prudent Family of the Bacons of Norfolk and Suffolk; he died in
the year of our Lord 1578. the threescore and seventh year of his age, and
lies entombed in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's, with this Latin Epitaph
inscribed on him.

Hic Nicclaum ne Baconem conditum
Existima illum, tam diu Britannici
Regni secundum Columen, exitium Malis,
Bonis asylum, caeca quem non extulit,
Ad hunc honorem sors; sed Aequitas, Fides,
Doctrina, Pietas, unica and Prudentia.
Neu morte raptum creed: qui unica brevi,
Vita perennes emerit duas: agit
Vitam secundam coelites inter animus.
Fama implet orbem, vita quae illi tertia est,
Hac positum in Ara est corpus, olim animi domus;
Ara dicata sempiternae memoriae.
His Motto was, Mediocria firma.

He left behind him as a Monument of his incomparable worth in continuance of
his Name, Sir Francis Bacon, our English Plato, the inimitable Writer of this
Age.

The Life of ROBERT DEVEREUX Earl of ESSEX.
Infelix virtus and ventis vela secundis,
Extrema Comitem tandem oppressere ruina.
RObert Devereux Earl of Essex was born Anno 1566. He had scarcely attained to
ten years of age, when his Father Walter Devereux Earl of Essex and Earl
Marshal of Ireland, deceased at Dublin, premonishing his Son to have always
before his eyes the six and thirtieth year of his age, as the utmost term of
his life, which neither himself, nor his Father before him outlived; and the
son did not attain to it. At his Fathers death he was by the Lord Burleigh his
Guardian sent to the University of Cambridge, under the tuition of Doctor
Whitguift, then Master of Trinity-Hall; a man of the primitive temper, when the
Church by lowliness of spirit did flourish in highest examples of Piety and
Learning. At sixteen years of age he took the formality of Master of Arts, and
kept his public Acts, yet notwithstanding his good erudition, it is reported
of him, that like certain Vegetables he did bud and open slowly, Nature
sometime delighting to play an after-game as well as Fortune, which had both
their tides and turns in his course.

His first advancement to Court was by means of the Earl of Leicester, yet not
so much out of love to him, as it was thought, as out of envy to Sir Walter
Raleigh, whose splendor at Court he meant to allay with this young Earl. His
first appearance in the Fields of Mars was at Tilbury Camp, Anno 1588. where he
was by the Queen made in the Field Commander of the Cavalry, (as he was before
in Court) being much graced by her openly in the view of the Soldiery and
people, even above my Lord of Leicester himself. But scarcely was he thus
warmed in the Queens favor, when without her consent or knowledge he thrust
himself into the Portugal Voyage, hazarding thereby his future fortunes,
besides the danger of incurring the Queens displeasure, and laying himself open
to the practice of the Court; notwithstanding a noble report coming home before
him, (as indeed his actions deserved no less) at his return all those clouds
were dispersed, and this his excursion afterward accounted but a sally of
Youth. Nay, he grew every day taller in her Majesty's grace and favor,
insomuch that the King of France imploring her assistance against the Prince of
Parma, who in hostile manner had invaded his Dominions; the charge of that
enterprise was committed unto him; who full of valor, though young in years,
being furnished with four thousand Foot and two hundred Horse, besides many
Pyoners and other Volanteers, whose Heroic Aspects determined the courage of
their hearts, landed in Normandy, and laid siege to the strong City of Roan; in
assaulting whereof his Brother Walter Devereux (a Diamond of the time, both of
an hardy and delicate mixture) was slain with a small shot, to the excessive
grief of the Earl; who after a tedious Winters Siege challenged Mounsieur
Villerse the Governor to a single combat; who not desirous to purchase his
honor with the effusion of his blood, refufed it: with contempt of his
refusal, the Earl returned into England.

The Queen having now experience of his valor, soon found an occasion for him
to show it; the King of Spain threatening to invade her borders, she thought it
the best policy to invade his first: to perfect so great a design, a mighty
Navy is made ready, consisting of an hundred and fifty ships, wherein were
above 14000. soldiers and sailers. Our intended brevity will not permit us to
recount the several Officers in this expedition. The Earl of Essex and Charles
Howard, Lord Admiral of England, were commanders in chief. The first of June
they set forth from Plymouth, and on the 18. of the same month came to Cabo
St. Vincent, where they lighted upon an Irish Bark, who certified them, that at
Cales from whence they came, were store of Galleys, Ships of War, and Merchant
Ships, laden with Munition, Coin, Oil, Wine, Wax, Silk, Cloth of Gold, and
Quicksilver; news most acceeptable unto the Generals. The twentieth of June
they cast Anchor on the West side of the Island, where a fair Dove, a fortunate
presager of their success, lighted upon the main yard of the Lord Admiralls
ship, and sat there quietly the space of three hours, every man gazing, but no
man suffered to remove her. The next day a Council being called, it was
determined the fight should be begun with the lesser ships, because the road
was too shallow for the greater; the Lord Thomas Howard, Sir Walter Rawleigh,
Sir Francis Vere, Sir George Carew, and Sir Robert Southwell, with some
Londoners, and a squadron of Low Country ships undertook the same, which they
valiantly attempted, manfully maintained, and bravely continued: nor were the
Spaniards backward in performance of their duties, but resolutely fought in
defense of their lives; each side striving to acquit themselves bravely, which
made the fight continue fierce and doubtful.

The valiant Essex (though by a Council of War appointed to keep the main
Battle) upon the sudden, from Port Saint Mary's side, thrust himself foremost
in this Sea fight: which the other General perceiving, desirous to participate
of the danger, as well as of the honor of victory, forsook his great ship, too
unweldy for those narrow waters, took into his Pinnace, that he might not be
overacted in point of Honor. The scales of War which before were even, now
turned to the English side: the Spanish Admiral a ship of fifteen hundred tun,
was by their own soldiers set on fire, whose ruin was accompanied with two
other ships that lay next her; the rest of their fleet ran themselves on ground
in the Bay of Port Real.

The Earl of Essex in pursuit of his design landed his men at Puntal, a League
from Cales: to oppose his Forces half a mile from the Town appeared many horse
and foot; but they finding the English numbers exceed their expectation, they
presently gave back: the English perceiving their stratagem to out-wit them,
counterfeiting a fear, made a retreat; by which means having enticed forth
their enemies, they returned with such violence that they forced them back into
the Town: but there they having an advantage from the higher ascent, played so
fore upon the English, that their foremost ranks began to give back; which
valiant Essex perceiving, to engage his soldiers resolutions, caught his own
Colors, and cast them over the Wall into the Town: the undaunted English
ashamed to lose their Ensign, forgot all danger, ascending the wall with shot
and sword, make way through the thickest press of the enemy; in the interim Sir
Francis Vere broak the the Gate and rushed in, and the rest with him; diverse
were wounded with stones from the tops of houses, and Sir John Wingfield slain
in the Marketplace with a shot from the Castle.

The Town thus surprised, the Castle was summoned, which the next day yielded;
the Citizens compounding with the Lords Generals to pay an hundred and twenty
thousand Duccats for their ransom, were suffered to depart; for the assurance
of which payment, forty of the chiefest Citizens were brought pledges into
England.

Far worse sped the ships that had run themselves on ground, who being
assaulted by Sir Walter Rawleigh, profferred two millions and a half of Duccats
for their redemption; but he telling them he was sent to destroy ships, not to
dismiss them upon composition, they were by the command of the Duke of Medina
Sidonian, Admiral of Spain, set altogether on fire: it was judged by the wiser
sort of people that the Spaniard was damnified by this expedition no less then
twenty millions of Duccats. The fortunacy of this enterprise gave occasion to
one of the Wits then living to frame this excellent Annagram on the Earl of
Essex name.

Deureux
Vere Dux.
Which he afterward englisht in this Distich.

Vere Dux Deureux and verior hercule; Gades,
Nam semel hic vidit, vicit at ille simul.
Alcides yields to Deureux, he did see
Thy beauties Cales, but Deureux conquered thee.
The whole Navy returning home safe, crowned with victory and laden with
spoils, yet seemed the revenge far less then the injury offered by the
Spaniard: wherefore the next year a third voyage was undertaken, whereof the
Earl of Essex was made commander in chief. Their design was to intercept the
Indian Fleet in their return into Spain; many of the Nobility and principal
Gentlemen accompanied the Earl in this expedition. The ninth of July, 1597.
they set sail from Plymouth, directing their course to Feral and the Groyne:
but God, as a worthy Author interprets, was so displeased at these nations
enmities, that they had not sailed forty leagues, but they were encountered with
such a terrible tempest, that the Mariners themselves were at their wits end,
and the Fleet had much ado to recover Plymouth. And attempting to set out the
second time, the wind fell so cross, that for a whole months time they could
not get out of the Haven. The 17 of August they again hoise sail, but before
they came in view of Spain they were dispersed by another horrible tempest; in
which they lost two of their ships. The 15 of September they fell into the
Isles of Flores, Evernes, Fyal, and Pike, all which submitted themselves to the
Earls devotion; afterward they sailed to Gratiosa, whose inhabitants submit,
and find mercy: here would the Earl have tarried in expectation of the Indian
Fleet, had he not been most unluckily dissuaded by Graves his Pilot; for no
sooner was he gone, but the American Fleet came by, (wherein were forty ships,
and seven of them laden with Treasure:) these fearful sheep, hearing the
English wolves were abroad, loath to lose their golden fleece, sailed with all
speed they could to Tezcera, where they gained the Haven, all but three ships
which the English took; the rest securing themselves in the Port, which being
impregnable. The English sail from thence to Sain Michaels, where they took
Villa Franca, a fair Town well stored with Merchandise, wine, wood, and corn;
here they tarried six days, during which space, a Caraque coming out of the
East Indies, and perceiving the English were there, ran her self ashore,
unloaded her Merchandise, and then fired her self. October the ninth they hoist
sail for England; but in their passage were assailed by such a tempest that
quite lost them the sight of the Spanish Fleet, who likewise suffered much by
the same tempest; for one of their ships was cast upon Dartmouth, the Soldiers
and Mariners half starved in her; who upon examination confessed, that the
Spanish Fleets intention was to seize upon some Haven in Cornwall: which being
nigh the mouth of the Chancel, might be convenient to receive Forces from
Spain; but man proposes and God disposes, for the divine providence
frustrated the designs both of the Spaniard and the English. The Earl of Essex
upon his return was created Earl Marshal of England.

Hitherto have we beheld our Earl ascending the zenith of Honor, but
favorites of great Princes are seldom without parasites; who wanting true
worth in themselves, make a ladder of mischief to climb up to promotion: these
buz into the Earls head strange fancies and chymaera's, that his deserts were
far greater then his rewards; that during his absence Sir Robert Cicill was
made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and Charles Lord Howard created
Earl of Nottingham, with relation in his pattent to the Victory in eighty eight
and his good service at Cales; that he was descended of the blood royal of
Scotland and England, and had better right to the Crown then any other of the
compettitors. This puts the Earl upon indirect courses, and though he cannot
attain to be King of England, he seeks to be made a petty King of Ireland: the
state of which Country (ordained to be the Sepulcher of his Father, and the
gulf of his own fortunes) was at that present in a dangerous condition, by
reason Tir Oen, a notorious rebel, had lately achieved such a victory with so
great loss to the English, as they had never felt the like since they first set
footing in Ireland. Whereupon a serious consultation was held on whom to send
to quell the rebels; Essex though he seemed not to desire the employment, yet
still was ready with his exceptions if any other were nominated: at length it
was concluded that he should be the man, and an Army of twenty thousand foot,
and thirteen hundred horse, allotted unto him; with these and a great retinue
besides of the Nobility, he passes into Ireland.

His first action after his arrival was against the Petty Rebels in the
Province of Mounster, contrary to his Commission which was to go immediately
against Tir Oen himself; but men who prefer their private fancies before
public Instructions, seldom attain to their wished desires: For
notwithstanding he took the Castle of Cahir, and drove the Rebels into the
Woods and Groves adjoining, his Forces by this means were so impaired; that the
gain did not countervail the loss; wherefore sending for fresh supplies out of
England, in the mean time he sends directions to Sir Coniers Clifford,
President of Connaught, to set upon the Rebels in one place, (thereby to sever
their Forces) while he assaulted them in another. This counsel though good, yet
found ill success; Clifford with fifteen hundred Soldiers marching toward
Belike, set upon the Rebels; but the Fight continuing long, and the English
wanting Powder, were put to flight, Clifford himself, and many of the old
Soldiers being slain.

In the mean time Essex receives fresh Forces out of England; and withal a
check for neglecting the Queens Command; wherefore at length he sets forth
toward the borders of Vlster, with thirteen hundred Foot and five hundred
Horse. Tir Oen not able to match him in power, yet seeks to over-match him in
policy, and by his Messenger desires a parley; Essex mistrusting not the
poison in the bate, condescended, appointing the shallow of Balla Clinch for
their meeting place: thither came Essex alone, with whom Tir Oen had private
conference a full hour; and not long after by their Delegates concluded a Truce
from six weeks to six weeks till May Day.

This Transaction more incensed the Queen, who dispatcheth very sharp Letters
unto him, blaming his delay, and letting slip every fair opportunity; with
which Letters he likewise receives advertisement, that Sir Robert Cecil was
made Master of the Wards, a place which he expected himself. This Sir Robert
Cecil was a man of lame feet, but of a sound head; one who bare great sway in
the Court, and a special stickler against the Earl; which exasperated him the
more, not that he lost the place himself, but that his Adversary had attained
unto it. This State proceeding entered so deep into his thoughts, that he
studies revenge, and held private consultations of returning into England with
part of his Forces, to surprise his Adversaries. But from this dangerous course
the Earl of Southamptom and Sir Christopher Blunt diswaded him; yet within a
month over he went, and came with speed to the Court at Nonesuch; where
falling upon his knees before the Queen, after a little talk she bid him retire
to his Chamber, and soon after committed him to custody in the Lord Privy Seals
house; where having remained the space of six months, he began to repent him
of his former courses, and showed so great patience, and so much submission,
that the Queen gave him leave to return to his own House again. Nevertheless
the popular voice, the crowd of common people so extolled his innocence, that
she could not, for the removal of suspicion of Injustice, free her self and her
Councillors, but was forced to bring him to a trial; which accordingly she did
in the house of the Lord Privy Seal. The chief Articles objected against him
were, That contrary to his Commission he had made the Earl of Southhampton
General of the Horse; had drawn his Forces into Munster, neglecting the Arch
Rebel Tir Oen; entertained a parley with him against the Dignity of the Queens
Majesty, and the person of a Viceroy, which he represented; and that the
Parley was suspicious, in regard it was private. The Earl (remembering the words
of Solomon, Proverbs 16.14. The wrath of a Prince is as messengers of death,
but a wise man will pacify it,) fell down upon his knees at the end of the
board, professing he would not contest with the Queen, nor excuse the faults of
his young years, either in whole, or in part; protesting that he always meant
well, howsoever it fell out otherwise; and that now he would bid his rash
enterprises adieu: with many other words to the like purpose, which made the
Assembly there present to weep. For indeed he was a man dearly beloved both of
the Queen, Peers, and People; nor do we read of any English Subject, whose fall
was more lamented then his.

At length this sentence was pronounced against him, That he should be deposed
from the office of a Privy Counselor, suspended from the functions of Earl
Marshall, and Master of the Ordnance, and be imprisoned during the Queens
pleasure. And indeed her pleasure was he should not endure Imprisonment long;
for upon his show of humiliation and mortification, she removed Berkley his
Keeper, and gave him leave to go at large; only admonishing him to make his
own discretion his Keeper, and not to come at the Court, or in her presence.

Now the Earl thinking all danger was past, and that a serene sky would succeed
this storm, in a presumptuous confidence of the Queens wonted favor, he became
an earnest suitor to her for the Farm of sweet Wines: she to try the truth of
his temper made him this answer, That she must first know what it was worth,
and not give away things hand over head. His high spirit not brooking a
denial, falls into discontented expressions which came to the Queens ear. That
it was now plain, the Queen intended to make him as poor as Job; that he should
live of the basket, and gather crumbs under the table; that the Queen was now
old and decreped, and withered as well in mind as in body. And now again he
runs upon desperate counsels, for the removeal of his Adversaries from the
Court. The Earl of Southampton is sent for out of the Low Countries, his doors
set open for all Comers, decayed Soldiers, and discontented persons admitted
by Merrick his Steward to his own table; Citizens flock thither each day in
great numbers, and all signs popularity appeared. The chief of his Council were
the Earl of Southampton, Sir Charles Danvers, Sir Ferdinando Gorge, Captain of
the Garrison of Plymouth, Sir Christopher Blunt, his two servants, Merrick and
Cuffe, with some others: These meeting in consultation at Drury House, resolve
the Queens Palace shall be seized upon, and his Adversaries secured, who were
nominated to be Raleigh, Cobham, Carew, Cecill, And the Admiral. But before
they could effect their designs, the Queen by several circumstances having
suspicion of their actions, sent Secretary Herbert to call him before the
Council; the Earl doubting the matter, excuses himself that he was not very
well. But this slight excuse increasing the suspicion, four of the Lords were
by the Queen sent unto him: namely the Lord Keeper, the Earl of Worcester, Sir
William Knolles, and the Lord Chief Justice of England: these coming to Essex
House, found there a confused number of people, and the Earls of Essex,
Rutland, and Southampton in the midst of them; after some little talk the
four Lords were secured; Essex with a Troop of two hundred men at his heels
making haste into City, being falsely informed that the Citizens would take his
part. The Earl of Bedford, the Lord Cromwell, and other Lords meeting him by
the way, join themselves, Essex crying out as he went, For the Queen, for the
Queen, they lay wait for my life. Whilst thus he seeks in vain for help of
the Citizens, certain of the Nobility entered the City with a Herald, declaring
him and all his adherents Traitors: this so abated the edge of their courages,
that some of his followers began to shift for themselves; amongst which was Sir
Ferdinando Gorge, who the better to obtain the Queens mercy, freeth the four
Lords that were kept prisoners in Essex House, going along with them to the
Court by water.

The Earl himself thinking to return, was opposed by men in Arms at the West
end of Paul's; where after a short bickering he retired to Queen-hive, and went
to Essex-House by water. By and by the Admiral besieges the House, commanding
them to yield, which at first they refuse; but afterward finding their cause
to be desperate, they fall upon their knees, and deliver up their weapons to
the Admiral. The chief of them, as Essex, Southampton, Rutland, Sands,
Cromwell, Mounteagle, Danvers, and Bromley, were committed to the Tower, the
rest were put in common Prisons.

The Earl being thus immured, sent this Letter to Sir Thomas Egerton Lord
Chancellor. The Copy hereof the better to express the temper of his spirit, I
have word for word inserted.

The Earl of Essex Letter to the Sir. Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor.
My very good Lord, though there is not a man this day living that I should
sooner make judge of any question that might concern me then your self, yet you
must give me leave to tell you, that in some cases I must appeal from all
earthly Judges; and if in any then surely in this, when the highest Judge on
earth has interposed upon me the heaviest punishment without trial or hearing:
since then I must either answer your Lordships arguments, or else forsake mine
own just defense, I will force mine aching head to do me service for an hour. I
must first deny my coffeehouse which was forced to be an humerous
discontent; and so that it was unseasonable, or is so long continuing, your
Lordship should rather condole with me then expostulate: natural seasons are
expected here below, but violent and unseasonable storms come from above. There
is no tempest to the passionate indignation of a Prince, nor yet at any time so
unseasonable, as when it lights on those that might expect an harvest of
their painful and careful labors. He that is once wounded must needs feel
smart till his hurt be cured, or the part hurt before senseless: but cure I
expect none, her Majesty's heart being obdurate: and be without sense I cannot,
being of flesh and blood. But you may say I may aim at the end; I do more then
aim, for I see an end of all my fortunes: I have set an end to all my desires,
in this course do I any thing for my enemies: when I was present I found them
absolute; and therefore I had rather they should triumph alone, then have me
attendant upon their Chariots. Or do I leave my friends, when I was a Courtier
I could tell them no fruit of my love, and now that I am a Hermit they shall
bear no envy for their love to me: or do I forsake my self because I do not
enjoy my self; or do I overthrow my fortune, because I build not a fortune of
paper walls; or do I ruinate my honor, because I leave following the pursuit
or wearing the false ones or shadow of honor; do I give courage or comfort to
the enemies, because I neglect my self to encounter them; or because I keep my
heart from business, though I cannot keep my fortune from declining: No no, I
give every one of those considerations his due right; and the more I weigh
them, the more I find my self justified from offending in any one of them. As
for the two last objections that I forsook my Country when it has most need of
me, and fail in that dissolvable duty which I owe my Sovereign; I answer, that
if at this time my Country had any need of my public service, her Majesty
that governs it would not have driven me to a private life. I am tied to my
Country by two Bonds, one public; to discharge carefully and industriously
that trust which is committed to me; the other private, to sacrifice for it my
life and carcass, which has been nourished in it. Of the first I am free,
being dismissed by her Majesty; of the other, nothing can free me but death;
and therefore no occasion of performance shall sooner offer it self, but I will
meet it half way. The indissolvable duty I owe to her Majesty, the service of
an Earl, and of a Marshal of England, and I have been content to do her the
service of a Clerk; but I can never serve her as a villain or a slave. But you
say I must give way to time; so I do, for now I have seen the storm come, I
have put my self into harbor. Seneca says, we must give way to Fortune. I
know that Fortune is both blind and strong and therefore I go as far as I can
out of the way, You say, the remedy is not to strive; I neither strive nor seek
for remedy. But you say, I must yield and submit, I can neither yield my self
to be guilty, nor this my Imprisonment to be just: I owe so much to the Author
of Truth, as I can never yield truth to be falsehood, nor falsehood to be truth.
Have I given you cause you ask, and yet take a scandal? No, I gave no cause so
much as to take up Fimbria his complaint; I did tutum telum corpore accipere, I
patiently bear, and sensibly feel all that I then received when this scandal
was given me: nay, when the vilest of all Indignities are done unto me, does
God require it? Is it impiety not to do it? Why, cannot Princes err? cannot
Subjects receive wrong? Is an earthly power infinite? Pardon me, pardon me my
Lord, I can never subscribe to these Principles: Let Solomon's fool laugh when
he is stricken; let those that mean to make their profit of Princes, show to
have no sense of Princes injuries. Let them acknowledge an infinite
absolutnesse on earth, that do not believe an absolute infiniteness in heaven.
As for me I have received wrong, I feel it; my cause is good, I know it: and
whatsoever comes, all the powers on earth can never show more strength or
constancy in oppressing, then I can show in suffering whatsoever can or shall
be imposed on me. I must crave your Lordships patience to give him that has a
crabbed Fortune leave to use a crooked style. But whatsoever it is, there is no
heart more sensible or more affected toward your Lordship, then that of

Your Lordships poor Friend Essex.


The ninteenth of February following, Essex and Southhamdton were arraigned in
Westminster Hall; their Indictment was, for plotting to deprive the Queen of
her life and Kingdom, to surprise her in her very Palace; and that they brake
forth into open rebellion, by imprisoning the Counselors of the kingdom, by
exciting the Londoners to rebellion with vain fictions, by assaulting the
Queens loyal Subjects in the City, and by defending Essex-house against the
Queens Forces. Hereunto they pleaded not guilty, but being found guilty by
there Peers, they had sentence of death pronounced against them by Buckhurst
Lord Treasurer, high steward of England for that time.

Six days after was the fatal day appointed to put a period to Essex his life;
the Queen notwithstanding her Motto, Semper eadem, yet in the case of life and
death was often times wavering; willing she was to have remitted what was past,
if she might have been ascertained of his loyalty for the time to come:
nevertheless she gave command he should not be executed; but being informed he
should say, He could not live but she must perish, she countermanded her former
word and gave order he should be executed.

In pursuance of which order he was brought forth to the place of execution,
where a Scaffold was erected; sundry of the Nobility being present, where
having craved mercy of God, and pardon of the Queen, he had his head severed
from his body.

The thirteenth of March following, Merrick and Cuffe were drawn to Tyburn, and
there hanged, and two days after, Sir Charles Danvers, and Sir Christopher
Blunt were beheaded on Tower Hill: for great men seldom fall alone, but as the
Poet has it.

Winds with great fury on tall Cedars blow,
Whose fall does ruin them that are below.
One of our modern writers observes that happened to the Countess of Essex; she
being fearful in her husbands behalf, gave a Letter which she had received from
him to the custody of one Rihove, a Dutch woman that waited on her; this
Dutchwomans husband, named Daniel, lighted by chance upon the Letter, and
perceiving some passages in it, which might bring the Earl of Essex into
danger, got a cunning fellow to draw a counterfeit copy of the said letter;
with this he comes to the fearful Lady who was newly brought to bed,
threatening to give the same to her husbands adversaries, unless she would
presently give him three thousand pounds. She to shun the danger, paid him
eleven hundred and seventy pounds at the very instant; yet did he deliver her
the counterfeit copy only, meaning to make use of the true one, to get
another some of the Earls adversaries. This imposter being found out, he was
censured to perpetual imprisonment, condemned in three thousand pounds (two of
which were to go to the Countess) and his ears nailed to the pillory, with this
writing over his head. A notorious Cheater.

I shall conclude all with some few observations on this unfortunate Earl: as
to his first rise, my Lord of Leicester introduced him who had married his
mother, a tie of affinity. Sure it is that he no sooner appeared in the Court,
but he took with the Queen and Courtiers; and I believe they all could not
choose through the sacrifice of the Father, but look on the living Son; whose
image by the remembrance of former passages was afresh, like the bleeding of
men murdered, represented to the Court. The Cicero of our modern times
parallels him and Buckingham; where the difference was is too transparent:
certain it is, to use Sir Robert Nauntons own words, that there was in this
young Lord, together with a most goodly person, a kind of urbanity or innate
courtesy, which both won the Queen, and took too much on the people; which
amongst other disparities, Buckingham never did attain to the latter. What has
been imputed to his fall, is, that he drew too fast from the Queens indulgence,
like a child sucking of an over uberous Nurse; which caused him to express
himself in such peremptory language, when he heard that my Lord Mountjoy
received a favor from the Queen for his running so well a tilt; when as though
he would have limited her respects, he said, Now I believe every fool must have
a favor: which made the Queen swear by Gods death, it was fit that one or
other should take him down, and teach him better manners. All Authors agree
that he was a man of a rash spirit, thirsty after the uncertain fame of
popularity, which helped him on to his Catastrophe. One writes this Latin
Epitaph on him.

Epitaphium de eodem Comite.
Ecce sub hoc tumulo situs est celeberrimus Heroes
Qui cecidit, patrii spesque decusque soli:
Fama ingens: annis juvenis: fortissimus armis:
Nobilitate potens: religione pius:
Terra Britannia parens, and testis Hibernia lethi,
Tristia fata gemunt: fortia facta canunt:
Facta togae, bellive magis, praestantia mirer?
Optima, pace domi: Maxima mart foris.
Mors fera corpus habet: Coelo Comes inclyte, vivis:
Vita dicata Deo: mors nonna vita data est.
The Life of Sir ROBERT CECILL.
Tu pater and patriae Princeps, Prudentia cujus
Extulit immensum roges populosque Britannos.
THis Earwig of the Court Sir Robert Cecil, afterward Earl of Salisbury, was
the Son of the Lord Burleigh, and the Inheritour of his Wisdom, and by degrees
Successor of his places and favors, though not of his Lands; for he had Sir
Thomas Cecil his elder Brother, afterward created Earl of Exeter. He was first
Secretary of State, then Master of the Wards, and in the last of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign came to be Lord Treasurer: all which were the steps of his
Fathers greatness, and of the Honor he left to his House. For his Person he
was not much beholding to Nature, though somewhat for his Face, which was the
best part of his outside; but for his inside, it may be said, and without
Solecisme, that he was his Fathers own Son, and a pregnant Proficent in all
Discipline of State. He was a Courtier from his Cradle, (which might have made
him betimes,) yet at the age of twenty and upwards, he was much short of his
after-proof; but exposed; and by change of climate he soon made show what he
was, and would be. He lived in those times wherein the Queen had most need and
use of men of weight; and among able ones, this was a chief, as having his
sufficiency from his instructions that begat him, the Tutourship of the times
and Court, which were then the Accademies of Art and Cunning.

This great Master of State, and the staff of the Queens declining age; who
though his little crooked person could not promise any great supportation, yet
it carried thereon a head, and a headpiece of a vaste content; and therein it
seems Nature was so diligent to complete one, and the best part about him, as
that to the perfection of his memory and intellectuals, she took care also of
his senses, and to put him in Linceos oculos, or to pleasure him the more,
borrowed of Argus, so to give unto him a prospective sight; and for the rest of
his sensitive Virtues, his predecessor Walsingham had left him a receipt, to
smell out what was done in the Conclave: and his good old father was so well
seen in the Mathematics, as that he could tell you through all Spain every
part, every ship, with the burdens, whither bound with preparation, what
impediments for diversion, of enterprises, counsels, and resolutions. And that
we may see (as in a little Map, how docible this little man was, I will present
a taste of his abilities. The Earl of Devonshire (upon the certainty the
Spaniard would invade Ireland with a strong Army) had written very earnestly to
the Queen and the Council for such supplies to be sent over, that might enable
him to march up to the Spaniard, if he did land, and follow on his prosecution
against the Rebels. Sir Robert Cecill (besides the general dispatch of the
Council, as he often did) wrote this in private; for these two began then to
love dearly.

My Lord,
Out of the abundance of my affection, and the care I have of your well doing,
I must in private put you out of doubt, (for of fear I know, you cannot be
otherwise sensible, then in the way of honor) that the Spaniard will not come
unto you this year; for I have it from my own, what preparations are in all his
Parts, and what he can do: For be confident, he bears up a reputation by
seeming to embrace more then he can gripe. But the next year be assured he will
cast over unto you some Forelorn-hopes, which how they may be reinforced beyond
his present ability, and his first intention, I cannot as yet make any certain
judgment; but I believe out of my intelligence, that you may expect there
landing in Munster; and the more to distract you, in several places; as at
Kinsale, Bur-haven, Baltimore, where you may be sure (coming from Sea) they
will first fortify and learn the strength of the Rebels, before they dare
take the field; howsoever (as I know you will not) lesson not your care,
neither your defenses; and whatsoever lies within my power to do you and the
public service, rest thereof assured.


And to this I would add much more, but it may (as it is) suffice to present
much as to his abilities in the pen, that he was his Crafts-master in foreign
intelligence: and for domestique affairs, as he was one of those that sat at
the stern to the last of the Queen, so was he none of the least in skill, and
in the true use of the Compass.

And so I shall only vindicate the scandal of his death, and conclude him, for
he departed in the month of May, 1612. at Saint Margrets near Marlborough, in
his retun home from the Bathe; as my Lord Viscount Cranborne, my Lord Clifford
his Son, and Son-in-law, and many more can witness. But that the day before he
swounded in the way, was taken out of the Litter, and laid into his Coach, was
a truth; out of which that falsehood concerning the manner of his death had its
derivation, though nothing to the purpose, or to the prejudice of his worth. He
was from his greatest enemies acknowledged to be a complete Statesman, a
support of the Protestant Faction, a discloser of Treasons, the Mercury of his
time. His body lies buried at Macfield. He was famous for his buildings, more
especially that called Britains Burse; with this and other rare edifices to
his extraordinary cost, with which he adorned his Country.

The Life of Sir THOMAS OVERBURY.
A man's best Fortune, or his worst's a Wife;
Yet I that knew nor Marriage, Peace, nor Strife;
Live by a good one, by a bad one lost my life.
A Wife like her I write, scarce man can wed:
Of a false Friend like mine, there is none has read.
THis Witty (but unfortunate) Knight Sir Thomas Overbury was the son of Sir
Nicholas Overbury of Burton in Glocestershire, who to his natural propension of
Ingenuity had the addition of good Education. He having been a while Student of
the Law in the Middle Temple, soon after he cast Anchor at Court, the then
Haven of hope for all aspiring spirits. Yet upon some discontent he descended
from those lofty Pinacles, and traveled into France, where having been some
time, he returned again, and was entertained into the respects of Sir Robert
Carre, one who was newly initiated a Favorite to King James, who put him in
trust with his most secret employments; in which he behaved himself honestly
and discreetly, purchasing by his wise carriage in that place good affection
and respect, not only from Sir Robert Carre, but of other eminent Persons. In
process of time this favor procured profit, profit indulged honor, honor
large employments, and in him expert execution; for where diligence and
humility are associate in great affairs, there favor is accompanied with both.
So that many Courtiers perceiving great hopes grew into familiarity with him;
the Knights expectations are performed, and his businesses accomplished beyond
his expectation to his wishes; so that his diligence and parts gained him
extraordinary resentments from the Viscount to his uniting him into friendship
with himself; insomuch; that to the show of all the world this bond was
indissolvable; neither could there be more friendship used, since there was
nothing so secret, or private, but the Knight imparted it to Master Overbury.

After some continuance of time, Sir Robert Carre is made Viscount, and Master
Overbury had the honor of Knighthood conferred on him; who grew still more and
more into the affections of the people; so that now his worth and his wealth
were so much taken notice of, that he was likely to taper at Court. These
Eminencies as they are not unvaluable, so in their spectatours they raise
scruples and cause doubts, especially in the Viscount; for Sovereignty and Love
can abide no Rivals.

And indeed what State on earth is so firm that is not changeable, or what
friendship so constant that is not dissolvable? Who would imagine this Viscount
should become instrumental to his death, who had done him so faithful service,
and to whom he had embosomed his most secret thoughts? We shall therefore in
the next place lay down the grounds of this revolt of friendship on the
Viscounts part; for we find no breach in Sir Thomas, but that rather his
constant affection, and free delivery of his opinion (scorning to temporize)
occasioned his death.

There had lately past a Divorce betwixt the Earl of Essex and the Lady Frances
Howard, so that she being now free, a motion of Marriage was propounded betwixt
Viscount Carre and this Lady: Sir Thomas Overbury, who had written a witty
Poem, entitled, The Wife, thinking her not agreeable to his intentions of
Matrimony, dissuaded the Viscount from it, with words reflecting much on the
Countesses reputation. This counsel, though it proceeded from an unfeigned love
in Sir Thomas, yet where beauty commands, all discretion being sequestered,
created in the Viscount a hatred toward him; and in the Countess, the fury of
a woman, a desire of revenge: who persuaded the Viscount, That it was not
possible that ever she should endure those injuries, or hope for any prosperity
so long as he lived. That she wondered how he could be so familiar, so much
affected to this man Overbury, that without him he could do nothing, as it
were, making him his right hand, seeing he being newly grown into the Kings
favor, and depending wholly upon his greatness, must expect to be clouded, if
not ruined, when his servant that knew his secrets should come to preferment.
The Viscount apt enough of his own inclination to revenge, further exasperated
by the Countess, resolves upon his death; and soon he found an occasion to act
it. The Council finding Overburies diligence and sufficiency, nominates him as
a fit man to be Ambassador into the Low Countries to the Arch Duke, as
thinking they could not serve him up to preferments worthy of his deserts.
Before he had given in his answer, the Viscount comes to him, acting his fatal
part against Sir Thomas, disswades him from undertaking it; using this
argument, That his preferment and expectations depended not on Foreign
Nations. You are now, said he, in credit at home, and have already made trial
of the dangers of travel, why then should you hazard all upon uncertainties,
being already in possession of that you can probably expect by these means.
Overbury not doubting the Viscounts fidelity toward him, was persuaded by him;
forgetting the counsel of the Poet.

Ne cuiquam creed, haud credere quisquam,
-- Nam front politi.
Astutam vapido celant sub pectore vulpem.
Believe thou not scarce any man,
For often a Phrygian face
Is smoothly covered with a smile,
Within seeks thy disgrace.
King James deeply incensed with the refusal of his tendered honors, for his
contempt, commits him to the Tower; the Viscount aggravated his offense to the
King, but privately promised Sir Thomas by his intimacy with the King, to bring
him off from any troubles that might arise: but whatsoever he pretended, he
practiced the contrary. And now having him in the place they desired, their
next study to secure their revenge, was closely to make him away, which they
concluded to be by poison. To this end, they consult with one Mrs. Turner, (the
first inventor of that horrid Garb of yellow Ruffs and Cuffs, and in which Garb
she was after hanged) she having acquaintance with one James Franklin, a man
skilled for their purpose, agreed with him to provide that which should not
kill presently, but cause one to languish away by degrees, a little and a
little. Sir Jervas Velvis Lieutenant of the Tower, being drawn into the
conspiracy, admits of one Weston, Mrs. Turners man, who under pretense of
waiting upon Sir Thomas, was to act that horrid tragedy. The Plot thus
contrived, Franklin buys certain poisons, viz. Rosater, White Arsenick,
Mercury Sublimate, Cantharides, red Mercury, with three or four more deadly
ingredients, which he delivered to Weston, with instructions how to use them.
Weston (an apt scloller in the Devils school) tempers them in his broth and
meat, increasing or diminishing their strength, according as he saw him
affected: besides these, poisoned tarts and jellies are sent him by the
Viscount. At last, his salt, his sauce, his meat, his drink, and whatsoever he
eats is mingled with poison, till his hair fell from his head, and he was
strangely forced to part with the excrements of his nails; so that had he not
been a very strong man he could have never stood it out so long. Besides these
villainies, was added this affliction, that none of his friends were permitted
to see him, or so much as to speak with him but at a window; so that all things
considered, we may conclude him, as to his outward condition, truly miserable.

In the mean time the Viscount flourishes, the marriage is consumated betwixt
him and the Countess, and more honors conferred on him, being created Earl of
Somerset. Sir Thomas Overbury hearing of this marriage, makes great
lamentation, foreseeing thereby his own death; yet having some weak hopes of
the Earl, he sends this letter to him, to mind him of his former promise.

Right noble and worthy Sir, your former accustomed favors, and absolute
promise concerning my present deliverance, has caused me at this time to
solicit your Lordship, and to put you in remembrance of the same; not
doubting that your Honor is at all forgetful of me, but only (by reason of my
imprisonment) being possessed of diverse diseases, would for my bodies health and
safety, taste the felicity of the open Air; in which cause if your Lordship
please to commiserate my present necessities, and procure me my speedy
deliverance, I shall not only stand so much the more obliged to you, but also
acknowledge you to be the preserver of my life. The Earl having received the
Letter, returns him answer, that presently he could not accomplish his desires;
but willed him not to doubt, for shortly he should have a deliverance: which
indeed proved true, thought not as Overbury intended; for the conspirators now
hearing some inkling of Sir Thomas's releasement, resolve upon his quick
dispatch; to this end Weston agrees with an Apothecary, for twenty pound, to
administer an empoysoned glister unto him. Sir Thomas persuaded that it would
be much for his health, takes it; by the infusion whereof he falls into a
languishing disease, with a griping in his guts; the next day after which
extremity of pain he died: and because there was some blisters and ugly botches
on his body, the conspirators gave it out that he died of the French Pox. This
past current, and the mischief lay concealed a long time, but God who will
never suffer such mischiefs to pass unpunished, revealed the same. Somersets
conscience begins now to accuse him; that former love that he bore to him, till
the eyes of his Lady had enchanted him, returned; his wonted mirth forsakes
him, he is cast down, he takes not that felicity in company he was wont, but
still something troubles him. And hearing of the peoples mutterings concerning
Overburies death, finding the King in a good humor, he makes his address to
this effect. That whereas it had pleased his Majesty to commit many things unto
his charge, and some of them proving something too weighty for him to undergo,
it was so that ignorantly he had run himself into a Praemunire, whereby he had
forfeited to him both his lands, goods, and liberty, unless it pleased him of
his wonted favor to grant him pardon for that and many other offenses that he
had ignorantly committed. The King still bearing a good affection toward him,
bids him draw his pardon, and he would sign it. Which accordingly he did, but
it coming to the Lord Chancellours hands, he refused to let it pass the Seal,
and acquainted the King with the danger that might accrue thereby. And now
suspicion growing higher of Sir Thomas Overburies death, Weston is examined by
the Lord Cook, who at the first stiffly denied the same; but being persuaded by
the Bishop of London, he tells all: How Mistress Turner and the Countess came
acquainted, what relation she had to Witches, Sorcerers, and Conjurers; that
Northampton, Somerset, Franklin, the Monsons, and Yelvis had all their hands in
it; whereupon they were all apprehended, some sent to the Tower, others to
Newgate. Having thus confessed, being convicted according to course of Law, he
was hanged at Tyburn; after him Mistress Turner, after her Franklin, then Sir
Jervas Yelvis, upon their several Arraignments of the fact, were found guilty,
and executed; some of them died very penitent and sorrowful for what they had
done against such an incomparable person. The Earl and his Countess were both
condemned, but through the Kings gracious pardon had their lives saved, but
were never admitted to the favor of the Court.

This Ingenuous Knight, whose death was so generally lamented, was the other
Sidney of this Nation. One of our Modern Writers observes, that he was too
honest, which with the Machiavelians is interpreted to be too open breasted; as
they retain this principle, that one that waits on great persons ought to keep
a secret till his breath stinks. Whereas without question he did enlarge
himself too much also in his discourse to others, which besides his downright
Integrity to the Viscount, being as sharp Wits are too much addicted to an
unfortunate way of jeering and jeasting, must of necessity prove fatal to him;
the revenge of a woman being always in pursuit. His Poem of a Wife is to the
life; his Characters to this day not outwitted by any. To give a taste of the
respects those times tendered him, I have affixed these following Verses.

To the Memory of the generally bewailed Gentleman, Sir THOMAS OVERBURY.
But that we are bound in Christian piety
To wish Gods will be done; and destiny
(In all that haps to men, or good, or ill)
Suffered or sent by that implored will;
Methinks t'observe how Virtue draws faint breath,
Subject to slanders, hate, and violent death:
Wise men kept low, others advanced to State,
Right checked by wrong, and ill men fortunate;
These moved Effects from an unmoved Cause
Might shake the firmest faith; Heavens fixed laws
Might casual seem, and each irregular sense
Spurn at just Order, blame Gods Providence.
But what is man, to expostulate the Intents
Of his high Will, or judge of strange Events?
The rising Sun to mortal sight reveals
This earthly Globe; but yet the stars conceals:
So may the sense discover Natural things,
Divine above the reach of humane wings:
Then not the Fate, but Fates bad instrument
Do I accuse in each sad accident;
Good men must fall: rapes, incests, murders come,
But woe and curses follow them by whom.
God Authors all men's actions, not their sin,
For that proceeds from devilish lust within.
Thou then that suffer'dst by those forms so vile,
From whom those wicked Instruments did file
Thy drossy part, to make thy fame shine clear,
And shrine thy soul in Heavens all glorious Sphere;
Who being good, naught less to thee befell,
Though it appeared disguised in the shape of Hell.
Vanish thy blood and nerves; true life alone
In Virtue lives, and true Religion,
In both which thou art deadless: O behold
(If thou can look so low as earths base mold)
How dreadful Justice (late with lingering foot)
Now comes like whirlewind! how it shakes the root
Of lofty Cedars; make the stately Brow
Bend to the foot! how all men see that now
The breath of Infamy does move their sails;
Whiles thy dear name by loves more hearty gales
Shall still keep wing, until thy Fames extent
Fill every part of this vast Continent.
Then you the Sire of their murdered Son
Repine not at his fate, since he has won
More honor in his sufferance: and his death
Succeeded by his virtues endless breath.
For him, and to his Life and deaths example,
Love might erect a Statue, Zeal a Temple:
On his true worth the Muses might be slain,
To die his honors web in purest Grain.
Though for his worth the Muses were all slain
His honored Works would raise them up again.
An Elegy upon the untimely Death of Sir Thomas Overbury, poisoned in the Tower.
'T Would ease our sorrow, 'twould release our tears,
Could we but hear those high Celestial Spheres,
Once tune their motions to a doleful strain,
In sympathy of what we Mortals plain,
Or see their fair Intelligences change
Or face or habit, when black deeds, so strange,
As might force pity from the heart of Hell,
Are hatched by Monsters, which among us dwell.
The Stars methinks like men inclined to sleep,
Should through their Crystal Casements scarcely peep;
Or at least view us but with half an eye,
For fear their chaster Influence might descry
Some murdering hand, embrew'd in guiltless blood,
Blending vile juices to destroy the good.
The Sun should wed his beams to endless Night,
And in dull darkness canopy his Light,
When from the rank stews of adultrous Breasts,
Where every base unhallowed project rests;
Is belcht, as in defiance of his shine,
A stream might make even Death it self to pine.
But those things happen still, but never more clear,
Nor with more luster did these Lamps appear:
Mercury capers with a winged heel,
As if he did no touch of sorrow feel,
And yet he sees a true Mercurian killed,
Whose birth his Mansion with much honor filled.
But let me not mistake those powers above,
Nor tax injuriously those Courts of Jove.
Surely they joy to see these Acts revealed.
Which in blind silence have been long concealed;
And Virtue now triumphant, whilst we mourn
To think that e're she was foul Vices scorn:
Or that poor Overburies blood was made
A Sacrifice to malice and dark shade.
Weston, thy hand that Couvre-feu Bell did sway,
Which did his life to endless sleep convay.
But rest thou where thou art, I Will seek no glory
By the relation of so sad a story.
If any more were privy to the deed,
And for the crime should be adjudg'd to bleed,
To Heaven I pray, with reared up hands and eyes,
That as their bodies fall, their souls may rise:
And as those equally turn to one dust,
So these alike may shine among the just;
And there make up one glorious constellation,
Who suffered here in such a differing fashion,
The Life of Sir WALTER RALEIGH.
SIR Walter Rawleigh the Learned Apollo and Oracle of our Nation was one that
(it seems) Fortune had picked out of purpose, to make an example of her
mutability or tennis-ball, thereby to show what she could do; for she tossed him
up of nothing, and too and fro to greatness, and from thence down to little
more then to that wherein she found him; (a mean Gentleman) not that he was
less, for he was well descended, and of good Alliance, but poor in his
beginnings. And for my Lord of Oxfords Jest of him (the Jack, and an upstart)
we all know, it savours more of emulation and his humor, then of truth; and it
is a certain note of the times, that Queen Elizabeth in her choice never took
into her favor a mere new man, or a Mechanic, as Comines observes of Lewis
the Eleventh of France, who did serve himself with persons of unknown parents;
such as was Oliver the Barber, whom he created Earl of Dunoyes, and made him ex
secretis consiliis, and alone in his favor and familiarity.

His approaches to the University and Inns of Court, were the grounds of his
improvement; but they were rather excursions, then sieges or settings down, for
he stayed not long in a place; and being the youngest brother, and the house
diminished in patrimony, he foresaw his own destiny that he was first to roll
(through want and disability to subsist other ways) before he could come to a
repose: and as the stone does by long lying, gather moss, he first exposed
himself to the Land Service in Ireland, a Militia which then did not yield him
food and raiment, (for it was ever very poor) nor had he patience to stay
there, though shortly after he came thither again under the command of the Lord
Gray, but with his own colors flying in the field; having in the interim cast
a new chance, both in the Low Countries, and in a voyage to Sea. And if ever
man drew virtue out of necessity, it was he: therewith was he the great example
of industery; and though he might then have taken that of the merchant to
himself, per mare, per terras, currit mercator ad Indos, he might also have
said, and truly with the Philosopher, Omnia mea mecum porto; for it was a long
time before he could brag of more then he carried at his back; and when he got
on the winning side, it was his commedations that he took the pains for it, and
underwent many various adventures for his after perfection. And before he came
into the public note of the world, and that it may appear how he came up (per
ardua) per varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, not pulled up by chance, or
by any gentle admittance of Fortune: I will briefly describe his native parts,
and those of his own acquiring which was the hopes of his rising.

He had in the outward man a good presence, in a handsome and well compacted
person, a strong natural wit, and a better judgment, with a bold and plausible
tongue, whereby he could set out his parts to the best advantage; and to these
he had the adjuncts of some general learning, which by diligence he enforced to
a great augmentation, and perfection; for he was an undefatigable reader,
whether by Sea or Land; and none of the least observers, both of men and the
times. And I am confident, that among the second causes of his growth, that
variance between him and the Lord Gray, in his descent into Ireland, was a
principal; for it drew them both before the Council Table, there to plead for
themselves; where (what advantage he had in the cause, I know not) but he had
much the better in the telling of his tale; and so much that the Queen and the
Lords entertained no ordinary considerations of his person, and his parts: for
from thence he came to be known, and to have access to the Queen, and to the
Lords; and then we are not to doubt how such a man might rise by his
compliance, the most expeditious way of progression. Whether Leicester had then
cast in a good word for him to the Queen I cannot determine; but true it is, he
had gotten Queen Elizabeth's ear at a trice, and she began to be taken with his
elocution, and loved to hear his reasons to her demands; and the truth is, she
took him for a kind of Oracle, which nettled them all: yea, those that he
relied on, began to take his sudden favor for an allarum, and to be sensible
of their own supplantation, and to project his, which made him shortly after
sing, Fortune my foe, etc. So that finding his favor declining, and falling
into a recess, he undertook a new peregrination to leave that Terra infirma of
the Court, for that of the Wars; and by declining himself, and by absence, to
expel his, and the passion of his enemies, which in Court was a strange device
of recovery; but that he knew there was some ill office done him, that he durst
not attempt to mind any other ways, then by going aside: thereby to teach
envy a new way of forgetfulness, and not so much as to think of him. Howsoever,
he had it always in mind never to forget himself; and his device took so
well, that at his return he came in (as Romans do, by going backwards) with the
greater strength, and so continued to her last, great in her grace, and Captain
of the Guard. One observation more may not be omitted; namely, that though he
gained much at the Court, yet he took it not out of the Exchequer, or merely
out of the Queens Purse, but by his Wit, and the help of the Prerogative; for
the Queen was never profuse in the delivering out of her Treasure, but paid
many, and most of her servants part in money, and the rest with grace, which as
the case stood, was taken for good payment, leaving the arrear of recompense
due to their merit, to her great successor, who paid them all with advantage;
our Rawleigh excepted, who fortunately in the very first beginning of his
Reign, fell into his displeasure, by combining with the Lords, Cobham and Gray,
Sir Griffin Markham, George Brook Esquire and several others, to destroy the
King, raise sedition, commit slaughter, move rebellion, alter Religion, subvert
the State, to procure Invasion, leavy War, and to set up the Lady Arabella
Steward, etc. of all which crimes being arraigned, he was found guilty, and
condemned. But King James being a Prince of peace, unwilling to stain the
beginning of his Reign with blood, contented himself with only his
Imprisonment, this following Letter to his Favorite having saved his life.

Sir Walter Raleigh to the Duke of Buckingham.
If I presume too much, I humbly beseech your Lordship to pardon me, especially
in presuming to write to so great and so worthy a Person, who has been told
that I have done him wrong. I heard it but of late, but most happy had I been
if I might have disproved that villainy against me, when there had been no
suspicion that the desire to save my life had presented my excuse. But my
worthy Lord, it is not to excuse my self that I now write: I cannot, for I have
now offended my Sovereign Lord, for all past, even all the World, and my very
Enemies have lamented my loss; whom now if his Majesty's mercy alone do not
lament, I am lost. Howsoever that which does comfort up my soul in this
offense, is, that even in the offense it self I had no other intent then his
Majesty's service; and to make his Majesty know that my late enterprise was
grounded upon a truth; and which with one ship speedily set out, I meant to
have aspired, or have died; being resolved, as it is well known, to have done
it from Plymouth, had I not been restrained. Hereby I hoped not only to
recover his Majesty's gracious Opinion, but to have destroyed all those
Malignant Reports that had been raised of me. That this is true, that Gentleman
whom I so much trusted, my Keeper, and to whom I opened my heart, cannot but
testify; and wherein I cannot be believed living, my death shall witness: yea,
that Gentleman cannot but avow it, that when we came back to London, I desired
no other treasure then an exact description of those places in the Indies. That
I meant to go hence as a discontented man; God I trust, and my own actions will
dissuade his Majesty, whom neither the loss of my Estate, thirteen years
Imprisonment, and the denial of my pardon could beat from his service, or the
opinion of being accounted a fool, or rather a distract, by returning as I did,
balanced with my love to his Majesty's person and estate, had no other place
in my heart.

It was the last severe Letter from my Lords for the speedy bringing of me up,
and the impatience of dishonor that first put me in fear of my life, or
enjoying it in a perpetual Imprisonment, never to recover my Reputation lost,
which strengthened me in my late and too late lamented resolution. If his
Majesty's Mercy does not abound, if his Majesty do not pity my old age, and
scorn to take the extremest and utmost advantage of my errors; if his Majesty
in his great charity do not make a difference betwixt offenses proceeding from
a life, saving natural impulsion, without all ill intent, and those of an ill
heart; and that your Lordship, remarkable in the world for the nobleness of
your disposition, do not vouchsafe to become my successor; whereby your
Lordship shall bind a hundred Gentlemen of my Kindred to honor your Memory,
and bind me for all that time my life, which your Lordship shall beg for me, to
pray to God that you may ever prosper; and ever bind me to remain

Your most humble Servant, W. Raleigh.


He remained prisoner in the Tower above thirteen years, during which time he
writ that Elabourate Work, entitled, the History of the World; which Book for
its worthiness Dr. Heylin terms, Primus in Historia. When at last being
desirous of his liberty, he studied his exit, acquainting the King with the
avaritious Intelligence of a rich Mine which himself and one Captain Kemish had
formerly discovered by the Informations of the Indians in the Country of
Guiana. For the obtaining of which, if his Majesty would please to give him
leave to make a journey thither, he made no doubt but to benefit the State,
without prejudice to the Spaniard. Which Proposition was condescended unto by
the King, as he then imagines he would be far enough from his Accomplices; but he
commanded to set down not only the Country, but the very River by which he
was to enter it: as also to name his ships, number, men, and Artillery. Which
being known to Gundamore, Leiger Ambassador here for the King of Spain, he
writes to his Master with the purpose of his Voyage. Upon which the King of
Spain directed his Letters to all parts of the Indies to provide for his
coming. Nevertheless Sir Walter Raleigh prosecuted his design, and having
endured infinite dangers, besides a tedious journey, at last he came to Guyana,
where he was much cherished of the Indians of his acquaintance. But falling
desperately sick, he gives order to five small ships to sail into Drinoque,
having Captain Kemish for their Conductour toward the Mines. But passing up
the River by Saint Them, they were set upon by the Spaniard; whereupon they
assaulted the Town, and took it. But in the charge Master Walter Raleigh, Sir
Walters son (more desirous of honor then safety) was slain. The English
finding such stout opposition, that there was no way for them to obtain their
purpose but only by desperate designs, the Spaniards having so fortified the
passage to the Mines, they were forced to return, to the great grief of Sir
Walter Raleigh; who told Kemish upon his return that he had undone him, and
wounded his credit with the King past all recovery; which caused Kemish
desperately to kill himself. And now Sir Walter Raleigh being returned into
England, Gundamore so exclaimed against him to the King for breach of Peace,
and so wrought upon his timorous disposition, that he was committed to the
Tower. Where expecting every hour to be sacrificed to the Spanish cruelty, some
few days before he suffered, he sent for Master Walter Burre, who formerly
printed his first Volumn of the History of the World, whom taking by the hand,
after some other discourse, he asked him how that Work of his had sold. Mr.
Burre returned this answer, that it had sold so slowly, that it had undone him.
At which words of his, Sir Walter Raleigh stepping to his Desk, reaches his
other part of his History to Mr. Burre, which he had brought down to the times
he lived in; clapping his hand on his breast, he took the other unprinted part
of his Works into his hand, with a sigh, saying, Ah my Friend has the first
part undone thee, the second Volume shall undo no more; this ungrateful world
is unworthy of it. When immediately going to the fire side, he threw it in, and
set his foot on it till it was consumed: As great a loss to Learning as
Christendom could have, or owned; for his first Volumn after his death sold
thousands.

And now the time approached wherein he was to act his last part on the Stage
of this world, he first sent this following Letter to King James.

Sir Walter Raleigh to King James before his Trial.
It is one part of the office of a just and worthy Prince to hear the
complaints of his Vassals, especially such as are in great misery. I know not
amongst many other presumptions gathered against me, how your Majesty has been
persuaded that I was one of them who were greatly discontented, and therefore
the more likely to prove disloyal: But the great God so relieve me in both
worlds as I was the contrary; and I took as great comfort to behold your
Majesty, and always learning some good, and bettering my knowledge by hearing
your Majesty's discourse. I do most humbly beseech your sovereign Majesty not
to believe any of those in my particular, who under pretense of offenses to
Kings, do easily work their particular revenge. I trust no man, under the color
of making examples, should persuade your Majesty to leave the word merciful out
of your style: for it will be no less profit to your Majesty, and become your
greatness, then the word invincible. It is true that the Laws of the Realm are
as no less jealous of the Kings, then Caesar was of Pompey's Wife; for
notwithstanding she was cleared for keeping company with Claudius, yet for
being suspected, he condemned her. For my self, I protest it before God
Almighty, and I speak it to my Master and Sovereign, that I never invented
Treason against him: and yet I know I shall fall in manibus little a quibus non
possum evadere, unless by your Majesty's gracious compassion I be sustained.
Our Law therefore, most merciful Prince, knowing her own cruelty, and knowing
that she is wont to compound Treasons out of her own presumptions and
circumstances, and does give this charitable advice to the King her supreme,
Non solum sapiens esse, sed misericors, etc. cum tutius est reddere rationem
misericordiae quam judicii. I do therefore on the knees of my heart beseech
your Majesty from your own sweet and conformable disposition, to remember that
I have served your Majesty twenty years, for which your Majesty has yet given
me no Reward; and it is fitter I should be indebted to my Sovereign Lord, then
the King to his poor Vassal. Save me therefore, most merciful Prince, that I
may owe your Majesty my life it self, then which there cannot be a greater
debt. Limit me at least my Sovereign Lord, that I may pay it for your service
when your Majesty shall please. If the Law destroy me, your Majesty shall put
me out of your power; and I shall have none to fear but the King of kings.

Walter Raleigh.


Being brought before the Lord Chief Justice at the Kings Bench in Westminster
Hall, the Attorney General demanded Execution according to the Judgment
formerly pronounced against him. Whereupon he was asked what he could say why
he should not die, according to the Law. His answer was, That this fifteen
years he had lived by the mere mercy of the King, and did now wonder how his
mercy was turned into justice, he not knowing any thing wherein he had provoked
his Majesty's displeasure; and did hope, that he was clear from that Judgment
by the Kings Commission, in making him General of the Voyage to Guiana; for (as
he conceived) the words, To his trusty and well-beloved Subject, etc. did in
themselves imply a pardon. But the Court resolving otherwise, he was committed
into the hands of the Sheriff of Middlesex, who presently conveyed him to the
Gatehouse in Westminster.

The Imputation of the first bringing in of Tobacco into England lies on this
Heroic Knight; but as in the Life of Sir Francis Drake I have cleared him,
that his Mariners first brought it in. So for that report, that when he went
to his Trial, he took three Pipes in the Coach. I rather look on him as he was
too guilty of occasioning the mode of this vanity, rather then that it was any
Institution of his own.

The day appointed for his Execution being come, a Scaffold was erected for him
before the Parliament House; upon which being brought, with a cheerful
countenance and undaunted look, he spoke as follows.

My Honorable Lords, and the rest of my good Friends that are come to see me
die, know that I much rejoice that it has pleased God to bring me from
darkness to light, and in freeing me from the Tower, wherein I might have died
in disgrace, by letting me live to come to this place; where though I lose my
life, yet I shall clear some false accusations unjustly laid to my charge, and
leave behind me a testimony of a true heart both to my King and Country.

Two things there are which have exceedingly possessed and provoked his Majesty's
indignation against me, viz. A confederacy or combination with France, and
disloyal and disobedient words of my Prince. For the first, his Majesty had
some cause, though grounded upon a weak foundation to suspect mine inclination
to the French Faction; for not long before my departure from England, the
French Agent took occasion, passing by my house to visit me; we had some
conference during the time of his abode only concerning my Voyage, and nothing
else, I take God to witness.

Another suspicion is had of me, because I did labor to make an escape from
Plymouth to France: I cannot deny, but that willingly, when I heard a rumor,
that there was no hope of my life upon my return to London, I would have
escaped for the safeguard of my life, and not for any ill intent or conspiracy
against the State.

The like reason of suspicion arose, in that I persuaded Sir Lewis Stenkly, my
Guardian, to flee with me from London to France; but my answer to this is, as
to the other, that only for my safeguard, and naught else, was my intent, as I
shall answer before the Almighty,

It is alleged, that I feigned my self sick, and by art made my body full of
blisters when I was at Salisbury. True it is, I did so, the reason was, because
I hoped thereby to defer my coming before the King and Council, and so by
delaying might have gained time to have got my pardon. I have an example out of
Scripture for my warrant, that in case of necessity, and for the safeguard of
my life; David feigned himself foolish and mad, yet it was not imputed to him
for sin.

Concerning the second imputation laid to my charge, that I should speak
scandalous and reproachful words of my Prince, there is no witness against me
but only one, and he a Chemical Frenchman, whom I entertained rather for his
Jeasts then Judgment. This man to incroach himself into the favor of the
Lords, and gaping after some great reward, has falsely accused me of seditious
speeches against his Majesty; against whom if I did either speak or think a
thought hurtful or prejudicial, Lord blot me out of the Book of Life.

It is not a time to flatter or fear Princes, for I am a Subject to none but
deatb; therefore have a charitable conceit of me: that I know to swear, is an
offense, to swear falsely at any time is a great sin; but to swear falsely
before the presence of Almighty God, before whom I am forthwith to appear, were
an offense unpardonable: therefore think me not now rashly, or untruly to
confirm, or protest any thing.

As for other Objections, in that I was brought perforce into England, that I
carried sixteen thousand pounds in Money out of England with me more then I
made known; that I should receive Letters from the French King, and such like;
with many protestations he utterly denied.

Having ended his Speech, he saluted the Company; and after he had made his
addresses to heaven, submitted his neck to the stroke of the Axe. Thus ended
this worthy Knight; a man of such admirable parts, that he is more to be
admired then sufficiently praised. Leaving him to his repose till the last
great day, I shall only set down this following Epitaph made by himself.

Even such is time which takes in trust
Our youth, and joys, and all we have;
And pays us but with age and dust
Within the dark and silent grave:
When we have wandered all our ways,
Shuts up the story of our days.
From the which earth, death, grave, and dust,
The Lord shall raise me up I trust
The Life of Mr. William Cambden.
THis learned Antiquary, who so diligently preserved the memories of many noble
Families of this Nation, and whose laborious Works have been a great light to
Histories already extent, and such as future Ages shall produce, is deservedly
placed amongst our Heroes; that he whose pen made so many others live, in his
never dying Brittania, may likewise live here in this present Work, amongst the
rest of our English Worthies.

He was Son to Master Sampson Cambden, descended of an ancient family in
Staffordshire; his Mother was extracted from the worshipful family of the
Curwens in Cumberland, as he himself witnesses in his Britannia. He was born
in the Old Bailey in the City of London, Anno. 1550. That he was well educated,
his learned Works make manifest; being put to School, first in Christ-Church,
then at Paul's. At fifteen years of age, (so soon was he ripened for the
University) he went to Magdalen College in Oxford: where having much profited,
he removed from thence to Broadgates Hall, where he gave some proofs of his
learning in those short Latin graces the Servitors still use. From thence he
went to Christ-Church, where he attained to such eminency, as his abilities
preferred him to be Master of Westminster School.

There is as a learned Gentleman observes, scarce any profession in the
Commonwealth more necessary, which is so slightly performed. The reasons
whereof he takes to be these. First, young Scholars make this calling their
refuge; yea perchance before they have taken any degree in the University,
commence Schoolmasters in the Country; as if nothing else were required to set
up this profession, but only a Rod and a Ferula. Secondly, others who are able
use it only as a passage to better preferment, to patch the rents in their
present fortune, till they can provide a new one, and betake themselves to some
more gainful calling. Thirdly, they are disheartened from doing their best, with
the miserable reward which in some places they receive; being Masters to the
Children, and slaves to their Parents. Lastly, being grown rich, they grow
negligent, and scorn to touch the School, but by the proxy of an Usher.

But our Schoolmaster was of another temper, studying his Scholars natures, as
carefully as they their Books, and rankt their dispositions into several forms;
for that Schoolmaster deserves to be beaten himself, who beats nature in a Boy
for a fault. The truth is, our English Schoolmasters, I mean the unworthier
sort of them, to conceal their ignorance and continue their profits, keep Boys
in Lillies Grammar; first to get it by short lessons, by heart, and then to
construe it, which they have a Book to help themselves with; continuing so long
in this no less slothful and knavish practice of theirs, that Foot-boyes and
Mechanics in other Countries speak good familiar Latin, before we are out of
our Quae Genus: it being a custom beyond the Seas to choose a large Grammar, as
Disputerius, or the like, which they only explain, and then fall to their
Vocubularies, familiar Authors, and Dictionaries; and in a short time are able
to travel with the Latin Tongue over the world. Mr. Cambden taking great pains
in the erudition of youth, continued so for a long space, till that he was
called aside: Queen Elizabeth making him first Richmond Herald, and not long
after Clarenceaux King of Arms; so that here was the story, as Mr. Fuller
writes of Dionysius inverted, who from a King became a Schoolmaster, but here a
Schoolmaster became a King; (I mean of Arms) which place he discharged with
great integrity, being very careful to preserve the memories of extinguished
families, and restoring many to their own rightful Arms; as also to curb their
usurpation who unjustly entitle themselves to ancient families. Spending his
time under a peaceable Prince, he had leisure to compose those most excellent
Works of his, which he left behind him, as a Monument of his never dying fame.
Viz. his Britannia, which he wrote in Latin, since translated into English by
Philemon Holland Doctor of Physic. A Book which will speak its own worth
better then my rude Pen can set it forth. His History of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, the Original and true Edition of which he writ in Latin, it was
Printed at London in Folio. The lesser Volumes Printed in Holland are
corrupted. That passage in favor of Mary Queen of Scots left out, for which
the doors of the Cloisters being shut too by one with a vizard to disguise, he
was soundly banged about the walks with these words often repeated, For Queen
Elizabeth, and so was dismissed, not knowing to his dying-day, who bestowed so
much pains upon him. He wrote a Greek Grammar, which for the clear method and
brevity of it, is outdone by no foreign nation. His last book which one would
have had written on his monument for his Epitaph, Cambdens Remains, contains
the Languages, Names, Sirnames, Allusions, Annagrams, Armories, Moneys,
Empresses, Apparel, Artillery, wise Speeches, Proverbs, Posies, and Epitaphs.

To recreate the Reader, I think it not amiss to relate some few passages out
of this last mentioned book, that it may appear, that our most gravest Authors
would many times mix somewhat of mirth with their more solid writtings, to draw
the Reader on as well by pleasure as profit.

Amongst other pleasant passages he mentions, Johannes Erigena, surnamed
Scotus, a man renowned for learning, who sitting at the Table, in respect of
his learning, with Charles the Bald, Emperor and King of France, behaved
himself as a slovenly Scholar, nothing courtly: whereupon the Emperor asked
him merrily; Quid interest inter Scotum and Sotum; What is the difference
between a Scot and a Sot? He merrily, but yet malapertly answered, Mensa, the
Table; as though the Emperor were the Sot and he the Scot.

In another place he mentions the Emperor did set down unto him a dish with
two fair great fishes, and one little one; willing him to be carver unto two
other Scholars that sat beneath him: this Master John, who was but a little
man, laid the two great Fishes upon his own Trencher, and set down the other
little Fish unto the two Scholars, who were big men; which when the Emperor
saw, he smiling said, In faith, Master John, you are no indifferent divider?
yes, if it like your Highness, very indifferent (said he) for here (pointing to
himself and the two great Fishes) be two great ones, and a little one, and so
yonder (reaching his hand toward the Scholars) are two big ones and a little
one.

He continues with the pleasant relation of Winefridus born at Kirton in
Devonshire, after surnamed Boniface, who converted Freesland to Christianity,
was wont to say, In old time they were golden Prelates, and wooden Chalices,
but in his time wooden Prelates, and golden Chalices.

Then discourses in another place of Ethelwold the Bishop of Winchester, in the
time of King Edgar, in a great famine, sold away all the sacred Gold and Silver
Vessels of his Church, to relieve the hunger-starved poor people, saying, That
there was no reason that the senseless temples of God should abound in riches,
and living Temples of the Holy Ghost starve for hunger.

In another place, that when Hinguar of Denmark came so suddenly upon Edmund
King of the East Angles, that he was forced to seek his safety by flight; he
happened unhappily on a troop of Danes, who fell to examining of him, whether
he knew where the King of the East Angles was; whom Edmund thus answered, Even
now when I was in the palace, he was there, and when I went from thence, he
departed thence, and whether he shall escape your hands or no, God knows. But
so soon as once they heard him name God, the godless infidels pitifully
martyred him.

In another place he takes notice of a quick retort to Geffery, base Son to
King Henry the Second; who being by him advanced to the Sea of Lincoln, would
in his Protestations and Oaths always protest, By my faith, and the King my
Father. But Walter Mapes, the Kings Chaplain told him, You might do as well to
remember sometimes your Mothers honesty, as to mention so often your Fathers
Royalty.

As also of Eubulus a scoffing Comical Greek Poet, who cursed himself, if ever
he opened his mouth against women; inferring, albeit Medea were wicked, yet
Penelope was peerless; if Clytemnestra were naught, yet Alcestes was passing
good; if Phaedra were damnable, yet there was another laudable: But here, says
he, I am at a stand; of good women I find not one more, but of the wicked I
remember thousands.

To this purpose I have read in an old Manuscript, Women are all in extrems,
too willing, or too wilful; too forward, or too froward; too friendly, or too
fiendly; too courteous, or too coy; the mean they always meanly account of.

As also of a certain Captain, who being persuaded to marry, replied no; If I
marry a Wife, she will be wilful; if witty, then wanton; if poor, then
peevish; if beautiful, then proud; if deformed, then loathsome; and the least
of these is able to kill a thousand men.

But I fear I have been too prolix, I shall only add one story concerning
Cardinal Wolsey, then give you a taste amongst many others of some of his merry
Epitaphs, and so proceed. There was a noble man merrily conceited, and
riotously given, that having lately sold the Manor of an hundred Tenements,
came ruffling into the Court in a new Suit, saying; Am not I a mighty man that
bear a hundred houses on my back? Which Cardinal Wolsey hearing, said, You
might have better employed it in paying your debts. Indeed my Lord (quoth be)
you say well, for my Lord, my father, owed my master, your father, three half
pence for a Calves-head; hold, here is two pence for it; Wolsey's Father being
a Butcher. I will only set down a few lines of his merry Epitaphs as
resemblances of the rest.

An Epitaph on Menalcas.
Here lies Menalcas as dead as a log,
That lived like a Devil, and died like a Dog:
Here does he lie said I? then say I lie,
For from this place he parted by and by.
But here he made his descent into Hell,
Without either Book, Candle, or Bell.
Upon one of a base condition, yet in respect of his Name, would have claimed
Kindred of a most Noble Family, and being a notorious Liar was this written.
Here lies M. F. the son of a Bearward,
Who would needs bear Arms in despite of the Herhaught:
Which was a Lion as black as a Jeat-stone,
With a Sword in his paws instead of a Whetstone.
Five sons had this Liar, it is worth the revealing,
Two arrant Liars, and three hanged for stealing,
His Daughters were nine, never free from sores,
Three crooked Apostles, and six arrant Whores.
Another on one that was bald.
Here lies John Baker enrolled in mould,
That never gave a penny to have his head poll'd.
Now the plague and the pox light on such a device,
That undid the Barber, and starved the Lice.
But to return where we left, Master Cambden was so great a lover of Learning
that he founded an History-Professour in Oxford, to which he gave the Manor
of Bexley in Kent, worth in present a hundred and forty pounds per annum, but
(some few years expired) treble as much. And now having lived many years in
honor and esteem, death at last, even contrary to Jus Gentium, killed this
worthy Herald; so that it seems, Mortality, the Law of Nature, is above the Law
of Arms. He died the 74. year of his age, November 9. 1623.

He was buried in the Abbey of Westminster, having this Epitaph upon his
Funeral Monument.

Qui fide Antiqua, and opera assidua Britannicum
Antiquatem indigavit,
Simplicitatem innatam honestis studiis excoluit.
Animi solertiam candore illustravit
Gulielmus Camdenus ab Elizabetha R.
Ad Regis Armorum (Clarentii Titulo)
Dignitatem evocatus.
Hic spe certa resurgendi in Christo S. E.
Q.
Obiit Anno Domini 1623. 9. Novembris. Aetatis suae 74.

A base villain, for certainly no person that had a right English soul could
have done it, has defaced his Effigies, not suffering his Monument to stand
without violation, whose learned Leaves have so preserved the Antiquities of
the Nation.

Though we have met with most horrid transactions, and the inevitable dart of
death has deprived us of learned Master Dodsworth, yet Divine Providence has
still left us two Argus-eyed Antiquaries, Master Ashmole and Master Dugdale;
who by their studious Inquiries to their vaste expenses in most learned
Volumes, have retrived from our late ruins the honor of the Nation. On these
Gentlemen I only look as fit to write the Life of their deceased Predecessor
Master Seldom, one of the late Worthies of our Age, and Wonders of the World.

The Life of THOMAS SUTTON.
Suttonum Ingenium and locupletem industria fecit,
congestas miseris ille refudit opes.
FAith, Hope, and Charity, these three divine Graces are a created Trinity, and
have some glimmering resemblance of the Trinity uncreated; for as there the Son
is begotten of the Father, and the Holy Ghost proceeds from them both; so true
Faith begets a constant Hope, and from them proceeds Charity: thus is Gods
Temple built in our hearts. St Augustine says, that the foundation of it is
Faith, Hope the erection of the walls, and Charity the perfection of the roof;
an excellent virtue, very rare in this contentious self-interested Age, wherein
fratrum quoque rara gratia est. As a shame to these times, and an honor to the
former, I have inserted the life of this worthy Gentleman, which if I had
omitted, I had in some kind detracted from the honor of the Nation. Master
Thomas Sutton was of a good extract born in the County of Lincoln, the then
seat of Baron Willoby of Eresby, where in his youth he was generously and
liberally brought up; he had some knowledge of the Languages, and might pass
for more then an indifferent Scholar. In his youth he attended Thomas Howard
Duke of Norfolk, and afterward presented his service to the Earl of Warwick,
with whom for some space of time he was in high favor, as also with his
Brother, that Fox of the State, Robert Earl of Leicester. In process of time
the eminency of his Qualifications being more particularly taken notice of, he
was preferred, made Master of the Ordnance of Barwick, of the Laws of which
Castle I have seen a transcript reputed to have been under his own hand. This
place he held for a long time quietly, the Barwick Ordinance having been since
charged to Covenant purposes; but by him only shot off with silver for
Charitable uses. The truth is, he first raised his estate from that employment,
by living sparingly and thrivingly, continually purchasing and improving of
what he had got by merchandise and otherwise. Afterward in his latter time he
withdrew himself from the concourse of conversation, and dwelt in a little Town
called Castle-Camp in the County of Cambridge; there he lived privately many
years, retained no great Family, entertained few Guests, obscured himself as
much as he could, and made no show of his Estate; yet notwithstanding his
wealth was so every where openly known, that at last every one gave him the
name of the Rich Sutton. And now by this time it was the general wonder of all
men, he having no Heir, how he would dispose of his great estate: This made his
Kindred, with emulation one to another in his sickness, most diligently to
attend him; and in his health, against the time of his sickness they strove who
should present him with the richest gifts; every one of them being freely
accepted of. The old man, who as he received all, so they thought at his death
to have their own again with the largest Interest.

I have conversed with some of the Wits, who credibly informed me, that Been.
Jonsons Play of the Fox under the name of Vulpone, had some allusion to Mr.
Suttons manner of treating of his Kindred. But to pass by such impertinences; as
he had vaste sums, so he had vaste thoughts; he had honorable ways, and
determined uses to empty his bags with: the word P. F. being not heard of in
those days. A Friend of his, with whom he was very intimate, walking with him
in his Summer-Parlour, thought to please him with a motion of putting out a
sum of his money to interest on good security. Master Sutton showing a
dislike, told him, that he had other purposes, and for the lawfulness of Usury
he was not so fully convinced of it, but that he did believe that the most
confident Usurer that ever lived would give the best bag he had on his
deathbed to be cleared of that case of conscience. He being asked by his
friend what he would then do with his money, he answered, that he was only as
treasurer and disposer for poor and wanting persons: which words of his agreed
with his mind, as the end of his Life declared. For as he determined with
himself, so he afterward built an Hospital, having first got a Grant from K.
James confirmed by Act of Parliament. To this purpose, having bargained with
Tho. Earl of Suffolk for a House then called the Seat of the Carthusians, now
the Charter House, which was much out of repair; this with many thousands of
pounds he bought of the Earl, though some asperse him, and report that he got
it into his hands first by fraud, the Deeds being entrusted to him, that he
kept them; by which subtilty he had the advantage to make his own market. I
cannot believe this, but if it were true, he had great need, if it could stand
him in any stead, to fly to that Scripture which the Romanists make so much use
of, Charity covers a maltitude of sins. But to pass by this diversion, this
House questionless he bought lawfully of the Earl, which he turned into an
Hospital: When he was very old, and considering how soon his crazinesse and
weakness might set a period to his life, and not knowing what injuries the
present or future Ages might act against his Charity, he took such care to
confirm his will by the Royal power, and the Laws of the Land, that except it
has been abused by the corruption of some particular covetous persons, it has
not been otherwise violated. The particulars of his Testament are too large to
be inserted here, I refer the Reader to the printed Copy: I shall only out of
it instance a few particulars. He bestowed upon his Kindred, Friends, and
Servants, vaste sums of money, besides six thousand pounds a year to the
Hospital: For the performance whereof he chose honest, wise, and experienced
Executours. His Will being thus perfected, he fell deadly sick at his House at
Hackney near London; in the year of our Lord 1611. he died. Not long after his
death the House began to be turned into an Hospital, though after his decease,
this good work with several quirks and pretenses of Law was oposed, as to the
very foundation of it, the Kings ears being abused. At last such was the
faithful zeal of those that were entrusted, God assisting them in so honorable
actions, that the Institution came to perfection by a quiet possession to the
use appointed, with a Library, as a gift worthy of such an Hospital. In this
House fourscore old men are maintained, which should be decayed Gentlemen and
Soldiers, according to the Doners intent, who are to have an allowance both
for their bodies and souls. There is also a School for thirty children of poor
parents; though I am credibly informed rich persons of late years, that make
the greatest friends, soonest get their children in; an abuse of the Will of
the deceased, and a crying oppression of the poor. These Children have their
constant diet and clothing. There are several other stipends for the Governor,
Overseers, Physicians, and Chyrurgeons of the Hospital, together with an annual
allowance, and an ample stipend assigned to a learned Minister, who in the
Chapel on the Lords Day is to preach to the Hospitallers with prayers twice
every day in the week. An honorable gift to the end of the world bestowed on
the distressed members of our Saviors body.

Master Sutton was first buried in Christs-Church in London, but afterward
removed and interred in the Chapel of his Hospital the Charter House, where a
costly Monument was erected for him by his Executours. The Papists that glory
so much of their good works, cannot show a nobler foundation for a particular
person of his quality.

To conclude, though our actions of Charity are never so great, (foolishly
thought by them meritorious) yet if not the effects of a true saving faith,
they are lost, and a man may for all his Charity go to the Devil. And though
the Catholics would plead from the form of the last judgment, Matthew 25.
that God accepts men to Life for their deeds of Charity, feeding, clothing,
relieving, etc. yet the Scripture fully testifies, that God neither accepts
these, nor our selves for them, no further then they are the effects of a true
faith; our persons being first justified by faith in Christ, then God will
crown our works. This according to the holy Writ we acknowledge, that Charity
for the perpetuity of it excells all other Graces; when we have possession of
those pleasures that we believed and hoped, what longer use is there of faith
and hope: but our Love shall not end with our lives; we shall everlastingly
love our Maker, Savior, Sanctifier, Angels, and Saints: where no discontent
shall breed any jar in our Halelujahs. To conclude, as the use of Mr. Suttons
Love and Charity was a comfort and delight to him on earth, what can we think
it will be to him in heaven?

The Life of the most Noble, Sir FRANCIS BACON Viscount of Saint ALBANES.
AFter I had bestowed much pains, and strictly enquired the transactions of the
life of this incomparable Knight, having finished it with all the ingenuity,
care, and impartiality of a studious mind, I at last had the happiness to meet
with it in Latin, exactly and admirably done by Doctor Raleigh his Chaplain;
who as he discharged his faithful trust in publishing of some of his Works, I
thought my self obliged to do him the right of the alone setting forth of his
Life more especially, as no person better knew him then this Reverend Doctor;
I have only translated what he did word for word, neither adding nor
detracting.

Sir Francis Bacon, the Honor of his age and Country, the credit and ornament
of Learning, was born at York-House in the Strand, a noted Street, adjoining to
the City of London, on the 22. day of January, in the year of man's salvation,
MDLX. His Father was that famous Counselor to Queen Elizabeth, and while he
lived, one of the chief Props and Pillars of her Kingdom, Sir Nicholas Bacon
Knight, Keeper of the great Seal of England; a Hero of approved wisdom,
judgment, moderation, and integrity. His Mother was Anne, a Daughter of Sir
Edward Cook, (who had the education of Edward the Sixth King of England) a Lady
both of singular Piety and Virtue, and eminently learned, having no mean skill,
especially considering her Sex, in the Greek and Latin Tongues; sprung from
such Parents, what manner of person he was like to prove; is hence easy to
conjecture, since no advantages either from Nature or Education could be
imagined to be wanting to him: he past the more tender years of his childhood
not without rare testimonies of many growing excellencies, and great abilities
of mind; nor did he come on faster in age, then in ingenuity and acuteness of
wit, which promised high assurances of that profound and universal knowledge
and comprehension of things which rendered him afterward so famous, and brought
him to be taken notice of by many noble persons, and others that were eminent
both in dignity and place; and principally by the Queen her self, who, as I
have heard from some of repute and credit, took much delight oftentimes to
discourse with him, and to try his wit with difficult questions; but with so
much gravity and deliberate judgment did he behave himself, that the Queen was
used to call him the little Lord Keeper of the Seal. Being asked of her how old
he was, he yet a child, ingeniously answered, That he was the younger by two
years for her happy Reign. When he had attained the age that was thought ripe
for the University, or rather more early then others commonly used to go, he
was by his Fathers appointment entered of Trinity College in Cambridge, under
the tuition of the most Reverend John Whitgift Doctor of Divinity, at that
time Master of that College, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury; a Prelate of
the first magnitude, and most conspicuous for Sanctity, Learning, Patience, and
Humility, under whom he was found to have made a wonderful progress in the
Liberal Arts and Sciences, and above all that were his contemporaries; while
he gave himself up wholly to his study in the University, wanting yet somewhat
of sixteen years of age. The Philosophy of Aristotle (as his Lordship has been
pleased to impart to me in private discourse) began to seem unsavory and
distasteful to him, not out of any disesteem of that Author, for it was ever
his custom to load him with high praises; but because of the insufficiency of
that way of Philosphy, since it was so contrived and disposed (as his Lordship
was oftentimes pleased to inculcate) as if it had been framed only for
disputations and controversies, and was altogether barren as to the production
of such operations as tended to the benefit of humane life; in which opinion he
persisted to his very last gasp.

After he had run through the whole course of the Liberal Arts, his Father
thought fit to have him bend and apply himself chiefly to the study of
Politics; and for that cause, took care to send him into France, in the
Company of Sir Amie Pawlet, at that time appointed Ambassador in ordinary to
the French King. He had not been there very long, ere he was so far looked upon,
as to be thought a fit person to be sent into England upon some special message
to the Queen; which employment having worthily discharged, he was sent back by
the Queen, not without some testimony of her grace and favor. Upon his going
into France the second time, he took this resolution, not to see England again,
till after some certain-years expired. During his travels in France, his Father
the Lord Keeper died; leaving behind him (as I have heard from some that were
acquainted with his affairs) a considerable sum of money, purposely set apart
for the purchasing of certain Lands and Revenues, for the use of this his
youngest Son; who only of all the rest was left after his Fathers decease,
destitute of a hereditary patrimony: for though in his Fathers estate, yet not
in his Fathers affection; held he the lowest place But since the buying of
those Lands was only intended and not performed in his Fathers lifetime,
there fell no more to his share, then according to the proportion of money that
was to be distributed among five brothers; which was the cause that he enjoyed
but a slender and somewhat hard fortune during his younger years; for he came
not to the possession of that noble and most delightful Manor of Gorhambury
till many years after, and that by the death of his most dear Brother Mr.
Anthony Bacon, a man of great note, and one that had been much conversant in
the Courts of Foreign Princes; for the excellency of his Wit equal, but for
knowledge in the Liberal Arts, inferior to his Brother. Between these two
there had ever past a most firm league of friendship, as being, besides the
same paternal extraction, united by a more strict tie of having both one Mother.

As soon as he returned out of France, his care was to pitch upon some certain
course of life; thereupon he addicted himself to the study and profession of
the common Law of England: in which undertaking he in a short time made an
admirable progress. Although to use his own words he made choice of that
profession, rather as subservient and auxiliary, then as his principal
intention. He set forth from the first to the last diverse Tractates concerning
this subject; in which, though perhaps by some of the ancient standers of that
profession, he might be exceeded as to the bulk of volume and number of cases;
yet for matter of weight, and his insight into the fundamentals and mysteries
of the Law, he gave place to none. He had scarce served out his Apprentiship in
the Law, before he was by the Queen taken into her learned Council
extraordinary; a favor, as I have heard, scarce granted to any one before. The
habitation he chose as most commodious for his studies and Office of Advocate,
was amongst the honorable society of Grey's-Inne, into the number of which
Society he admitted himself; there he erected that neat and elegant structure,
which at this day is known by the name of the Lord Bacons Buildings; in which
at times he spent the greatest part of his life (some few years only excepted)
even to the very day of his death. In this Society he carried himself with that
mildness, that affability and generosity of mind, that thereby he attracted to
himself great love and respect from the Seniors and Students of that Inn.

But though he was tied by the exigence of his fortune, and for his better
maintenance to profess the Law; yet his mind and affection inclined more to
the Political Arts and Offices of State: of which if it had pleased her Royal
Majesty, he was as capable as any. In the full strength of his age he admitted
himself of the number of those that followed that noble, though unfortunate
Hero, the Earl of Essex; whom as a most faithful and bosom Counselor, he
served to his utmost power, ad still labored to instill into his mind
wholesome and honorable precepts; till at length that Earl giving ear to the
counsels of certain rash and hairbrain'd men, ran headlong to his own
destruction.

This he owed to the native and ingenuous endowments of his mind, that they
opened to him an easier and freer access unto the Princes Court, then to any
others of the same profession; and so by consequence to the presence of the
Queen her self, who did not think much to enter into discourse with him apart:
and with much familiarity (as often as there was offered any opportunity) not
only in reference to his Profession, and about matters of Law; but also about
the weighty affairs of State, and the concernments of the kingdom: and at all
times he gave her such judicious answers, that she received great satisfaction
by them. But though she abundantly cherisht him with the favor of her
countenance, yet never with the favor of a bountiful hand; as never having
advanced him to any public office, either of honor or profit, excepting only
one dry reversion of a Registers Office in the Star Chamber, computed at the
yearly value of 1600. pound; into the possession of which he came not till
about twenty years after, or thereabout: of which office his Lordship said
pleasantly in Queen Elizabeth's time, That it was like another man's Farm
bordering upon his own house, and so might help his prospect, but not fill his
Barn. But in King James his Reign, he at length enjoyed that office, and
managed it by a deputy. Now that he was not sooner preferred cannot be any way
attributed to the least aversion or displeasure that the Queen had in her mind
against him, but to the fraud and envy of some one of the Noble men, (at that
time powerful with the Queen) who sought by all means possible to depress and
hinder him; lest if he should be advanced to any height of honor, his own
glory should be eclipsed by him. However though in the time of his Mistress
Queen Elizabeth, his merited promotion was still forestalled or kept back; yet
after the change of Government and the coming in of his new master King James,
he with a quickened pace soon made a large progress; being by this King
eminently enobled with places of trust, honor, anst great revenues. I have
seen some letters written with his own hand to King James, in which he
acknowledges him to have been so good a master to him, as to have nine times
conferred upon him his iterated favors, thrice titles of great honor, six
times offices of profit: the Offices he means, I suppose were these; he being
Council extraordinary to his Majesty, in which place he had formerly served the
Queen, the Kings Sollitour General, the Kings Attorney General, or principal
Procurator, made one of the Kings Privy Council, while yet he held the place of
Attorney General, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, lastly Lord
Chancellor of England. Which two last Offices, although they are the same in
Authority and Power; yet in their Patent, degree of honor, and favor of the
Prince, they differ: and since the time of his holding that Magistracy, none of
his successors has been honored with that title unto this day. His honors
were first his being Knighted by the King, then he was created Baron Verulam,
lastly Viscount of St. Albons; besides other rich gifts and extentions of a
bountiful hand, which his Majesty was pleased to bestow upon him, as well out
of the profits of the great Seal, as out of the Office of Alienation.

When he had arrived to that part of his age, in which fortune smiled upon him,
he began to think of marrying; and at length took to Wife Alice the Daughter
and one of the Heirs of Bennet Bernham Esquire, and Alderman of London, with
whom he received a very considerable Dowry, as well in Land as in ready money:
children he had none by her; but for as much as children conduce very much to
the perpetuating our names after death, he was not altogether destitute of that
advantage, since it was his hap to be blessed with an other kind of Offspring,
for the perpetuation of his memory to after times: namely, the Off spring of
his brain, in which he was always wonderfully happy, like Jove himself, when
he was delivered of Palace. Nor did this want of children in the least measure
abate his affection to his Wife, toward whom he behaved himself as an indulgent
Husband, and showed her all manner of conjugal love and respect, bestowing upon
her rich Furniture, precious Jewels, and likewise settled upon her a fair
Jointure: nor is it to be omitted in honorable remembrance of him, that she
wore a rich Wedding Gown which he had bestowed upon her, about twenty years
after his death; for so long she survived her most honored Husband.

The last five years of his life, retiring himself from Court-Affairs, and all
kind of busy employments, he bent himself wholly to study and contemplation;
which kind of life seemed indeed to be most pleasing to him, as if he would
have chosen by his good will to dwell rather in the shade then in the
sunshine. Of which also we may find some not obscure intimations in the
reading of his Works; in which space of time he wrote the greatest part of his
Books, as well those that were written in English as in Latin; which according
to the order of time that they were written in, I (who was present all the
while and observed) shall endeavor to reckon up, and they were these
following. The History of the Reign of Henry the Seventh, King of England;
written in English. The Abecedary of Nature, a Metaphysical tractate, which, I
know not by what evil fate, perished. The History of the Winds. The History of
Life and Death. The History of Dense and Rare, never till now in Print. The
History of Heavy and Light, which also is lost. These Books were composed in
the Latin tongue. Next were certain English Fragments, as namely these. A
Discourse concerning the carrying on of a War with Spain. A Diologue concerning
the Holy War. The-Fable of new Atlantis. A Preface to be placed before the body
of the Laws of England. The beginning of the History of Henry the Eighth King
of England. Between some of these came that learned work of his, called The
Advancement of Learning; in the Translating of which (a thing undertaken of his
own accord) out of his native Tongue into the Latin, our most honored Author
took very great pains, and from time to time inricht it with many and various
additions. After these came his Councels, Civil and Moral, formerly called
Essays, augmented both as to their number and weight, in the English tongue.
Some of David's Psalms Composed into English Verse. Moreover diverse of his Works
already mentioned, he converted out of English into Latin, which were these.
The History of the Reign of Henry the Seventh, King of England. His Counsels
Civil and Moral, called Faithful sayings, or the Inward sense of things. The
Diologue of the Holy War, and the Fable of New Atlantis; these he translated in
favor of Foreigners, by whom he heard they were desired. Other Books that he
writ originally in Latin were, his book of the Wisdom of the Ancients, reviewed
by himself. The last place was taken up by his Syvla Sylvarum, or Natural
History; a work written in English. And these were the fruits which ripened in
the shade of the forementioned five years. The Books composed before that five
years space I here pass by; but it was fully determined by him at the command
of the late most Serene King Charles, to have compiled the History of Henry the
Eighth King of England: but that Work proceeded not beyond designation only,
it pleasing God to put a period to the life of this most famous Author. Yet
there is extant a certain taste of that History which a few morning hours of
one day brought forth, published in English amongst his Miscellany Works; and
from thence you may discern the Lion by his claw.

The Virtues of this Hero, and the rich endowments of his mind were so many,
that to commemorate them would take up no less space then the whole course of
life; those faculties which you shall find in other men, though not of the
meanest parts, to lie dissever'd and solitary, in him appeared to be united,
and as it were joined in Wedlock: these were a ready and acute wit, a faithful
memory, a penetrating judgment, and a flowing eloquution. Of the former three
his Books abundantly testifies, of which (as Hirtius says of Julius Caesar) As
well and truly others may judge as we also know with what ease and celerity he
writ them. But of the fourth, namely his Eloquution, I judge it not amiss to
mention that which I have heard the famous Sir Walter Raleigh (a man endowed
with singular virtues, and who well deserves to have his judgment relied on)
once discoursing, viz. That the Earl of Salisbury was a good Orator, but a bad
Writer; and contrariwise, that the Earl of Northampton was a good Writer, but a
bad Orator; but that Sir Francis Bacon excelled in both, as well in speaking
as in writing.

Often came this thought into my mind, that if ever God in these last times
vouchsaft to enlighten any mortal man with a certain ray of humane Science,
doubtless it was this very man whom he so enlightened; for though our Author
had been a diligent peruser of Books, yet it cannot be granted that he took his
knowledge out of Books only, but out of certain principles and notions kindled
within, which nevertheless he not rashly, but with great caution and
deliberation divulged. That Work of his called Novum Organum (to which he
himself attributes the first place among his works) was certainly no idle dream
or comment of his own brain, but as it were a fixed and radicated notition, the
offspring of many years and hard labor. I found among the Archives of his
Lordship about a dozen Copies written with his own hand of this Novum Organum
new labored, and brought back to the Forge from year to year; and every year
more exactly polisht and corrected, until at length it grew up to that Volume
in which it was published: just as some sort of creatures are wont to lick their
young ones, until such time as they bring them to a certain form and firmness
of members. In the composing of his Books he chiefly aimed at the life and
vigor of expression, and perspicuity of Words, rather then Elegancy or the
quaint order of Phrase; and as he was writing or dictating he would often ask
whether his sense was very clear and perspicuously rendered, as one who knew it
to be equal that words should wait upon things, not things upon words; and if
by chance he had lighted upon a more polite style then ordinary, (as among us
he was ever counted a grand master of English Eloquence) it therefore happened
as being a difficult thing for him to shun it; for he was not overmuch taken
with subtilties and allusions of words, but always set himself industriously
to avoid them, well knowing that such kind of vanities were nothing else but
deviations or wanderings from the intended aim, and that they did not a little
hurt and detract from the gravity and dignity of style. When he used to read he
would not dwell so long upon a Book, as to glut or weary himself; for though he
read much, yet it was with great judgment and a rejection of all the Refuse
that commonly we shall meet withal in most writers; yet he still intermingled
with his studies a convenient relaxation of mind, as gentle walking, riding in
a Coach, or on a Horse, and that not swift but leasurely, playing at Bowls, and
other exercises of the like nature; nor did he give way to the loss of any
time, for as soon as he returned home, he presently and without the least delay
set himself afresh to reading and meditation, so that he suffered not any
moment or particle of time to perish or pass away in vain.

His Table you might well call a repast for the ears as well as for the belly,
not unlike those Attick Nights, or the Banquets of the Deipnosophists, at which
men might feast their minds and intellects no less then their bodies. I have
also known some men of excellent wit, who profess that they betook themselves
to their Commonplace books as often as they arose from his Table. He never
counted it any glory to baffle or put to the blush any of his guests or those
that discourst with him, as some delight to do; but whatsoever their parts or
faculties were, he was still ready to cherish and help them forward: nor was it
his custom to arrogate to himself only the liberty of speech, but to permit
unto those that sat with him the freedom of speaking when ever it came to
their turn, adding this also, that he would most willingly hear any one
discourse in his own Art, and was still forward to incite and draw him on to
that manner of discourse; as for himself he contemned no man's observations, nor
was he ashamed to light his own Lamp at another Candle.

His speeches and common sayings were scarce ever called in doubt, as he
discourst all heard him willingly, no man opposing, as if the things he uttered
had been rather Oracles then sayings; which I judge must be attributed, either
to the exact weighing of his words before he uttered them in the balance of
truth and reason, or else to the esteem that all men had of him. Whence that
kind of argumentation, in which a controversy was held pro and con, his Table
was scarce acquainted with; or if any such by chance did intervene, it was
managed with great submission and moderation.

I have aften observed, and it was taken notice of by many noble persons, that
if happily any occasion fell out into discourse of repeating another man's speech,
he was still furnished with a way to bring it forth in a new and better dress;
so that the Author of it might perceive his own saying brought to him back
again more elegantly apparelled then when he sent it from him, although in
sense and substance no whit injured; as if to use handsome forms of speaking
were a thing planted in him by nature: not unlike what Ovid in the business of
composing Verse sung of himself.

What ere I tried to write became a Verse. As aften as he was constrained by
his Office to condemn any guilty person (which duty was incumbent upon him, as
being learned Council to the Kings majesty) whether in criminal matters of a
lesser nature, or in capital offenses, he never carried himself proud or lofty
toward the delinquent, but always mild and of a moderate temper: and though
he knew that it was his duty in behalf of the King to urge and aggravate the
crime, as much as in him lay against the guilty person, yet he so carried
himself, that at the same time he looked upon the fact with an eye of severity,
upon the person with an eye of mercy. In matters of State when he was called
into the Kings Privy Council, he ever observed the best manner of counselling,
not engaging his master in any rash counsels, or such as were grievous to the
people, but rather temporate and equal; insomuch as King James honored him
with this testimony, That he knew the method of handling matters after a mild
and gentle manner; and particularly expressed himself, that it was a thing highly
pleasing to his Majesty.

Nor was he when occasion served less gracious with the Subjects of the
Kingdom, then with the King himself; he was ever very acceptable to the
Parliamentary Committees (while he sat there) of the Lower House, in which he
often made Speeches with great applause. After he was advanced to the office of
Attorney General, and elected to sit in Parliament, liberty was granted to him,
by common suffrage, of sitting in consultation among them; a thing not known to
have been granted to any other Attorney General.

And as he had the praise of a good Servant toward his Master, (for as much as
in nineteen years administration, as he himself affirmed, he never incurred the
Kings displeasure for any offense immediately committed against the Kings
Majesty) so he obtained the name of a good Master toward his own Servants, and
freely rewarded their diligent services with eminent Offices, as often as they
came into his power to bestow, which was a main cause why he was almost wearied
with prayers to receive into the number of his Pages so many young men of the
better sort, and sprung from noble families; and if any of them abused his
grace and favor, that was only to be attributed to the error of his native
goodness, though it redounds to their perpetual infamy and intemperance.

This our worthy was a strict worshiper of the Divine Majesty, for although it
has been a custom among the vulgar to brand political persons, and men of
eminent wits with the note of Atheism, yet that he both acknowledged and
worshipped God, appears most evidently by various testimonies dispersed through
the whole course of his Works; for otherwise he had destroyed and overthrown
his own principles, which were, That Philosphy only sipt and slightly tasted
of, draws us from God, as that which magnifies second causes beyond their due;
but that Philosophy taken in a full draught brings us at length back unto God.
Now that he himself was a very profound Philosopher, there is no man I suppose
that can deny; nor is this all, but he was likewise both able and ready to
render an account of that hope which was in him to any one that desired it; and
of this, that Confession of Faith, set forth at the end of his Volumne has
left a sufficient proof. He very frequently used (when he was in perfect health
to be present at Divine service, whether privately or publicly celebrated, at
the hearing of Sermons, at the Participation of the holy Eucharist, and at
length he quietly slept in the true Faith established in the Church of England.

This is to be affirmed for a certain, that he was utterly void of all malice,
which as he said himself, he never brought forth nor nourisht; of the revenging
of injuries he never so much as thought, since to the performance thereof, had
he been so disposed, he was sufficiently armed, both with opportunity and
power. A remover of Officers from their places, he was not in the least manner,
although he might have inricht himself by the destruction and ruin of others:
nor did he ever bear the name of a calumniator of any man to his Prince. On a
certain day, when one of the chief Ministers of State, who had borne him no
good will, being lately dead; the King asked him what he thought of that Lord
who was dead, he answered, That he was such a one as never had promoted his
Majesty's Affairs, or made them better; but that doubtless he had done his best
to keep them from sinking or declining. This was the hardest Sentence he would
utter concerning him, which indeed I reckon not among his Moral but his
Christian virtues.

His name was more celebrated and shined brighter abroad amongst foreigners,
then at home among his own Countrymen; as it is mentioned in holy Writ, A
Prophet is not without honor, except in his own Country, and in his own House.
To make this good, I shall produce a little passage out of an Epistle sent from
Italy (the shop of polite Wits) to the late Earl of Devonshire, at that time
Baron Candish, which was thus. The new Essays of the Lord Chancellor Bacon, as
also his History, and whatsoever besides he is now about, I shall expect with
infinite thirst of mind, but especially in his History I promise to my self a
perfect and well polisht work, and chiefly in the Affairs of Henry the Seventh;
in the relating of which, he will have liberty to exercise the gift of his
accute wit. That Lord daily increases in fame, and his Works are more and more
in chocie request among us, and those who in humane Affairs are wise above the
vulgar, repute him among the greatest and most sublime wits of the age, and so
in truth he is. Many of his Books were taught other languages, as well the
ancient and modern, both heretofore and of late by those of foreign Nations.
Diverse eminent men, while he was living, came over into England for no other
cause but only to see him, and to have an opportunity of discoursing with him;
upon one of whom he bestowed his Picture drawn whole at length from head to
foot to carry back with him into France; which he thankfully received, as a
thing that would be very grateful and acceptable to his Countrymen; that so
they might enjoy the Image of his Person as well as the Images of his Brain,
viz. his Book. Among others the Marquess of Fiat a Nobleman in France, (who
came Ambassador into England in the first year of Queen Mary's coming over,
the Wife of King Charles) was affected with a very earnest desire of seeing
him; whereunto having gained an opportunity, and coming into his Bedchamber
where he lay sick of of the Gout, he addressed himself to him with a very high
Complement; as that his Lordship had always been to him like the Angels of
whom he had heard and read many things, but that it had never been in his power
to see them. From the time of which meeting such amity was contracted between
them, and so great a veneration the Marquess had for him, that besides frequent
visitations they held a constant correspondence in Letters, saluting one
another by the name and title of Father and Son. Not to mention here those
innumerable Commendations sent him in Epistles from the most eminent men of
Foreign Nations, addicted to the study of Wisdom and good Arts, it being a
thing common to him with others of note and fame.

But now that I discourse of his Fame, I would to be understood as if I writ in
a style not exclusive but comparative; for his Fame ever among the English was
not faint or drooping, but lively and vigorous, especially among those that
were conspicuous for their acute and sublime parts; of which I shall insert two
testimonies, and no more. The first is this, When his History of Henry the
Seventh was just ready for the Press, it was sent by King James to Fulk Lord
Brook to peruse, who when he had read it all over, sent it back to the Author
with this commendation; Present my respects to his Lordship, and entreat him
from me to have a special care of buying good Paper and Ink; for this Work of
his is excellent above any thing that I have seen in this kind. The other is
the testimony of Doctor Samuel Collins, late Professor of Divinity in the
famous University of Cambridge, and Master of Kings College, a man of no
vulgar wit, who (whether pleasantly or seriously) affirmed to me, That after he
had read his Book of the Advancement of Learning, he thought himself driven to
that pass, that he must be forced to renew the whole course of his studies from
the very beginning, and that all this while he had but lost his labor.

It was earnestly desired by some, that I would insert some things concerning
his Diet, and the government of his Health, in regard that because of his
universal knowledge in natural things, his example might be a guide to others.
As to his Diet therefore he used rather a full and liberal way of feeding,
according as he found his stomach able to bear, then thin and sparing; which
way he has also commended in some places of his History of Life and Death. In
his younger years he fed chiefly upon the more delicate and light sort of
meats, as the flesh of Fowls, and the like; but afterward having learned more
experience, he rather approved of stronger meat, such as is sold in the
shambles, as that which would supply the body with more firm and substantial
juice, and (that I may use his own words) less dissipable, upon which alone he
himself would often feed, although his Table were furnished with variety of all
sorts of dishes; you may well think that he did not in the least manner neglect
that which you shall find him to have so often cried up in his writings,
namely the often use of Nitre, whereof he took every day in the morning, about
three grains in a mess of thin warm Broth, and this course he continued for
thrity years at least before his death. As for his use of Physic, it is true
that he lived medicinably but not miserably, for once in six or seven days, he
continually took a dram and a half of Rubarb, and no more, infused and
macerated for the space of half an hour in a draught of Ale and White Wind mixed
together; and that a little before meat (either dinner or supper) to keep his
body from drying up, since as he affirmed it would carry away the
excrementitious humors of the body, and not cause the spirits to exhale, as
frequent sweating uses to do. Now certainly to take so little Physic as this
could not be miserable, but for any other medicaments, whatsoever has been
vulgarly reported, he would not at all accustom himself to them. The remedy
against the Gout, which he himself discovered, and which he found by experience
would assuage the pain in two hours space, is extant at the end of his Natural
History.

It is likely that at his Nativity the Moon held some principal place, as in
the Horoscope or Mid-heaven; for as often as the Moon was in the wane or suffered
an Eclipse, he was taken with a sudden faintness or depression of spirit, and
this would happen though he had had no knowledge beforehand of the Moons
defect; but as soon as the Moon had begun to recover her former light, he
presently grew well again.

He died on the 9th. day of April, MDCXXVI, very early in the morning, being
the day before the feast of the Resurrection of our Lord, commonly called
Easter Eve, in the sixty sixth year of his age, at the Earl of Arundels House
at High-gate, a Village near London; to which place he came about eight days
before, not with an intent to make any abode there, but only for his pleasure
and recreations sake: but God so ordained it, that in this place he should end
his days. It was of a lingering Ague that he died, together with a strong
Catarrh, which caused so violent a defluction of humors to his breast, that by
a sudden suffocation the passage of his life was intercepted. He was buried in
St. Michaels Church near St. Albans, a place destined for his Sepulcher upon
some grand considerations; as both because the body of his Mother lay buried in
the same Church, as because that Church is the only place remaining at this
day, out of the ruins of old Verulam. Here a famous Monument of white Marble
was built to his memory (by the care and gratitude of Sir Thomas Mutes,
administrator of his last Will and Testament, heretofore Secretary to his
Lordship, and afterward Clerk to the Privy Council under two Kings) having
upon it his Effigies in a posture sitting in a chair, and intent upon his
study; together with an Epitaph, which that most elegant and polite person Sir
Henry Wootton composed, out of the reverence and admiration which he bare to
his memory.

But though his Body which he put off and laid aside were mortal, yet his Books
and Fame will doubtless be everlasting; and as soon will the frame of the Earth
be dissolved as they stoop to fate: moved with the consideration of which, it
seemed good to me to collect, according to my slender capacity, these memories,
such as they are, that I also might be serviceable to the propagating of his
name to posterity. There are some light passages and pleasant Apothegms which I
have often Beard discoursed of the life of this ever to be honored Worthy,
which as this reverend Doctor thought too low for the Grandeur of Sir Francis
to have recorded, I submit to his better determination and have thought fit to
silence my Pen.

The Life of LANCELOT ANDREWS Bishop of Winchester.
IT is poetized of the Thracian Orpheus, that his Oratotary was so powerful,
that with it, he drew the senseless stones after him, toward the building of
Thebes; which some moralize that his eloquence was such, as attracted the
senseless and stony multitude from Barbarism, to frame themselves to a civil
and well ordered life. What was storied of Orpheus, may fitly be applied to
this learned Bishop, who with his heavenly Oratory, drew many stony senseless
hearts out of the Captivity of Satan, unto the glorious freedom of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. For his person we can add nothing to him, to name him is
enough to all that knew him, and to read him will be enough to them that knew
him not; his piety being such as was esteemed comparable to that which was
found in the primitive Church.

This right reverend father in God, Bishop of Winchester; Prelate of the
Garter, was born in the City of London, descended from the ancient Family of
the Andrews in Suffolk; his Father a Merchant of good repute, and (according to
the Religion of those ancient times) very devout being one of the Society and
Masters of the Holy Trinity; commonly called Trinity-House. He in his tender
years, showed great aptness to learning, which he so improved under his two
Schoolmasters, Mr. Ward, Master of the Coopers Free School in Radcliffe, and
Mr. Mulchaster Master of the Merchant-Taylors Free School in London, that he
promised a golden Harvest from so hopeful a seed-time. So that from his youth
he declared an extraordinary worth, that he was made up of learning and virtue;
in both of them so eminent, that it was hard to judge which had the precedence
and greater interest; though it was truly asserted from his contemporaries,
that there was not any kind of Learning that he was a stranger to, but in his
profession admirable; which was as well if not better known abroad then admired
at home.

Having under these two gained an excellent knowledge in the Greek and Hebrew
Languages, he was sent to Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, where he was by Doctor
Wats Archdeacon of Middlesex, a Benefactor to that house, placed in one of the
Greek Schollarships: soon after he was made Bachellour of Arts, and a
Fellowship being void, he and Thomas Dove (afterward Bishop of Peterburgh) for
the obtaining thereof, were put to a trial of some Schollastical exercises;
upon performance whereof, they chose him into the fellowship; yet so well did
they approve of his opponent, that they made him some allowance for his present
maintenance, under the title of a Tanquam Socius. Thus this great miracle of
worth that arrived to such a fullness of material learning, had yet room enough
left him in the temper of his brain for almost all Languages to seat
themselves; so that his learning had all the helps that Language could afford,
and his language learning enough for the best of them to express: so that it
might be said of him as it was of Claudius Drusus, that he was a man of great
parts as mortal nature could receive, or industry make perfect.

In process of time his endowments made him so eminent, that he was invited
unto Jesus College in Oxford, by Mr. Hugh Price, who built the same; whose
decerning spirit presaging of his future abilities, nominated him in his
foundation to be one of his first Fellows there; and having taken the degree of
Master of Art, he applied himself wholly to the study of Divinity. Soon after
was he chosen Catechist in the College, which he performed so well, that not
only the University became his common auditors, but many out of the Country
resorted thither, greatly admiring at his profound learning.

Henry Earl of Huntington hearing of his worth, sent for him, to accompany him
into the North (whereof he was President;) where by his painful preaching, he
converted many Recusants to the Protestant Religion. And now his abilities
being still better known to the world, Sir Francis Walsingham, (Secretary of
State to Queen Elizaheth) took special notice of him, and by his means he was
preferred to be Vicar of Saint Giles without Cripple-Gate London; then Prebend
and Residentiary of St. Paul's, and afterward Prebend of the Collegiate Church
of Southwell; soon after upon the death of Doctor Fulk, he was elected into the
Mastership of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge. Afterward he was made Chaplain in
ordinary to Queen Elizabeth, who took such delight in his preaching, that she
resolved upon his higher preferment: but having made him first Prebend, and not
long after Dean of Westminster, death prevented her of her intentions.

But what was wanting in her, was performed by her learned successor King
James; who admiring him for his transcendent abilities: (soon after his coming
to this Crown) made him Bishop of Chichester, and Lord Almoner, and withal
added the parsonage of Cheyham in Surrey to his Commendam.

He now as he excelled most of his Brethren in dignity, he thought it not
enough, unless he did more then imitate them in sanctity of life; and knowing
no better rule for his direction herein, then what Saint Paul had prescribed to
Timothy; he resolved to make those precepts his rules of practice. In these
addresses of his to Heaven, first, he led his life (as in respect to men)
blameless; his virtues admired by all, but imitated of few: his life being like
a candle set on a candlestick, which gave light to the whole House; drawing
many souls to God as well by his holy conversation, as pious preaching. It is a
true saying. A man's pious carriage makes his speech persuasive. Secondly his
charity was most transcendent, to pass over many vast sums, he bestowed upon
poor Parishes, Prisons, and Prisoners, his private Alms in his last six years
(besides those public) amounted to the sum of 1300. pounds and upwards.
Notwithstanding by what has been said he might seem in his life time to be his
own Almoner, yet extended he his works of compassion most abundantly at his
death, leaving four thousand pounds to purchase two hundred pounds land per
annum for ever, to be distributed by fifty pounds quarterly thus; to aged poor
men fifty pounds, to poor widows, the wives of one husband, fifty pounds to
the binding of poor Orphans Apprentices, fifty pounds; and to the relief of
poor prisoners, fifty pounds. Also he gave two hundred pounds to poor
Maidservants of honest report, who had served one Master or Mistress seven
years, to be distributed presently after his decease. Many other acts of
Charity did this good Bishop do; a fair copy for new succeeding rich
Cleargy-men, who are all for the mountain word of Faith, but have nothing to do
with good Works to write after.

He had always a special care of promoting sufficient and able men to Livings;
a great man's letter will do but little good with him, if he saw not piety as
well as personage in the party. His enquiry was constantly to know what hopeful
young men were in the University, and on them he bestowed the preferments which
fell in his gift; thus he weighed their merits in the Balance. His own manner
of preaching being no less wise then eloquent; so he would have men of his
profession to be possessed with a Christian and religious wisdom to preserve
peace and truth together. Nevertheless as he understood his own qualifications,
he the better knew what men of his function were able to perform. And though
his improvements were admirable, after he was Vicar of Saint Giles, and his
dislikes of all preaching, which by being too frequent, is withal too loose,
thence was his censure on himself (recorded by Bishop Brockridge in his Funeral
Sermon) that when he preached twice a day at St. Giles, he prated once; not but
that his very table talk, and what, in the depth of his humility he called his
prating, was more useful and more learned then the very best preaching of them
that are enemies to his Glory, as well as Doctrine. But because he thought the
word of God was never well enough handled, and that the work of God was never
well enough done, until it had received the utmost care and circumspection: as
Mr. Fuller excellently discoursing of preaching twice a day, commends the
necessity of a large repitition in the afternoon; which he compares to a dish
of cold meat, which with a little addition will suffice those that are not of
too greedy appetites, all ear and nothing else. Doctor Dun renders an excellent
reason, why some are so tedious and long-winded in their holding forth; For
that, says he, there ware is course, they can afford the larger measure. But
to return to our present undertaking, our Bishops fidelity in his Almoner-ship
was such, that he would never suffer one penny of that which accrewed to him by
that place; to be mingled with any of his own Rents or Revenues; and wherein he
kept a more exact account then of his own estate. And if upon accounts at any
time he found any surplusage, he would never suffer it to lie by him, but like
a faithful Steward distribute the same to poor householders, and other persons
where he saw most need.

But in recounting his virtues, let us not forget to what height they preferred
him; having held the Bishopric of Chichester about four years, his Majesty
advanced him to that of Ely, wherein he sat about nine years; in which time he
was made a Privy Counselor first of England, and then of Scotland, in his
attendance of the King thither. He was afterward preferred to the Bishopric
of Winchester, and the Deanery of the Kings Chapel; which two last preferments
he held to the day of his death.

He was ever faithful, provident, and careful to keep in good repair the Houses
of all his Spiritual Preferments, and spent much money that way. As upon the
Vicarage House of Saint Giles, the Prebends and Deans House of Westminster, and
the Residentiaries House of S. Paul's. Upon the house belonging to the
Bishopric of Chicester he expended above four hundred and twenty pound: Of Ely
above two thousand four hundred and forty pound. Of Winchester (besides a
Pension of four hundred pound per annum, from which he freed his See at his own
charge) he spent two thousand pound.

He bequeathed several Legacies to the Parishes of Saint Giles, Saint Martins
Ludgate, where he had dwelt, Saint Andrews in Holborn, Saint Saviors in
Southwark, All Saints Berking, where he was born, and others. Also to
Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge (where he had been a Scholar, Fellow, and Master) a
thousand pound to purchase Land for two Fellowships. Besides three hundred
Folio Books of his own, to the increase of their Library; together with a gilt
Cup, and a Basin and Ewer of great worth.

His gratitude to those from whom he had received any benefits was most
conspicuous; as Doctor Ward, son to his first Schoolmaster, upon whom he
bestowed the Living of Waltham in Hampshire. Master Mulcaster his other
Schoolmaster he always reverendly respected living, and being dead caused his
Picture (having but few other in his House) to be set over his Study door. Upon
a Kinsman of Doctor Wats (which was all he could find of that Generation) he
bestowed preferments in Pembroke-Hall. But should I go about to particularize
all his Virtues, it were sufficient of its self to make up a Volumn.

Master Crashaw, the second Herbert of our late Times, write these following
Verses in Latin and English on the Bishop; some of which are placed before his
Picture to his Sermons.

In Picturam reverendissimi Episcopi D. Andrews.
Haec charta monstrat, fama quem monstrat magis,
Sed and ipsa quem dum fama non monstrat satis,
Ille, ille solus totam implevit tubam,
Tot ora solus domuit, and famam quoque
Fecit modestam: mentis igneae pater
Agilio, radio lucis aeternae vigil,
Per alta rerum pondera indomito vagus
Cucurrit animo, quippe naturam ferox
Exhausit ipsam, mill Faetus artibus,
Et mill linguis ipse se in gentes procul.
Variavit omnes, fuitque toti simul
Cognatus orbi; sic sacrum and solidum jubar
Saturumque coelo pectus ad patrios libens
Porrexit ignes; hac eum (Lector) vides
Huc (ecce) charta: O utinam and audires quoque.
Upon Bishop Andrews Picture before his Sermons.
This Reverend Shadow cast that setting Sun,
Whose glorious course through our Horizon run,
Left the dim face of this dull Hemispheer,
All one great eye, all drowned in one great tear.
Whose fair Illustrious soul led his free thought
Through Learnings Universe, and vainly sought
Room for her spacious self, until at length
She found the way home, with a holy strength
Snatched her self hence to Heaven, filled a bright place
Amongst those immortal fires, and on the face
Of her great Maker fixed her flaming eye,
There still to read pure true Divinity.
And now that grave aspect has deigned to shrink
Into this less appearance; if you think,
It Is but a dead face Art does here bequeath:
Look on the following leaves, and see him breath.
To draw to a period of his Life which happened September 25. 1626. in the
third year of the Reign of King Charles, and 71. of his Age. When he changed
this mortal for an immortal life, becoming one of those heavenly Choristers,
which sing continual Hallelujahs unto the Lord, as Master Waller admirably
expresses in his Poems.

All that the Angels do above
Is that they sing, and that they love
He lies buried in the upper Isle of the Parish Church of Saint Saviors in
Southwark, over whom his Executours have erected a very fair Monument of Marble
and Alablaster, enscribed with this Epitaph.

LECTOR,
Si Christianus es, siste:
morae pretinum erit,
Non nescire te, Qui vir hic situs sit
Ejusdem tecum, Catholicae Ecclesiae Membrum,
Sub eadem faelicis Resurrectionis spe:
Eandem D. Jesus praestolans Epiphaniam,
Sacratissimus Antistes, Lancelotus Andrews,
Londini oriundus, educatus Cantabrigiae
Aulae Pembroch: Alumnorum, Sociorum, Prefaectorum
Vnus, and nemini secundus.
Linguarum, Artium, Scientiarum,
Humanorum, Divinorum omnium
Infinitus Thesaurus: stupendum Oraculum:
Orthodoxae Christi Ecclesiae
Dictis, Scriptis, Precibus, Exemplo
Incomparabile Propugnaculum:
Reginae Elizabethae a sacris,
D. Pauli London Residentiaerius:
D. Petri Westmonast. Decanus,
Episcopus Cicestrensis, Eliensis, Wintoniensis,
Regine Jacobo tum ab Eleemosynis,
Tum ab utriusque Regni Consiliis,
Decanus denique sacelli Regii.
Idem ex
Indetessa opera in studiis,
Summa sapientia in rebus,
Assidua pietate in Deum,
Profusa largitate in egenos,
Rara amaenitate in suos,
Spectata probitate in omnes.
Aeternum admirandus:
Annorum pariter, and publicae famae satur,
Sed bonorum paessim omnium cum luctu denatus,
Caelebs hinc migravit ad Aureolam coelestem.
Anno Regis Caroli IIIo. Aetatis suae LXXIo. Christi MDCXXVI.

Tantum est (Lector) quod te maerentes posteri
Nunc volebant, atque ut ex voto tuo valeas, Dicto,
Sit Deo Gloria.
His Works were many and pious. Ninety six Sermons preached upon several
occasions, like which the Christian World has not many such bodies of Sermons;
he being a Preacher that had both the Urim and the Thummim: the former in his
word, the latter in his example. In the next place his Opera Posthuma, Concio
ad Clerum pro gradu Doctoris. Ad Clerum in Synodo Provinciali. Coram Rege
habita Vo. August 1606. In discessu Palatini XIIIo. April 1613. Theologica
Determinatio de Jurejurando. De Vsuris. De Decimis. Respontiones ad 3.
Epistolas Petri Molinei. An Answer to the 18. and 20. cc. of Cardinal Perons
Reply. A Speech in the Star Chamber against Master Thrask. Another there
concerning Vows in the Countess of Shrewburies case. His Respontio ad Apologiam
Cardinalis Bellarmini. An Author, whom when he wrestled with, felt him, he
being one as well able to shift for himself, as any of the Roman party. His
Manual of Devotions he originally penned in the Greek Tongue, which Mr. Drake
has most excellently translated. Another excellent Volumn of his on the
Commandments, published by Master Jackson, with his Incomparable Lectures on
Genesis, which he preached in Saint Paul's: A Volumn, which had he lived to have
revised, could not have been outdone. To conclude, how consummate a Divine,
how exact a Preacher, how accute a Disputant, how judicious a Moderatour, and
how eminent a Christian he was, there is nothing more easy to determine, both
from the admiration of the best men, and from the malignity of the worst, then
from these his Incomparable Writings, which he left behind him for his
perpetual Monuments?

The Life of Doctor DONE Dean of PAUL'S.
THis Worthy Prelate, whose Learning has made him deservedly famous, was born
in London, extracted by his Fathers side from an ancient and worshipful Family
in Wales, and by his Mother from the learned Sir Thomas Moor, and the laborious
Judge Rascal, those two great Pillars of Law and Learning. His first Education
was in his Fathers house, where a private Tutour had the care of him; under
whom he so profited, that at nine years of age he was sent to the University of
Oxford, having besides the Latin and Greek, attained to a knowledge of the
French Tongue; Languages which few Children understand at that age; nay, many
scarcely their own.

Remaining in Hart-Hall (having for the advancement of his studies Tutours in
several Sciences to instruct him) he in short time advanced to such a height of
Learning, as declared him fit to receive his first degree in the Schools: but
his Parents being of the Romish persuasion, conscionably averse to some parts
of the Oath, dehorted him from it; whose advice as Paternal Commands, he
dutifully obeyed. Here fell he in acquaintance with that great Master of
Language and Art, Sir Henry Wootton, betwixt whom was such friendship
contracted, that nothing but death could force the separation.

And now (like a laborious. Be desirous to gather honey from more flowers then
one) he was transplanted from Oxford to Cambridge, (our other renowned Nursery
of Learning) where he much improved his studies, but took no degree, for the
reasons formerly mentioned.

Being about seventeen years of age, his Father died, who left him three
thousand pound in ready money his mother and those to whose care he was
committed, willing he should be able to manage such an estate, took him from
Cambridge, and placed him in Lincolns-Inne; where for the improvement of his
knowledge, they provided him Tutors in several Sciences, as the Mathematics
and others; but with these they had instructions also, to instill into him the
Principles of the Romish Church. And indeed they so wrought with him, (having
for their advantage, besides their opportunity, the example of his most dear
and pious Parents) that they had almost obliged him unto their faith. But
rectifying his judgments by the holy Scriptures, and conferring Papists and
Protestants Works together he was not only drawn off from their Opinions, but
more settledly grounded in the Protestant Religion.

And now having a youthful desire to travel, and a fit opportunity by occasion
of the Earl of Essex going to Cales, he embraced the advantage, and went along
with him; and having seen the issue of that expedition, left them and went into
Italy, and from thence into Spain; where by his industry he attained to a
perfection in their Languages, and returned home with many useful observations
of those Countries, their Laws, and Government.

Soon after his return the Lord Elsmore, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and
after Chancellor of England, taking notice of his abilities, entertained him
for his chief Secretary, in whose service he fell in love with a young
Gentlewoman who lived in that Family, Niece to the Lady Elsmore, and Daughter
to Sir George More, Chancellor of the Garter, and Lieutenant of the Tower. And
notwithstanding her Friends opposed, and endeavored what they could to prevent
it, yet some faithful promises having interchangeably past betwixt them, they
resolved, and did marry, without the knowledge or advice of those that might
justly claim an interest in the disposing of them.

But his Father-in-law Sir Geor. More was so immeasurably incensed at what was
done, that he not only detained his wife from him, but procured the Lord
Elsmore to discharge him of the place he held under his Lordship. And although
the Lord Chancellor at his dismission protested he thought him a fitter
Secretary for a King then a Subject, yet could not this put a period to Sir
Georges choler, never leaving till he had cast him into prison, as also his
two special Friends, Master Samuel Brook, (who was after D in D. and Master of
Trinity College in Cambridge) who had married him, and his Brother Master
Christopher Brook of Lincolns-Inne, who gave him his Wife, and witnessed the
Marriage.

In the time of Master Donnes melancholy Imprisonment, how true I know not,
only I have heard it often discoursed, that he writ on the window with the
point of his Diamond, reflecting on the then present affliction of his Marriage
these words, John Done, done and undone.

But long were they not there, but Mr. Done got himself enlarged, and soon
after his two Friends; and long it was not ere the edge of his Father-in-laws
passion was taken off by the advice of some Friends, who approved his Daughters
choice: and although at present he refused to contribute any means that might
conduce to their livelihood, yet did he bestow upon them his Paternal Blessing,
and secretly labored his sons restoration into that place of which his own
rashness had bereft him; although it found no success. The Lord Chancellor
replying, That though he was sorry for what he had done, yet it stood not with
his credit to discharge and re-admit Servants at the request of passionate
Petitioners.

And now Mr. Done by means of his Father-in-law being brought out of
employment, the greatest part of his portion by many and chargeable travels
wasted, the rest disburst in some few Books, and dear bought experience; was
surrounded with many and sad thoughts. And indeed no apprehension of
discourtesie strikes so deep into a man, as to receive it from those where we
expect the greatest courtesies; certainly he who hurts his Son-in-law, cannot
choose but harm his own Daughter. Neither is it enough for him to say he
repents him of what he has done, unless withal he endeavor for him a new
employment, and allow him maintenace so long as he is out of it: As did this
good Knight Sir George More, who repenting of his error gave Master Done a
Bond to pay him eight hundred pound at a certain day, as a portion with his
Wife, and to pay him for their maintenance twenty pound quarterly, (as the
Interest of it) until the said portion were paid.

Master Done during the time of his Father-in-laws displeasure, was courteously
entertained by their noble Kinsman Sir Francis Wally of Pirford, where he
remained many years; who as their charge increased, (for she had yearly a
child) so did he increase his love and bounty.

Sir Francis dying, he for a while kept house at Micham near Croyden in Surrey;
but being importuned by his friends, he left Micham, and had a convenient house
assigned him by that honorable Gentleman Sir Robert Drury, next his own, in
Drury Lane, who not only gave him his dwelling rent free but was also a daily
cherisher of his studies.

And now was he frequently visited by men of greatest learning and judgment in
this kingdom; his company desired by the Nobility, and extremely affected by
the Gentry; his friendship was sought for of most foreign Ambassadors, and
his acquaintance entreated by many other strangers, whose learning or
employment occasioned their stay in this kingdom. Diverse of the Nobility
interceeded for his preferment at Court, and great hopes was given him of some
State employment; his Majesty having formerly known and much valued him, was
much pleased to hear his learned disputes, frequently used as they sat at
meals. About this time was that great dispute in England, concerning the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, in which the King had engaged himself; who talking
occasionly with Mr. Done concerning some arguments urged by the Romanists,
received such satisfactory answers, that he commanded him to state the points,
and bring his reasons to him in writing; which within six weeks he performed,
with such contentment to the King, that he persuaded him to enter into the
Ministry; to which Mr. Done seemed to be modestly unwilling, his modesty
apprehending it too weighty for his abilities; his friends also (knowing how
his education had apted him) mediated with his Majesty to prefer him to some
civil employment: but the King having a descerning spirit, replied, I know Mr.
Done is a learned man, will prove an excellent Divine, and a powerful
Preacher. Which caused this learned King again to solicit him to enter into
Sacred Orders, which yet he deferred for the space of three years, applying
himself in the mean time to an incessant study of Textual Divinity, and
attained to an admirable perfection in the Greek and Hebrew Tongues.

Soon after his entering into this holy profession, the King made him his
Chaplain in ordinary; he attending his Majesty in his progress to Cambridge,
the University (knowing his worth) with a universal consent; made him Doctor in
Divinity. Immediately after his return home, his Wife dyed, leaving him the
careful Father of seven Children living, (having buried five) to her he
promised never to bring them under the subjection of a stepmother; and
although his age being but forty two years, might promise the contrary, yet
kept he his word faithfully, burying with his most dear and deserving Wife, all
his sublunary joys in this world, and living a retired life, applied himself
wholly to the exercise of Divinity.

And now his preaching and godly conversation was grown so eminent, that
fourteen Advowsions of several Benefices were offered unto him in the Country;
but he having a natural inclination to London his Birthplace, refused them,
and accepted of a Lecture at Lincolns-Inne, being glad to renew his intermitted
friendship with them; where he continued for the space of three years,
constantly and faithfully dispensing the word of God; and they as freely
requiting him with a liberal maintenance. About which time the Palsgrave
usurping the Crown of Bohemia, much trouble arose in those kingdoms; for the
composing whereof, the King sent the Earl of Carlisle, (then Viscount Doncaster)
his Ambassador to those unsettled Princes, and by a special command from his
Majesty, Doctor Done was appointed to go along with him, which accordingly he
did; to the great comfort of that virtuous Lady the Queen of Bohemia, who very
gladly received him as the Ambassador of Christ; and during his abode there,
being a constant hearer of his most excellent and powerful preaching.

Within fourteen months he returned home, and about a year after his return;
the Deanery of Saint Paul's being vacant by the removal of Doctor Carry to the
Bishopric of Exeter, the King bestowed the same upon him: at his entrance into
the Deanery he repaired the Chapel belonging to his house, Suffering (as the
Psalmist has it) his eyes and temples to take no rest, until he had first
beautified the house of God. Soon after the Vicarage of Saint Dunstans in
London fell to him by the death of Doctor White, with another Ecclesiastical
endowment, about the same time. Thus God blessed him, that he was enabled to be
Charitable to the Poor. His Father-in-law Sir George More coming to pay him the
conditioned sum of twenty pound, he refused it, saying, as good Jacob said when
he heard his Son Joseph lived, It is enough, you have been kind to me, and
careful of my Children, and I thank my God I am provided for; therefore I will
receive it no longer: and not long after freely gave up his Bond of eight
hundred pounds.

But as envy is always attendant on the best deserving, so did some malicious
person whisper in the Kings ear, that Doctor Done had preached a Sermon that
implied a dislike of his Government; the King herewith incensed, sent for him,
to answer the accusation; which was so satisfactory, as gave the King exceeding
great content; who with much earnestness said to some of his Council, My Doctor
is a very honest man.

He was made Dean in the fiftieth year of his age, and in the fifty fourth year
a dangerous sickness seized him, which turned to a spotted Fever, and ended in
a Cough, that inclined him to a Consumption. During this sickness he wrote this
heavenly Hymn, expressing the great joy he then had in the assurance of Gods
mercy to him.

A Hymn to God the Father.
Will thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin, though it were done before?
Will thou forgive that sin through which I run,
And do run still, though still I do deplore?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
Will thou forgive that sin which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their door?
Will thou forgive that sin which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in a score?
When thou have done, thou have not done
For I have more.
I have a sin of fear, that when I have spun
My last thread, I shall perish on the shore;
But swear by thy self, that at my death thy Son
Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
And having done that, thou have done,
I fear no more.
But it pleased God to restore him to his health, and to add unto his life
five years more. August 1630. being with his Daughter Mistress Harvy at
Abrey-hatch in Essex, he fell into a Fever, which with the help of his
constant infirmity, vapors from the Spleen, brought him into a Consumption; yet
notwithstanding his disability, the first Friday in Lent being come, (which was
his old constant day he was appointed to preach on) he resolved not to decline
that service: and although some of his Friends persuaded him from undertaking
it, fearing it might be a means to shorten his days, he passionately denied
their requests, saying, He would not doubt, that God who in many weaknesses had
assisted him with an unexpected strength, would now withdraw it in his last
employment. His Text was; To God the Lord belong the issues from death. Many
that saw his tears, and heard his hollow voice, professing they thought the
Text prophetically chosen, and that Doctor Done had preached his own Funeral
Sermon.

He would often desire, if that God would be pleased to grant it, that he might
die in the Pulpit; if not that, yet that he might take his death in the Pulpit;
that is, die the sooner by occasion of those labors. And indeed we may justly
conceive that God granted his requests; for after his Sermon was over,
hastening to his house, he never moved out of it, until like St. Stephen, He
was carried by devout men to the grave. During the time of his sickness, his
spirits being much spent, which made him unapt to discourse, a Friend asked
him, Why are you sad? to whom he replied after this manner; I am not sad, I am
in a serious contemplation of the mercies of my God to me; and now I plainly
see, it was his hand that prevented me from all temporal employment. And I see
it was his will that I should never settle nor thrive until I entered into the
Ministry; in which I have now lived almost twenty years, (I hope to his glory)
and by which (I most humbly thank him) I have been enabled to requite most of
those friends that showed me kindeness when my fortunes were low. And (as it
has occasioned the expression of my gratitude) I thank God, most of them have
stood in need of my requital. I have been useful and comfortable to my good
father-in-law Sir George More, whose patience God has been pleased to exercise
by many temporal crosses. I have maintained my own Mother, whom it has pleased
God after a plentiful fortune in her former times, to bring to a great decay in
her very old age. I have quieted the consciences of many that groaned under the
burden of a wounded spirit, whose prayers I hope are available for me. I
cannot plead innocence of life, (especially of my youth) but I am to be judged
of a merciful God, who has given me (even at this time) some testimonies by
his holy Spirit, that I am of the number of his elect. I am full of joy, and
shall die in peace.

He lay fifteen days earnestly expecting his hourly change; his speech which
had long been his faithful servant, remained with him till his last minute. In
his very last hour (as his body melted away and vapourated into spirit) his
soul having some revelation of the beatifical vision, he said; I were miserable
if I might not die. And after many periods of his faint breath, with these
words, Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, he rendered up his soul to him that
gave it him.

He was buried in Saint Paul's Church, attended with many persons of Nobility
and Eminency; after his burial some mournful friends repaired, and as Alexander
the Great did to the grave of the most famous Achilles, so they strewed his
with curious and costly flowers. Nor was this (though not usual) all the honor
done to his reverend ashes, for some person (unknown) to perpetuate his memory,
sent to his two Executors, Doctor King, and Doctor Montford, an hundred Marks
toward the making of a Monument for him; which they faithfully performed, it
being as lively a representation, as in dead Marble can be made of him.

The recreation of his youth were Poety, in which he was so happy, as if Nature
with all her varieties had been made to exercise his great wit, and high fancy:
nor did he leave it off in his old age, as is witnessed by many of his Divine
Sonnets, and other high, holy, and harmonious composures, as under his Effigies
in these following verses to his printed Poems, one most ingeniously expresses.

This was for youth, strength, mirth, and wit the time
Most count their golden age, but 'twas not thine:
Thine was thy later years, so much refined
From youths dross, mirth, and wit, as thy pure mind
Thought like the Angels nothing but the praise
Of thy Creator in those last best days.
Witness this Book, thy Emblem, which begins,
With love, but ends with sighs and tears for sins.
He left behind him many fruits of his labors, as six-score Sermons, all writ
with his own hand, a large and laborious Treatise entitled Biathanatose,
concerning self-murder. The resultance of fourteen hundred Authors, most of
them analized with his own hand. Nor were these only found in his study, but
all businesses that past of any public consequence in this or any of our
Neighbour-Kingdoms, he abreviated either in Latin, or in the Language of the
Nation, and kept them by him for a constant Memorial.

The Life of GEORGE VILLERS Duke of Buckingham.
TAll Cedars are shaken with the wind, when the humble shrub rests secure; Envy
strikes not at the lowly person, her aim is evermore at the tallest. How vain
then is that man, who enjoying the quiet of a retired life, ambitiously hunts
after honor? How few Favorites go to the grave in peace, Histories make
mention, and this Age can testify: this truth will be too sadly instanced in
the late Lord Duke of Buckingham, who from the mean estate of a private
Gentleman being raised to the highest pitch of honor a subject could be
capable of came at last to an untimely end.

His first rise began at the Earl of Somersets fall, one upon whom King James
had heaped many great favors; for from the degree of a Knight he was first
made Viscount Rochester, next sworn a Privy Counselor, then created Earl of
Somerset, and last of all made Lord Chamberlane. But this serene Sky of favor
was soon over-shadowed with Clouds by the Earls undeserving; for having married
the Lady Frances Howard, Daughter to Thomas Earl of Suffolk, and not long
before divorced from the Earl of Essex, the unfortunate Knight Sir Thomas
Overbury for speaking against the match, was by their procurement committed to
the Tower, and not long after poisoned, as I have more at large treated of in
his Life; for which fact both the Lady and Earl were arraigned and condemned,
yet through the Kings great clemency had their lives spared, but were for ever
banished his presence.

This great Favorite being thus disgusted, King James, who would not long be
without an alter idem, or Bosom-friend, took into special regard, as I have
intimated, Master George Villers, (a Gentleman of a good extraction, but a
younger Brother) and finding him susceptible, and of good form, molded him
(Platonically) to his own Idea. And that he might be a fit companion for a
King, raised him in honor next to himself; yet not all at once, but by
degrees, making him first a Knight, and Gentleman of his Bedchamber, soon
after a Viscount, and Master of the Horse; a while after erected Earl of
Buckingham, then Marquess of Buckingham, and made Lord Admiral. King James
having thus hardened and pollished him about ten years in the School of
observance (for so a Court is) and in the furnace of trial about himself, for
he was a King that could peruse men as well as books; he made him the Associate
of his Heir Apparent, together with the Lord Cottington, an adjunct of singular
experience and trust in foreign travel, and in a business of love and of no
equal hazard, enough to kindle affection even between the distantest
conditions; so as by various and inward conversation abroad (besides that
before and after at home) with the most constant and best natured Prince (bana
si sua nocint) that ever any Nation enjoyed, this Duke (which last title was
conferred on him in Spain) now becomes seized of reiterated favor as it were
by descent, though the condition of that state commonly be no more then a
tenancy at will, or at most for the life of the first Lord, and rarely
transmitted, it being a kind of wonder to see favor hereditary, yet in him it
proved far otherwise, as one writes.

The King loves you, you him; both love the same,
You love the King, he you, both Buck-in-game;
Of sport the King loves game, of game the Buck,
Of all men, you, why you, why, see your luck
And although it be ever the perpetual lot of those who are of choicest
admission into Princes favors, to feel as strong strokes of envy and ill will
from beneath, as they do beams of grace and favor from above; the Princes love
procuring the peoples hate: this Duke contrarily found their affection so great
toward him, that in open Parliament the generality honored him with no lesser
acclamation, then the preserver of his Country. But what odd turns are in the
passions of men, and how little time continue their affections, may appear in
this; those very men in a Parliament holden the first year of King Charles,
accusing him as the only cause of all bad events which happened in the
Commonwealth; drew up a charge of thirteen Articles against him, the Prologue
whereof expressing the prodigious greatness of this Duke; the influence of
whose power this ensuing Letter of Sir Henry Wottons does sufficiently express.

My most noble Lord,
When like that impotent man in the Gospel, I had lain long by the Pools side,
while many were healed, and none would throw me in; it pleased your Lordship
first of all to pity my infirmities, and to put me into some hope of
subsisting hereafter: therefore I most justly and humbly acknowledge all my
ability and reputation from your favor; you have given me encouragement, you
have valued my poor endeavors with the King, you have redeemed me from
ridiculousness, who have served so long without any mark of favor; by which
arguments, being already, and ever bound to be yours, till either life or
honesty shall leave me, I am the bolder to beseech your Lordship to perfect
your own work, and to draw his Majesty to the settling of some things that
depend betwixt Sir Julius Caesar and me, in that reasonable form, which I
humbly present to your Lordship by my Nephew, likewise your obliged servant
being my self by a late indisposition confined to my Chamber, but in all
estates such as I am,

Your Lordships, Henry Wootton.


But to return where I left to the preface of his Titles as I find them copied
in the Parliaments Declaration against him; For the speedy redress of the great
evils and mischiefs, and of the chief causes of those great evils and
mischiefs, which this Kingdom of England now grievously suffers, and of late
years has suffered, and to the honor and fafety of our Sovereign Lord the
King, and of his Crown and Dignities, and to the good and welfare of his
People; the Commons in this present Parliament, by the authority of our said
Sovereign Lord the King assembled, do by this their Bill show, and declare
against George, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of Buckingham, Earl of Coventry,
Viscount Villers, Barron of Whaddon, Great Admiral of the Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, and of the Principality of Wales, and of the Dominions and Islands
of the same, of the Town of Calais, and of the Marches of the same, and of
Normandy, Gascoigne, and Guyen; General Governor of the Seas and ships of the
said Kingdoms; Lieutenant General, Admiral, Captain General, and Governor of
his Majesty's Royal Fleet and Army lately set forth; Master of the Horses of
our Sovereign Lord the King; Lord Warden, Chancellor and Admiral of the
Cinque Ports, and of the members thereof; Constable of Dover Castle, Justice in
Air of all Forests and Chases on this side Trent, Constable of the Castle of
Windsor; Lieutenant of Middlesex and Buckinghamshire; Steward and Bailiff of
Westminster; Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's
Honorable Privy Council in his Realms, both of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.

The same Parliament likewise was the Duke accused of High Treason by the Earl
of Bristol, and the Earl of Bristol in like manner accused of High Treason by
the Duke; the Factions of both sides were passing jocund at this contest,
observing,. That whilst between these Grandees mutual malice brake out, truth
came to her own. But that Parliament being broke up abruptly, the people were
frustrated of their expectations.

To recover the Dukes reputation, which seemed eclipsed by this charge of High
Treason, a Navy being made ready for the relief of Rochel, the Duke was made
Commander both by Sea and Land; who endeavoring by his Achievements to remove
all cause of calumny against him, by the ill success of that enterprise more
exasperated the hatred of the people. The cause of this expedition (that we may
relate things in order to truth) was as follows: The French King during the
Treaty of Marriage between England and France, pretending a Martial design
against Italy and the Valtoline, obtained of King James the Loan of the
Vant-guard, a parcel of the Navy Royal, and (with the owners consent) of six
Merchants Ships more; but a rumor being spread that those ships were intended
against Rochel, then revolted from him, an express caution was put in to the
contrary. But before those ships set out, King James died, and the French King
and the Rochellers (by the mediation of King Charles) came to an accord; but no
sooner was the French Army advanced for Italy, but the Rochellers (upon
pretense that the King had not kept touch with them in slighting Fort Lewis)
under the leading of Subize, surprise the Isle of Rhee, surprise many ships in
the Harbor, and bad fair for the taking of Fort Lewis, had not the Duke of
Vendosme posted thither with relief. The French King nettled at this insolency,
began to raise an Army, sets forth all the ships he could procure, obtained
naval aid of the Dutch, and demanded of Captain Pennington the delivery of the
English ships, agreeable to his Masters promise; Pennington refuses to deliver
any till a further signification of his Majesty's pleasure: but King Charles
rather willing to submit to the hazard of Lewis his breach of faith, then to
the blame of receding from his own promise, returned answer, That his will was,
that he should consign up his own, and the six Merchants ships to the service
of his Brother.

With these Forces he quickly undoeth what Subize had done, forces him from
his strength, reprizeth many of his ships, and so impetuously chaseth him, as
he, with much difficulty, escaped to the Isle of Oleron. King Charles
discontented for the misimployment of his ships, sent an expostulatory message
to his Brother, demanding the cause of this violation of his Royal Parole; and
withal, requiring the restitution of his ships.

Lewis returns answer, That the Rochellers had first temerated, and slighted
their faith with him, and that necessity enforced him to use all means to
impede the progress of so great disloyalty, which he could not well do without
the aid of the English Ships, his own Fleet being upon other service. And for
the restitution of those ships he replied, That his Subjects by whom they were
manned, held them contrary to his mind, and therefore wished him to come by
them as he could.

This answer nothing pleased King Charles other discontents also arising, and
Rochel being close beleagured by the Duke of Guise, a Navy was made ready,
whereof the Duke was made Admiral, as you have heard. June the 27. the year of
our Lord 1627. he set sail from Portsmouth with about 6000. Horse and Foot;
their design was intended against Fort Lewis, upon the Continent near Rochel;
but upon a false information that the Duke D' Angoulesm was there with fifteen
thousand men, (whereas indeed he had but three thousand Foot, and two hundred
Horse) they altered their determination, and instantly directed their course
toward the Isle of Rhee.

July the 30. early in the morning they showed themselves upon the Islands of
Oleron, to the number of about twenty Sail, being at first supposed to be
Dunkerks waiting the motion of the Hollanders then in the road; but upon their
nearer approaches toward the Isle of Rhee, and that the Hollanders took no
Alarm, they were then suspected to be English. At a certain Fort called De la
Pree they landed; to the number of 1200. whom to oppose Sieur de Toiras
Governor of the Citadel of Saint Martins, with the like number encountered;
the Fight continued fierce and doubtful. On the English side were slain Sir
William Heyden, and Sieur de Blancard a Frenchman, Agent from the Duke of
Rohan and the Protestants. Of the French, the Governors Brother, and the
Barron of Chuntal; of common Soldiers on both sides, about nine hundred,
whereof the French bare the greater share; and now having tried a taste of each
others valor, the French retire to their Garrison, and the English to their
Ships.

Three days together both sides lay quiet, as if they had spent their whole
stock of valor at once, or sworn a truce on both sides; at length the Duke
went on shore again, intrenching himself, until he had debarqued all his Horse;
and receiving a recruit from Rochel of 500. Foot, marches directly toward St.
Martins Fort. Upon his approach the Islanders abandoned the Town and fled into
the Castle: so that the Duke being now possessed of the one, thought it would
not be long ere the other was his; but those who reckon without their host (we
say) must reckon twice: two months together the Duke encamped before this
Fort, during which time Toiras the Governor had hired a French man to have
stabbed the Duke; who being taken by the English, confessed his intentions. But
what detriment the French could not do the English by treachery they performed
otherwise; that gallant Gentleman Sir John Buroughs being slain with a Musket
shot from the Castle, as he was viewing the English Works, whose body was after
honorably enterred at Westminster. At length the Castle was reduced to a
condition of yielding, when in the very nick of necessity Mounsier Balin at an
high flood, in the dead of night conveyed in twelve Pinnaces laden with
Provision, which so cheared their drooping spirits, that they resolved to stand
it out resolutely, which accordingly they did, till at last they were relieved
by the Marshal of Schomberg; who with four thousand Foot, and two hundred
Horse, landed at Fort de la Pree, and undiscovered, marched up to the view of
the Fort, and of the English. The Duke alarmed at this sudden apparition,
fearing to be charged front and rear, resolved to rise and be gone; the French
upon their retreat, came up to the very tail of their rear, hallowing to them
in a Bravado: whereupon the English were drawn up in Battalia, but the French
would advance no nearer, until spying their advantage, the English being to go
over a narrow passage, having salt pits on either side, they then came on
amain, pouring great vollies of shot upon the English; and having routed the
Lord Montjoyes Troops, and taken him prisoner, they fell upon Sir William
Coninghams, but they most bravely fought it out even to the last man: had the
Lord Montjoyes Troops done the like a quarter so many had not perished; but
cowards are foes to their own lives, and gain only this by running away, to be
killed more basely, and further off from their fellows.

The rear being thus routed, they fall on upon the main Battle, but Sir Edward
Conways who commanded the van, facing about, made them retreat; and having left
a select company of musketeers to guard the pass until night, they burnt the
Bridge, lodging that night in a place called the Loose, and the next day went
on board.

Thus returned home the English with extreme loss, whereof the Duke as in
Command the chief, so did he share chiefly in the disgrace; the French
scoffingly saying, Though the Duke could not take the Cittidal of St. Martins,
yet it was odds but he would take the Tower of London. Doctor Moor also a
Prebend of Winchester, took occasion in his Sermon to cite that of Augustus in
Cornelius Tacitus, Quintili Vare read Legiones, which, says the Historian
perished, propter inscitiam and temeritatem Ducis, giving him a quaint wipe the
Amphibology of the word Dux, thus (as the Poet has it.)

When we do think (puffed up with hope) that we do fly aloft,
Then soonest clipped are our wings, by angry stars full often.
But the King was not so daunted at this disaster, but that he resolved to give
one pluck more for the relief of Rochell; which the Earl of Denbigh attempting
with ill success; a third Fleet was made ready, then which there never before
appeared a more gallant Armado formed by our Nation. The Duke desirous to
recover his reputation, much blemished by his discomfiture at the Isle of Rhee,
was by the King made Commander in chief; but before his setting forth, being at
breakfast at Portsmouth with Subize, and others of principal quality, one John
Felton (sometimes a Lieutenant to a Foot Company in the Regiment of Sir John
Ramsey) watching his opportunity, as the Duke was passing through an Entry with
Sir Thomas Friar, (to whom he declined his ear in the posture of attention) in
the very instant of Sir Thomas his retiring from the Duke, Felton with a knife
stabbed him on the left side into the very heart; saying as he struck him, The
Lord have mercy upon thy soul; a Speech which the Duke had scarce time to say
for himself: such effusion of blood flowing from the wound after the knife was
pulled out, that he presently expired; being only heard to say (some report
with an oath) The Villain has killed me. The motives that induced Felton to
this execrable murder are said to be these; he had long, and in vain waited
for his arrears of pay, due for former service; again, he was twice repulsed
upon his Petition for a Captains place, and others super-inducted over his
head. But least private malice should be thought his only motive to the fact,
he declared it to be the late Remonstrance of the House of Commons; sticking a
paper to the lining of his hat, wherein he had written as follows.

I would have no man commend me for doing it, but rather discommend themselves;
for if God had not taken away their hearts for their sins, he had not gone so
long unpunished.

John Felton.


The man is cowardly base in mine opinion, and deserves neither the name of a
Gentleman or Soldier, that is unwilling to sacrifice his life for the honor
of God, his King, and Country.

John Felton.


Felton for this fact suffered at Tyburne, very penitent and sorry for what he
had done; his body was from thence conveyed to Portsmouth, and there hung in
Chains. Of this fact of Feltons a modern Wit thus writes.

Some say the Duke was virtuous, gracious, good,
And Felton basely did, to spill his blood.
If it be so, what did he then amiss,
In sending him the sooner to his Bliss;
All deaths seem pleasant to a good man's eye,
And bad men only are afraid to dye:
Changed he this Kingdom to possess a better,
Then is the Duke become John Feltons debtor.
Many are said to be the warnings the Duke had of his end; some two months
before, one Doctor Lamb (a creature of the Dukes) was by the rude multitude
slain in the Streets; they telling him as they were belabouring him with stones
and cudgels, That were his Master the Duke there, they would give him as much.
This time also was common in many men's mouths.

Let Charles and Mary do what they can,
The Duke shall dye like Doctor Lamb.
The same day that Lamb was slain, the Dukes Picture fell down in the High
Commission Chamber at Lambeth. These with other the like accidents fore-bodeing
something of present fatality to the Duke, being spoken of in the Lady Davis
her hearing, she, for certain replied, No, his time is not come till August.
The same Lady also, (as I was informed by a Gentleman of near relation unto me)
did by her servant certify the Duke, that at such time as a Mole, which he had
upon his Shoulder, should go away, the Duke should dye; which accordingly came
to pass. But the most strange (if true) is that related by Lilly in his
Observations on the Life and Death of King Charles, namely, that a Demon
appeared to one Parker in the likeness of Sir George Villers the Dukes Father,
bidding him go and tell his Son, that unless he refrained such and such
company, he should ere long be killed, and withal showed him a knife, appointed
for the act; Parker told the Duke of these things, but being an old man was
judged to dote: not long after the Demon appeared to him again, telling him
that the Duke should not long survive; and also bid him set his own house in
order for he should shortly dye. Both which things accordingly came to pass.

He died the thirty sixth year of his age, a time which by the course of Nature
he might have doubled. Never did so great a man fall so much unlamented, though
causeless, as by the success of Affairs wise men have since determined.

The Life of Sir HENRY WOTTON.
TO survey him at one single prospect, Sir Henry Wotton was born at Bocton-Hall
in the County of Kent. in the year of our Redemption 1568. descended of an
ancient and honorable Family, great cherishers of Learning, as appears by that
excellent Antiquary Master William Lambert in his Perambulation of Kent. He had
three elder Brothers, all Knights, men eminent for Wisdom and Piety; by all
which it appears, that Sir Henry Wotton was a branch of such a Kindred as left
a stock of reputation to their posterity.

His Childehood being spent under the tuition of his Mother, he was sent to
Winchester School, a place of strict Discipline and Order, that so he might in
his youth be molded into a method of living by rule. Where having much
profited, he was removed from thence to New College in Oxford, where he
remained till about the eighteenth year of his age; from thence transplanted
into Queens College, where to show the world some part of his abilities, he
writ a Play of the Tragedy of Tancredo, which though some sour dispositions
may condemn, yet considering his youth, and those weighty sentences contained
in the same, it may be thought neither uncomely nor unprofitable.

During Sir Henry's abode at Oxford, his Father (being then in Kent) dreamed
that the University Treasury was robbed by five Townsmen and poor Scholars;
and being that day to write to his son Henry, thought it worth so much pains,
as by a Postscript in his Letter, to make a slight enquiry of it: which coming
to his hands, the very morning after the night in which the robbery was
committed, was by him shown, and by means thereof the five guilty persons
discovered and apprehended.

The next year he proceeded Master of Arts, at what time he read an Optic
Lecture with great applause of the University; especially of those two great
Wits, Albericus Gentilis, a Learned Italian, and Doctor Done sometimes Dean
of Paul's, of whose worth none that but pretends to Learning can be ignorant.
With these two he entered into a bosom friendship, which continued during the
term of their lives.

Attaining now to the age of two and twenty, he left Oxford, and betook himself
to travel, to purchase the rich treasure of foreign knowledge. Almost nine
years was he absent from England, the most of which time he remained in Germany
and Italy, acquainting himself with the most learned of either Nations. At his
return Robert Earl of Essex, (then one of the Darlings of Fortune) who hearing
of his abilities, took him to be one of his Secretaries: at the fall of the
Earl (with whom fell Master Cuffe his other Secretary) he privately posted out
of England, and went to Florence in Italy, where he met with his old Friend
Siegnior Vietta, then Secretary to the great Duke of Tuscany: having stayed
some short time there, the Duke intercepted certain Letters that discovered a
design to take away the life of the then King of Scots. The Duke abhorring the
fact, and resolving to endeavor a prevention of it, advised with his Secretary
Vietta, by what means a caution might be given to that King; and after
consideration it was resolved to be done by Sir Henry Wotton, who gladly
undertaking the same, to avoid the light of English Intelligence, posted into
Scotland by the way of Norway, under the name of Octavio Baldi; being admitted
private audience with the King, he was not only discovered wherefore he came,
but also who he was: and having stayed there three months with great
contentment, he returned to Florence with a fair and grateful account to the
Duke of his employment.

Queen Elizabeth dying, no sooner was King James entered upon the English
Government, but he advances him (being returned from Florence) to the Order of
Knighthood; and having had experience of his Abilities, sends him Ambassador
to the State of Venice, where he remained almost twenty years; during which
time he studied the dispositions of those Dukes, and the Consultors of State,
well knowing that he who negotiates a continued business, and neglects the
study of dispositions, usually fails in his proposed ends. And although through
some misunderstanding he fell one time into King James' displeasure, yet did he
by an Apology so clear himself, that as broken bones well set become the
stronger, so Sir Henry Wotton did not only recover, but was much more
confirmed in his Majesty's estimation and favor then formerly he had been.

Thrice was he sent Ambassador to the Republic of Venice, once to the Emperor
Ferdinando the second, as also to several German Princes, to incline them to
equitable conditions for the restoration of the Queen of Bohemia and her
descendents, to there patrimonial inheritance of the Palatinate. And although
success had made the Emperor inexorable, that his Embassage obtained not the
wished effect; yet so nobly deported he himself in that journey, that the
Emperor adjudged him a person of much honor and merit; and at his departure
presented him with a Jewel of Diamonds, of more value then a thousand pounds,
which Sir Henry acepted; but the next morning at his departing from Vienna, at
his taking leave of the Countess of Sabrina where he lodged, thanking her for
her honorable entertainment, he prevailed with her to accept of that Jewel as
a testimony of his gratitude: with which action the Emperor being displeased,
Sir Henry Wotton was heard to say, That though he received it with
thankfulness; yet, he found in himself an indisposition to retain it, it being
a gift that came from an enemy to his Royal Mistress: he so usually called the
Queen of Bohemia.

Here it would not be amiss for the Readers diversion, to discourse touching
the Affairs of the Embassy of an Ambassador: to give some short hints, as to
their Original, Privileges, Wisdom, Valor, quick Wits, and Behaviors; they
are the Legates, Deputies, Messengers of Princes, and Orators of Kings; for all
these terms do include one function, exercised in different manners. And
because there are sundry sorts of them somewhat different from the custom of
our age, I will not only treat of them as they were in times past amongst the
Romans, as they were in the times of their most magnificent glories, but as
near as I can, briefly digest the usage and duty of them as they are now put in
office by Emperors, Kings, and Princes. The Jews were a people most ancient,
from whom all Government, Learning, Morality, Philosophy and other notable
things have been derived. Amongst them, in honor to the antiquity of Religion,
Phineas the Priest, the Son of Eleazer with ten Princes of the Tribes, was sent
Ambassador to the Israelites beyond Jordon. The Greeks sent Ulysses that
Eloquent Orator, and with him Menelaus, to reconcile the differences betwixt
them and the Trojans. There might be infinite instances of other Nations. The
person that should be thus employed ought to be nobly born free, of good
credit, honest, loyal, valiant, circumspect, learned, eloquent, adorned with
the languages, liberal, with other necessary virtues and qualifications. For
the order how Ambassadors have been received and used by Princes. Alexander ab
Alexandro thus expresses, Alex ab Alex. Lib. 5. Cap. 3. Apud Graecos nisi
praeconibus adhibitis, Legatos minime hostium fines ingredi docebat; neque
Legationis munere fungi quenquam, nisi prius infusae aqua ab eisdem manus
abluissent, Jovique coronatis poculis propinassent, hi tamen Legati qui cum
patriis sacris, Olympiam aut Pytheam missi erant, sacris qui vero foedera
percutiebant quasi pacis arbitri, and interpretis dicti sunt: in his Fourth
Book, and the 21. Chap. speaking of the time when they should be received,
neque illud praetereundum, etc. Neither is it to be over passed; that it is
remembered, that to Legates and Foreign Nations admitted into the Senate, the
Roman Consuls were not accustomed to give any answers but only in Latin: who
being admitted after the manner of the Fathers, the Senate gave them power of
that they would have: but the Greeks by their Deputies appointed, did declare
their minds if any body required any thing. And the Arrebates and Belonaces
did assemble their Councels by the sound of Trumpets; but if they would speak
any thing in their own Language to such being admitted, in the Senate were
interpreters given, by whom they did propound what was needful, and receive the
agreement and answers of the Senate. Many have been the privileges, immunities
and advantages they have derived to their own honor and the happiness of those
that have employed them. Francis Dandalus the Venetian Orator, being sent
Ambassador into France to pacify the French King, and the great Clergyman,
for that he was displeased with the States of Venice for the receiving of
Feraria; when he had diverse times used his best arguments, yet could not remove
the anger of the Bishop of Rome, falling on his hands and knees (no compulsive,
but a free way of introducing the subtilty of his design) being raised by the
Pope, he powered forth such a flood of Rhetoric, that he so wrought on him,
that he reconciled him and the Venetians. When Clement the Seventh Bishop of
Rome, and Charles the Fifth, the Emperor, had met at Bononia about diverse
affairs, Francis Alvarez the Legate of Denide, commonly called Presto John, was
King of the Abyssine Ethyopians, which do possess the middle part of Africa,
being come to Benonia, by the conduct of the Ambassadors of John King of
Portugal, did in the Senate, in the name of the King, promise Faith and
Obedience to Clement Bishop of Rome, in the year of our Lord 1533. For which
wise dispatch of his Embassy, after ages took notice of him. I shall forbear to
enlarge my self, and only insert a few of their Apothegms. Policartidas an
Orator, being sent with others to certain Dukes, when it was demanded of them
whether his coming was public or private, they answered, that if they had
obtained the effect of their message, they came publicly; if not, privately:
which subtle answer did admirably manifest their good intentions to their
Country: for if the legation succeeded to their minds, they would give the
glory to their Country; if otherwise, they would have the reproach and repulse
to appertain to the Commonwealth. The Lacedaemonians sending but one Legate to
King Demetrius, he highly resented it for an indignity, asking if one man were
enough to come to him. To which the Ambassador answered, Yes Sir, we deemed it
sufficient to send but one to one man. Such another answer did Agis the Son of
Archidamus use, being sent to Philip King of Macedon. When certain Lacons, a
people of Greece inhabiting Sparta, went Ambassador to the tyrant Ligdanus, who
often deferred conference with them, excusing himself that he was somewhat
sickly; they desired the messengers to return him this answer, That they came
to talk, not to wrestle with the King. The Romans dispatched their Ambassadors
to Bithnia to assuage a domestical breach betwixt Drusus the Father, and
Nicomodes the Son; which Legates were such as one of them had many scars of
wounds in his head and face, another was diseased in his feet, and the third
but of a slender Wit: of whom M. Cato was wont to jest, that the same Embassy
lacked both head, feet and heart. Two Legates, says Poggius, being sent from
the Council of Constance to Petrus de Luna the false Pope, did amongst other
bitter chidings and hard speeches which they used together upon the Title of
the Pontificiality, after that the Pope had said of himself, This is the ark of
Noah; meaning that all the power of the Pontifical Sea remained in him: they
answered, there were many beasts in the Ark of Noah; expressing thereby, that
there were many vices in the Pope, and many wicked men in the Church. These
with infinite more might be collected out of our English Authors, but to knit
up this discourse wherein I have epitomized the office, management, gravity,
magnanimity, policy, witty and wise answers of Ambassadors; to conclude, these
messengers of Princes to Princes, had, as we may allude, their first
institution and original from the order of Archangels, who have been the
Ambassadors of God, to such persons as God has honored in great matters
either of revelation or successes of kingdoms; as Gabrel was to Daniel: or of
opening some strange things, as he was also to the Virgin of the conception of
the Savior of souls. But enough of, and perchance too much to some cavelling
heads, that there has been so large a digression, which I have only
enterprised to illustrate the perfection of our Knight in this illustrious
employment; he having observed all the laws of Ambassadors, and so managed the
Affairs of his Prince, that he was the wonder of those times he lived in, and
an admirable example for ours.

Sir Henry Wotton returning home in the latter year of King James his Reign,
his estate much wasted with his continued Embassies, very desirous to enjoy the
quiet of a retired life; he obtained to be made Provost of Eaton College,
which how well it suited to his fancy, this speech of his to a friend will
sufficiently testify. I thank God and the King, by whose goodness I am now in
this condition; a condition which that Emperor Charles the Fifth seemed to
approve: who after so many remarkable victories, when his glory was great in
the eyes of all men, freely gave his Crown, and the Cares that attended it, to
Philip his Son, making a holy retreat to a Cloystral life; where he might by
devout meditations consult with God (which the rich or busy men seldom do)
and have leisure both to examine the errors of his life past, and prepare for
that great day, wherein all flesh must give an account of their actions. And
after a kind of tempestuous life, I now have the like advantage from him, that
makes the outgoings of the morning to praise him, even from my God whom I
daily magnify for this particular mercy, of an exemption from business, a
quiet mind, and a sufficient maintenance, even in this part of my life, when
my age and infirmities seem to sound me a retreat from the pleasures of this
world, and invite me to a contemplation; in which I have ever taken the
greatest felicity.

This contemplative life he continued to his end, so that this place seemed to
be the beginning of his happiness, the College being to his mind, as a quiet
Harbor to a Seafaring-man after a tempestuous Voyage; where by the bounty of
the pious Founder, his very food and raiment were plentifully provided in
kind; where he was freed from corroding cares, and seated on such a rock, as
the waves of want could not probably shake; where he might sit in a calm, and
looking down, behold the busy multitude turmoiled and tossed in a tempestuous
sea of dangers! And (as Sir William Davenant has happily expressed the like in
another person.)

Laugh at the graver business of the State,
Which speaks men rather wise then fortunate.
He died in December. 1639 having completed seventy three years. His will was
made by himself above two years before his death, wherein he appointed that his
Executours should lay over his Grave a plain stone of Marble, with this Epitaph
enscribed thereon.

Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus Author.
Disputandi pruritus, Ecclesiarum scabies.
Nomen alias quaere.
Which may be englished thus.

Here Is lies the first Author of this Sentence.
The Itch of Disputation will prove the Scab of the Church.
Enquire his name elsewhere.
To acquaint the world with two or three other Instances of the readiness of
his Wit, he having in Rome retained an acquaintance with a pleasant Priest, who
invited him one evening to hear their Vesper-Musick at Church; the Priest
seeing Sir Henry stand obscurely in a corner, sends to him by a Boy of the
Quire this question written in a small piece of paper; Where was your Religion
to be sound before Luther? To which question Sir Henry Wotton presently
under-writ, My Religion was to be found then, where yours is not to be found;
in the written word of God.

To another that asked him, Whether a Papist may be saved? He replied, You may
be saved without knowing that; Look to your self.

To another, whose earnest zeal exceeded his knowledge, and was still railing
against the Papists, he gave this advice: Pray Sir forbear till you have
studied the Points better; for the wise Italian has this Proverb, He that
understands amiss concludes worse. And take heed of entertaining this opinion,
That the further you go from the Church of Rome, the nearer you are to God.

He left behind him many Monuments of his Learning, whose worth are such, that
they speak themselves more incomparably to posterity, then any Eulogies I can
bestow upon them. Give me leave to conclude with the words of one of the
learned Modern Critics: That for the generality of the style throughout his
Works, it is most queintly, delightful, gentle, soft, and full of all manner of
blandishments, only his pen flowed a little too much with the oily adulation
of Court-flattery. Questionless if Sir Henry Wotton was reduced to any of these
subserviences, they were occasioned from his generous expenses in the time of
his Embassies for his Masters honor, who used him as Queen Elizabeth did Sir
Francis Walsingham, who had but from hand to mouth.

The Life of THOMAS WENTWORTH Earl of Stafford, and Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
TO particularize all the actions of the Earl of Strafford would of its self
require an entire Volume, it being a Garden of choice Varieties, wherein points
of Law are interwoven with Acts of State, and the Affairs of Ireland, as in the
same Escutcheon, quartered with those of England. I shall only take a
superficial view of his life, and not strain my self ambitiously to show forth
the utmost reach of his perfections; he being a rare conjunction of Courage
attended with loyalty, to danger; Wisdom accompanied with Eloquence, to
admiration; who could both think and speak, speak and do: whose answers and
replies to the Articles exhibited against him by the House of Commons, show his
abilities to be such, that whatsoever is spoken of him, is infinitely below
what was spoken by himself.

He was born in Yorkshire, well descended, and as well educated; which fitted
him to sustain the weighty Affairs he afterward underwent. A great stickler at
the first against the Prerogative, until allured by Court-preferment he turned
Royalist: for the King finding his worth and ability never left till he had
gained him to himself, obliging him to his side by many titles of honor and
places of trust; whose services he found equivalent to his favors, continuing
to his death a trusty servant, a faithful friend, a prudent Counselor, and a
constant adherer to his side in all his exigencies.

The greatest services he did to the King were during the time he was
Lieutenant of Ireland, by his augmenting and advancing the Kings Revenues
there, restoring the Churches maintenance, suppressing the Outlaws,
establishing obedience to Royal Authority, impediting the Tyranny and
usurpation of the great ones over the Commons, causing the Irish to leave off
many of their barbarous customs, and conform themselves to the more civil
manners of the English, which drew much hatred upon himself; for changes
(though for the better) are most times ill resented by the vulgar: witness
those troubles in England in the time of King Edward the Sixth. Nor could these
innovations have found more dislike in any Nation under the Heavens then
Ireland, so wedded are those people to their ancient, vain, ridiculous customs.

But since I have inserted his most remarkable actions in the Life of King
Charles, I shall omit those passages, and come to his solemn Trial, so
paramount in the Equipage of all Cirumstances, that (as former ages have been
unable) so future are unlikely to produce a parallel of them.

This great Minister of State was by the Parliament (well known for the length
of it) accused with twenty eight Articles of High Treason, February 16. 1640.
The particulars are too long for me here to recite; the substance of them
being, that he endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Governments of
the Realms of England and Ireland, and enriching himself by indirect ways in
his office, for incensing the King against the Scots, for endeavoring to set
things amiss betwixt his Majesty and the people, and to have given counsel
tending to the disquiet of the three Kingdoms. The 13. of April following began
his Trial in Westminster Hall, where there was a Throne erected for the King,
on each side whereof a Cabinet enclosed about with boards, and before with a
Tarras: before that were the Seats for the Lords of the upper House, and sacks
of wool for the Judges: before them ten stages of seats, extending further then
the midst of the Hall, for the Gentlemen of the House of Commons: at the end of
all was a desk closed about, and set apart for the Lord Lieutenant and his
Council. The Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward; his Accusers were Pym,
Glin, Mainard, Whitlock, St. John's, Palmers, Sir Walter Earls, Stroud, Seldom,
Hampden and others; Many days were spent, and much Rhetoric used on both
sides: for the Lieutenant was no child, but as cunning in the art of defense
as any man in England; equal, if not surpassing his Predecessor the Earl of
Kildare, in the time of King Henry the Eighth. But the House of Commons were
implacable in their hatred toward him, nothing being satisfactory to them but
his downfall: So that some conclude his death was for necessity, and rather for
the satisfaction of rancourous apprehensions, then for any guiltiness in the
cause.

The lower House perceiving by the Lieutenants insinuating and witty defenses,
a great increase of his friends in the Lords House, they resolved of no more
hearing of him in public, but to draw up a Bill of Attainder, and present the
same to the Lords, whereby first the matter of Fact should be declared to have
been sufficiently proved, and then in the matter of Law, that he had incurred
the censure of Treason, for intending to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom. And they were confident the Lords would ratify, and approve of this
Bill of theirs, and give judgment accordingly.

But the Lords fearing such Proceedings, as a beaten path trodden out to the
ruin of their own lives and estates, told the House of Commons, that they
themselves as competent Judges, would by themselves only give sentence in the
Cause; nor was there course suitable to the practice and State of the Kingdom,
the safety of the Nobility, or to Equity or common Justice.

It was replied by them of the Lower House, that they were resolved to go on
with their Bill, and if the same should be rejected by the Lords, they feared a
rupture and division might follow, to the utter ruin and desolation of the
whole Kingdom. That no content would be given to the Subject, unless the man
who had so much intruded upon their right, and discontented the people, might
be punished as a Traitor, and dealt withal according to his demerits.

But the Lords were resolute in their first determinations, and resolved to
give him a fair hearing in the matter of Law, whereupon his Council were called
to the Bar, Master Lane the Princes Attorney, Master Gardener Recorder of
London, Master Lo, and Master Lightfoot, who spoke both much, and to the
purpose. Yet would this nothing satisfy the House of Commons; no, though the
King in person in a set Speech declared unto them, That there never was such a
project, nor had the Lord Strafford ever offered such advice, for the
transporting of an Irish Army into England, neither had advised him to
establish an Arbitrary Government, that he would never in heart nor hand concur
with them to punish him as a Traitor; and desired therefore that they would
think of some other way how the business might be composed. Nor should it ever
be less dear to him (though with the loss of his dearest blood) to protect the
innocent then to punish the guilty. But this made the House of Commons a great
deal the more pressing, fearing by the Kings peremptory answer that there was
some plot underhand.

But the House of Commons were not so much inflamed by the Kings Speech as the
common people, who to the number of five or six thousand, having Weapons and
Battoons in their hands came to Westminster; and at the entering at every
Coach, cried out for speedy justice and execution, with a wonderful and strange
noise. After this they drew up the names of those either in the House of
Commons, or the House of Lords, whom they imagined to favor the Lieutenant,
and gave them the Title of Straffordians, with this close, That all those, and
all other enemies to the Commonwealth should perish with him; and did post up
the names of fifty five at the Corner of Sir William Brunkards house, in the
old Pallace-yard in Westminster, writing underneath

This and more shall be done to the Enemies of Justice afore-written. The House
of Commons in the mean time were not idle, but brought forth a Protestation, or
band of Association, (as they termed it) much like the Covenant taken not long
before in Scotland; which without further process or delay, was subscribed by
the whole House, except the Lord Digby and an Uncle, or Friend of his.

Not long after, the Bill against the Lord Stafford past the Lords, there were
forty five present; of which nineteen voyced for him, and twenty six against
him: the greatest part of his friends absented themselves upon pretense,
(whether true or suppositious) that they feared the multitude; otherwise his
suffrages had more then counterpoised the voters for his death.

Nothing wanted now, but the Kings assent to this Bill, which the same
afternoon was desired of him; the King desired respite for two days,
consulting in the mean time with some Bishops and Judges what to do in this
case, who as the sequel shows, advised him thereunto: so that we may herein
admire at the wonderful Providence of God, to suffer not only the King and the
Country, but the Church too, to be involved in his blood, who had stood so
stiffly in the Churches maintenance.

But nothing gained his Majesty's assent thereunto so much, as a Letter from
the Lieutenant himself; wherein he desired his Majesty that for the preventing
of such mischiefs as might happen by his refusal to pass the Bill: intimating
his consent therein, as this following Letter of his testifies.

May it please your sacred Majesty,
It has been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your Majesty
and your people; and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private condition considered, it has been
a great madness, since through your gracious favor I was so provided, as not
to expect in any kind to mend my fortune, or please my mind, more, then by
resting where your bounteous hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majesty and your
people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you
and them: no other means to effect, and settle this happiness, but by the
Council, and assent of the Parliament, or to prevent the growing evils upon
this State, but by entirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the
loyalty, and good affections of your English Subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, this truth finds little credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed, as something of
separation between you, and your people, under a heavier censure then which I
am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now, I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me;
notwithstanding your Majesty has declared, that in your Princely opinion, I am
not guilty of treason, nor are you satisfied in your conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great strait, there is before me the ruin of my
Children, and Family, hitherto untouched in all the branches of it with any
foul crimes. Here is before me the many ills, which may befall your sacred
Person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self, and Parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, then is necessary for the preservation both of
King and people. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared by
mortal man, Life or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less man,
then God knows mine infirmities give me. And to call a destruction upon my
self and young children where the intentions of my heart (at least have been
innocent of this great offense) may be believed, will find no easy content
from flesh and blood.

But with much sadness I am come to a resolution of that which I take to be
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self, which
doubtless is the prosperity of your sacred Person, and the Commonwealth,
infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the Honor and
Justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that Declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me
to their Lordships; so now, to set your Majesty's conscience at liberty, I do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, in prevention of mistakes which may happen,
by your refusal to pass this Bill: And by this means remove (praised be God) I
cannot say, this accursed (but I confess) this unfortunate thing forth of the
way, toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust shall ever establish
between you and your Subjects.

Sir, my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, then all the world can do
besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Gods grace I
forgive all the world with a calmness and meekness of infinite contentment to
my dislodging soul; so Sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your exceeding
favors. And only beg that in your goodness you would vouchsafe to cast your
gracious regard upon my poor Son, and his three Sisters, less, or more, and no
otherwise, then as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter appear
more or less guilty of this death,

God long preserve your Majesty. Your Majesty's most faithful, and humble
Subject, and Servant, Strafford.
Tower 4. May, 1641.

Whereupon the next morning the King signed the Bill, a Commission being drawn
up for his Execution.

It is reported that this Speech the Earl intended to have spoken on the
Scaffold; but being intercepted, he delivered it to his Brother Sir George
Wentworth, from whose original Copy under the Earls own hand, this is word for
word transcribed.

People of my Native Country, (I wish my own or your Charity had made me fit
to call you Friends.)
It should appear by your concourse and gazing aspects, that I am now the only
prodigeous Meteor, toward which you direct your wandering eyes. Meteors are the
infallible Antecedents of Tragical events, and do commonly level their
malevolent operation upon some remarkable person. At this present I am become
my own prodigy, and the cross influence will appear in my too sudden Execution;
and this fear is only left me, the consequence will produce a greater effusion
then mine. I would to God my blood would cure your sad hearts of all their
grievances, (though every drop thereof were a soul on which a life depended, I
could tender it with as much alacrity, as some, nay, the most of you are come
to triumph in my fatal expiration:

In regard I have been by you (my native Country, whose wisdom and justice in
respect of the generality of it; is no way questionable) voted to this untimely
end; I have not one sylable to say in justification of my self, or those
actions for which I suffer; only in excuse of both, give me leave to say my
too much zeal to do my Master service, made me abuse his Regal Authority: and
howsoever I have been one most unfortunate, yet at all times a favorite in the
prosecution of my places and offices. Yet as I shall answer before the dreadful
tribunal; whereunto your just anger has before nature doomed me, my intents
were fairer then my actions; but God knows the overgreatness of my spirits
severity in my government, the witchcraft of authority, and flattery of
multitudes to sharpen it, are but ill interpreters of my intention; which that
you may believe I have no argument but improtestation, which has but this
circumstance to confirm it, that it proceeds from a dying man.

If I should take upon me to make a relation of all the particulars of my
Arraignment and Attainder, it would but too much prorogue your longing
expectation of my shameful death; besides, it would be needless in respect I
should but say over again what I said before the Parliament, and perhaps be as
little believed, though the terms on which I then answered be far different
from my attestation now; that being before my condemnation and this after it:
besides, there were multitudes to catch it as fast as I uttered it; and
doubtless you shall have it upon every stall-post; for I have been, and whilst
I breath am the pestilence which rages through your minds, your estates, and
trades; and you will read the bills of your losses, though the disease that
brought the destruction be removed.

Having nothing in this world but a little breath which within a few minutes is
to be expired, I should not use it to this purpose, but that custom upon these
directions prescribes my warrant for it; and further, that I might be an
example to great persons, that they may know the favor of a great King is not
equivalent to the breath of Nations; and that it is a thousand times better and
more noble for a Lion to play with a Glove then to tear it; nor is it proper
for a Dove to soar with Eagles wings; and the rather, because the necessity of
the times requires that I should dye only for example.

He that gave conscience to you all (that are willing to accept it) my Royal
Master did in his own conscience once declare me guiltless of those facts for
which this death is come upon me; but heaven which has made your general
clamours the organ of my destiny, thought me not worthy to enjoy this life. I
have abused, and from your voices, as from the lips of Oracles, I have received
my woeful doom, wherein my charity at this hour cannot nor will accuse you of
the least injustice; but still I trench upon your patience, and linger in the
thing you came to look for, my death.

A little, a little more and I have done; for a testimony of my Faith and
Religon, be pleased to understand that I have professed and do now dye in the
true Protestant Religion, not in any points deviating in my belief from the
fundamental grounds, authorized by the Church of England. I would say more of
this, but that I desire my private ejaculations may be my last meditations:
only because I know there is not any one of you at ods with my soul or person,
though with my facts and vices; I cannot doubt but your humanity and charitable
inclinations will afford me your devout prayers. For my Saviors sweet mercy,
good people pray for me, even for my eternal Saviors sake, into whose bosom I
render my woeful and afflicted soul; sweet Jesu my redeemer, the redeemer even
of me a woeful and dejected sinner, receive into thy arms my Spirit.

At the time appointed, he marched to the Scaffold more like a General in the
head of an Army to breath victory, then like a condemned man to undergo the
sentence of death. The Lieutenant of the Tower desired him to take Coach, for
fear the people should rush in upon him and tear him in pieces: No (said he)
Master Lieutenant, I dare look death in the face, and I hope the people too:
have you a care that I do not escape, and I care not how I dye, whether by the
hand of the Executioner, or the madness and fury of the People; if that may
give them better content, it is all one to me.

Having mounted the Scaffold, and seeing his Brother Sir George Wentworth
weeping. Brother said he, What do you see in me that deserves these tears? does
my fear betray my guiltiness, or my too much boldness any Atheism? think now,
that you do accompany me to my marriage bed. Nor did I ever throw off my
clothes with such freedom and content, as in this my preparation to my Grave;
that stock, [pointing to the Block appointed for his Execution] must be my
Pillow; here must I rest, and rest from all my labors: no thoughts of envy, no
dreams of treason, jealousies of foes, cares for the King, the State, or my
self, shall interrupt this nap: therefore Brother with me pity mine enemies,
who beside their intention have made me blessed; rejoice in my innocence,
rejoice in my happiness.

Kneeling down upon the Scaffold, he made this Protestation; I hope Gentlemen
you do think that neither fear of loss or love of reputation will cause me to
belie God and my Conscience: for now I am in the door going out, and my next
step must be from time to eternity, either of peace or pain. To clear my self
to you all, I do solemnly protest before God, I am not guilty (so far as I can
understand) of that great crime laid now to my charge, nor have had the least
inclination or intention to damnifie or prejudice the King, the State, the
Laws, or Religion of this Kingdom; but with my best endeavors to serve all,
and support all, concluding with these words, as God might be merciful to his
soul.

Addressing himself to my Lord Primate of Ireland, he said, It is my very great
comfort that I have your Lordship by me this day, in regard I have been known
to you these many years; and I do thank God and your Lordship for it that you
are here, I should be very glad to obtain so much silence, as to be heard a few
words; but I doubt I shall not, the noise is so great. My Lords, I am come
hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, to pay that last debt I
owe to sin, which is death; and by the blessing of that God to rise again
through the merits of Jesus Christ to righteousness and life eternal. [Here he
was much interrupted.]

My Lords, I am come hither to submit to that judgment which has passed
against me; I do it with a very quiet and contented mind; I thank God, I do
freely forgive all the world: a forgiveness that is not spoken from the teeth
outward (as they say) but from the very heart. I speak it in the presence of
Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not a displeasing thought
arising in me toward any man living. I thank God I can say it, and truly too,
my conscience bearing me witness, that in all my employment, since I had the
honor to serve his Majesty, I never had any thing in the purpose of my heart,
but what tended to the joint and individual prosperity of the King and People;
although it has been my ill fortune to be misconstrued.

I am not the first that has suffered in this kind, it is the common portion
of us all, while we are in this life to err, righteous judgment we must wait
for in another place; for here we are very subject to be misjudged one of
another. There is one thing that I desire to free my self of, and I am very
confident (speaking it now with so much cheerfulness) that I shall obtain your
Christian Charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being against
Parliaments, that I did always think the Parliaments of England were the most
happy Constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the best means
under God to make the King and People happy.

For my death I here acquit all the world, and beseech the God of heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the intentions and
purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I die for. And my Lord Primate it
is a great comfort for me, that his Majesty conceives me not meriting so severe
and heavy a punishment as is the utmost execution of this sentence: I do
infinitely rejoice in this mercy of his, and I beseech God return it into his
own bosom, that he may find mercy when he stands in need of it.

I wish this Kingdom all the prosperity and happiness in the world, I did it
living, and now dying it is my wish; I do most humbly recommend this to every
one that hears me, and desire they would lay their hands upon their hearts, and
consider seriously, whether the beginning of the happiness and Reformation of
a Kingdom should be written in Letters of blood; consider this when you are at
your homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the least drop of my blood
should rise up in judgment against any one of you; but I fear you are in a
wrong way.

My Lords, I have but one word more, and with that I shall end. I profess that
I dye a true and obedient son to the Church of England, wherein I was born, and
in which I was bred; peace and prosperity be ever to it.

It has been objected, (if it were an objection worth the answering) that I
have been inclined to Popery; but I say truly from my heart, that from the time
that I was one and twenty years of age, to this present, going now upon forty
nine, I never had in my heart to doubt of this Religion of the Church of
England, nor ever had any man the boldness to suggest any such thing to me, to
the best of my remembrance; and so being reconciled by the merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, into whose bosom I hope I shall shortly be gathered, to
those eternal happinesses which shall never have end. I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man, for any rash or unadvised words, or any thing done
amiss; and so my Lords and Gentlemen farewell. Farewell all the things of this
world.

I desire that you would be silent, and join with me in prayer, and I trust in
God we shall all meet and live eternally in Heaven, there to receive the
accomplishment of all happiness, where every tear shall be wiped away from our
eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts. And so God bless this Kingdom, and
Jesus have mercy on my soul.

Having ended his Speech, he addressed himself to prayer, wherein he continued
about a quarter of an hour; and then standing up, took his leave of all the
Nobles and considerable Persons on the Scaffold; which done, he prayed again,
and then laying his head down on the Block, had the same dissevered from his
body by the Executioner at one blow.

His Body was afterward embalmed, and carried into Yorkshire, there to be
buried amongst his Ancestors.

I shall close the Scene, and shut up all with Mr. Cleavelands excellent
Epitaph on this Hero.

Here lies wise and valiant Dust,
Huddled up 'twixt fit and just:
Strafford, who was hurried hence
'Twixt treason and convenience.
He spent his time here in a mist,
A Papist, yet a Calvanist.
His Prince's nearest joy and grief,
He had, yet wanted, all relief:
The Prop and Ruin of the State,
The Peoples violent love and hate.
One in extremes, loved and abhorred.
Riddles lies here, and in a word.
Here lies --, and let it lie
Speechless still, and never cry.
The Life of WILLIAM LAUD Archbishop of Canterbury.
THis reverend Father in God William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, the times
he lived in neither knowing his worth nor worthy of his person, have too much
vilified. He was of no extraordinary Extraction as well as Stature, yet he rose
by his deserts to the highest degree of Honor. He was born at Reading in
Barkshire, the year of our Redemption 1573. His Father a man of a competent
Estate, willing to see his pregnant son well educated, who in few years
attained to such learning, that he was sent to St, John Baptists College in
Oxford; where he was such a Proficient, that in twelve years space he was
looked upon, and applauded even to admiration of the University, from whence he
proceeded Batchelour and Master of Arts.

Not long after he was chosen Procter of the University, about which time he
also became Chaplain to the Earl of Devonshire, where first he fell acquainted
with the Nobility, a great cause (no doubt) of his preferment. Soon after he
proceeded Batchelour, then Doctor in Divinity; and becoming Chaplain to
Doctor Neal Bishop of Rochester, was by him recommended to King James, and
made his Chaplain.

Being now in the path to promotion, he neglected no opportunity conducible
thereunto, but proves very serviceable to all those who might be any ways
advantageous to his advancement; more especially was he observient to the Duke
of Buckingham, the grant Favorite of the times. So that in short space he was
made Prebend of Bugden, and Westminster, Dean of Gloucester, Archdeacon of
Huntington, and President of Saint John's College in Oxford; besides these,
several Benefices bestowed upon him, Stanford in Northamptonshire, West-Tilbury
in Essex, Cuckston in Kent, and Ibstock in Leicestershire.

Not long after King James (the best Master to his Servants that ever was)
bestowed the Bishopric of St. David's upon him, and with it in Commendam the
Parsonage of Creek. King James dying, his Son our late Sovereign Charles
finding his abilities, took him into more special regard, making him first
Bishop of Bathe and Wells, then Dean of his Chapel, next a Privy Counselor,
soon after Bishop of London, then Chancellor of Oxford, and not long after
Archbishop of Canterbury. Higher he could not be advanced in England, in Rome
he might, who to gain him to their side, made him a ridiculous tender of a
Cardinals Cap; to which he returned answer, That somewhat dwelt within which
would not suffer that, till Rome were otherwise then it is. Implying thereby,
that that Church had errors to which his conscience could no ways conform.

Far different was Bishop Laud from his Predecessor D. Abbot, whose judgment
for the indifferency of things Ceremonial, made the enjoining of them by Bishop
Laud be termed an innovation; many in their writings at that time inveighed
bitterly against Episcopal Government, as also against the Bishops; three of
which violent opponents were, Mr. Pryn a Barrester of Lincolns Inn, Dr.
Bastwick a Physician, and Master Burton a Divine, who were censured in the
Star Chamber to pay each of them five thousand pounds to the King, to lose
their ears in the Pillory, and to be imprisoned perpetually. The first in
Canarvan Castle in Wales; the second in Lanceston Castle in Cornwall, and the
other in Lancaster Castle; Master Pryn over and above, to be stigmatized on
both cheeks with the letter S. for a Schismatic.

This severity, with the obtruding of the Common Prayer Book altered, on the
Scots, which was by the Kings special command, so exasperated them and the
English Commonalty, that Libels were each day scattered about; one pasted on
the Cross in Cheapside, That the Archbishop of Canterbury had his hand in
persecuting the Saints, and shedding the blood of the Martyrs. Another in the
South Gate of Paul's, That the Devil had let that house to him. Another on the
North Gate of Paul's, That the government of the Church of England is a candle
in the snuff, going out in a stench. Another hanged upon the Standerd in
Cheapside, wherein his Speech in the Star Chamber was set in a kind of
Pillory, etc. Five hundred persons likewise under the name of Apprentices beset
his house at Lambeth, intending no doubt to have done to him as the unruly
Rabble did to his Predecessor Simon Sudbury, in the time of King Richard the
second, who was sacrificed to the fury of the people; for which one of the
chief, named Thomas Benstea, being taken, was hanged and quartered.

Many have been the reports that this Archbishop was addicted to Popery, and a
great friend to the Papists. Certainly he who shall read the relation of his
conference with the Jesuit Fisher, will find him so little theirs, as he has
for ever disabled them from being so much their own as they were before, it
being the exactest Masterpiece of Polemick Divinity of all extant, as Sir
Edward Deering in one of his Speeches writes, that this Book of his mortally
wounded the Jesuit in the fifth rib. This learned Volume might have satisfied
the people as touching his Religion, and his Diary written by himself of the
Integrity of his Life. For he had not any intermission for his pen, and best
intentions of mind against the Roman Faction, whatsoever the Covenanters have
interpreted to the contrary; he having continual occasions to lift up his eyes
to heaven, for the preservation of the glory of the Church, and the honor and
safety of his Majesty, as by the abstract of a discovery made by Andreas ab
Habernsfeid against the designs of the Papists, to stir up a Commotion in
Scotland, and in the heat thereof to murder the King and the Archbishop may
appear; the Copy of the Archbishops Letter, and his Majesty's Notes thereupon,
for vindication of his Integrity I have here inserted.

The Archbishops Letter to the King upon the first overture of this Discovery.
May it please your Majesty,
As great as the secret is that comes herewith, yet I choose rather to send it
in this silent covert way, and I hope safe, then to come thither, and bring it
my self. First, because I am no way able to make haste enough with it.
Secondly, because should I come at this time, and antedate the meeting
September 24. there would be more jealousy of the business, and more enquiry
after it; especially if I being once there should return again before that day,
as I must, if this be followed as is most fit.

The danger it seems is eminent, and laid by God knows whom, but to be executed
by them which are very near about you: For the great honor I have to be in
danger with you, or for you, I pass not, so your sacred Person and the State
may be safe. Now, may it please your Majesty this information is either true,
or there is some mistake in it. (A.) If it be true, the persons which make the
discovery will deserve thanks and reward; if there should be any mistake in it,
your Majesty can lose nothing but a little silence.

The business (if it be true) is extreme foul. The Discovery thus by Gods
Providence offered, I do hereby humbly beg it upon my knees of your Majesty,
that you will conceal (B) this business from every creature, and his name that
sends this to me. And I send his Letters to me to your Majesty, that you may
see his sense both of the business and the Secrecy. And such instructions as
you think fit to give him. I beseech you let them be in your own hand for his
warrant, without imparting them to any; and if your Majesty leave it to his
discretion to follow it there in the best way he can, that in your own hand
will be instruction and warrant enough for him: And if you please to return it
herewith presently to me, I will send an express away with it presently.

In the mean time I have by this express returned him this answer, (C) That I
think he shall do well to hold on the Treaty with these men with all care and
Secrecy, and drive on to the discovery so soon as the business is ripe for it,
that he may assure himself and them they shall not want reward, if they do the
service. That for my part he shall be sure of secrecy, and that I am most
confident that your Majesty will not impart it to any, that he have a special
eye to the eighth or the ninth Proposition.

Sir, for Gods sake and your own safety, secrecy in this business; and I
beseech you send me back (D) this letter, and all that comes with it speedily
and scretly, and trust not your own pockets with them, I shall not eat or sleep
in quiet till I receive them. And so soon as I have them again, and your
Majesty's warrant to proceed, no diligence shall be wanting in me to help on
this discovery.

This is the greatest business that ever was put to me, and if I have herein
proposed or done any thing amiss, I most humbly crave your Majesty's pardon;
but I am willing to hope I have not herein erred in judgment, (E) and in
fidelity I never will. These Letters came to me on Thursday, September 10. at
night, and I sent these away according to the date hereof, being extremely
wearied with writing this Letter, copying out these other which come with this,
and dispatching my Letters back to him that sent these, all in my own hand.
Once again secrecy for Gods sake and your own; To his most blessed protection I
commend your Majesty, and all your Affairs, and am

Your Majesty's most humble faithful Servant, W. Cant.
Lambeth September. 11. 1640.

His Majesty's Notes and Apprehensions on this Letter.
(A) It is an unanswerable dilemma.

(B) I concur totally with you in opinion, assuring that no body does or shall
know of this business, and to show my care to conceal it, I received this but
this Afternoon, and now I make this dispatch before I sleep. Herewith I send
his warrant as you advise, which indeed I judge to be the better way.

(C) I like your Answer extreme well, and promise not to deceive your
confidence nor break your word.

(D) I have sent all back, I think these Apostils will be warrant enough for
you to proceed, especially when I expressly command you to do so

(E) In this I am as far from condemning your judgment, as suspecting your
fidelity.

York 13. C. R.


This Letter I have inserted the rather, because some men sharp-witted only in
speaking evil, have reported him to be a man of little Learning, etc. To wipe
off such aspersions vulgarly cast on him, that he was addicted to the Romish
persuasion: to which purpose they nickname his honor Superstitious, which
wise and moderate men name, a zeal to Gods house, to his perpetual honor. The
North Door of Saint Paul's was repaired at his own charges, the Workmen
themselves not knowing from whence their money came.

Thus have you seen this Archbishop mounted on the top of Fortunes wheel; but
what estate on earth is so permanent, that it remains unmovable: for Honor is
like a mountain which seems to those who are at the foot of it with his
towering head to touch the skies; but to those that are at the top, it seems
with its Basis to reach the Abyss. Anno 1641. he was by the House of Commons
accused of fourteen Articles of High Treason, and for four years together
continued a Prisoner in the Tower. Yet like his Master and King he enjoyed not
so much as the quiet of a prison; for oftentimes (about fourscore several
days) he was carried from the Tower to Westminster, and there arraigned in the
House of Lords. At last he was adjudged to be hanged, drawn, and quartered; but
upon his Petition to the Lords, that sentence was changed to beheading, which
was sadly performed on Tower Hill January 10. 1644. On the Scaffold he made a
Sermon unto the people, taking his Text out of Hebrews 12. and the 2. verse;
and having concluded his Sermon, he made a short prayer; upon the conclusion
whereof, the Executioner, a sign given him, cut off his head at the first
stroke.

He in his prosperity furnished Oxford with many excellent Volumes and rare
Manuscripts; many other endeavors had he for the propagation of Learning, but
his untimely death has prevented us of so great benefits, as notworthy of so
much happiness.

I have not enlarged my self in the writing of this Reverend Fathers Life, like
as I have done in others; I must apologize, as Mr. Speed in one of his
Descriptions writes, that such a Gentleman had begun, who afterward went
through the greatest difficulties of a most curious Map; to build upon whose
foundations he held it too injurious: so I must with all submission
acknowledge, that a Gentleman of most accomplished parts has made a progress at
large in this reverend Prelates History; for me to have went about to build,
when he alone had laid such a firm foundation, as shall outlive all other
Historians, I could not but count it too ambitious; and am so far from thinking
my self worthy to attend his noble purposes, that if I had not thought it a
crime of necessity, though in the Epitome to place him amongst these eternized
Heroes; with Mr. Speed, I should rather have left out a whole Country, then in
these few pages have committed the sin of presumption against his admirable
endeavors.

The Life of ROBERT DEVEREUX Earl of Essex, General of the Parliaments Forces.
THis Earl was borne in London Anno Dom. 1592. beginning his morning in the
evening of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. His Father was that Robert Devereux
Earl of Essex, whose unfortunate life we have already discoursed of; his Mother
was the widow of Sir Philip Sidney, one whose Pen and Sword have rendered him
famous to all posterity. His education in his youth was at the University of
Cambridge, afterward committed to the tuition of Bishop Whitgift a reverend
Divine. King James restoring him to his Fathers Titles and Estate forfeited by
his fathers treasons to Queen Elizabeth: That a perfect reconcilement might be
made in all things, a Marriage was contracted betwixt him and the Lady Frances
Howard, Daughter to the Earl of Suffolk, a Lady of a transcendent beauty: but
she full of fire, and the Earl of ice, upon complaint made, they were separated
(by a most just sentence of nullity executed by Commission under the great Seal
of England) after they had enjoyed the Society of one bed for three years
together. Some report that indirect and unjustifiable practices were used in
the scrutiny of her Virginity, but I aver, according to the truth of
allegations and proofs, as the Jury of Midwives declared, she was an untouched
Virgin: so did the Earl himself confess that (though he had often attempted it)
he never could and believed never should unty her Virgin zone: whereupon the
Commissioners pronounced a divorce betwixt them. Some Authors write that she
did not much affect the Earl, being of a lustful appetite. Some on the other
side imputed it to his travels; others to her looseness in the time of his
absence, suffering her body to be abused. Others bring Viscount Car on the
stage, that she placed her affections on him. Others write that Mrs. Turner and
Doctor Forman were employed to bewitch the Earl, and to procure frigidity quo
ad hanc; so much do our Historians differ in their relations of this
unfortunate marriage.

The Earl perceiving how little he was beholding to Venus, is now resolved to
address himself to the Court of Mars; and to this purpose he bestows himself in
the Netherlands, which at that time was the School of Honor for the Nobility
of England in their exercise of Arms: where having continued for certain years,
and gained renown by his experience and perfection in the feats of Arms, he
advanced from thence into the Palatinate, to which place went also the Earl of
Southampton, the Lord Willoughby, the Earl of Oxford, and Sir John Borlans with
their Regiments; but these not seconded as they expected, and being invaded by
so potent an Enemy as was then the Emperor, and seconded by so puissant a
Potentate as the King of Spain; having in vain endeavored with such weak
forces to resist so great power, they returned into England.

King James dying; in the beginning of his Sons Reign a design went on for a
sudden expedition into Cadiz in Spain, which was committed to the mangement of
Viscount Wimbleton and the Earl of Essex; who putting forth to Sea, were much
dammaged with a furious storm: but meeting together in the height of the
Southern Cape, they sailed to Cadiz; where having taken Puntal Castle, and in
likelihood to fire the Ships in the Harbor; the field men in the interim being
directed to Land, for their recreation and to take in fresh water, having
discovered the Cellers plentifully stockt with wine, they carrowsed thereof so
liberally, in despite of more sober commands to the contrary, as put them to
the hazard of a dismal reckoning. Whereupon the Admiral finding the Soldiers
thus insufferably disordered, fearing the Spaniard upon this advantage might
make a lamentable butchery amongst them, was forced to put to Sea again; and
having staid some time in expectation of setting upon the Plate Fleet in their
returning home, the Pestilence so reigned in their Navy, that they had scarce
men enough to handle their Sails; which enforced them to ply home with all the
speed they could.

The Earl of Essex soon after his return made a voyage into Holland, not loving
to lie idle when any action of Honor was on foot; where he behaved himself
with such gallant resolution, as got him high repute in the mouths of all men.

Having given these undeniable testimonies of his valor, he was ambitious to
give some further proofs of his virility; and having been a while in England,
he solicites the affection of Mrs. Elizabeth Paulet (daughter of Sir William
Paulet of Wiltshire, extracted from the noble line of the Marquess of
Winchester) with whom he consumated his Nuptials at Netley the Earl of
Hartfords house; by her he had a Son, who was Christened Robert, after his
Fathers name; he dyed in the year 1636. and lies buried at Drayton in the
County of Warwick.

With this Lady he did agree and cohabit, but it was but a short time, becoming
soon unhappy in his second, as he was in his first choice; for he could as
little digest her overmuch familiarity with Mr. Vdal, as his former Ladies with
the Earl of Somerset: upon which distaste, this Earl did ever after abandon all
uxorious thoughts, and for a while lived a retired life.

Soon after began the long Parliament, in which such Differences arose betwixt
them and the King, that for the deciding thereof, each part had their recourse
to Arms. The Parliament very wisely chose Essex for their General, there being
no person in the Kingdom so fit to take the people, and credit their designs;
who having an Army raised, marches with them against the King. The King on the
other side proclaims Essex and his adherents Traitors; and confident in the
justness of his cause, gives him Battle on a place called Edgehill, which was
fought with much eagerness, and in a manner with equality; for though the King
kept the field, and therein had the honor of the day, yet lost he many brave
Commanders, who there dyed in the bed of Honor. Amongst others, the Lord
Aubigney, Sir Edward Vaerney, who carried the Kings Standard, Colonel Monroe
and others.

Soon after was an overture for Peace, but whilst it was in agitation, a
second Battle was fought at Brainford; Essex at that time was sitting in the
Parliament House, but alarmed with the noise of the great guns, he speedeth
down, his coming putting a stand to the Kings Forces, who then were upon point
of Victory. There were slain on the Parliaments side Sergeant Major Quarles, a
man of eminent parts; who left behind him one only Daughter named Esther:
since married to Master William Holgate of Saffron Walden, a deserving
Gentleman; whose love to learning and learned men, has made his name famous to
all posterity. Captain Lilburne with some others were taken prisoners: the
winter then drawing on apace, both Armies retired to their Winer quarters.

The next Spring Essex sets forth with his Army, lays Siege to Reading; to
relieve which, the King, Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice advanced with a
great Army; but being worsted at Causham-Bridge, the Town was surrendered to
the Earl of Essex.

Presently after the taking of Reading, the Parliament side began to decline on
a sudden; a contageous sickness seized on the Earl of Essex Soldiers: the
Marquess of New Castle was grown very powerful in the North, and Sir William
Waller defeated in the West; Bristol being delivered up to the King: so that
had he with his Army come up the next way to London, it was thought he would
have found but little opposition; Gloucester only held out against him. The
King unwilling to leave any Town behind him, lays Siege thereunto; to the
raising whereof, the Army being not in a capacity of themselves, the Train
Bands of London assented to this expedition, who raised the Siege, and not long
after gave the Kings Forces Battle at Newbery; this was a long and bloody
fight, nor had either of the parties much cause to boast. On the Kings side
were slain the Earl of Carnarvan, the Earl of Sunderland, the Lord Faulkland,
Colonel Morgan, Lieutenant Colonel Fielding, Mr. Strode, and other eminent
persons. On the Parliament side was slain Colonel Tucker, Captain George
Massey, Captain Hunt, and others. The Earl of Essex with the Trained Bands
returned to London, where he had solemn thanks given him by the Parliament.

And now the Winter coming on, he had the leisure for a while to refresh
himself, and to make new provisions for War against the ensuing Spring; which
being come, he marches with his Army from London. Sir William Waller at some
distance marching with him, after a while he sits down before Oxford, where the
King then was; who fearing a Siege, about midnight did take Horse, attended
with certain Troops, who carried some Foot mounted behind them, and came to
Witney five miles from Burford; whither also Essex followed him. Prince Maurice
who had long laid Siege to Lyme, upon his approach toward those parts, he
raises it. The strong Town of Weymouth it surrendered unto him, yea all the
Countries round about came in unto him, and the Garrisons opened their Gates at
the first sound of his Trumpet. At Chard within the compass of twelve miles
came four thousand men unto him, protesting to live and to dye in the cause of
the Parliament, as their friends at Dorchester did before them.

Barnstable revolteth to him, Sir Richard Grenvile is beaten, and Taunton
Castle taken by his forces; soon after he possesses himself of Mount Stanford,
Plimpton, Salt-Ash, and diverse other small Garrisons: from thence he advances
toward Tavestock, where he took Sir Richard Grenviles house, and in it two
pieces of Canon, eight hundred Arms, a great quantity of rich Furniture, and
three thousand pound in Money and Plate. He marches into Cornwall, forcing his
passage over at Newbridge, with the loss of a hundred and fifty of his enemies;
about Listethel he encountered Sir Richard Grenvile, whom he overthrew,
immediately upon this Bodmin, Tadcaster, and Foy stoop unto him. But the King
who all this while was not idle understanding of his advance into Cornwall,
resolved to march after him, for he found that his Army did daily increase. The
presence of a Prince, by a secret attraction, for the most part prevailing upon
the affections of the people. Essex hereupon sends to the Parliament for
Recruits, but before he could receive any supply, the King had so cooped up his
Army, that his Horse had no room for forage: in this strait he calls a
Council of War, wherein it was concluded, that three thousand Horse under the
command of Sir William Belfore should attempt to break through the main body of
the Kings forces; which accordingly was put in execution: necessity whetting
their valors, so that with some loss they got through, and came safely to
Plymouth. But the Foot having not that swift means of escape, were forced to
yield themselves. The Earl made his escape by Sea, attended with the Lord
Roberts, and taking shipping at Foy, landed at Plymouth, sick both in body and
mind.

Thus on a sudden was all undone, which he with much pains and hazard had been
long a doing; so uncertain is the chance of War, that he who now rides
triumphantly in the Chariot of Victory, may ere long become the Object of his
enemies mercy.

Soon after followed the new moddeling of the Army, wherein all those
Commanders who were Members of either House of Parliament were called home;
Essex hereupon surrendered up his Commission, Sir Thomas Fairfax being made
General in his stead; after which time he continually sat in the House of
Peers, until the time of his death, which was on the 14. of September, 1646.
and 56. year of his age. His Funeral was solemnized with great state; a
Monument being erected for him in Westminster Abbey, which a mad villain most
uncivilly defaced.

The Life of Sir CHARLES LUCAS.
SO much pity is owing from posterity to the unfortunate Loyalist Sir Charles
Lucas, that should I omit to render him his due honors, I might be taxed of
partiality, at least to have fallen short of what the Title of this Volume
promises, he being one whose Learning and Valor has made him, amongst others,
eminent of the English Nation.

I shall not need to spend much time in setting forth the stem from whence this
illustrious Ciens sprung; he who has not heard of the Family of the Lucas's
knows nothing of Gentility; yet had no honor accrew'd to him from his famous
Progenitors, it were honor enough to him to be Brother to that nobly
accomplished, and deservingly honored, the Plato of this age, the Lord Lucas;
a Gentleman singularly gifted in all suitable elements of worth, as also to Sir
Gervas Lucas, a valiant Commander, sometimes Governor of Belvoir Castle. For
his Education, it was generous, having his youth sufficiently seasoned in
principles of knowledge, both Humane and Divine, to which joining his Manhood
and Discipline in the Field, he had scarce his equal. He was a person
accompanied with a resolute spirit, of an active disposition, and a suitable
discretion to manage it; strict in his commands without a supercillious
severity, free in his rewards to persons of desert and quality; in his society
he was affable and pleasant, in his charge serious and vigilant, remiss in
nothing that might any way improve or expedite his dispatch in Martial Affairs.

But to take a brief survey of his Military Exploits, I shall in the first
place (omitting engagements of less consequence as not so pertinent) mount up
the Hill near Newbury and Enborn Chase, the two places where that memorable
Battle was fought, where Sir Charles Lucas with sundry other worthy Commanders
behaved themselves as bravely as any of the most eminent Heroes from the
beginning of this unhappy War; in which Fight Sir Charles was grievously
wounded. Here were his characters of Honor deeply stamped in a Crimson die.

For the more brevity I shall pass by his valiant courage upon the Parliaments
Forces at the assault of Cawood Castle; where with skill and valor he forced
his way through their Quarters to such places as he thought convenient, and that
with such confidence and magnanimity, as his very name became a terror to his
enemies.

His Gallantry at Marston Moor will be had in remembrance, so long as that
Fight shall be recorded in our English Annals.

His valiant mannagement of Affairs at Newark, where he expressed himself an
absolute Soldier both in his Discipline and personal action.

His brave and successful attempt in his march from Berkley Castle with part of
his Regiment, betwixt Slymbridge and Beverston Castle, upon Colonel Masseys
Garrisons.

His incomparable Gallantry, in the pursuit of his design at Tidbury.

But to descend from these particulars to the main thing we intend, namely his
Magnanimity in defending Colchester, besieged by a powerful and successful
Enemy. We will in the first place give you a brief account of the occasion
thereof, and then as briefly relate the most memorable concernments during the
Siege.

When the Parliaments Army had so subdued the Kings Forces, that not one
Garrison stood our for him openly, and the King himself sold unto them by the
Scots, it was expected by the people a composure of differences would have
ensued, and the King reestablished on his Throne again, according as they had
promised in many Declarations. But contrary thereunto, they enacted to settle
the Kingdom without him; this much discontented the generality of the people,
and first they showed their dislike thereof by way of Petition; but that not
prevailing, they resolve force. Langhorn, Powel, and Poyer, strengthen
themselves in Wales; the Scots (notwithstanding they had sold the King not long
before) yet now exclaim against the English for breach of Covenant, and resolve
to have the other march for England. Against the Welchmen was Lieutenant
General Cromwell sent, and Sir Thomas Fairfax designed to go against the Scots;
but called back to march against the Kentish-men, who in a Body of six thousand
had possessed themselves of Maidstone, with a resolution to stand it out
against all opposers. But Sir Thomas Fairfax falling upon them, after a short
but smart fight, the Kentish-men were routed, and their Army dispersed, only
the Earl of Norwich with about three thousand men crossed the Thames, and
passed into Essex.

Where he found Sir Charles Lucas with some other persons of eminent honor and
quality, as the Lord Capel, Loughborough, etc. with a complete body of resolute
men: who after they had secured the Committee at Chelmsford, struck into
Colchester; a Town inconsiderable as was generally conceived both by the Enemy
and adjacent parts of the Country, either to receive by a provisional way of
relief any great force into it, or by reason of the indefensive and intenible
condition of the Town, to stand out any time upon their settling or planting in
it. Yet so constantly, courageous, vigilant, and incredibly industrious were
these loyally disposed Gentlemen, as this Town, which in opinion by reason of
her disprovision could not probably hold out against so powerful and formidable
an Enemy the space of one week, continued three months in a most resolute
defiance, and resistance of a victorious Army, sated with such fullness of
Conquests, and supplied with such fresh and constant Recruits, to bring their
successive Achievements to a more absolute period. At length after many stout
endeavors, Sallies and Assayes, gallantly performed, having eaten all the
Horses, Dogs, Cats, and whatsoever, (though most reluctant to Nature) could
afford them nourishment, this unfortunate Town of Colchester was surrendered
after the continuance of three months Siege completely ended; with these
strict conditions, the superior officers to mercy, and the Soldiery upon
quarter for life.

To those that shall demand what should be the reason for the besieged to hold
out so long, by their continued resistance, to bring both themselves and the
rest of the inhabitants into such misery and fearful distress; especially
seeing there appeared no hope at all of raising that lasting Siege, nor of the
Generals remove till he had finished his design; besides, their pertinacy and
aversion from such reasonable conditions as in the beginning were proposed to
them, could not but highly incense the General, and bring them (as afterward
it did) to extreamer terms, upon intelligence of their necessitous condition,
that they might either be enforced to perish through Famine, or necessarily
surrender the Town.

To this sad inquiry, I answer, that (besides others) there were three main
reasons, which induced them to hold out so long as they did.

The first was, that not only the County wherein they were beleagured, but
other Counties too, had engaged themselves upon their fidelity, (a strong gage
of assurance to valiant men) that they would really join in assistance with
them: but this strong engagement procured an easy dispensation, none appearing
visibly, save only a small party about Saffron Walden, who as they were soon
up, were as soon down; being routed at Linton by a party of Horse under Major
Sparrow.

But far greater hopes had they from London; many of of the Royalists having
engaged their persons under the Earl of Holland, Duke of Buckingham, etc. to
succor them. But this expected aid proved fruitless, for having lost that
active spark of Honor. the Lord Francis Villers, the rest of their flying Army
were surprised at Saint Needs, few escaping to carry tidings of their
disastrous success.

But the main reason which induced them on to the continuance of this Siege,
was their daily expectance of relief from the North; for the Scots having now
ended their debate with their Presbyterian Clergy, concerning the convenience
and inconveniency of this War, with 30000. men, under the leading of Duke
Hamilton, entered England. This numerous Army of Covenanters appearing so
invincible, made the Presbyterians in England to rest confident, and to cry out
Hosanna to the Mother Kirk of Scotland. But as an Army of Sheep having a Lion
to their leader, is better then an Army of Lions with a Sheepish Commander;
even so this Canopy-General, whose port and magnificence in his march promised
wonders, though it proved but Majesty in an imbroidered habit with a feverish
heart. At Preston in Lancashire he was encountered by Cromwell, with a handful of
men in comparison of his vast Army; the effect of which fight was, that the
Scots went home by weeping cross, complaining they had lost more by Hamilton,
then ever they got by Lesley.

Soon after followed the surrender of Colchester, and within five hours after
the surrender, the deaths of Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle. What
motives induced the General to more severity against them then the rest, I know
not; but certain it is, never was the message of death (though the terriblest
summons that can come to nature) entertained by any with more magnanimity, and
undaunted resolution, then it was by them. Never did Roman with greater
courage, nor Christian with firmer confidence court grim death, then did this
matchless pair of Heroes. Sir Charles Lucas was the first designed to dye; who
having retired himself a while for prayer, with a pious and humble commendation
of his soul into the hands of God, he stood up, remembering no doubt, that
saying, It behooves a General to dye standing: and tearing open his Doublet, he
exposed his naked Breast, crying out, Now Rebels do your worst: he was
immediately dispatched on the place.

Sir George Lisle's turn was next; who beholding that sad spectacle, the dead
body of his dearest friend, fell upon it and kissed it, as if he meant to
breathe into it another soul: with a free but true relation of his virtues and
endowments, he often would redouble these words. In how short a moment has a
brave spirit expired! well, this priority was due to thee, but I shall not be
long behind thee, my death which is now at hand shall restore thee to me.

After this, standing up, and taking five pieces of Gold out of his pocket, he
gave one to his Executioners, and the other four he sent to four friends in
London; then turning to the standers by, he said, Oh how many do I see here
about me, whose lives I have saved in hot blood, and now must mine be taken
away most barbarously in cold blood! sure the like was never heard of among the
Goths and Vandals, or the veriest Barbarians in the world in any age; -- after
which words, and some few invocations upon the name of Jesus, he was also
dispatched, as he stood in an Heroic posture, courting grim death with a
spritely countenance, and a greedy expectation.

I have heard it reported by diverse credible persons, that on the ground where
Sir Charles Lucas fell when he was shot, there has grown no Grass; where the
print of his body was, still remaining bare; notwithstanding round the same,
the Grass flourished with verdancy: what this should signify concerning his
guilt or innocence, as the ways of God are unsearchable, so shall I not
determine any thing, but leaving every one to his own opinion, please my self
with the only traditional relation of it.

This Epitome which I have derived to posterity, is but as a glimpse or
sparkling to the radiant beams of this Carbuncle of Honor.

The Life of King CHARLES.
KIng Charles the First was born at Dumfermling in Scotland, November 19. Anno
Dom. 1600. He was not next Heir to the Crown, then having an elder Brother
Prince Henry, of admirable parts; but God countermanding Natures dispose, by
taking away his Brother, left him the Heir Male to the British Diadem. At the
death of his Father he had attained to twenty five years of age, whereof the
most part of one was spent in Spain, in making addresses to the Lady Infanta in
the quality of a Wooer; and although he attained not the end for which he went,
yet it gave him a tincture of travel and experience, more worth perchance then
the mark he aimed at; attaining by this means to a greater degree of that which
made Ulysses so famous.

Quod mores hominum multorum videt and urbes. Amongst other Curiosities I have
met with a Letter of Pope Gregory's, to win him to his Religion, when he was
Prince, which I have inserted, with his answer.

A Copy of the Letter written from Pope Gregory the Fifteenth, to Charles
Prince of Wales, then being in Spain.
Most noble Prince, Salutation and Light of the Divine Grace: Forasmuch as
Great Britain has always been fruitful in Virtues, and in Men of great
worth, having filled the one and the other world with the glory of her renown;
she does very often also draw the thoughts of the Holy Apostolical Chair to the
consideration of her praises. And indeed the Church was but then in her infancy
when the King of kings did choose her for his Inheritance; and so
affectionately, that we believe the Roman Eagles have hardly out-passed the
Banner of the Cross. Besides that many of her Kings instructed in the knowledge
of the true Salvation, have preferred the Cross before the Royal Scepter, and
the Discipline of Religion before Covetousness leaving examples of Piety to
other Nations, and to the Ages yet to come. So that having merited the
Principalities and first places of blessedness in Heaven, they have obtained on
Earth the triumphant Ornaments of true holiness. And although now the State of
the English Church is altered, we see nevertheless the Court of Great Britain
adorned and furnished with Moral Virtues, which might serve to support the
charity that we bear unto her; and be an ornament to the name of Christianity,
if withal she could have for her defense and protection the Orthodox and
Catholic Truth. Therefore by how much the more the Glory of your most Noble
Father, and the apprehension of your glorious inclination, delights us, with so
much more zeal we desire, that the Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven might be
opened unto you, and that you might purchase to your self the love of the
Universal Church. Moreover it being certain, that Gregory the Great of most
blessed memory, has introduced to the English people, and taught to their
Kings the Law of the Gospel, and the respect of Apostolical Authority: we as
inferior to him in Holiness and Virtue, but equal in Name and Degree of
Dignity, it is very reasonable, that we following his blessed footsteps, should
endeavor the salvation of those Provinces, especially at this time when your
Design (most Noble Prince) elevates us to the hope of an extraordinary
advantage: therefore as you have directed your journey to Spain toward the
Catholic King, with desire to ally your self to the House of Austria, we do
much commend your Design, and indeed do testify openly in this present
business, that you are he that takes the principal care of our Prelacy. For
seeing that you desire to take in marriage the Daughter of Spain, from thence
we may easily conjecture, that the ancient seeds of Christian Piety, which have
so happily flourished in the hearts of the Kings of Great Britain may (God
prospering them) revive again in your soul. And indeed it is not to be believed
that the same man should love such an Alliance that hates the Catholic
Religion, and should take delight to oppress the Holy Chair. To that purpose we
have commanded to make continually most humble Prayers to the Father of Lights
that he would be pleased to put you as a fair Flower of Christendom, and the
only hope of Great Britain, in possession of that most noble Heritage that
your Ancestors have purchased for you, to defend the authority of the Sovereign
High Priest, and to fight against the Monsters of Heresy. Remember the days
of old, enquire of your Fathers, and they will tell you the way that leads to
Heaven, and that way the Temporal Princes have taken to attain to the
everlasting Kingdom. Behold the Gates of Heaven opened, the most holy Kings of
England, who came from England to Rome accompanied with Angels, did come to
honor and do homage to the Lord of lords, and to the Prince of the Apostles in
the Apostolical Chair: their actions and their examples being as so many voices
of God, speaking and exhorting you to follow the course of the lives of those
to whose Empire you shall one day attain.

Is it possible that you can suffer that the Heretics should hold them for
impious, and condemn those that the Faith of the Church testifies to reign in
the Heavens with Jesus Christ, and have command and authorisy over all
Principalities and Empires of the Earth? Behold how they tender you the hand of
this truly happy Inheritance, to conduct you safe and sound to the Court of the
Catholic King, and who desire to bring you back again into the lap of the
Roman Church: beseeching with unspeakable sighs and groans the God of all mercy
for your salvation, and do stretch out to you the Arms of the Apostolical
Charity to embrace you with all Christian affection, you that are her desired
Son, in showing you the happy hope of the Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed you
cannot give a greater consolation to all the people of the Christian Estates,
than to put the Prince of the Apostles in possession of your most noble Island,
whose Authority has been held so long in the Kingdom of Britain for the
defense of Kingdoms, and for a Divine Oracle; which will easily arrive, and
that without difficulty, if you open your heart to the Lord that knocks, upon
which depends all the happiness of that Kingdom. It is of our great charity
that we cherish the praises of the Royal name; and that which makes us desire
that you and your Royal Father might be styled with the names of Deliverers and
Restorers of the ancient and paternal Religion of Great Britain which we hope
for, trusting in the goodness of God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings,
and who causes the people of the earth to receive healing, to whom we will
always labor with all our power, to render you gracious and favorable: in
the interim take notice by these Letters of the care of our Charity, which is
none other than to procure your happiness, and it will never grieve us to have
written them, if the reading of them stir but the least spark of the Catholic
Faith, in the heart of so great a Prince, whom we wish to be filled with long
continuance of joy, and flourishing in the glory of all virtues.

Given at Rome in the Palace of St. Peter, the 20th. of April, 1623. in the
third year of our Popedom.

The Answer of Prince Charles to the Popes Letter.
Most Holy Father, I received the dispatch from your Holiness with great
content, and with that respect which the piety and care, wherewith your
Holiness writes, does require: It was an unspeakable pleasure to me to read the
generous exploits of the Kings my Predecessors, in whose memory posterity has
not given those Praises and Elogies of Honor as were due to them: I do believe
that your Holiness has set their example before my eyes, to the end that I
might imitate them in all my Actions, for in truth they have often exposed
their Estates and Lives for the exaltation of the holy Chair; and the courage
with which they have assaulted the enemies of the Cross of Jesus Christ, has
not been less than the thought and care which I have, to the end that the peace
and intelligence which has hitherto been wanting in Christendom might be bound
with a true and strong concord. For as the common enemy of the peace, watches
always to put hatred and dissension amongst Christian Princes; so I believe
that the glory of God requires that we should endeavor to unite them; and I do
not esteem it a greater honor to be descended from so great Princes, than to
imitate them in the zeal of their piety. In which it helps me very much to have
known the mind and will of our thrice honored Lord and Father, and the holy
intentions of his Catholic Majesty, to give a happy concurrence to so
laudable a design: for it grieves him extremely to see the great evils that
grow from the division of Christian Princes, which the wisdom of your Holiness
foresaw, when it judged the marriage which you pleased to design, between the
Infanta of Spain and my self, to be necessary to procure so great a good; for
it is very certain that I shall never be so extremely affectionate to any thing
in the world, as to endeavor Alliance with a Prince who has the same
apprehension of the true Religion with my self: Therefore I entreat your
Holiness to believe, that I have been always very far from encouraging, or to
be a partizan of any Faction, against the Catholic, Apostolic Roman
Religion: but on the contrary, I have sought all occasions to take away the
suspicion that might rest upon me, and that I will employ my self for the time
to come, to have but one Religion and one Faith, seeing we all believe in one
Jesus Christ, having resolved in my self to spare nothing that I have in the
world, and to suffer all manner of discommodities, even to the hazzarding of my
estate and life, for a thing so pleasing unto God. It rests only that I thank
your Holiness for the permission you have been pleased to afford me, and I pray
God to give you a blessed health, and his glory after so much pains which your
Holiness takes in his Church.

Signed, Charles Stuart.


In his Journey to Spain he passed through Paris, where by the benefit of false
hair he attained to a sight of that incomparable Lady Henretta Maria, Daughter
to that Martial King of France, Henry the Fourth, whom afterward he received
into his Bed. Which Marriage, (concluded on by King James) was with great
solemnity commenced at Westminster, June 18. 1625. And in the first year of his
Reign he assembled a Parliament, where speedy supplies were desired, for the
setting forth a Fleet against the Spaniard, (friendship growing stale betwixt
these two Kings, by reason of the breach of Marriage, and the detention of the
Palatinate.) But the King was not so quick but the Parliament were as slow; for
notwithstanding the streams of King James his bounty had so drained the
Exchequer, that he left his Son only an empty Purse to encounter with a full
bagg'd Monarch, yet could not the Parliament be persuaded to come off roundly
with their Subsidies; some were very prompt to give without delay, others would
give but in convenient time, not then; but the most part agreed not to give,
and to make an humble Remonstrance declaring the causes wherefore.

Most of the Voters of this Remonstrance flew high against the Duke; some would
divest him of his Offices, the Admirality especially; others of his Revenue, by
resuming what he possessed of the Crown Demesnes; others demanded an account of
what Public moneys he had been entrusted with. This being signified to the
King, occasioned this Speech of his Majesty.

His Majesty's Speech at the same time concerning the Duke of Buckingham and
Cook.
I must withal put you in mind of times past; you may remember my Father moved
by your Council, and won by your persuasions, brake the Treaties; in these
persuasions I was your instrument toward him, and I was glad to be
instrumental in any thing which might please the whole body of the Realm: Nor
was there any then in greater favor with you then this man, whom you now so
traduce. And now when you find me so sure entangled in War, as I have no
honorable and safe retreat, you make my necessity your privilege, and set
what rate you please upon your Supplies; a practice not very obliging toward
Kings. Mr. Cook told you, It was better to dye by a Foreign Enemy then be
destroyed at home. Indeed I think it is more honorable for a King to be
invaded, and almost destroyed by a Foreign Enemy then to be despised at home.

The King expecting no conclusion from those for his assistance, who were so
divided in their opinions, soon dissolved the Parliament.

Yet notwithstanding the backwardness of the Parliament, the King so forwarded
the business, that in the beginning of October a Navy way was sent to sea,
under the Command of Vicount Whimbleton, as also some ships of the
Netherlanders, with whom the King had entered an Offensive and Defensive
League, against the King of Spain, and Emperor of Germany: these landing at
Cades, had the Fort of Puntal surrendered unto them, and in it fifteen barrels
of powder and eight Pieces of Ordnance, with store of Wine; whereof the
Soldiers drank so immoderately, (notwithstanding more sober commands to the
contrary) that had the Spaniard known his advantge, he might have made a
lamentable butchery amongst them. The Admiral seeing this disorder of the
Soldiers, thought it bootless to stay any longer on Land; and thereupon put to
Sea again, intending to stay twenty days in expectation of the Plate Fleet,
then in return from the West Indies; but the Plague of Pestilence so raging
amongst them, that every day hundreds were thrown overboard; he was forced to
make all the speed he could back into England: yet was not his haste such, but
that the News of his ill success was there before him. So true is that of the
Poet.

Ill News has wings, it very fast does go,
Comfort's a Cripple, and comes always slow.
February the second next ensuing was the King crowned, and four days after a
Parliament assembled; the Spring approaching, (a time fit for Martial
employments) supplies were desired, to which the Commons by way of Remonstrance
replied, That if addition may be made of other things importing his service,
then in consultation amongst them, they were resolved so to supply him, as
might evidence the truth of their intentions; might make him safe at home, and
formidable abroad. And now again fall they on a vigorous proceeding against the
Duke of Buckingham, accusing him with thirteen Articles of High Treason, the
Prologue whereof we have declared in his Life; to which the Duke returned so
modest and humble an answer, that it abated the edge of some of their
Indignations against him; yet were they resolved to give a reply to his answer,
but whiles they were intentive upon it, the King sent them a Letter, demanding
without further delay the speedy producing of their Bill of Subsidy to be
passed: which accordingly they did, but first drew up a Declaration of the same
make and mind with their former impeachment; which so incensed his Majesty, as
on the very next day, being June 15. he dissolved the Assembly.

Presently after the dissolution of the Parliament, the King being informed of
several misdemeanors committed by the Queens Servants, commanded them all to
leave the Land, and depart into France; the French King herewith incensed, sent
Mounsieur Bossompier, extraordinary Ambassador into England, to demand their
restitution to their former places. But returning without a satisfactory
answer, Lewis resolves upon open hostility, and seizes upon the English ships
at Bordeaux. This indignity King Charles stomacht with such vehemence of
spirit, that he resolves the sword should end the controversy; to which
purpose he published a Manifest, as follows.

A Manifest of the Reasons which moved his Majesty to take up Arms against the
French, published by the Duke of Buckingham in the Isle of The, July 21. 1627.
What part the Kings of Great Britain have always taken in the affairs of the
Reformed Churches of this Kingdom, and with what care and zeal they have
labored for the good of them, is manifest to all, and the examples thereof are
as ordinary as the occasions have been. His now Majesty of Great Britain comes
nothing short of his Predecessors therein, if his good and laudable designs
for their good had not been perverted to their ruin, by those who had most
interest for their due accomplishment. What advantages has he refused? What
parties has he not sought unto? that by his Alliance with France he might work
more profitably and powerfully the restitution of those Churches to their
ancient liberty and splendor? And what could be less hoped for by so strict an
Alliance, and from so many reiteratad promises by the mouth of a great Prince,
but effects truly Royal, and sorting with his greatness? But failings have been
such, that his Majesty by so many promises, and so straight an obligation of
friendship has not only been disappointed of means to obtain liberty and
surety for the said Churches, and to restore peace to France by the
reconciliation of those, whose breath utters nothing else but all manner of
obedience to their King, under the liberty of their Edicts: that contrariwise
they have prevailed by the interest which he had in those of the Religion to
deceive them, and by this means not only to untye him from them, but also to
make him, if not odious unto them, at least suspected in perverting the means,
which he had ordained for their good, to a quite contrary end; witness the
English Ships designed for the extirpation of them of the Religion, but to the
contrary express promise which was made, that they should not be used against
them in the last Sea Fight. What then may be expected from so puissant a Prince
as his Majesty, so openly eluded, but a through feeling equal and
proportionable to the injuries received.

But his patience has gone beyond policy, and as long as he had hopes that he
could benefit the Churches by any other means, he had no recourse by way of
Arms: so far that having been made an instrument and worker of the last Peace,
upon conditions disadvantageous enough, and which would not have been accepted
without his Majesty's intervention, who interposed his credit and interest in
the Churches to receive them, even with threatenings, to the end to shelter the
honor of the most Christian King; under assurance of his part, not only for
the accomplishment, but also for the bettering of the said condition, for which
he stands caution to the Churches.

But what has been the issue of all this but only an abuse of his goodness?
And that which his Majesty thought a sovereign remedy for all their sores, has
it not brought almost the last blow to the ruin of the Churches? It wanted but
a little by continuing the Fort before Rochel, the demolishment whereof was
promised by the violence of the Soldiers and Garrisons of the said Forts and
Isles, as well upon the inhabitants of the said Town as upon strangers; in lieu
whereas they should have retired, they have been daily augmented, and other
Forts built; as also by the stay of the Commissioners in the said Town beyond
the time agreed on, to the end to make broils, and by means of the division
which they made to slide amongst the Inhabitants to open the gates to the
neighboring Troops, and by other withstandings and instructions of peace, I
say a little failed, that the said Town, and in it all the Churches had not
drawn their last breath. And in the mean time, while his Majesty has yet
continued, and not opposed so many injuries, so many faith-breakings, but by
complaint of Treaty, until he had received certain advice, confirmed by
intercepted Letters, of the great preparation the most Christian King made to
pour upon Rochel; and then what could his Majesty of Great Britain do, but to
vindicate his honor by a quick arming against those, who had made him a
complice of their deceits? And to give testimony of his integrity and zeal
which he has always had for the reestablishing of the Churches, an
establishment which shall be dear and precious to him above any other thing.

This is the sole end of his arming at this time, and not any particular
interest; yet whosoever would doubt thereof, let him consider the circumstance
of times, and disposition of affairs as they stand now with his Majesty. For,
who will believe that he can have any design upon France, or to have projected
conquests here in a time so disadvantageous, having now for his enemy one of
the most puissant Kings of the world? and if he had such a design, surely he
would have sent greater Forces, than those now sent upon this action, whereof
if the number were known, they would be Judged but Auxiliaries only; and that
their aim is no other, but for the good of the Churches, which for many
important reasons and considerations, he finds himself obliged before God and
man to protect and succor.

But if it be alleged that his Majesty has been moved to take up Arms for
other respects, as the detention and seizure of the Ships and Goods of his
Subjects at Bordeaux, and other places of this Kingdom, to the breach and
manifest contravention of the peace betwixt the two Crowns which in this point
tend expressly to the irreparable prejudice, yea, to the total ruin of
Commerce; in the rupture whereof, the poor people of this Realm, being not able
to vent their Merchandises, groans not only under the burden of so many Taxes
and Impositions, but for the very necessity of life it self; that the
apprehensions his Majesty has of the powerful increase of the most Christian
King by Sea, has moved him to arm for preventing the growth thereof: And
lastly, that being hopeless of any accommodation of things, he has been
constrained to put himself in arms. The answer to all this is, that whosoever
shall search the Arrests, Prizes, and Seisures which have been made on both
sides, he shall find his Majesty and his Subjects have hitherto profited by
this breach, and that it turned to their advantage.

In the second place he is so far off from being jealous of the pretended power
of the French by Sea, and that he should have reason to hinder it, that there
needs no more than for him to grant, when he thinks it fit, Letters of Mart to
his Subjects, and so these vain and feeble Forces at Sea might be dissipated
without the employent of any Fleet Royal. Finally, that there has been a
necessity to arm thus, because there is no hope of accommodation otherwise, the
contrary will be most manifest to him who will consider the researches which
have been made at several times, as well by their own Ministers, as by the
Ministers of other Princes to his Majesty, to treat of accommodating things at
their instigation. It appears by all this that his Majesty has not been forced
to arm for any particular interest, but only for defense of the Churches, for
the security and freedom whereof he stood responsible; yet there are some that
dare amuse the world, that his Majesty has a particular design in it, and that
he uses Religion for a pretext to gain a party, by means whereof, and by which
conjunction he hopes to push on his purposes to the end at which they aimed No,
no, our Religion teaches us otherwise, his Majesty's piety (wherein he gives
place to no man living) will never permit him. His design is the establishment
of the Churches, his interest is their good, and his aim their contentment,
that being done, these Drums beating, those Ensigns displayed shall be folded
up again; And all this noise of War shall be buried in night and silence, which
would never have been but for their cause.

The King having raised good sums of money by loan and otherwise, sets forth
a Fleet under the Dukes command, for the relief of Rochel; but the Duke
returning home with ill success, being discomfitted at the Isle of The, the
King of France reinforceth his Siege: whereupon the Rochellers sue once again
to King Charles for supplies; who being necessitated for money, assembleth a
Parliament, March 17. 1627. who readily and cheerfully gave him five Subsidies:
whereupon the King granted them the Petition of Right. That gallant Standard of
Common Liberty, deserving to be recorded to all posterity; the substance
whereof reduced to four heads, take as follows.

1. They do pray your most excellent Majesty, that no man hereafter be
compelled to make or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or such like
charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament; and that none be called to
make answer, or to take such oath, or to give attendance, or be confined or
otherwise molested, or disquieted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof.
2. And that no freeman be taken, and imprisoned, or be disseised of his
freehold or liberty, or his free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, but by
the lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. 3. And that your
Majesty would be pleased to remove the Soldiers and Mariners now billetted in
diverse Counties, and that your people may not be so burdened in time to come,
4. That the late Commissions, for proceeding by Marshal Law, may be revoked and
annulled, and that hereafter no Commission of like nature may issue forth to
any person or persons whatsoever to be executed, lest by color of them any of
your Majesty's Subjects be destroyed, and put to death contrary to Law, and the
Franchises of the Land.
All which they most humbly pray of your most excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, that all awards, doings, or
proceedings to the prejudice of your People, shall not be drawn hereafter into
consequence and example.

Never (writes a late Author of the History of the Reign of King Charles) did
arbritary power, since Monarcy first founded, so submittere faces, so vail its
Scepter; never did the Prerogative descend so much from perch to popular lure,
as by this concession; a concession able to give satisfaction ever so
supererogation, for what was amiss in all the Kings bypast government.

Much hoped it was that this Parliament would have had a happy conclusion, but
what Gregory Nazienzen complained of Councels, That he never saw any one end
well; King Charles might with as much verity have pronounced (as to his
content) of Parliaments, not any one he summoned, having had any termination
other then disgustful to him; for no sooner was the Petition of Right granted,
but the Parliament resolved upon a large Remonstrance to the King, wherein they
ripped up many grievances of the Kingdom, accusing the Duke of Buckingham his
excessive power, and abuse of that power, the principal cause of all those
evils and dangers: to which the King returned a smart answer, wherewith the
Commons being displeased, fell down right upon another Remonstrance against
Tonnage and Poundage. Whereupon the King (unwilling to hear of any more
Remonstrances of that nature) prorogued the Parliament unto October 20.

During this Session, the Earl of Denbigh with fifty Sail of Ships attempted
the relief of Rochel; but prevailing nothing, a third Fleet was prepared ready,
whereof the Duke of Buckingham was to have the Command: but being ready to
embarque, he was stabbed with a knife by Felton a discontented person; of
which, as also of his unfortunate proceedings at the Isle of The, I refer my
Reader to his foregoing Life.

The Duke being dead, the charge of the Fleet was committed to the Earl of
Lindsey, a Gentleman of a gallant resolution; but before his coming, the Town
was so blocked up by Land, and barred up by Sea, that it was almost
unapproachable: yet many gallant attempts were made by the Earl, bringing up
his Ships to the very mouth of the Bar; but being ready to enter the pass, the
wind whisked about into an opposite Point, which drove them dangerously foul
one upon another: whereupon the Rochellers hopeless of relief, opened their
Gates, submitting themselves to the Kings mercy, which was granted them. The
Famine and War having made such havoc amongst them, that of twenty two
thousand souls, but four thousand were left.

October the 20. being come, the Parliament was prorogued to January the 20.
following; at which time they met, who begun where they last left with Tonnage
and Poundage; for complaints came in thick and threefold against the Customers
for taking and distraining Merchants goods. Great stickling was betwixt the
King and Parliament concerning this business, the King claiming it as a
Prerogative belonging to the Crown, they denying it as an infringement of the
Petition of Right. After much debating and high words on both sides, the
dissolution of the Parliament put a period to the contest.

Not long after, by mediation of the Seignory of Venice, a Peace was concluded
between France and England; Spain also hampred with wars and want of money,
made overtures of a Peace, which at last was concluded, and published with more
then ordinary Solemnity.

These Wars with France and Spain had so emptied the Exchequer, that the King
was forced to make use of his Prerogative for a supply, which was by summoning
all persons who had Estates of forty pounds per annum to receive the Order of
Knighthood; formerly practiced by several Kings, though now a long disuse had
made it a novelty. Many of the Country Hobs, who had gotten an estate liable
to a Fine, took it first as a jest, and thereupon made no appearance, but
their purses afterward paid for it in good earnest. This project alone
bringing in to the Exchequer no less then a hundred thousand pound.

May the 29. 1630. the Queen was delivered of a Son, who was baptized by the
name of Charles, having two years before miscarried of a son of the same name,
who lived not above an hour, which occasioned Randolphs Muse thus to express
her self.

Thy first birth Mary was unto a Tomb,
And sad Lucina did not aid thy womb:
To Heaven thou then were fruitful, now to earth;
Thou can give Saints, as well as Kings, a birth.
It was now seven years and better, since Charles was crowned King of England;
Scotland (his Native Country) had a Crown also to bestow upon him; and the
King adjudged it worth the going for; for though (says one) it conferreth no
one dram of solid and real grandeur to the Throne, yet ceremoniated as it is
with such formalities, it represents it self a serious vanity. There attended
him this journey, the Earls of Northumberland, Arundel, Pembroke, Southampton,
Salisbury, Carlisle, Holland, Monmouth, and New Castle; the Bishop of London,
Lord Treasurer, Secretary Cook, Vice Chamberlain, with many other Gentlemen of
quality. June 18. 1633. he was crowned with great Solemnity at Edinburgh; and
having visited Ealkland, Sterling, and some other eminent places, he returned
back again into England. Thus he was crowned by a Nation that afterward
snatched it from his Royal Temples.

The King at his return found his Exchequer near empty, whereupon he consults
with his Attorney Noy for a way how to supply it; he searching old Records,
(being a man very studious that way) finds an ancient precedent of raising a
Tax for setting forth a Navy in case of danger; to which purpose a Writ was
issued out to the seveaal Counties in England, for the raising of money
sufficient for the setting forth of forty seven ships; at which the Commons
grumbled, as an illegal Tax, contrary unto the Petition of Right. The King for
his better satisfaction demands the opinion of the Judges, who all of them
under their hands confirmed the Legality thereof; yet were not the Commons so
satisfied therewith, but that some of them stood it out even unto imprisonment.
Much debate was afterward about it, and the King got not so much money, as ill
will of the Subjects thereby. At this time the King received a Letter from
Sidan King of Morocco; the Contents follow.

A Letter from Sidan King of Morocco, to Charles King of ENGLAND.
When these our Letters shall be so happy as to come to your Majesty's sight, I
wish the Spirit of the righteous God may so direct your mind, that you may
joyfully embrace the Message I send; presenting to you the means of exalting
the Majesty of God, and your own reward amongst men. The Regal Power allotted
to us makes us common servants to our Creator; then of those people whom we
govern: so that observing the duties which we owe to God, we deliver blessings
to the world; in providing for the public good of our State, we magnify the
Honor of God like the Celestial Bodies, which though they have much
veneration, yet serve only to the benefit of the world. It is the excellency
of our Office to be Instruments, whereby happiness is delivered to the Nations.
Pardon me Sir, This is not to instruct, (for I know I speak to one of a more
clear and quick sight then my self) but I speak this, because it has pleased
God to give me a happy victory over some part of those rebellious Pirates that
have so long molested the peaceable trade of Europe, and has presented further
occasion to rout out the generation of those who have been so pernicious to the
good of our Nations. I mean, since it has pleased God to be so auspicious to
our beginnings in the Conquest of Salla, that we might join and proceed in hope
of like success in the War against Tunis, Algier, and other places, (Dens, and
Receptacles for the inhumane villainies of those who abhor Rule and Government.)
Herein whilst we interrupt the corruption of malignant spirits of the world,
we shall glorify the great God, and perform a Duty that will shine as glorious
as the Sun and Moon, which all the earth may see and reverence: a work that
shall ascend as sweet as the perfume of the most precious odours in the
Nostrils of the Lord; a work grateful and happy to men; a work whose memory
shall be reverenced so long as there shall be any that delight to hear the
Actions of Heroic and magnanimous spirits, that shall last as long as there be
any remaining among men, that love and honor the piety and virtue of noble
minds. This action I here willingly present to you, whose piety and virtues
equal the greatness of your power: that we who are servants to the great and
mighty God, may hand in hand triumph in the glory which this action presents
unto us: Now because the Islands which you govern have been ever famous, for
the unconquered strength of their shipping, I have sent this my trusty Servant
and Ambassador to know whether in your Princely wisdom you shall think fit to
assist me with such Forces by Sea, as shall be answerable to those I provide by
Land; which if you please to grant, I doubt not but the Lord of Hosts will
protect and assist those who fight in so glorious a cause. Nor ought you to
think this strange, that I who much reverence the peace and accord of Nations,
should exhort to a War. Your great Prophet CHRIST JESUS was the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, as well as the Lord and Giver of peace: which may signify unto
you, that he who is a Lover and Maintainer of peace, must always appear with
the terror of the Sword, and wading through Seas of Blood, must arrive to
Tranquillity. This made James your Father of glorious memory so happily
renowned admongst all Nations. It was the noble fame of your Princely virtues
which resounds to the utmost corners of the earth, that persuaded me to invite
you to partake of that blessing wherein I boast my self most happy. I wish God
may heap the riches of his blessings on you, increase your happiness with your
days, and hereafter perpetuate the greatness of your name to all Ages.

The occasion of writing this Letter was as follows; a rabble of Pirates rest
themselves in Salla, a Port Town of the Realm of Fess, and belonging to the
King of Morocca, creating thence great mischief to him, both by Sea and Land;
and not to them only, but to all the Merchants of other Countries, whose
business led them toward the Seas. Unable to suppress them for want of
shipping, he craved aid of King Charles of England, by whose assistance he
became Master of the Port, destroyed the Pirates, and sent three hundred
Christian Captives for a present to his sacred Majesty, An. 1634. Nor staid he
here, but aiming at the general good of Trade and mankind, he sent this Letter
to his Majesty by one of the chief Eunuchs of his Chamber, handsomely attended
in the Port and quality of an Ambassador, desiring the like aid against those
of Tunis and Algiers, who did as much infest the Mediterranean, as the Pirates
of Salla did the Ocean. In order whereunto his Majesty began immediately to
strengthen and increase his Royal Navy; and to that end required the wonted
naval Aid (lately best known by the name of Ship Money) from all his Subjects,
and possible enough might have pursued this design for suppressing the Pirates
of Algiers and Tunis, if he had not been unhappily hindered by the insurrection
of the Scots, and those continued troubles which ensued upon it.


I have the rather inserted this Letter, considering how seriously our learned
Doctor Heilin in his Cosmography reflected on it, so as to blame Mr. Le-strange
for omission of it; the truth is, the Letter carries some weight with it, and
savours of more piety then could be expected from a Mohammedan. His Ambassador
was entertained with great honor, with a magnificent Masque, and a costly
Antic Show through the Streets, at the vast expenses of the Inns of Court
Gentlemen.

To proceed, far greater troubles arose in Scotland, concerning the Book of
Common Prayer. The King at his last being there, observing that God Almighty
was very negligently, and as he thought undecently worshipped, took the
Reformation thereof into his Princely care: to which end he gave directions to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, and to diverse other Bishops,
to Revise, Correct, Alter, and Change, as they pleased, the Liturgy compiled in
his Fathers time; which accordingly they did: and having showed it to the King,
he approved thereof, in regard that coming nearer to the first Liturgy of King
Edward the Sixth, in the Administration of the Lords Supper, it might be a
means to gain the Papists to the Church, who liked far better of the first,
then second Liturgy. But the Scotch, a scrupulous Nation in their opinion, who
(as one says of them) are more afraid of the name of yielding, then
resisting, and would sooner offend against Religion, then the Ceremonies of it,
did publicly refuse it. From hence proceeded Tragedies, Tumults, War, and
Invasion; for upon the first reading thereof, the people were so violent
against it, that the Dean and Bishop of Edinburgh hardly escaped with life; nor
were they only the rascal multitude that thus opposed it, but many of the
Noblemen, Barons, and Gentlemen; amongst whom the chief were the Earl of Hume,
and the Lord Lindsey. To appease these disorders, the King sent down the
Marquess Hamilton, in the quality of an high Commissioner, impowring him with a
Commission to use the utmost of his interest and power for the settling of
peace: but whether (as some write) he dealt deceitfully, in aspiring to the
Crown himself, or no, I judge uncertain; but most certain it is, that after his
coming the differences increased far greater then before; and no question but
it had become far better for the King, had this Marquess been either a more
close friend, or an opener enemy.

The King being at home in no good condition, used all means he could to
pacify his enemies abroad, not only winking at many of the foul disorders of
the Scots, but also yielded unto them in their desires for many things, which
nevertheless allayed not their spirits, but rather encouraged them to proceed
as they had begun. For as Cleaveland has it.

Nor Gold, nor Acts of Grace, it is steel must tame
The stubborn Scot, a Prince that would reclaim,
Rebels by yielding, does like him, (or worse)
Who saddled his own back to save his horse.
Hamilton being returned into England, the Scots began might and main to levy
Soldiers, to impose Taxes, to raise Fortifications, to block up some, and
seize others of the Kings Castles, and to prepare for War. The King not to be
behind hand with the Scots (it being no good policy in War to strain courtesy
who should begin first) raised a considerable power, to the maintenance whereof
many of the Nobility contributed largely, especially the Bishops; it being for
the preservation of their own Hierarchy. March 27. the Army began to march, the
Earl of Arundel commanding in Chief: but all the preparation both of one side
and the other proved only an interview of two Armies, nothing being acted
considerable in the way of engagement; for after a few days attendance upon
each other, a Pacification was concluded upon, distributed into these Articles.

On the Kings Part.
1. His Majesty to confirm what his Commissioner promised in his name. 2. That
a general Assembly be indicted, to be kept at Edinburgh, August 6. 3. That
command be given for a Parliament to be holden at Edinburgh, August the 20. 4.
That he recall all his Forces by Land or Sea, and restore all Ships and Goods
arrested and detained, since the pretended Assembly at Glasgow, upon the
Covenanters disarming, and disbanding of their Forces, dissolving their Tables,
and restoring to the King all his Castles, Forts, and Ammunition, and releasing
all the Persons, Lands, and Goods, then under restraint, or detained since the
pretended Assembly of Glasgow. This his Majesty to do by Declaration.
On the Scots Part.
1. The Forces of Scotland to be disbanded within eight and forty hours after
publication of the Kings Declaration. 2. They to render up after the said
publication, all Castles, Forts, Ammunition of all sorts, so soon as the King
shall send to receive them. 3. They to hold no meetings; treatings, nor
consultations, but such as are warranted by act of Parliament. 4. They to
desist from all fortifications, and those to be remitted to the Kings pleasure.
5. They to restore to all the Kings Subjects, their Liberties, Lands, Houses,
Goods, and Means, taken or detained from them, since the first of February
last.
This Pacification being solemnly ratified on both sides, the King well hoped a
general peace would ensue, but what ever the Scots pretended, the sequel showed
they intended nothing less; for they still kept their Officers in constant Pay,
they did not slight their fortification at Leith, they still continued their
Meetings and Consultations, they still disquieted, molested, and frighted all
of different inclinations; and which was worst of all, they dispersed a
scandalous Libel, entitled, Some conditions of his Majesty's Treaty with his
Subjects of Scotland, before the English Nobility, are set down here for
remembrance. Which Book tending to the defamation of his Majesty, and disavowed
by the Commissioners then present at the Treaty, was by the command of the
Council, burnt by the common Hangman.

The King (who intended to stay till the General Assembly was met) seeing
matters remain in this doubtful posture, returned into England, leaving the
Earl of Traquair his Commissioner. August the 6 the Assembly met at Edinburgh,
wherein Episcopacy, the five Articles of Perth, the High Commission, the
Liturgy, and Book of Canons, were abolished the Earl of Traquiar assenting
thereunto.

The Assembly being ended, the Parliament began; who instead of reforming
Abuses, fell upon new moddelling the Government, forming an Act Recissory,
whereby former Acts concerning the Judicatory of the Exchequer, concerning
Proxies, and concerning confirmation of Ward Lands, should be nulled. Which
being signified to the King, he by his Commissioner the Earl of Traquair,
prorogued the Parliament until the 2. of June next.

These actings of the Scots warping altogether toward War, were much forwarded
by an accident. November 19. it happened a great part of the walls of the
Castle of Edinburgh, with the Cannons mounted, fell to the ground; this being
the Anniversary night of the Kings Birthday, was construed in the Grammar of
Superstition, an ominous presage of the ruin of the Kings design. The King
appointed the Lord Estrich, Colonel Ruthen, and the Governor of the Castle, to
take order for the re-edification of what was lapsed; but the Scots would not
suffer any materials to be carried in for reparation. This Indignity the King
concludes intolerable, and thereupon resolves to relieve himself by force:
to this end a private Juncto is selected for the close carrying on of the
design, wherein it was agreed his Majesty should call a Parliament, to assemble
April the 13. next. The King approved well of their Council, but withal said,
My Lords, the Parliament cannot suddenly convene, and the subsidies they grant
will be so long in levying, as in the interim I may be ruined; therefore some
speedy course must be thought upon for supplies.

The Lords willing to forward the business, told him they would engage their
own credits; and the Lord Deputy of Ireland giving the onset, subscribed for
twenty thousand pound; the other Lords writing after his Copy, subscribed
conformable to their Estates; the Judges also contributed largely, as also the
Recusants, who are ever sure to undergo the lash, yielded according to their
abilities. From which Loyalty of theirs to his Majesty, the more envious and
schismatical sort of people gave out, that the King was in his heart a Papist:
I have thought it my duty to insert in Latin and in English his Majesty's
Declaration to all Foreign Churches concerning his sincerity in the true
Protestant Religion.

Declaratio serenissimi potentissimique Principis Caroli, magnae Britanniae
Regis ultramarinis Protestantium Ecclesiis transmissa.
Carolus singulari Omnipotentis Dei providentia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and
Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, etc.
universis and singulis qui praesens hos Scriptum seu Protestationem
inspexerint, potissimum reformatae Religionis cultoribus cujuscunque sint
gentis, gradus aut conditionis, salutem.
Cum ad aures nostras non ita pridem fama pervenerit sixistros quosdam Rumores
Literasque politica vel perniciosa potius quorundam industria sparsas esse, and
nonnullis Protestantium Ecclesiis in exteris partibus emissas, nobis esse
animum and consilium ab illa Orthodexi Religione, quam ab incunabilis
embibimus, and ad hoc usque momentum per integrum vitae nostrae curriculum
amplexi sumus, recedendi, and Papismum in haec Regnaiterum introducendi, quae
conjectura seu nefanda potius calumnia nullo prorsus nixa vel imaginabili
fundamento horrendos hosce tumultus, and rabiem plusquam belluinam in Anglia
suscitavit sub larva cujusdam (Chymericae) Reformationis, Regimini Legibusque
hujus Domini non solum incongruae sed incompatibilis: Volumus ut toti
Christiano Orbi innotescat, ne minimam quidem animum nostrum invasisse
cogitatiunculam hoc aggrediendi, aut transversum unguem ab illa Religione
discedendi, quam cum Corona Sceptroque hujus Regni solenni and sacramentali
juramento tenemur profiteri protegere and propugnare. Nec tantum constantissima
nostra praxis and quotidiana in exercitiis praefatae Religionis praesentia cum
crebris in facie nostrorum Agminum asseverationibus publicisque Procerum hujus
Regni testimoniis, and sedula in Regiam nostram sobolem educando
circumspectione (omissis plurimis aliis argumentis) luculentissime hoc
demonstrat, sed etiam foelicissimum illud matrimonium, quod inter nostram
primogenitam et illustrissimum Principem Auriacum sponte contraximus, idem
fortissime attestatur: quo nuptiali foedere insuper constat nobis non esse
propositum illam profiteri solummodo sed expandere and corroborare quantum in
nobis situm est.

Hanc Sacrosanctam Anglicanae Christi Ecclesiae Religionem tot Theologorum
Convocationibus sancitam, tot Comitiorum Edictis confirmatam, tot Regies
Diplomatibus stabilitam, una cum Regimine Ecclesiastico and Liturgia ei annexa
(quam Litergiam Regimenque celebriores Protestantium Authoxes, tam Germani quam
Galli, tam Dani quam Helvetici, tam Batavi quam Bohemi multis Elogiis (nec sine
quadam invidia) in suis publicis scriptis comprobant and applaudunt, ut in
transactionibus Dordrechtanae Synodi, cui nonnulli nostrorum Praesulum (quorum
dignitati debita praestita fuerit Reverentia) interfuerunt, apparet.) Istam,
inquimus, Religionem quam Regius noster Pater (beatissimae memoriae) in illa
celeberrima fidei suae Confessione omnibus Christianis Principibus (ut and haec
praesens nostra protestatio) exhibita public asserit: Istam, istam Religionem
solenniter protestamur, nos integram, sartam tectam, and invoilabilem
conservaturos, and pro virili nostro (Divino adjuvante Numine) usque ad
extremum vitae nostrae periodum protecturos, and omnibus nostris Ecclesiasticis
pro muneris nostri and supradicti sacrosancti Juramenti ratione doceri and
praedicari curaturos. Quapropter injungimus and in mandatis damus omnibus
Ministris nostris in exteris partibus, tam Legatis, quam Residentibus,
Agentibusque and Nunciis, reliquisque nostris subditis ubicunque Orbis
Christiani terrarum, aut curiositatis, aut commercii gratia degentibus hanc
solennem and synceram nostram protestationem, quandocunque sese obtulerit loci,
and temperis opportunitas, communicare, asserere, asseverare.

Datum in Academia and Civitate nostra Oxon. pridie Idus Maii 1644.
The same in English.
Charles by the Providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To all those who profess the true Reformed Protestant Religion, of what
Nation, Degree, and Condition soever they be, to whom this present Declaration
shall come, Greeting:
Whereas we are given to understand, that many false rumors and scandalous
Letters are spread up and down amongst the Reformed Churches in Foreign parts,
by the politic, or rather the pernicious industry of some ill-affected
persons; that we have an inclination to recede from that Orthodox Religion,
which we were born, baptized, and bred in, and which we have firmly professed
and practiced through the whole course of our life to this moment: and that we
intend to give way to the Introduction, and public exercise of Popery again in
our Dominions; Which conjecture or rather most detestable calumny, being
grounded upon no imaginable foundation, has raised these horrid Tumults, and
more then barbarous Wars throughout this flourishing Island, under pretext of a
kind of Reformation, which would not prove only incongruous, but incompatible
with the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom. We desire that the
whole Christian World should take notice and rest assured, that we never
entertained in our imagination the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to
depart a jot from that holy Religion, which when we received the Crown and
Scepter of this Kingdom, we took a most solemn Sacramental Oath to profess and
protect. Nor does our most constant practice and daily visible presence in the
exercise of this sole Religion, with so many Asseverations in the head of our
Armies, and the public Attestation of our Barons, with the circumspection used
in the education of our Royal Offspring, besides diverse other undeniable
Arguments only demonstrate this; but also that happy Alliance of Marriage we
contracted betwixt our eldest Daughter and the Illustrious Prince of Orange,
most clearly confirms the reality of our Intentions herein: by which Nuptial
engagement it appears further, that our endeavors are not only to make a bare
profession thereof in our own Dominions, but to enlarge and corroborate it
abroad, as much as lies in our power. This most holy Religion of the Church of
England ordained by so many Convocations of Learned Divines, confirmed by so
many Acts of Parliament, and strengthened by so many Royal Proclamations,
together with the Ecclesiastic Discipline and Liturgy thereunto appertaining;
which Liturgy and Discipline, the most eminent of Protestant Authors, as well
Germans as French, as well Danes as Swedes and Switzers, as well Belgians as
Bohemians do with many Elogies (and not without a kind of envy) approve and
applaud in their public writings, particularly in the Transactions of the
Synod of Dort, wherein, besides other or our Divines (who afterward were
Prelates) one of our Bishops assisted, to whose Dignity all due Reverence and
Precedence was given. This Religion, we say, which our Royal Father of blessed
memory does publicly assert in that this famous Confession addressed (as we
also do this our Protestation) to all Christian Princes; This most holy
Religion, with the Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, we solemnly protest, that by
the help of Almighty God, we will endeavor to our utmost power and last period
of our life, to keep entire and inviolable; and will be careful according to
our duty to Heaven, and the tenor of the aforesaid most Sacred Oath at our
Coronation, that all our Ecclesiastics in their several degrees and
incumbencies, shall preach and practice the same. Wherefore we enjoin and
command all our Ministers of State beyond the Seas, as well Ambassadors as
Residents, Agents and Messengers; and we desire all the rest of our loving
Subjects that sojourn either for curiosity or commerce in any Foreign parts to
communicate, uphold, and assert this our solemn and sincere Protestation, when
opportunity of time and place shall be offered.

For the for ever silencing of such black-mouthed people, I have here set down
his Majesty's Speech and Protestation before his receiving the Holy Eucharist
at Christ Church in Oxon, 1643.

His Majesty being to receive the Sacrament from the hands of the Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, used these public expressions immediately before his
receiving the blessed Elements, he rose up from his knees, and beckning to the
Archbishop for a short forbearance, made this Protestation.

My Lord,
I espy here are many resolved Protestants who may declare to the world the
Resolution I now do make. I have to the utmost of my power prepared my soul to
become a worthy receiver, and may I so receive comfort by the Blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the establishment of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, as it stood in its beauty in the happy days of Queen Elizabeth,
without any connivance at Popery. I bless God that in the midst of these
public distractions I have still liberty to communicate; and may this
Sacrament be my damnation, if my Heart do not join with my Lips in this
Protestation.

But to proceed in our History; the King was not so busy in preparing against
the Scots, but they were as forward in providing for his resistance; those of
the Nobility and Gentry who stood firm for the King they imprisoned; they
invited and procured to their service many Commanders from Holland, and reared
works of Fortification in all places agreeable to their designs. In this state
stood the Affairs of both Kingdoms, when April 13. according to pre-appointment
the Parliament assembled, the Earl of Strafford being led into the upper House
by two Noble men, to give them account of his proceedings in Ireland, having
there obtained the grant of four Subsidies for the maintenance of ten thousand
Foot, and fifteen hundred Horse: implicitly hinting agreeable to what Scheme
England should proportion their supplies. The King also to forward the
business, sent a message to the Lower House, representing to them the
intolerable Indignities and Injuries wherewith the Scots had treated him; and
withal declared to them, that if they would assist him with supplies suitable
to the exigency of his sad occasion, he would for ever quit his claim of
Ship Money; and into the bargain give them full content in all their just
demands. This Message delivered by Secretary Vane, he (whether wilfully or
casually mistaking I leave undetermined) required twelve Subsidies, whereas it
was said his express order was only for six. This Proposition raised the House
of Commons to such animosity, as the King advising with his Juncto, their
Compliance was represented to him so desperate, as May the fifth he ordered the
Dissolution of the Parliament.

But though the Parliament were sullen, and would not give down their milk, the
Gentry and others contributed largely, especially the Clergy, who in their
Convocation granted a Benevolence of four shillings in the pound to be assest
upon all the Clergy for six years together toward this Expedition. With these
and other forementioned aids, a Royal Army was raised, whereof the Earl of
Northumberland was appointed Generalissimo, and the Earl of Strafford
Lieutenant General; but both Generals falling sick, the charge of the Army was
committed to the Lord Conway: who marching with the Army as far as Newburn upon
Tine, was encountered by the Scots, and worsted three hundred of the English
being slain and taken. Sir Jacob Astley, then Governor of New Castle, hearing
of this Defeat, deserted the same, as not tenable against so potent an Army;
which Town was taken into the Scots possession. The King (who had stayed
behind during the time the Queen was brought to bed of her third Son Henry)
advances after his Army, when at Northalerton he was certified of the Lord
Conway's discomfiture, and Sir Jacob Astley quitting New Castle; this being
accounted an unlucky omen, some of the Lords desirous of Peace, working upon
the occasion, presented to the King at York, this following Petition.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of your Majesty's
most loyal and most obedient Subjects, whose Names are underwritten, in behalf
of themselves and diverse others.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
The zeal of that duty and service which we owe to your Sacred Majesty, and our
earnest affection to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England, have
moved us in all humility to beseech your Royal Majesty to give us leave to
offer to your Princely Wisdom the apprehension which we and others your
faithful Subjects have conceived of the great distempers and dangers now
threatening the Church and State, and your Royal Person, and of the fittest
means by which they may be removed and prevented.

The evils and dangers whereof your Majesty may be pleased to take notice, are
these.

1. That your Majesty's sacred Person is exposed to hazard and danger in the
present Expedition against the Scottish Army; and by occasion of this War your
Majesty's Revenue is much wasted, your Subjects burdened with coat and conduct
of money, billiting of Soldiers, and other Military Charges, and diverse
Rapines and Disorders committed in several parts of this your Realm by the
Soldiers raised for that service, and your whole Kingdom become full of fears
and discontents.

2. The sundry Innovations in matters of Religion, the Oath and Cannons lately
imposed upon the Clergy, and other your Majesty's Subjects.

3. The great increase of Popery, and the employing of Popish Recusants, and
others ill-affected to the Religion by Laws established, in places of power and
trust, especially in commanding of Men and Arms, both in the Field, and sundry
Counties of this your Realm, whereas by Law they are not permitted to have any
Arms in their own houses.

4. The great mischiefs which may fall upon this Kingdom, if the intentions
which have been credibly reported of bringing in Irish and Foreign Forces
should take effect.

5. The urging of Ship Money, and prosecution of some Sheriffs in the
Star Chamber for not levying it.

6. The heavy charge upon Merchandise, to the discouragement of Trade, the
multitude of Monopolies, and other Patents, whereby the Commodities and
Manifactures of the Kingdom are much burdened, to the great and universal
grievance of your people.

7. The great grief of your Subjects, by long intermission of Parliaments, and
the late and former dissolution of such as have been called, without the happy
effects which otherwise they might have produced.

For remedy whereof, and prevention of the dangers that may arise to your Royal
Person, and to the whole State; they do in all humility and faithfulness
beseech your most excellent Majesty, that you would be pleased to summon a
Parliament within some convenient time, whereby the causes of these, and other
great Grievances which your people lie under, may be taken away, and the
Authors and Counselors of them may be brought to such legal trial, and
condign punishment, as the nature of their several offenses shall require. And
that the present War may be composed by your Majesty's wisdom without blood, in
such manner as may conduce to the honor and safety of your Majesty's person,
the comfort of your people, and the uniting of both your Realms against the
common enemy of the reformed Religion. And your Majesty's Petitioners shall
ever pray, etc.

Concluded the 28. of August 1640. Francis Bedford. Robert Essex. Mulgrave. Say
and Seal. Edward Howard. William Hartford. Warwick. Bullingbrooke. Mandevile.
Brook. Pagett.


This Petition being seconded by another from the Scots to the same effect, the
King the twenty fourth day of the same month assembled the Lords together at
York, where it was concluded, that a Parliament should be summoned to convene
November the third next ensuing; in the mean time a cessation of Arms was
concluded between both Nations, whereupon the King and Lords posted to London.

Tuesday November the third, according to pre-appointment the Parliament
assembled; no sooner were they set, but Petitions came thronging in from all
Counties of the Kingdom, craving redress of the late general exorbitancies both
in Church and State; many who were in prison were ordered to be set at liberty,
as Pryn, Bastwick, and Burton, and the Bishop of Lincoln; and many who were at
liberty were ordered to be sent to prison, as Sir William Beecher, the Earl of
Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, Secretary Windebank; and the Lord
Keeper Finch, who was forced to fly the Land; Ship Money was voted down, the
late Cannons damned, Peace is concluded with Scotland, and three hundred
thousand pound allowed them for reparations. This was summarily the first
actings of the Parliament, which gave much content to many people, especially
the Londoners; who to the number of 15000. Petition for the abolishing of
Episcopacy it self. Indeed some few of the Clergy at this time, as at all
others, were corrupt in their lives; many of them being vicious, even to
scandal; yea, many of those who pretended much purity in their conversations
were most covetous and deceitful in their dealings, besides their pride was
intolerable; insomuch, that a great one amongst them was heard to say, He
hoped to live to see the day, when a Minister should be as good a man as any
upstart Jack Gentleman in England. Well therefore might it it be said of the
Priests of our times, what Gildas surnamed the wise, wrote of the Priests of
his time. Sacerdotes habet Britannia, sed insipientes; quam plurimos,
Ministros, sed impudentes; clericos, sed raptores subdeles, etc. Great Britain
has Priests indeed, but silly ones; Ministers of Gods word very many, but
impudent; a Clergy, but given up to greedy rapine, etc. Yet let none mistake
me, I write not thus to persuade any to an ill opinion of the Ministry; for
though our Church had cause to grieve for the blemishes of many, yet might she
glory in the ornaments of more; so that Episcopacy received not at this time
the fatal blow, but was only mutilated in her former glory: the House of
Commons voting, that no Bishop shall have any vote in Parliament, nor any
Judicial power in the Star Chamber, nor bear any sway in Temporal Affairs, and
that no Cleargyman shall be in Commission of the Peace.

The Parliament having thus set bounds to the exorbitant power of the Clergy,
they next fell upon the Trial of the Deputy of Ireland; who as you heard not
long before was committed prisoner to the Tower: this man at first was a great
stickler against the Prerogative, until allured by Court preferment he turned
Royalist. Westminster Hall was the place assigned for his Trial; the Earl of
Arundel being Lord High Steward, and the Earl of Lindsey Lord High Constable;
the Articles charged against him being very many, are too long to recite. I
having more at large in their place inserted them in his Life. The sum of them
were for ruling Ireland and the North of England in an arbitrary way, against
the Laws, for retaining the Kings revenue without account, for increasing and
encouraging Popery, for maliciously striving to stir up and continue enmity
betwixt England and Scotland, and for laboring to subvert Parliaments, and
incense the King against them; yet notwithstanding this high charge, the Earl
by his answers so cleared himself, that the King told the Lords, he was not
satisfied in Conscience to Condemn him of high Treason, but acknowledged his
misdemeanors to be very great; at last wearied with the clamours of the
people, the Earl also by a letter desiring the same, he granted a Commission to
four Lords to Sign the Bill for his Execution; which Execution was accordingly
performed on Tower Hill, May 10. 1641.

Thus dyed this unhappy Earl, a sacrifice to the Scots revenge, cut off (as it
was thought) not so much for what he had done, as for fear of what he
afterward might do; a man of the rarest parts, and deepest judgment of any
English man of our late times.

The same day, fatal to the King, he Signed the Bill for the Deputy of Irelands
death, he also Signed the Bill for a trienial, or perpetual Parliament, which
should not be dissolved without consent of both Houses; some say Duke Hamilton
counseled him to it, others say it was the Queen, whoever it was, it was his
ruin: for the Parliament now fearless of a dissolution began to act in an
higher way then before, being fortified with a strong guard of Soldiers,
whereof the Earl of Essex was Captain: they without the Kings leave or
knowledge, appoint an extraordinary Assembly in the City, that should manage
all weighty and great occurrences; and to weaken his Majesty the more, or
rather to satisfy the insolence of the people, they cast twelve Bishops into
Prison, because they went about to maintain their privilege by the public
Charter. The King moved with this, accused five of the lower House, and one of
the upper House of high Treason; their names were, the Lord Viscount Mandevil,
Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, Sir Arthur Haslerig. Mr. Hollis, and Mr. Strowd. This
action of the Kings was by the Parliament adjudged a great breach of their
Privileges; certainly it much increased the differences between them, and left
scarce any possibility of reconcilement.

This small river of Discord being now grown a Sea of Dissension, the King and
Queen post to Hampton Court; yet before he went, that he might clearly
demonstrate his real intentions to compose all differences, he consented to the
Petition of the Parliament, to exclude the Bishops out of the House; an act
very prejudicial to himself; for by this means, the scale of Votes in the upper
House which often had turned to his advantage, did by this diminution incline
most commonly the other way.

Having staid about a month at Hampton Court, the Queen went into Holland, to
accompany her Daughter Mary, who was lately married to the young Prince of
Orange. The King, the Prince, the Palsgrave, the Duke of Richmond, and some
other of the Nobility went down into the North, intending to seize on the
Magazine at Hull; but the Parliament had before sent down one of their own
Members, Sir John Hotham, who from the Walls denied his Majesty entrance: the
King complains hereof to the Parliament, but they justify his Act; yet what
grains of affection toward his Majesty were wanting in Hull, were found
superabundant in the City of York; who with the Counties adjacent, declare
unanimously for his Majesty. Encouraged here with, August 22. 1642. he sets up
his Standard at Nottingham. The Parliament in the mean time raised a
considerable Army, whereof the Earl of Essex commanded in chief. And now were
the gates of Janus unlocked, and stern Mars released out of prison, the seldom
heard Drum rattled in every corner, and the scarce known Trumpet sounded in
every street; now Factions banded, Nicknames were invented, Oaths framed, and
amongst the rest the Covenant obtruded; against which his Majesty published this
following Proclamation.

His Majesty's Proclamation forbidding the tendering or taking of the late
Covenant: called, A Solemn League and Covenant for Reformation, etc.
Whereas there is a printed Paper, entitled, A Solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation, and defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of the King, and
the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
pretended to be ordered by the Commons in Parliament, on the one and twentieth
day of September last, to be printed and published; which Covenant, though it
seems to make specious expressions of Piety and Religion, is in truth nothing
else but a traiterous and seditious Combination against us, and against the
established Religion and Laws of this Kingdom, in pursuance of a traiterous
design and endeavor to bring in Foreign Forces to invade this Kingdom. We do
therefore straightly charge and command all our loving Subjects, of what degree
or quality soever, upon their Allegiance, that they presume not to take the
said seditious and traiterous Covenant. And we do likewise hereby forbid and
inhibit all our Subjects to impose, administer, or tender the said Covenant, as
they and every of them will answer the contrary at their utmost and extremest
perils.

Given at our Court at Oxon the 9. day of October, in the nineteenth year of
our Reign.
Hitherto have we beheld England like a curious Garden flourishing with all the
choicest flowers both for scent and color that ever Flora watered with pearly
drops, or Titans radiant beams gave birth unto, whose flourishing branches
adorned with Turtles twinn'd in chaste embraces, as if they simpathized of each
others peaceful and fruitful virtues, that Nature her self was enamored to
walk into the twined Meanders of her curious Mazes; here might you see the
Princely Rose [the King of Flowers] so full of fragrancy, that for its smell
and color it was the envy of all the world: there might you see the Lilly,
[Queen of Flowers] there might you see the Olive Plants [the Royal Progeny]
placed round about a table, where Kings and Queens had used to feast; [the
Nobility and Gentry] emulating each other to excel in sweetness. But now
(alas) with our late discords, the Scene is so altered, that this curious
Garden has been overrun with Weeds, I mean the miseries which followed upon
these dissentions. For (as one writes) the War went on with horrid rage in many
places at one time; and the fire once kindled, cast forth through every corner
of the Land not only sparks, but devouring flames; insomuch, as the Kindom of
England was divided into more Battles then Counties; nor had she more Fields
then Skirmishes, nor Cities then Sieges, almost all her Palaces of Lords, and
great Houses, being turned every where into Garrisons: they fought at once by
Sea and Land, and through all England (who could but lament the miseries of his
Country) sad spectacles were of plundering and firing Villages; and the
Fields, otherwise waste and desolate, rich only and terribly glorious in Camps
and Armies.

The Kings side at first prospered exceedingly, the Earl of New Castle his
General in the North, overthrowing the Lord Fairfax, and driving him into Hull:
in the West Sir William Waller a Parliament Chieftain, was utterly defeated by
the Lord Wilmot, who came from Oxford with an Army of the Kings; and having
lost all his Army, made haste to London: and such as the fortune of the Field
was, was the condition of Towns and Garrisons; for immediately after Wallers
defeat, the two greatest Cities of all the West were yielded up, Bristol to
Prince Rupert, and Excester to Prince Maurice. So that now the King was master
of all the West, save only Gloucester, which he besieged with a Royal Army.

Essex himself the great General at the same time, his Army decreasing
suddenly, some dying of sickness, others for want forsaking their Colors, was
constrained to leave the Field, and return to London, quartering the sick and
weak remnant of his Army at Kingston, and other adjacent places, until a
recruit could be made for him; so that it was judged by wise men, if the King
leaving Gloucester, had marched directly with his victorious Army to London,
which was then not at all fortified, and miserably distracted with Factions
within it: or besides, if the Earl of New Castle, letting alone the besieging
of Hull, (which likewise proved fruitless) had poured out his numerous Forces
upon the Eastern associated Counties, he had been more successful then he was.
But Fata viam invenient, Destiny will find ways that never were thought of
makes way where it finds none; and that which is decreed in Heaven shall be
effected by means, of which earth can take no notice of.

The King to no purpose thus spending his time at Gloucester, Essex the whiles
recruiteth his Army, with which marching from London eighty miles, he raises
the Siege; and having relieved the Town, in his retreat from thence encountered
and vanquished the Kings Army near to the Town of Newbery.

Both sides, excepting only the inexhaustible riches and strength of the City
of London, by this overthrow seemed of equal strength; yet each of them
endeavors to make themselves stronger, the Parliament calling in to their
assistance the Scots, the King the Irish. The Earl of Leven was General of the
Scots, to whom joined the Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Fairfax, and with
joint Forces besieged York; to raise the Siege Prince Rupert came with a great
Army out of the South, the three Generals left their Siege to fight the Prince:
under him also New Castle having drawn his Forces out of York, served; who on a
great Plain called Marston Moor gave Battle to the three Generals. The Victory
at first inclined to the Royalists, but by the valor of Cromwell (who fought
under Manchester) their whole Army was utterly defeated, Prince Rupert his
Ordnance, his Carriages, and Baggage being all taken.

This was the greatest Battle of the whole Civil War, and might have proved a
great Remora to the Kings proceedings, had he not soon after worsted Essex in
Cornwall, who having lost all his Artillery returned to London.

The Parliament soon after new modelled their Army; Sir Thom as Fairfax was
chosen General in the room of Essex: and now the Idol of a Treaty was set up at
Vxbridge, in which to show the clearness of his Majesty's intentions, I have
included some of his most material proceedings, conducible to an Agreement
betwixt him and the Parliament.

His Majesty's particular Prayer for a Blessing on the Treaty.
O most merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a people sorely
afflicted by the scourge of an unnatural War, do earnestly beseech thee to
command a Blessing from Heaven on this Treaty, brought about by thy Providence,
the only visible remedy left for the establishment of a happy Peace; soften
the most obdurate hearts with a true Christian desire of saving those men's
blood, for whom Christ himself has shed his. O Lord let not the guilt of our
sins cause this Treaty to break off, but let the truth of thy Spirit so clearly
shine in our minds, that all private ends laid aside, we may every one of us
heartily and sincerely pursue the Public good; and that the people may be no
longer so blindely miserable, as not see at least in this their day the things
that belong to their peace. Grant this gracious God for his sake who is our
peace it self, even Jesus our Lord, Amen.

His Majesty's Message to the Houses of Parliament, which drew on the following
Treaty at Uxbridge, December 13. 1644.
His Majesty has seriously considered your Propositions, and finds it very
dffiicult, in respect they import so great an alteration in Government both in
Church and State; to return a particular and positive Answer before a full
debate, wherein those Propositions and all the necessary explanations and
reasons for assenting, dissenting or qualifying, and all inconveniences and
mischiefs which may ensue, and cannot otherwise be so well foreseen, may be
discussed and weighed: his Majesty therefore proposes and desires as the best
expedient for peace, that you will appoint such number of persons as you shall
think fit, to treat with the like number of persons to be appointed by his
Majesty upon the said Propositions, and such other things as shall be proposed
by his Majesty for the preservation and defense of the Protestant Religion,
(with due regard to the ease of tender Consciences, as his Majesty has often
offered) the Rights of the Crown, the Liberty and Propriety of the Subjects,
and the Privileges of Parliament: And upon the whole matter to conclude a
happy and blessed Peace.

Sent by the Duke of Richmond, and the Earl of Southampton, December 13. 1644
His Majesty's Commission to certain Lords and Gentlemen to treat at Vxbridge,
with the Commissioners of the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, etc.
Charles Rex.

Whereas after several Messages sent by us to the Lords and Commons of
Parliament at Westminster, expressing our desires of Peace, certain
Propositions were sent by them to us at Oxon, in November last, by the Earl of
Denbigh and others; and upon our Answers, Messages, and Propositions to them,
and their Returns to us, it is now agreeed, That there shall be a Treaty for a
well-grounded Peace to begin at Uxbridge on Thursday the thirtieth day of this
instant January, as by the said Propositions, Answers, Messages, and Returns in
writing may more fully appear. We do therefore hereby appoint, assign, and
codnstitute, James Duke of Richmond and Lennox, William Marquess of Hertford,
Thomas Earl of Southampton, Henry Earl of Kingston, Francis Earl of Chichester,
Francis Lord Seymor, Arthur Lord Capel, Christopher Lord Hatton, John Lord
Culpeper, Sir Edward Nicholas Knight, one of cur principal Secretaries of
State, Sir Edward Hide Knight, Chancellor and Undertreasurer of our
Exchequer, Sir Richard Lane, Chief Baron of our said Exchequer, Sir Thomas
Gardener, Sir Orlando Bridgeman, Master John Asburnham; and Master Jeffery
Palmer, together with Dr. Richard Steward upon the Propositions concerning
Religion, to be our Commissioners touching the Premises, and do hereby give
unto them, or to any ten or more of them, full power and authority to meet, and
on our part to treat with Algernon Earl of Northumberland, Philip Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery, William Earl of Salisbury, Basil Earl of Denbigh,
Thomas Lord Viscount Wentworth, Denzil Hollis, William Pierpoint, Esquires, Sir
Henry Vane the younger, Knight, Oliver St. John, Bulstrade Whitlock, John Crew,
and Edmond Prideaux, Esquires, for the Lords and Commons assembled in the
Parliament of England at Westminster, and John Earl of London, Lord Chancellor
of Scotland, Archibald Marquess of Arguile John Lord Maytland, John Lord
Balmerino, Sir Archibald Johnson, Sir Charles Asking, George Douglas, Sir John
Smith, Sir Hough Kennedy, and Master Robert Carly, for the Estates of the
Parliament of Scotland, together with Master Alexander Henderson, upon the
Propositions concerning Religion, or with any ten or more of them, upon and
touching the matters contained in the said Propositions, Answers, and Messages,
or any other, according to the manner and agreement therein specified or
otherwise as they, or any ten or more of them shall think fit, and to take all
the Premises into their serious considerations, and to compose, conclude, and
end all Differences arising thereupon, or otherwise as they, or any ten or more
of them, in their wisdoms shall think fit; and upon the whole matter to
conclude a safe and well-grounded Peace, if they can; and whatsoever they, or
any then or more of them shall do in the Premises, we do by these presents
ratify and confirm the same.

Given at our Court at Oxon, the 28. day of January, one thousand six hundred
forty and four, in the 20. year of our Reign.
His Majesty's Instructions to the Commissioners at Uxbridge, Concerning the
Militia and Ireland.
First, concerning Religion. In this the Government of the Church, as is set
forth, Sect. 3. Numb. 14.

Next concerning the Militia. After Conscience, this is certainly the fittest
Subject for a Kings quarrel, for without it the Kingly Power is but a shadow,
and therefore upon no means to be quitted, but maintained according to the
known Laws of the Land; yet to attain to this so much wished peace of all good
men, it is in a manner necessary that sufficient and real security be given for
performance of what shall be agreed upon, I permit either by leaving strong
Towns, or other Military force into the Rebels possession (until Articles be
performed) to give such assurance for performance of Conditions as you shall
think necessary for to conclude a Peace, provided always that you take (at
least) as great care by sufficient security that Conditions be performed to me.
And to make sure that he Peace once set, all things shall return into their
ancient channels.

Thirdly, for Ireland. I confess they have very specious and proper Arguments
to propose this point, the gaining of no Article more conducing to their ends
then this: and I have as great reason in honor to take care how to answer this
Account; all the world knows the eminent inevitable necessity which caused me
to make the Irish Cessation, and there remain yet as strong reasons for the
concluding of the Peace, wherefore ye must consent to nothing to hinder me
therein, until a clear way be shown me how my Protestant Subjects may probably
(at least) defend themselves, and that I shall have no more need to defend my
Conscience and Crown from the injuries of this Rebellion.

His Majesty's Letter to the Duke of Richmond in pursuance of the said
Instructions.
Richmond, I thank you for the account you sent me by this Bearer, and have
nothing of new to direct you in, but only to remember you, that my going to
Westminster is not to be mentioned but upon probable hopes of procuring a
Treaty with the Commons, there or thereabouts, and that you mention the
security I ask with my coming to West. And I hope I need not remember you to
cajole well the Independents and Scots; this Bearer will tell you how well our
Western and Northern association go on, to whom I refer you for other things. I
rest.

Directions for Secretary Nicolas to the same effect.
First, for Religion and Church Government I will not go one step further than
what is offered by you already.

2. And so for the Militia, more than what ye have already allowed me, but even
that you must observe that I must have a nomination of the full half, as if the
total number, Scots and all, be thirty, I will name fifteen, yet if they (I
mean the English Rebels) will be so base as to admit of ten Scots to twenty
English, I am contented to name five Scots and ten English, and so
proportionably to any number that shall be agreed upon.

3. And for gaining of particular persons, besides security, I give you power
to promise them rewards for performed services, not sparing to engage for
places, so they be not of great trust, but as much profit as you will; with
this last you are only to acquaint Richmond, Southampton, Culpeper, and Hide.

His Majesty's Letter to his Commissioners at Uxbridge, for procuring longer
time to conclude the Treaty.
Right trusty, etc.
Having received from you a particular account of your proceedings in the
Treaty, and observing thereby, how impossible it is within the days limited to
give such full answer to the three Propositions you are now upon, as you might,
if upon consideration had of the rest of the Propositions, you could clearly
see what fruit such answers will produce, in order to a blessed peace for the
present, and the future good and happiness of this Kingdom, we have thought it
fit to advise you, that you propose and desire of the Commissioners with whom
you treat, that they will procure such further time to be allowed, after the
expiration of the twenty days, as may be sufficient for you, upon a full
understanding one of another upon the whole, to make such a conclusion, that
all our Subjects may reap the benefit good men pray for, deliverance from these
bloody distractions, and be united in peace and charity; and if you think fit,
you may communicate this our Letter to them: So we bid you heartily farewell.

Given at our Court at Oxon. Feb. 13. 1644.

Thus by these former passages all wise men may perceive how far the King
declared the truth of his intentions, which finding frustrate he speedily sent
this Letter to the Queen.

His Majesty's Letter to the Queen, March 5th. 1644.
Dear Heart,
Now is come to pass what I foresaw, the fruitless end (as to a present peace)
of this Treaty, but I am still confident, that I shall find very good effects
of it; for besides that my Commissioners have offered, to say no more, full
measured reason, and the Rebels have stucken rigidly to their Demands, which I
dare say had been too much, though they had taken me Prisoner, so that
assuredly the breach will light foully upon them. We have likewise at this time
discovered, and shall likewise make it evidently appear to the world, that the
English Rebels (whether basely or ignorantly will be no great difference) have
as much as in them lies, transmitted the command of Ireland from the Crown of
England to the Scots, which (besides the reflection it will have upon these
Rebels) will clearly show that reformation of the Church is not the chief, much
less the only end of the Scotch Rebellion; but it being presumption and not
piety so to trust a good cause as not to use all lawful means to maintain it; I
have thought of one means more to furnish thee with for my assistance than
hitherto thou have had: it is that I give thee power to promise in my name (to
whom thou think most fit) that I will take away all the Penal Laws against
the Roman Catholics in England, as soon as God shall enable me to do it; so as
by their means or by their favors, I may have so powerful assistance as may
deserve so great a favor, and enable me to do it: But if thou ask what I call
that assistance, I answer, that when thou know what may be done for it, it
will be easily seen, if it deserve to be so esteemed. I need not tell thee what
secrecy this business requires, yet this I will say, that this is the greatest
part of confidence I can express to thee; for it is no thank to trust thee in
any thing else but in this, which is the only thing of difference in opinion
betwixt us, and yet I know thou will make make as good a bargain for me even in
this, I trusting thee (though it concern Religion) as if thou were a
Protestant, the visible good of my Affairs so much depending on it; I have so
full entrusted this, Bearer Pooly, that I will not say more to thee now, but
that herewith I send thee a new Cipher, assuring thee that none has or shall
have any Copy of it but my self, to the end thou may use it when thou shall
find fit to write any thing which thou will judge worthy of thy pains to put in
Cipher, and to be deciphered by none but me, and so likewise from him to thee,
who is eternally thine.


The Spring approaching, both sides prepare themselves for action; a great
party of the Royalists was trouted by Cromwell at Islip-Bridge, diverse of the
Commanders taken prisoners: the remainder of the party flying to Bletchtington
House, were there besieged and taken; with the same success at Bampton-bush, he
took Vaughan and Littleton, and defeated their forces. The King in the mean
time marched Northward with his Army, and took the strong and considerable Town
of Leicester.

Soon after was that dismal Battle at Naseby, where the fate of England was to
be determined; the number of both sides were not much unequal, nor the ordering
of their Battalia's much unlike; the Kings Front was filled with brave Troops
of Horse, the Foot stood in the second body, the right Wing was commanded by
the Princes Rupert and Maurice, the left by Sir Jacob Ashley; other Commanders
of great quality sustaining their parts.

The Parliamentarian Foot made a firm body in the midst, the wings were guarded
by the Horse, the right wing was commanded by Cromwell, the left wing by Ireton;
the Foot (being divided into two bodies) was commanded by Major General
Skippon: fortune at the first favored the Royalists. The Parliaments left wing
being routed by Prince Rupert, the commander Ireton wounded, and taken
Prisoner; but betwixt the two other Wings the case was different, Cromwell
coming on with so great force, that he routed and overthrew the Kings left
Wing: the Battle seemed in an equal balance, the Wings on both sides being
scattered, but after some sharp dispute, the Royalists were routed, their Horse
disserting the Foot fled to Leicester; the cumbersome plunder of which place
being reputed the occasion of that defeat. The Kings Standard and one hundred
other Colors were taken, all the Ordnance, the Kings Coach, Cabbinet Letters,
a rich booty of Jewels, a great quantity of Gold and Silver, and almost five
thousand prisoners; which may seem the more strange, since on both sides there
were not five hundred slain.

To proceed, the loss of that day lost the King his Crown; for presently after
this, Leicester, Bath, Sherburn, yea, and Bristol it self were yielded up; the
Town of Taunton long besieged by Goring was relieved by General Fairfax, who
soon after took Tiverton and Dartmouth; and then marching into Cornwall at a
place called Torrington gave the Lord Hopton a great overthrow. Cromwell in the
mean time took Basin and Winchester, the Devizes and Barcklay were taken by
other Commanders, Wodstock by Rainsborough, and Carlisle by the Scots; who
marching from thence to besiege Newark, were called back to the relief of their
own Country, then almost subdued by the Marquess of Montross, of whom I shall
insert the less, having particularized it in his Life. This Marquess at first
sided with the Covenanters, participated of their counsels, and was the first
man when the Scots invaded England, Anno 1639. that set footing on English
Ground; but afterward detesting their doings, he became the most bitter enemy
to them that ever they had. About the beginning of the year 1644. when the
Scottish Covenanters came into England to assist the Parliament, Montross went
to Oxford to the King, to offer his service against the Covenanters in
Scotland. The King to fit him for-that, purpose, created him a Marquess, and
gave him his Commission, to be Lord Governor of Scotland, and General of all
his Forces. Scotland being then wholly under the Covenanters, it was agreed
that the Earl of Antrim should by the beginning of April, send over into Argile
(where the passage is short into Ireland) ten thousand Irish as a stock to
begin withal; this promise at the appointed time Antrim performed in part, but
was very deficient in the number of Soldiers; for instead of ten thousand, he
sent scarce twelve hundred, under the conduct of Macdonald: Montross
notwithstanding with these men, and the addition of his Atholians, patcht up an
Army, with which he afterward performed such exploits, as would pose Antiquity
amongst all the Camps of their famed Heroes, to find a parallel to this Army.

The first Summer after his arrival in Scotland he gave the Earl of Argile a
great overthrow; fiteen hundred of his men being slain and taken; afterward at
a place called Kilsithe, having scarce 4000. Highlanders and Irish, he
encountered and overthrew the States great Army, slew above five thousand of
them, and dispersed the rest: hereupon is their Army sent for, all Scotland
being almost at his devotion. Sir David Lesley returned with the Horse, and at
Selkirk gave Montross a defeat. The King in the mean time was routed at Routen
Heath by Pointz a Commander of the Parliaments Army, the Lord Digby the next
month was beaten at Sherburn in Yorkshire, and afterward utterly defeated at
Carlisle, Chester long defended by Biron was yielded up, and Ashley himself the
Kings General vanquished by Morgan, and taken prisoner with one thousand six
hundred of his men.

The King had now no Garrisons left but Oxford, Newark, Banbury, Wallingford,
Worcester, Ragland, and Pendennis; Newark was straightly besieged by Leven,
Pointz, and Rossiter, Oxford (wherein the King was himself) began to be blocked
up by Ireton and Fleetwood, and every day the coming of Fairfax himself, and a
straiter Siege of that City was expected; the King resolved therefore to go out
of Oxford before this should happen, and communicating his mind to some secret
and faithful Councillors, above all other places, he pitched upon the Scottish
Camp: to the Scots therefore, as they lay before Newark, the King sent Montruel
the French Ambassador, and himself soon after, as Ashburnhams man, with a
Cloak-bag behind him, escaped unknown out of Oxford, and came to Newark, to
the Scots, hoping to be received with great humanity by such good Subjects as
they boasted themselves to be.

But now both Fortune and Fidelity failed the distressed King; the Scots they
first betray him and then Pontius Pilate like washed their hands to declare
their Innocence. They delivered the King to the English upon Conditions (as
they pretended) that no violence should be offered to his Person; the English
now having their King a Prisoner, carry him first to Holnbey Castle, then to
Roiston, thence to Hatfield, not long after to Causam, then to the Earl of
Bedfords House near Ouborn, soon after to Hampton Court, the most stateliest of
all his Palaces; but with what content to his dejected mind let others judge,
to see his Palace turned into a Prison, and himself to be a Captive, must needs
be a sorrow fitter for out amazement then expression; for certainly as joy is
most sweet to them who have tasted the miseries of sorrow, so sorrow is most
bitter to them who have always lived in bliss, as one of our modern Poets
sings.

The very thought renews the memory,
Of my precedent lives felicity;
Whereby I know my sorrow is the more,
Who hapless now lived happy heretofore.
To hurry him out of his right mind he did not long stay at Hampton Court, but
by a crafty excuse he was juggled into the Isle of Wight; for a certain Letter
was left on the Table, whereby the King was advertised the there were some that
laid wait for his life; whereupon being frighted, he privily fled from Hampton
Court, leaving a Letter behind him, written with his own hand to the
Commissioners to be by them communicated to both Houses of Parliament: in which
Letter, after he had discoursed somewhat about Captivity, and the sweetness of
Liberty, he ended in these following words.

Now as I cannot deny, but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my retirement; so I take God to witness, that the public Peace is no less
before mine eyes. And I can sinde no better way to express this my profession,
(I know not what a wiser man may do) then by desiring and urging that all chief
interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction: as for
example, the Army, (for the rest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not
difficult to consent) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the liberty of their
consciences, and have an act of Oblivion, or Indemnity (which should extend to
the rest of all my Subjects) and that all their Arrears should be speedily and
duly paid; which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard and that I be not
hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall choose. To conclude,
let me be heard with freedom, honor, and safety, and I shall instantly break
through this cloud of retirement, and show my self ready to be Pater Patriae.

Charles Rex.

The King had not been long in the Isle of Wight, but he sends a Letter of
great length to the Parliament, in which he delivered his sense and opinion
concerning the abolition of Episcopacy, he disputed out of the dictates of his
conscience much, and gave touches also of other matters; of all which he hoped
that he should satisfy the Parliament with his reasons, if he might personally
treat with them; therefore he earnestly desired to be admitted with honor,
freedom, and safety, to treat personally at London: the Commissioners of
Scotland with great vehemence also pressed that this desire of the King might
be granted.

But the Parliament pretending tumults and innovations that might arise by the
Kings coming to London, which (as they said) was then full of Malignants, sent
down four Propositions to him to Sign, which being done he should be admitted
to a personal Treaty. The four were these.

1. That a Bill be passed into an act by his Majesty, for settling of the
Militia of the Kingdom. 2. That a Bil be passed for his Majesty's calling in of
all Declarations, Oaths, and Proclamations against the Parliament, and those
who have adhered to them. 3. For passing an Act, that those Lords who were made
after the great Seal was carried to Oxford, may be made incapable of sitting in
the House of Peers ever after. 4. That power may be given to the two Houses of
Parliament to adjorn, as the two Houses of Parliament should think fit.
The Commissioners of Scotland would seem in no wise to give their consent that
these four Bills should be sent to the King, before he treated at London;
therefore, in a very long Declaration they protested against it: the King
likewise denied to Sign them when they were sent unto him. Upon which denial, a
Declaration and Votes passed both Houses of Parliament, in this manner.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after many addresses to his
Majesty for the preventing and ending this unnatural War, raised by him against
the Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his Majesty, which
did contain only matter of safety, and security to the Parliament and Kingdom,
referring the composure of other differences to a personal Treaty with his
Majesty; and having received an absolute negative, do hold themselves obliged
to use their utmost endeavors, speedily to settle the present Government in
such a way, as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom in the enjoyment
of the Laws and Liberties thereof; and in order thereunto, and that the Houses
may receive no delay nor interruptions in so great and necessary a work, they
have taken their resolutions, and passed these Votes following, viz. Resolved,
etc. by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that no application or
address to be made to the King by any person whatsoever without leave of both
Houses.

Resolved, etc. by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the
person or persons, that shall make breach of this order, shall incur the
penalty of High Treason.

Resolved, etc. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive
no more any message from the King, and do enjoin, that no person whatsoever do
presume to receive or bring any message from the King to both or either of the
Houses of Parliament, or any other person.

To these Votes of Parliament the Army declared their consent and approbation,
and that they would live and dye in defense of the House of Commons; but the
people, though before they were enraged against the King; now seeing their
errors, resolved to plead his Cause: Petitions upon Petitions are presented
for a personal Treaty with the King, for the disbanding of the Army, and for
the removal of all other grievances. Langhorn, Powel, and Poyer, three eminent
Commanders, who had done many and great services for the Parliament, now
declare themselves for the King; and with an Army of 8000. men fortify
Pembroke and Chepstow Castles: Sir Thomas Glemham in the North seizes upon
Carlisle, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale upon Barwick and fortified it; the strong
Castle also of Pomfret was then taken by the Royalists, and the Governor
stain. Against these Sir Thomas Fairfax was marching Northwards, but far
greater dangers detained him in the South, for the Kentish men not far from
Gravesend were gotten together into an Army; with whom were above twenty
Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Country, and amongst them diverse
Commanders formerly of the Kings Armies: upon the approach of the Parliaments
Army some two thousand of them march to Maidstone, which they resolved to make
good against the Army. Fairfax (after the dispute of some passages) breaks up
to them, and assaults the Town with a great deal of boldness; they on the other
side defend themselves with unspeakable courage; at last the Kentish men are
overcome, 200. being slain, and about 1400. taken prisoners. But the Earl of
Norwich with about 3500. (with much ado) kept together, and got over the River
Thames into Essex; whereupon Sir Charles Lucas raises what strength he could
possible in that County, to whom joined the Lord Capel, the Lord Loughborough,
Sir George Lisle, Sir Bernard Gascoigne, Sir William Compton, with many more
Gentlemen and Soldiers, and having first taken the Committee Men at
Chelmesford, they marched to Colchester, a Town of great Antiquity; but the
people heretofore accounted no great friends to Monarchy, nor the Town of that
strength to withstand so enraged and successful an enemy as followed them at
the heels. June 12, 1648. they settled themselves a Garrison, the Parliament
Horse coming up and quartering within Canon shot of the Town. Touching these
proceedings I have further enlarged my self in the Life of Sir Charles Lucas.
But the greatest of all dangers which threatened the Parliament, was from the
North, from the Kingdom of Scotland; Duke Hamilton with an Army of five and
twenty thousand entered England for the King, with whom joined Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, diverse of the chief Ships of the Royal Fleet likewise, much about the
same time, revolted from the Parliament, and set their Vice Admiral Rainsborow
ashore, affirming they were for the King, and would serve Prince Charles,
sailing toward Holland, where the Prince the was, and with him his Brother the
Duke of York, who not long before fled privately out of London. The Earl of
Holland also with they young Duke of Buckingham, having five hundred Horse,
appeared in Arms for the King by Kingston; so that all things considered, we
may conclude that the Kings party since the beginning of the Wars was not in a
likelier condition, at least more formidible then at this present; but God had
otherwise decreed, and all these fair hopes in a few days vanished into
nothing, as the following ill successes will declare.

The Earl of Holland soon after his rising was put to flight by Sir Michael
Levesey and others. The Lord Francis Villers, Brother to the Duke of Bucking
ham was slain, and Sir Kenelm Digby's eldest Son, who as he was fighting with
four at once was cowardly thrust through his Back. Holland flying with the
remainder of his Horse was within few days after at the Town of Saint Needs by
Colonel Scroop (whom the General Fairfax had sent from Colchester for that
purpose) altogether subdued, Holland himself taken, and by the Parliament
committed prisoner to Warwick Castle.

Langhorn and Powel were totally routed between the two Towns of Fagans and
Peterstone, and having lost all their Army, escaped by flight to Colonel Poyer
into Pembroke Castle; which after a strait Siege was surrendered to Cromwell,
the three Colonels rendering themselves Prisoners at mercy. Poyer only
suffered death, who in hopes of a Reprieve, dissembled a reluctance when he was
ready to dye. Cromwell from thence marched against the Scots who were now come
as far as Preston in Lancashire, and with the addition of Lamberts strength,
gave Battle to Hamilton, (pursuing them as far as Warington, about twenty
miles) and killing many in the Chase, took Lieutenant General Bailey Prisoner,
with a great part of the Scottish Army, granting them only quarter for their
lives. In this Battle were slain three thousand Scots, and taken Prisoners
about nine thousand: Duke Hamilton himself within few days after, having fled
with a good party of Horse to Vttoxeter, was there taken prisoner by the Lord
Gray, and Colonel Wait. With Hamilton were taken about three thousand Horse
Langdale also not long after was taken prisoner in a little Village by
Widmerpole a Parliament Captain; this was the success of Hamiltons invading
England. The Trophies of this Victory were placed in Westminster Hall.

Soon after was the strong Town of Colchester surrendered to General Fairfax,
which for three months together with much Resolution and Gallantry was
defended by Sir Charles Lucas, Norwich, Capel, etc. until all hopes they had of
relief were utterly blasted, and all their provisions quite spent; not so much
as a Dog or a Cat left them to satisfy the necessity of Nature. Sir Charles
Lucas and Sir George Lisel were shot to death the same day the Town was
surrendered; the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel, and Master Hasting (Brother to the
Earl of Huntington) were sent Prisoners to London. The Lord Capel some few
weeks after, together with Duke Hamilton, and the Earl of Holland were all
three beheaded.

The Parliament during these Broils, to give some seeming satisfaction to the
Kingdom, annulled their former votes of making no further addresses to the
King, and restored again to their seats eleven of their Members, who had
formerly been impeached by the Army: a Treaty was voted to be with the King in
the Isle of Wight, the Earl of Middlesex, with two of the House of Commons were
sent to the King, who made answer, that he was very ready to treat of peace;
and named Newport in that Island to be the place. Five of the House of Peers,
and ten of the House of Commons were appointed Commissioners, and the Treaty
went on with a great deal of seeming satisfaction on both sides. But whiles
they were intent upon the business, a Petition was exhibited to the Parliament,
wherein they desired that the King might be tried by the Laws, and brought to
justice, and all further Treaties with him to be laid aside; which when the
Parliament denied, the Army not being satisfied, they march some of them
toward Newport, others to the King, who was now a Prisoner as large.

In the mean time the General sends his Letters to Colonel Hammond, to render
up his Command to Colonel Ewers, who is to take the charge of the King; but
the Parliament vote him hereupon to stay there, of which the General having
notice 27. November.

The Army fast and pray, and receive (according to the still continued fashion)
Petitions from several Counties in order to what they intend to resolve, and
therefore Hammond submits and delivers up the King to Ewers, and comes toward
the Army.

The Parliament are angry, and vote a Letter to the General, that his orders
and instructions for securing of the Kings person, are contrary to their
resolutions and instructions to Colonel Hammond, and that it is the pleasure
of the House that his Excellency recall his orders, and that Colonel Hammond be
free to take his charge to the Isle of Wight; the Treaty being ended, but
instead of obedience hereto he salutes them with a sharp Letter for money to
pay Arrears for the Army: hereupon the Army marches to London, and the King had
his removes by Ewers till he came to the Block.

After that the House had past their Vote for no address to the King, he being
in a sad condition by his stricter condition in Hurst Castle, hearing of these
Votes, prepares his soliloquies for his assured comfort in death, as we find
his meditations in those golden Leaves of his Book. As I have leisure (says
he) so I have cause more then enough to meditate on and prepare for my death;
for I know that there are but a few steps betwixt the Prisons and the Graves of
Princes.

Now the Ax was laid to the root of the Tree, the House of Commons vote that by
the Fundamental Laws of the Realm, it is Treason for the time to come to Levy
War against the Parliament and Kingdom; the Ordinance for the Kings Trial was
refused by the Lords, January 2. After this a Proclamation was from the House
of Commons for any one to accuse the King, the Ordinance of the Trial was
January 6. engrossed and read, and the manner referred to the Commissioners who
were to try him in the Painted Chamber, Monday the 8. of January, a
Proclamation resolved to be made in Westminster Hall, the Commissioners to sit
the next day, to which intent Mr. Denby the younger, a Sergeant at Arms to the
Commissioners, rid into the Hall, the Drums of the Guard beating without the
Palace, and in like manner at the Old Exchange, and in Cheapside, Jan. 9.

The Commons Vote the Title in Writs of Caroli dei gratia, etc. to be altered,
that great Seal be broken, and ordered a new one, with the Arms of England, and
the Harp for Ireland, with this word, The great Seal of England; and on the
reverse the Picture of the House of Commons, with these words, In the first
year of Freedom by Gods Blessing, 1648.

Now there was a new Tribunal erected, there being appointed 150 Judges or
Tryers, that so in number they might represent the people who are improved to
covenant, hear, Judge, and Execute Charles Stuart King of England; of these
there were of several sorts of persons, six Earls of the upper House, the
Judges of the Kingdom, Commanders of the Army, Members of the Commons, Lawyers,
men of several Trades and Professions. The Presbyterian Ministers, now too
late, disclaim against the prosecutions, and the English Nobility offer
themselves pledges on the the Kings behalf, but all too late; and now the
penitent Scots with their predecessor repent themselves of their Silver, and in
a Declaration express their dislike.

The High Court of Justice was framed in the upper end of Westminster Hall
betwixt the then Kings Bench and the Chancery. Saturday, Jan. 20. the King was
brought from St. James through the Park in a Sedan to White Hall, thence by
Water with guards to Sir John Cottons House, at the back end of Westminster
Hall.

The Judges met in the Painted Chamber attending the President Bradshaw in his
Scarlet Robe, the Sword born before him by Colonel Humphry, the Mace by
Sergeant Denby the younger, and twenty men for his guard with Partisans,
himself sits down in a Crimson Velvet Chair of State, fixed in the midst of the
Court with a Desk before him, and thereon a Cushion of Crimson Velvet; the
seats of each side, benches covered with Scarlet Cloth; the Partisans divided
themselves on each side. O yes! and silence made, the great Gate of the Hall
was opened for any one to enter. Colonel Tomson brought forth the Prisoner,
the Sergeant with his Mace received him to the Bar, where was placed a red
Velvet Chair; the King looks sternly on the Court, where he spies one person
who had received signal favors from him; at the sight of whom, as I received
it from one in the Court, he laid his hand on his breast, and pronounced to
himself scarce audibly, Caesar's words, Et tu Brute: after which he sat down,
not showing the least regard to the Court, but presently rises and looks
downwards on the guards and multitudes of the spectators. The Act of parliament
for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, was read over by the Clerk,
one Phelps, who sat on the right side of the Table, covered with a Turkey
Carpet, placed at the feet of the President, upon which lay the Sword and Mace.

The several names of the Rolls of Tryers were called over, and eighty answered
to their names, in the charge the King is accused in the name of the People of
England of Treason, Tyranny, and of all the Murders and Rapines that had
happened in the War, they imposed all the weight of the accusation on this,
that he raised War against the Parliament.

A great many people looking on with groans and sights, deploring the condition
of their King.

The President stood up and said,

Sir you have heard your Charge containing such matters as appear by it, and in
the close it is prayed that you answer to your Charge which this Court expects.
The King whilst he heard this Charge, with a majestic countenance and a smile
in answer to the President, asks the new judges by what Auhority they did bring
to Trial a King, their most lawful Sovereign against the Public Faith, so
lately given him, when he commenced a Treaty with the Members of both Houses.

By what (says he) emphatically lawful Authority; for (says he) I am not
ignorant that there are on foot every where every man's unlawful powers, as of
Thieves and Robbers in the High Way, he bids them only declare by what
authority they had arrogated this whatsoever power to themselves, and he would
willingly answer to the things objected; which if they could not, he advised
them to avert the grievous crimes from their own heads and the kingdom;
whatsoever they did, he resolved not to betray the charge committed to him by
God, and confirmed by ancient descent,

The President rejoynes that he was called to an account by authority of the
people of England, by whose election he was admitted King.

The king replied the Kingdom descended to him in no wise elective, but
hereditary above a thousand years, that he stood more apparently for the
Liberties of the People of England, by refusing as unlawful and arbitrary
authority, then the Judges or any other asserting it.

That the authority and power of the people was showed in Parliamentary
Assemblies, but that here appeared none of the Lords; who to the constituting
of a Parliament ought to be there, and which is more, some King ought to be
present, but that neither the one nor the other, nor both the Parliament
Houses, nor any other judicature on earth had any authority to call the King of
England to an account, much less some certain Judges chosen only by his
Accusers, masked with the authority of the Lower House and the same proculated.

Howbeit he willed them again that they would at least produce this their
Authority, and he would not be wanting to his defense, forasmuch is was the
same offense with him to acknowledge a Tyrannical Power, as to resist a lawful
one.

The president often interrupting the Kings Speech, told him that they were
satisfied with the^r authority, as it is upon on Gods authority, and the
kingdom, in doing justice in this their present work.

The Monday after the Court met in the Painted Chamber, where it was resolved
that the king should not be suffered to argue the Courts Jurisdiction, but that
the President should tell him that the Commons in Parliament had constituted
that Court, whose power was not to be disputed; that if he refuse to answer, it
shall be accounted a contumacy to the Court; that if he answer with a Salvo,
his pretended Prerogative above the Court, he shall be required to answer
positively yea or no; that he shall have a copy of his Charge till he own the
Court, and delare his intentions to answer on his second Trial. Solicitor Cook
moves that the Prisoner may make a positive answer, or that the Charge may be
taken pro Confesso, and the Court ot proceed to Justice. The President repeats
in brief the passages of the last day, and commands the King to answer to the
Articles of the Charge, unless he had rather hear the Capital Sentence against
him. The king persists to interrogate concerning the Cause, and says.

That he less regards his life then his Honor, his Conscience, the Laws, the
Liberties of the people, all which that they should not perish together; there
were weighty reasons why he should not prosecute his defense before the Judges,
and acknowledge a new form of Judicature; for what power had ever Judges to
erect a Judicature against the King; or by what Law was it granted, sure not by
Gods Law, which on the contrary commands obedience to Princes; nor by Man's
Laws, the Laws of our Land, since the Laws of England enjoin all Accusations to
be read in the Kings Name, nor do they indulge any power, of judging the most
abject Subject to the Lower (or Commons House) neither lastly their Power flow
from any Authority (which might be pretended) extraordinary delegated from the
people, seeing ye have not asked so much as every tenth man in this matter.

The President interrupting his Speech, rebukes the Kings, and bids him be
mindeful of his doom, affirming once more, that the Court was abundantly
satisfied of their Authority, nor was the Court to hear any reasons that should
detract from their power.

But what (says the King) or where in all the world is that Court in which no
place is left for reason.

Yes, (answered the President) you shall find Sir; that this very Court is
such a one.

But (the King presses) that they would at least permit him to exhibit his
reasons in writing, which if they could satisfactorily answer, he would yield
himself to their Jurisdiction.

Here the President not content to deny, grew into anger, demanding the
Prisoner to be taken away.

The King replied no more to these things then; Remember (says he) this is
your King, from whom you turn away your ear, in vain certainly will my Subjects
expect Justice from you who stop your ears to your King who is ready to plead
his Cause.

The Saturday after the 27. of January before they assembled, sixty eight of
the Tryers answered to their names.

The President in a Scarlet Robe, and as the King Came, the Soldiers cried out
for Execution of Justice.

The King speaks first, and desires to be heard a word or two, but short, and
yet wherein he hopes not to give just occasion wherein to be interrupted, and
goes on. A sudden Judgment (says the King) is not so soon recalled. But he is
sharply reproved of contumacy.

The President profusely praises the patience of the Court, and commands him
now at length to submit, otherwise he shall hear the sentence of of death
resolved upon by the Court against him.

The King still refuses to plead his Cause before them, but that he had some
things conducible to the good of his people, and the peace of the Kingdom,
which he desires liberty to deliver before the Members of both Houses.

But the President would not vouchsafe him so much as this favor, least it
should tend (he said) to the delay and retardation of Justice.

To which the King replies, It were better to sustain a little delay of a day
or two, then to precipitate a Sentence which will bring perpetual Tragedies
upon the Kingdom, and miseries to Children unborn.

If (says he) I sought occasion of delay, I would have made a more elabourate
contestation of the Cause which might have served to protract the time, and
evade (at least the while) a most ugly sentence; but I will show my self a
defender of the Laws, and of the Right of my Country, as to choose rather to dye
for them, the Martyr of my People, then by prostituting of them to an arbitrary
power go about to acquire any manner of liberty for my self, but I therefore
request this short liberty of speaking before a cruel Sentence be given; for
that I well know, it is harder to be recalled then prevented; and therefore I
desire that I may withdraw, and you consider.

They all withdraw, the King into Cottons House, and the Tryers into the Court
of Wards, and in half an hour return.

The President as he had begun, so he proceeds into a premeditated Speech to
hasten Sentence; which the King offers reason to forbear, whilst he might be
heard before his Parliament, and this he requires as they will answer it at the
dreadful day of Judgment, and to consider it once again.

But not prevailing, the President goes on; wherein he aggravates the Contumacy
of the King, and the hatefulness of the cimes, he asserts Parliamentary
Authority, producing Examples both Domestic and Foreign, etc. his Treasons he
styles a breach of Trust to the Kingdom, as his Superior, and is therefore
called to an account minimus majorum in Judicium vocat; his murders are many;
all those that have been committed in all the War betwixt him and his people
are laid to his charge, all the innocent blood which cannot be cleansed, but by
the blood of him that shed the blood.

So then for Tyranny, Treason, Murder, and many other crimes, he wishes the
King to have God before his eyes, and that the Court calls God to witness, that
mearly their Conscience of Duty brings them to that place of this employment,
and calls for Gods assistance in his Execution.

The King offered to speak to these great Imputations in the Charge; but he was
told that his time was past, the Sentence was coming on, which the President
commanded to be read under this form.

Whereas the Commons of England have appointed them an High Court of Justice
for the Trial of Charles Stuart King of England, before whom he has been three
times convented; and at the first time a Charge of High Treason and other
Crimes and Misdemeanors, were read in the behalf of the Kingdom of England,
etc. To which Charge he the said Charles Stuart was required to give his
answer: and so expressed several passages at his Trial in refusing to answer, for
all which Treasons and Crimes the Court does adjudge that the said Charles
Stuart, as a Tyrant, Traitor, Murderer, and Public Enemy shall be put to
death, by the severing his Head from his Body. This Sentence (says the
President) now read and published, is the Act, Sentence, Judgment, and
Resolution of the whole Court, to which the Members of the Court stood up, and
assented to what he said by holding up their hands.

The King offered to speak, but he was instantly commanded to be taken away,
and the Court brake up.

After the Sentence the King was hurried away, mocked and reviled by the
Soldiers, they puffed their Tobacco in his face, no smell being more offensive
to his father and him: such as saluted him they bastinadoed; one that did but
sigh, God have mercy, they cane'd; they intrude almost into his Closet, hardly
permitting him his private Devotions.

Sir Hardress Waller, Colonel Harrison, Colonel Dean, Comissary General
Ireton are to consider of the time and place of his Execution, and in the
Painted Chamber Monday January 29. the President and Judges met, and within the
Committee resolve, that in the open street before White Hall (his own House) is
the fittest place; that the King be there executed to morrow Tuesday between
ten and two of the Clock, upon a Scaffold covered with black, next to the
Banqueting House, where he was wont to ascend his Throne.

It was supposed the King would not submit his neck to the Enemies Axe, and
therefore it was so provided with staples and cords that he should not resist.

January 27. the King lodged at White Hall, the next day Sunday the Bishop of
London preached before him.

Afterward his children had leave to visit him, his children being come to
him, he first gave his blessing to the Lady Elizabeth, and bad her to tell her
Brother James when soever she should see him, that it was his Fathers last
command that he should no more look upon Charles as his eldest Brother only,
but be obedient to him as his Sovereign; that they should love one another and
forgive their Fathers Enemies. Then said the King to her. Sweet Heart you will
forget this, no (said she) I shall never forget it whilst I live, and pouring
down abundance of tears promised him to write the Particulars. Then the King
taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his knee said, Now they will cut off thy
Fathers head, (upon which the child looked very steadfastly on him) Mark Child
what I say, they will cut off my head, and perhaps make thee a King. But mark
what I say, You must not be King so long as your Brother Charles and James do
live, for they will cut off your Brothers heads (when they can catch them) and
cut off thy head too at last; therefore I charge thee do not be made a King by
them, at which the Child sighing said, I will be torn in pieces first, at
which the King smiled.

The fatal day appeared, Tuesday 30. January, when he prays and receives the
Sacrament, just at ten of the Clock in the forenoon he is called to come forth
from St. James's Palace then his Prison, to go on foot over the Park to White
Hall, guarded with a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before and the rest
behind him, with Colors flying and Drums beating, his private Guard of
Partisans about him, and Doctor Juxon Bishop of London next to him on one side,
and Colonel Thomlinson on the other.

Ascending the stairs up to the Park Gallery into his Cabinet Chamber, he
continued there at his devotion, and refused to dine, only about twelve of the
Clock, he eat a bit of bread, and drank a Glass of Clarret-wine; from thence he
was conveyed into the Banqueting House, and the great Window enlarged, out of
which he ascends the Scaffold: the Rails being hung round, and the floor
covered with Black; the Executioners disguised with vizards encountering him, he
not affrighted shows more care of the people living, then fear of his own
dying; for looking round about upon the people, whom the thick set Guards and
Troops of Horse kept a great distance off, and seeing he could not be heard by
them, omitting probably what he purposed to have spoken to them, turning to the
Officers and Actors, but rather to Colonel Thomlinson he said.

I would now speak nothing unto you in this place were it not that some men
would interpret my silence as an argument of guilt, and think that I took on me
the crimes objected with the same conscience as I submit to the punishment with
patience. I call God to witness of my innocence, (before whose Tribunal I must
shortly appear) it never entered into my thoughts to entrench on the just
privileges of Parliament, and that I raised not any Army before such time as
they had raised hostile forces against me, which from the order of proceedings
on both sides, and dates of Commissions and Proclamations will be clearly
manifested to the inquirer.

Mean while I acknowledge, and submisly own Gods Justice, which this day (by an
unjust sentence of mine) he has inflicted a just judgment on me, for as much
as heretofore I would not quit an innocent man, (meaning the Deputy of Ireland)
when oppressed by a most unjust decree.

With what Charity I embrace my enraged enemies, this good man is my witness,
(pointing to the Bishop of London) I pardon them all from my very heart, and I
earnestly beseech the God of all mercies, that he would vouchsafe to grant them
serious repentance, and remit this great sin.

Yet I cannot to my last gasp, but be solicitous of the peace of my kingdom,
which I am not able at the present better co consult for, then by chalking out
the way, from which you of the soldiery have exceedingly deviated, and by
which we must return to sobriety and peace.

Herein I perceive, you are most miserably out of the way, in that by the rule
of the Sword without all, even a shadow of right you think good to wrest the
government to your selves, and endeavor to establish the Kingdom, not by the
authority of the Laws, but upon the score of Conquest? which can never have any
accruit of right, unless adhered in by a just Cause and Triumph of War; namely,
either by the repulsing of wrongs, of recovering of rights unjustly detained.

But if more prosperous success shall advance the victor, beyond the modest
bounds of just and lawful, naught hinders, but that the Kingdoms that are
erected, both be, and be accounted great robberies, which we read heretofore, a
Pirat objected to Alexander.

But being out of the way (as you are) can you by no other expedient return
into the the right ways of peace, by no other counsel (believe me) can you
hope to divert Gods wrath, then by restoring to God, the King, the people,
respectively such things as are their dues.

You shall give God his due by restoring his pure worship, and Church rightly
regulated, according to the prescript of his holy word, which has long since
been miserably convulst and disjoynted. And this a national Synod duly called,
will best effectuate, to the King, (namely my successor) you will render full
right, if you restore those things which by the clear Letter of the Law stands
expressed.

Lastly you will put the people in their rights and due liberties, not by
lifting them in the consort of the Throne, and sway of the Scepter, but by
recovering unto the Laws there Authority, and the peoples observance to the
abrogating of which by the enormious power of the Sword, when as by no means I
could be induced, I was brought hither to undergo Martyrdom for my people.

So his last breath gently dissolving into a most meek prayer, the Bishop of
London said to him (thus) If his most excellent Majesty pleased he would openly
profess what he thought touching his Religion, not that any one alive could
suspect it, of which himself at all times throughont the whole space of his
life had given manifest testimonies.

Whereupon (says the King) that he deposited the testimony of his faith, which
this holy man (meaning the Bishop) or else expected defense in this behalf of
all men, who well knew his life and profession, namely, that I dye, (said he)
in the Christion Faith, according to the profession of the Church of England,
as the same was left me by my Father of blessed memory.

Then looking about upon the Officers, having (says he) a most gracious God,
and a most just cause, that I shall by and by change this corruptible Crown for
an immortal one; I both trust and rejoice, that I shall depart hence into
another Kingdom altogether exempt from all manner of disturbance. Then
preparing toward the Circumstances, the Bishop putting on his Night cap, and
uncloathed him to his Skycolour Satin Wastecoat; he said, I have a good cause,
and a gracious God, and gave his George Order to the Bishop, bidding him to
give it to the Prince.

There is but one stage more, (says the Bishop) this is turbulent and
troublesome, and but a short one, but it will soon dismiss into a way further,
even from Earth to Heaven, there you are assured of joy and comfort. I go
(says the King) from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown, where no
disturbance can be, but peace and joy for evermore.

Then lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, mildly praying to himself, he
stoopt down to the Block as to a prayer-desk, and most humbly bowed down his
generous Neck, to God, to be cut off by the vizarded Executioner, which was
suddenly done at one blow. Thus fell Charles, and thus all Regal Power with him.

His Body was buried at Windsor for to render him the more odious in the Vault
with Henry the Eighth. His Effigies at the Old Exchange being pulled down, with
this Inscription placed there, Sic exit ultimus Tyrannus. His own and his
Fathers Statue being not long before thrown down from the West end of Paul's.

A late worthy Historian writes, that though there were many excellent ones
written on him, yet the King himself was his own best Epitaph, as his Reign and
death makes as full and as perfect a story of goodness and glory as earth could
suffer; so his Christian virtues deserve as faithful a Register as earth can
keep. I shall conclude with one of our Modern Poets.

Crowns have their compass, length of days their dates,
But time puts periods both to Crowns and States.
This Epitaph came to my hands which I have here inserted.

Within this sacred Vault does lie
The Quintessence of Majesty;
Which being set, more glorious shines;
The best of Kings, best of Divines;
Britains shame, and Britains Glory,
Mirror of Princes, complete Story
Of Royalty, one so exact,
That the Elixirs of praise detract:
These are fair shadows; but to endure,
He Is drawn to the life in's Portraiture.
If such another Piece you would see.
Angels must limn it out, or he.
Master Lilly in his Monarchy or no Monarchy says, that some affirm that
several Prodigies appeared before his death: all he observed for a long time
before, was, that there appeared almost every year several Mock-suns, sometimes
two, sometimes three; so also Mock-moons, or Paracelenes, which were the
greatest he ever observed or feared.

The Life of the Lord CAPEL.
THis honorable Person, though he was not like some of our other Worthies,
crowned with the Successes and Laurels of War; yet is he no less to be
eternized for his endeavors, his animosity, constancy, and perseverance, to
the parting first with his vaste Estate, sequestered for his Loyalty, and
aterwards with his Life; so that he might rightly be termed The Flower of
English Fidelity, his name ever to be honorably mentioned, according to that
of the Psalmist, Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.

He was Son and Heir to Sir Arthur Capel of Hadham-hall in Hertfordshire, a
Gentleman of a great estate, one who followed the old Mode of our Nation, kept
a bountiful house, and showed forth his faith by his works; extending his
Charity in such abundant manner to the poor, that he was bread to the hungry,
drink to the thirsty, eyes to the blind, and legs to the lame, and might
justly be styled Great Almoner to the King of Kings.

Concerning the Humility of this worthy Knight, (though it be too sudden a
diversion) I shall presume to insert a story which I have heard delivered by
some well acquainted with his worship; That be being set at his gate all alone,
in a plain but decent habit, a Serving-man who had plumed himself with his
Masters cast feathers came riding to him, and asked him if Sir Arthur Capel
were within; Sir, replied the Knight, he was there not long ago, and if you
please to walk in you may hear further of his servants: Old Father said the
Serving-man, here take my Horse and first money he ever received in that kind;
Sir Arthur agreed to the motion, and with a smile received from him a single
penny, took his Horse and walked him, whilst the finical spruce Serving-man
strutted with convenient boldness into the house: but being informed by the
Servants that their Master was at the Gate, he replying to the contrary, one of
them to justify their words, went with him to the Gate to see, where they
found Sir Arthur very industrious in his employment; the Serving-man very much
ashamed of his mistake, craved pardon, and with humble obeisance, with his Hat
in his hand, with many cringes, would have received the Horse from the Knight;
Nay stay, says Sir Arthur, you paid me my hire, get up as soon as you will, I
am resolved to see you on Horseback. The old Knight putting his hand into his
purse gave him half a piece, which he said was for his taking so much care of
his Masters Horse, being purposely thus liberal to encourage his own Servants
to imitate his careful example.

But to return to his Son, he was very well educated, attained to some
perfection in learning, he had a good expression, and elegant style, as his own
Letters hest delineate. His Father dying, as he inherited his Estate, so did he
his virtues; his pious bounty appearing so conspicuous, that some envious
persons who hate good works in others, because they will do none themselves,
have maliciously aspersed him for an inclination to Popery. But as such
aspersions amongst persons of understanding speak nothing but the speakers
malice, so wrought it in others a deserved commendation of this of our late
Noble inimitable Lord more especially, that in these last times when Charity
lies bedridden, and faith only so much talked on, whereas he made his Faith
publicly known by his Works.

From the degree of Knight he was by King Charles advanced to be Baron of
Hadham. As it may be computed about that time the Earl of Strafford received
his Trial, this unfortunate Lord amongst others, being one that gave his fatal
Vote for the passing that Bill. In those great differences betwixt the King and
Parliament, he constantly and faithfully adhered to his Majesty, contributing
very much to his aid, both in purse and person: and at such time as the King
was secured in the Isle of Wight, some hopes being given of his restoration to
his former dignity by the coming in of Duke Hamilton with a potent Army; as
also of Langhorns, Powels, and Poyers declaring themselves for his Majesty,
together with the rising of the Countries in several places to the same unhappy
purpose; he with a selected number of his friends, associates, and servants,
joined himself with the Lord Goring, Sir Charles Lucas and others, who with a
great Party were up in Arms in Essex: and having valiantly defended Colchester
for the space of three months, against a potent enemy sated with success, were
at length (as I have already discoursed in the Life of Sir Charles Lucas) for
want of provision forced to yield both it and themselves, the superior Officers
to mercy, the common Soldiers with the loss of their flying Garments, the
Townsmen to pay the mulct of fourteen thousand pounds, which was above a
thousand pounds a month for the time that they held out the Siege. And for the
Articles of agreement which the Cavaliers had made with General Fairfax, they
could not but imagine that they had ascertained their lives; yet
notwithstanding upon their surrender (as has been mentioned) Sir Charles Lucas
and Sir George Lisle were shot to death; which to all discerning men must needs
seem strange and unusual, though the General in his Letter to the Parliament
calls it Military Execution; upon which the House debated and sent to the
General to explain his Letter of the 29. of September. His head Quarters were
then at Saint Albanes, from whence they had this answer, That the General does
not take upon him to conclude; but waving the business, leaves them to the
Civil Power, and so in effect to Trial for life. The Lord Capel and diverse
others were committed to the Tower, where whilst he remained he endeavored an
escape, and had effected it, had he not been betrayed by a second Banister, a
Water-man whom the Noble Lord entrusted himself with, who ignominiously for the
lucre of a little money discovered him; not long after this his misfortune,
this honorable Lord, together with the Earl of Holland, Duke Hamilton, the
Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen, was brought to a Trial before a High Court
of Justice in Westminster Hall; where (for the brevity to omit the particulars)
after a formal Trial, they were all condemned: the Earl of Norwich, and the
undaunted Welchman Sir John Owen, (whom they made march on Foot to his Trial)
were reprieved. It has been reported that the Earl of Norwich who was ever
pleasantly conceited, was sent to by a dear friend of his the day after his
Reprieve, to know what he conceived, as concerning the danger of his condition;
who returned this answer, That he thought in all haste to have put off his
Doublet, but now he had leisure to unhook his Breeches.

But to return to our enterprise, to furnish this Landscape rather then History
of this honorable person, concerning his deportment before and after the time
of his condemnation, when he was to encounter and look grim death in the face;
by way of introduction to a larger discovery of his Christian fortitude, I
shall set down the Copy of a Letter written by a reverend Doctor, who knew the
passages thereof as may be clearly perceived by the tenor of it.

SIR,
I hope this paper will find you upon recovery, you have my daily and hearty
prayers for it, not so much for your own sake (for I doubt not but it would be
much better for you, in regard of your self, to be dissolved and to be with
Christ) but in the behalf of the Church, your Friends, and poor Family; to
which notwithstanding be assured, God will be merciful, howsoever he disposes
of you, either for this life, or for a better. But if you live, (as I pray and
hope you will) you shall do very well to write the Life and Death of that noble
Lord and blessed Martyr, who professed at his death. That he dyed for the fifth
Commandment: and to dye in the defense, and for the Testimony of any Divine
truth, is truly and properly to be a Martyr.


That which I can contribute toward this work, is, to communicate some few
observations I made of him, and from him, before and after his condemnation. I
was several times with him, and always found him in a very cheerful and well
composed temper of mind, proceeding from true Christiun grounds, and not from
a Roman resolution only; (as his enemies are pleased to speak of him) he told
me often, it was the good God he served and the good Cause he had served for,
that made him not to fear heath: adding, he had never had the temptation of so
much as a thought to check him for his engagement in this quarrel, for he took
it for his Crown and Glory, and wished he had a greater ability and better
fortune to engage in it.

After his condemnation, and the afternoon before his suffering, we were a
great while in private together; when, bewailing with that sense which became a
true (and not despairing) penitent, the sins of his life past, the greatest he
could remember, was his voting my Lord of Straffords death; which though (as he
said) he did without any malice at all, yet he confessed it to be a very great
sin, and that he had done it out of a base fear (they were his own words) of a
prevailing party; adding, that he had very often and very heartily repented of
it, and was confident of Gods pardon for it. Then he told me, he had a great
desire to receive the Blessed Sacrament (so he called it) before he dyed the
next morning: asking what Divine of the Kings party I would recommend to him; I
replied, that (though many were more worthy, yet) none would be more willing to
do that service then my self; which he accepting very kindly, told me he durst
not desire it, for fear it might be some danger to me. After this, and some
conference in order to his preparation, both for his viaticum and his voyage,
the Sacrament and his death; he desired me to pray with him, which after I had
performed, and promised to be with him by seven the next morning, I left him
for that time to his own devotions.

The next day I was there at the time assigned, and after some short conference
in order to the present occasion, he desired me to hear him pray; which he did
for half an hour in an excellent method, very apt expressions, and most strong,
hearty, and passionate affections. First, confessing and bewailing his sins
with strong cries and tears: then humbly and most earnestly desiring Gods
mercy, through the merits of Christ only. Secondly for his dear Wife and
Children, with some passion; but for her especially with most ardent
affections: recommending them to the Divine Providence with great confidence
and assurance; and desiring for them rather the blessings of a better life,
then of this. Thirdly, for the King, Church, and State. And lastly, for his
enemies, with almost the same ardour and affection. After this, sending for my
Lord of Norwich and Sir John Owen, I read the whole Office of the Church for
Good Friday: and then, after a short Homily I used for the present occasion, we
received the Sacrament, in which action he behaved himself with great Humility,
Zeal, and Devotion. And being demanded after we had done, how he found himself,
he replied, very much better, stronger, and chearfuller for that Heavenly
repast; and that he doubted not to walk like a Christian through the vale of
death, in the strength of it. But he was to have an Agony before his Passion,
and that was the parting with his Wife, eldest Son, Son-in-law, two of his
Uncles, and Sir T. C. especially the parting with his most dear Lady, which
indeed was the saddest spectacle that ever I beheld. In which occasion he could
not choose but confess a little of humane frailty; yet even then he did not
forget both to comfort and counsel her, and the rest of his friends,
particularly in blessing the young Lord, he commanded him never to revenge his
death, though it should be in his power: the like he said unto his Lady. He
told his Son he would leave him a Legacy out of David's Psalms, and that was
this, Lord lead me in a plain path. For Boy, (says he) I would have you a
plain honest man, and hate dissimulation.

After this with much ado, I persuaded his Wife, and the rest to be gone; and
then being all alone with me, he said, Doctor, The hardest part of my work in
this world is now past, meaning the parting with his Wife. Then he desired me
to pray preparatively to his death, that in the last action he might so behave
himself, as might be most for Gods glory, for the endearing of his dead Masters
memory, his present Masters service, and that he might avoid the doing or
saying of any thing, which might savor either of ambition or vanity. This
being done, they were all carried to Sir Robert Cotton's house, where I was
with him, till he was called unto the Scaffold, and would have gone up with
him, but the Guard of Soldiers would not suffer me.

The same day he suffered, he writ this following Letter to his Wife.
My dearest life,
My eternal life is in Christ Jesus, my worldly considerations in the highest
degree thou have deserved, let me live long here in thy dear memory, to the
comfort of my Family, our dear Children, whom God out of mercy in Christ has
bestowed upon us. I beseech thee, take care of thy health, sorrow not, afflict
not thy self too much; God will be unto thee better then an Husband, and to my
Children better then a Father. I am sure, he is able to be so; I am confident,
he is graciously pleased to be so. God be with thee, my most virtuous Wife, God
multiply many comforts to thee, and my Children, is the fervent prayer of

Thy, etc.


March the 9. 1648. was the day appointed for his beheading, as also of Duke
Hamilton, and the Earl of Holland. A Scaffold being erected in the new
Palace-yard at Westminster, over against the great Hall Gate. The first that
mounted the same was Duke Hamilton, attended with Doctor Sibbald; who after
much delay, and many impertinent discourses, hoping as it was thought for a
politic Reprieve: but none coming, he submitted his neck to the Ax; upon whom
an unlucky Wit writing his Epitaph, thus descants.

A politition, yet a fool,
A teacher, and yet went to School,
A Hempen cord of silken twist,
A Papist yet a Calvanist,
A mere OGYGES, yet a stranger
To prudence, that foresees a danger;
Here lies (he is but to Scotland gone,
No worser Hell) it is Hamilton.
The next that entered the lists of death was the Earl of Holland, one whose
often changing from side to side had made him less acceptable in the eyes of the
people, though the disposition of affairs altering their postures so often, may
in part plead his excuse; no doubt he was real in his last undertaking. He came
to the Scaffold attended on by Mr. Bolton, and having made a long speech to the
people, of his honest intentions for the good of the Kingdom, and desiring of
God that it would please him, the people might look upon the posterity of the
King, and that they might be called in again, after many fervent prayers he had
his head severed from his body: upon whom our forementioned Poet thus
Satyrically goes on.

By Venus self beneath this stone
Lies Holland that spruce Earl,
His carcass here, his head is gone
To Bridget his brave Girl,
Who makes it her memento mori
While she lies close to Captain Pory.
Last of all our honored Hero mounted the Scaffold, to court grim death with
an undaunted brow; he came not as the two-former attended with a Minister,
having before prepared his way for death. Coming to the front of the Scaffold
he said as follows.

The conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the cause
of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say to
you, when I made an address to them (which was the last) I told them with much
sincerity, that I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be
partakers of his inestimable and boundless mercies in Jesus Christ; and truly,
I still pray that prayer, and I beseech the God of Heaven, forgive any injury
they have done to me, from my soul I wish it, and truly this I tell you, as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian; but it is necessary that I should
tell you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant, and truly I am a Protestant,
and very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it was
established in England by the thirty nine Articles; a blessed way of
profession, and such a one, as truly I never knew none so good: I am so far
from being a Papist, which some have very unworthily charged me withal that
truly, I profess to you, that though I love good works, and commend good works,
yet I hold, they have nothing at all to do in the matter of Salvation: my
Anchor hold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, that is
that I rest upon! And truly something I shall say to you as a Citizen of the
whole world, and in that consideration I am here condemned to dye, contrary to
the Law that governs all the world; that is, the Law of the Sword: I had the
protection of that for my life, and the honor of it; but I will not trouble
you much with this discourse, because in another place I have spoken very
largely and liberally of it. I believe you will hear by other means what
arguments I used in that case: but truly, that that is a stranger, you that are
English men, behold here an English man now before you, and acknowledged a
Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of England, not by any Law of England;
nay, shall I tell you more (which is strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws
of England that I know of. And truly, I will tell you, in the matter of the
civil part of my death, and the cause that I have maintained, I dye (I take it)
for maintaining the Fifth Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which enjoins
Reverence and Obedience to Parents. All Divines on all hands, though they
contradict one another in many several opinions, yet most Divines do
acknowledge that here is intended Magistracy and Order; and certainly I have
obeyed that Magistracy and that Order under which I have lived, which I was
bound to obey; and truly, I do say very confidently, that I do dye here for
keeping, for obeying that Fifth Commandment given by God himself, and written
with his own Finger. And now Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell
you, That I cannot imitate a better, nor a greater ingenuity then his, that
said of himself, For suffering an unjust judgment upon another, himself was
brought to suffer by an unjust judgment. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be
glorified, that all men that are concerned in it may take the occasion of it,
of humble Repentance to God Almighty for it, I do here profess to you, that
truly I did give my Vote to that Bill of the Earl of Strafford; I doubt not but
God Almighty has washed that away with a more precious Blood, that is, with
the Blood of his Son, and my dear Savior Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash
it away from all those that are guilty of it. Truly, this I may say, I had not
the least part, nor the least degree of malice in the doing of it; but I must
confess again to Gods Glory, and the accusation of my own frailty, and the
frailty of my nature, that truly it was an unworthy cowardice, not to resist so
great a torrent as carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think
I am most guilty of, but malice I had none; but whatsoever it was, God I am
sure has pardoned it, has given me the assurance of it, that Christ Jesus his
Blood has washed it away; and truly, I do from my soul wish, that all men that
have any stain by it, may seriously repent, and receive a remission and pardon
from God for it. And now Gentlemen, we have had an occasion by this intimation
to remember his Majesty, our King that last was; and I cannot speak of him, nor
think of it, but I must needs say, that in my opinion, that have had time to
consider all the Images of all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the
world; and truly, in my opinion, there was not a more virtuous, and more
sufficient Prince known in the world, then our gracious King Charles that dyed
last: God Almighty preserve our King that now is, his Son; God send him more
fortunate and longer days; God Almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both
the virtues and sufficiences of his Father: for certainly, I that have been a
Counselor to him, and have lived long with him, and in a time when discovery
is easily enough made, for he was young (he was about fifteen or sixteen years
of age) those years I was with him, truly I never saw greater hopes of virtue
in any young person then in him; great judgment, great understanding, strong
apprehensions, much honor in his nature, and truly, a very perfect English man
in his inclinations. I pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and unite the
Kingdoms one to another, to the happiness both of you and him, that he may long
live and reign among you, and that that Family may reign till thy Kingdom come,
that is, while all temporal power is consumated: I beseech God of his mercy,
give much happiness to this your King, and to you that in it shall be his
Subjects, by the grace of Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace
and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither; I pray God give
them as much mercy as their own hearts can wish; for my part I will not accuse
any one of them of malice, truly I will not; nay, I will not think there was
any malice in them; what other ends there are I know not, nor I will not
examine; but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them every
one: and so, the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
commands to his Majesty, that this Kingdom may be a happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient
people; God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom, God
Almighty preserve you all.

Having ended his Speech, he called for the Executioner, on whom he bestowed
five pounds, saying to him, I not only forgive thee from my soul, but desire
of God to give thee grace for a better employment. Having stood still a while
he said, God Almighty stench this blood, God Almighty stench, stench, stench
this issue of blood, this will not do the business; God Almighty find out
another way to do it. Then having taken his leave of those friends and servants
that were about him, he addressed himself to prayer, and upon a sign given by
him, had his head severed from his body by the Executioner.

Our forementioned Poet, better affected to this Honorable Lord, then to the
other two that dyed with him, bestows this Epitaph upon him, in remembrance of
his Virtues.

Here Virtue, Valor, Charity, and all
Those rare endowments we Celestial call
Included are, nor wonder at the story,
Capel lies here, Loyalties chiefest glory.
I shall close up all, only give you the abstract, or rather the introduction
to an Elegy, that a deserving person bestowed on him.

Disturb me not, my soul is mounting high
To pyramide great Capels memory;
I Will range my thoughts, it is a world that shall
Be ruled by Capels Echo, hallow all
Ye sacred Muses, and conspire to bring
Materials for this work and learn to sing:
For should you weep, your eyes might undertake
To drown the world which I intend to make.
Forbear, your tears are useless, you must now
Gaze upon earth with an undaunted brow;
Capel has taught us how to entertain
The pallid looks of fate, by him we gain
The art of dying, and from him we have
The definition of a deathless Grave.
Rare soul I say, thy ever active fame
Shall build a world unto thy pregnant name;
And every letter of thy stem, shall raise
A spacious Kingdom, where thy ample praise
Shall be recorded, every listening ear
Shall prove ambitious, be intranc't to hear:
'Twill be a glory when the world shall say,
'Twas bravely done, his Sovereign led the way:
And he as valiant Soldiers ought to do,
Marched boldly after, and was always true
To sacred Majesty; his Heroe'd breath
Disdained the fear of a so courted death;
Death added life unto his thoughts, for he
Contemned a death, he bought with Victory.
The very Birds shall learn to prate, and sing
How Capel suffered for his Royal King.
The Life of JAMES Marquess of Montross, Earl of Kincardine, etc.
IT may seem strange in such a scarcity of Scotch Worthies, there also being
already so many of our own, that I should go about to borrow one from that
Country, where if Diogenes were alive again, the Cinique, as I have heard one
merrily express, with his Lanthorn, would make no long inquest after such an
impossibility, but infallibly conclude, that there is not such another to be
found in Scotland.

This renowned Marquess was extracted from the Ancient and famous Family of the
Grahams in Scotland, whose valiant and loyal Actions have eternized their Names
to all posterity. His Grandfather and Father were advanced by King James and
King Charles unto places of the greatest honor in that Kingdom: which they
most happily discharged, with the love and good affection both of King and
People. This Honorable Person (whose Life we now relate) persisting in his
Predecessors steps, may give us cause to think that Valor and Loyalty were
entailed on that Family.

Yet at first he sided with the Covenanters against the Royal Party, they
pretending to nothing then, less then the preservation of Religion, the Honor
and Dignity of the King, the Laws of the Land, and the Freedom of the Nation.
But having found that those fair tales were only pretensions, and only coined
of purpose to draw people to their side, he like a wise man finding their
hearts alienated the King, he mediated a disengagement; but finding the work
difficult, he a while dissembled his intent, seeming as active as he was
before, that when time served he might dissert them to better purpose, having
also many of his friends amongst them, whom he hoped to draw off; by which
means he should be able to gather no small power, which would conduce much both
to the Kings safety and his own.

Whilst he was upon these determinations, the Covenanters had raised a strong
Army, and in a solemn convention at Duns, they determine to invade England;
Montross seeing he could not hinder those actions, would not seem to disapprove
of them; and having the command of two thousand Foot, and five hundred Horse,
to seem the more active, was the first man that set foot on English ground; and
had his friends fulfilled their promises, he had not only broken to pieces the
Covenanters designs, but in all probability had brought the whole Army along
with him to the King. But the Scots marching over the Tine, otherwise then he
expected, he was much disappointed of that opportunity he so longingly
attended; yet he kept the same loyal Inclinations toward the King, which
(taking advantage of the Treaty that ensued betwixt them) that he found means
to acquaint his Majesty by Letters, wherein he protested his faith and ready
obedience to him: but these Letters being stolen out of the Kings pockets by his
Bedchamber men, (the supposed instruments of Hamilton) and by them coppied out,
were sent to the Covenanters at New Castle, which place by the treachery of
some English Commanders was yielded unto them, who concealing their
Information, did not withal conceal their malignity against the Earl, but
labored all they could to render him odious to the people, and thereby
unserviceable to his Majesty. Nor wanted they fit instruments for this purpose,
for having obliged to themselves most of the Preachers throughout the Kingdom,
they made use of their mercenary tongues, to rail against the King and his
faithful Subjects, as the enemies of Christ; being themselves the while the
very shame and scandal of Christianity.

Yet still Montross goes on in his Loyal intentions, and joins to his side many
of the prime men for Nobility and Power, though some of them afterward for
fear betrayed their designs unto the Covenanters; so that on a sudden when he
suspected nothing, he with Napier Lord of Marchiston, and Sir Sterling Keer
were committed Prisoners to the Castle in Edinburgh. But a Pacification being
made betwixt both Kingdoms, he with his friends were set again at liberty.

Not long after in England happened those fatal discords betwixt the King and
Parliament; which growing so high, that they came to be determined by the
Sword: the Covenanters not to be wanting in the aid of their Confederates,
resolved to raise a puissant Army; and to oblige Montross to their side,
proffered him freely the Office of Lieutenant General of the Army, and what
ever else he could desire, and they bestow. But he not more careless of their
proffers then careful to inform the King of the danger that hereby hung over
his head, to which purpose he poasts into England, taking only the Lord Ogleby
into his counsel and company.

At York he informs the Queen of the covenanters intentions, and of the danger
that would ensue thereof; which doubtless had taken good effect at that time,
had not the coming of Duke Hamilton out of Scotland (upon pretense of kissing
the Queens hand, but with intent to overthrow Montross his councels) hindered
the same, who persuaded the Queen there was no fear of any Army, nor that the
King should need despair of amity and reconciliation with them; protesting he
himself would be active for the King with his person and estate.

But the Covenanters proceeding on in their designs, and Montross having better
knowledge of their intentions then before, he goes to Gloucester, and delares
the same to the King himself; but the King was so soothed up with Letters of
the contrary from Hamilton, and some such other Courtiers also buzzing in his
ears Montrosses youth, his rashness, his ambition, the envy and hatred he bare
unto the Hamiltons, and on the other side the Hamiltons fidelity, their
honesty, their discretion, their power; so that Montross nothing prevailed. In
the mean time the Covenanters were not idle, but having raised an Army of
eighteen thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, march for England; and now the
King (when it was too late) seeing himself thus grossy abused, sends for
Montross, and asks his advice what was best to be done.

Montross having declared the desperate estate Scotland was in at that present,
and how abominably his Majesty had been betrayed by them with whom he had
entrusted his secrets, resolved nevertheless, if the King would lay his
Commands upon him, nothing distrusting Gods assistance in a righteous cause, he
would undertake his cause, and use his best endeavors. The King applauding his
magnanimous resolution, giving him thanks, encouraged him to fit himself
cheerfully for so great a work; and the better to carry on the design, the King
sent the Earl of Antrim into Ireland, who engaged himself to be with Montross
in Argile, (a part of Scotland bordering upon Ireland) with ten thousand men by
the first of April 1644. this promise being past to him in December 1643. for a
sTock of men to set up withal; the King wrote to the Marquess of New Castle to
furnish him with aid, and sent Sir John Cockeram his Ambassador, with a
Commission and Instruction for foreign Aids and Arms. This being done, he sets
forward in his journey from Oxford toward Scotland, having in his company
about two hundred Horse, most of them Noblemen and Gentlemen, who had formerly
been Commanders in Foreign Countries. Being come to Durham, he sends the Kings
Instructions to the Marquess of Newcastle, and the next day they met and
conferred; but Newcastles wants were so great, that he could spare him at
present only an hundred Horse, and two Brass Field Pieces; but sent his
Orders to his Officers and Commanders in Cumberland and Westmerland to afford
him all the assistance they could, who accordingly met him near to Carlisle with
eight hundred Foot, and three Troops of Horse. With these small Forces he
enters Scotland, but having come to the River Anan, upon occasion of a Mutiny
among the English, most of them fly their Colors, and run back to England.
Notwithstanding he with his own men came to Dumfrise, and took the Town into
protection upon surrender, where he stayed a while, that he might be ready to
entertain Antrim and his Irish; but the time appointed being past, and no news
stirring of them, the Covenanters gathering themselves together on every side,
to secure himself from being surprised, he returns to Carlisle. And not loving
to lie idle, joins with the Kings Forces in Northumberland, takes the Town and
Castle of Morpet, as also an hundred Foot at the mouth of the River of Tine,
and afterward victuals New Castle; then intending to join his Forces with
Prince Rupert, who was coming to raise the Siege at York, he made all the haste
he could, but met him not till he was upon his retreat, the day after that
unfortunate Battle: All things thus failing him, he returns to Carlisle, and
sends the Lord Ogleby and Sir William Rolluck disguised into Scotland, to
discover the state of the Country; who returning back, brought him word, that
all things were in a desperate condition, and therefore counseled him to bend
his course some other way.

But Montross thinking it unworthiness in him to despair of so good a cause,
resolves upon a strange adventure, for delivering those few Gentlemen that had
been constant unto him to the Lord Ogleby, to be conducted to the King: he with
Sir William Rolluck, and one Sibbald, being disguized, entered Scotland,
Montross passing as Sibbalds man. Thus making all the haste they could, they
came at last to the house of his Cousen Patrick Graham of Innisbrake, not far
from the River of Tay in the Sherifdom of Perth; not long had he been there,
but he receives news of eleven hundred of Irish sent over by Antrim, who were
then upon the Mountains; who being made to understand of his being there, they
came marching unto him, and submitted to his command.

The next day the men of Athol, to the number of eight hundred, put themselves
in Arms, and joined with Montross; so that now having gotten this handful of
men, he desires to be in action; impatient therefore of further delay, he
marches from thence, with a resolution to set upon his enemies: and having
marched as far as Bucknith, five hundred more under the command of the Lord
Kilpont. Son to the Earl of Taith, joined with him, by whom he understood that
the Covenanters were thick in Arms at a Rendezvous at Perth; whereupon with all
the haste he could, he speedeth thither: these were commanded by the Lord
Elcho, who upon Montrosses approach provided to fight; they were in number six
thousand Foot and seven hundred Horse, so that contemning the paucity of their
enemies, they grew to a foolish confidence of Victory; but Montross so well
ordered his Army that their confidence failed them, for joining Battle they
were overthrown, two thousand being slain, and more taken prisoners.

The City of Perth upon this overthrow, submitted her self to the Conqueror,
to whom he did not the least harm; where having staid three days, many of his
Athol men returning home, he marches with the rest of his Forces to Aberdeen;
but the Town having a strong Garrison therein refused to submit and he thinking
it no wisdom to hazard the honor he had gotten by his late Victory upon the
doubtful success of a Siege, turns away toward Esk, whither came to him the
Lord Ogleby with his two Sons, Sir Thomas and Sir David, who with admirable
constancy continued with him to the very end of the War.

And now receiving intelligence that an Army of the Covenanters, under the
command of the Lord Burleigh lay at Aberdeen, with long marches he hies
thither, sets upon them, and after a long fight puts them to the rout, with the
loss of almost all their Foot; who flying for refuge unto the City, Montrosses
men came in thronging amongst them, through the Gates and Posterns, and laid
them on heaps all over the Streets. This Battle was fought September the 12.
1644. After this defeat Montross calling his Soldiers back to their Colors,
entered the City, and allowed them two days rest.

In the mean time news was brought that Argile was hard by with far greater
Forces then those they had dealt with last; whereupon he removes to Kintor, a
Village ten miles off from Aberdeen, expecting some of the Gordons would have
joined with him; but none appearing he resolved to withdraw his Forces into the
Mountains and Fastnesses, for though he had fought twice indeed very
prosperously, it could not be expected that seeing he was so beset on all sides
with great and numerous Armies, he should be able to hold out always without
relief: whereupon hiding his Ordnance in a Bog, he marches to an old Castle
called Rothmurk, intending to pass over the River of Spey, but on the other
side were the number of five thousand up in Arms to hinder his passage;
wherefore to save his Army from being oppressed with the enemies Horse, he
turned into Badenoth, a Rocky and Mountainous Country; here he fell very
dangerously sick, but recovering again, he sends Mac-donel who commanded the
Irish, with a Party into the Highlands, to invite them to take up Arms with
him, and if they would not be invited, to force them; he himself passes into
the North of Scotland, and having staid a while for recruit at Strathbogy, he
removed to Faivy Castle and possessed it. Secure now as he thought from Argile,
his confidence had well near destroyed him, he and Lothian with 2500. Foot, and
1200 Horse, having undiscovered come within two miles of him. Montross to
repair his Scouts negligence, having but 1500. Foot, and 50. Horse, draws them
up to a high craggy Hill, which over-looked the Castle, but before he had
appointed every one his ground to draw up in, many of his Soldiers fairly run
away; yet notwithstanding their cowardice, he so behaved himself with the
remainder, that though Argile several days attempted to assault him, he
carried away nothing with him but loss and disgrace.

Montross being now desirous to join with Mac-donel and those Highlanders he
had raised, takes the advantage of the night, and returns to Strathbogy,
whither also Argile follows him, and endeavors by great promises to draw away
his Soldiers from him. Montross to prevent his designs, marches from thence to
Balveny and so to Badenoth, yet had Argiles promises wrought such effects in
many of the Gentry and prime Soldiers, that they shamefully deserted him:
Montross looking upon their revolt with indignation and scorn, hastes into
Athol, and joins with Macdonel. Argile at that time lay at Dunkeldon, but
being frighted with the report of Montrosses coming, when he was yet sixteen
miles off, he bid his men shift for themselves, and he himself fled as fast as
he could to Perth. Montross hereupon passes into the Country of Argile, and
harazes the same with Fire and Sword; and hearing that the Earl of Seafort with
five thousand Horse and Foot were near at hand, he resolves to fight them; but
whilst he was preparing against him, he had information that the Earl of
Argile having gathered Forces out of the lower parts of the Kingdom, and joined
unto them such Highlanders as yet adhered unto him, containing in all about
three thousand Foot, were at an old Castle called Innerligh upon the Bank of
Logh-Aber, some thirty miles of him, which caused him to march in all haste
through untrodden paths, and was on their backs ere they were aware, and giving
them Battle overthrew them, having the killing of them with a most horrible
slaughter for nine miles together; no less then 1500. being killed, among whom
were very many Gentlemen of the Campbels, whose deaths were answerable to their
names, dying in Campo belli, in the Field of War. Argile himself escaped by
Boat, many of the conquered fled into the Castle, which was soon after
surrendered to Montross.

Long staid he not there, but returns again by the coasts of Harrick, Arne, and
Narne, a great party of his enemies being assembled at Elgin, upon the news of
his approach dispersed themselves, leaving the Castle of Elgin unto him, here
the Lord Gordon eldest Son to the Marquess of Huntley, with a select number of
his friends and clients joined themselves to him; having now two thousand Foot
and two hundred Horse he marches to Brechin, where he understood Sir John
Hurrey General of the Horse for the Covenanters was with a great party of
Horse, whom he encounters and puts to flight; and understanding that Bailey a
Commander of great account had been fetched out of England to withstand him, he
resolves to give him Battle, and thereupon goes against him; but having in vain
often provoked him thereunto, many of his Soldiers also deserting him, he was
forced with much difficulty and hazard to retreat to the Mountains.

And now being out of his enemies reach, he sends the Lord Gordon to levy new
Forces, whilst he with a small Party marches through Angus into Pertshire,
that he might distract the enemy till such time he made up his Army: Bailey
understanding where he was, intends to surprise him, but he found Montross
provided for him, who so valiantly repulsed his assault, that by killing some
and routing others he forced them to a retreat.

Hurrey having thus before mist his market on Montross intended to make it up
on the Lord Gordon; Montross fearing he should be over-mastered, thought it
necessary to oppose Hurrey as soon as was possible, as well to secure so dear a
friend from so eminent danger, as to be nibbling at the enemies Forces, as he
found them asunder, and to cut off that power by peace-meal, which he well
knew, if it were all in a body would be above his strength; therefore by long
and continued journeyes, he marches into Mar, and joins with the Lord Gordon,
who had raised a thousand Foot, and two hundred Horse; and indeed it was but
time, Hurry having gotten within six miles of him, who understanding of
Montrosses coming, retires with all speed he could to Innerness: Montross as
hastily follows after him, here the Earls of Seafort and Sunderland, the
whole sept of the Frasers, and most of Murray and Cathness, and the
neighboring parts joined with Hurry, so that Montross fearing to be
over-powred had a great mind to retire; but not only Hurry pressed so
vehemently upon him, that it was scarce possible for him to retreat, but Baily
also with a Southern Army, much stronger then Hurry's, was gotten betwixt the
Mountains and him, so that fearing to be hemmed in between two Armies, he
resolves to try the fortune of War without delay, and commit the success to
God; to gain much advantage as he could, he marshalls his Army, and gives them
Battle, which was fought with much courage and eagerness on both sides; each
part striving to outvie the other in valor; at length the Covenanters were
overthrown, three thousand of their Foot Soldiers being slain, but most of
their Horse escaped by a more timely then honorable flight.

Hurry with his broken Troops fled unto Baily, after whom Montross (having a
few days refreshed his Souldidiers) followed after, whom Baily provokes unto
Battle, which he refused, yet nevertheless by frequent skirmishes, and
especially breaking up their quarters in the night, be so weakened their power
and courage, that as well Commanders as Soldiers, hastily and disorderly
betook themselves by night to Innerness when none pursued them.

In the mean time the Earl of Lindsey, the prime ringleader of the Covenasters
next unto Argile, had raised a new Army, and had passed over with his Forces
into Angus, intending to be a reserve unto Baily; Montross resolving to quell
this new Army, marches against him with such speed, that the news of his
approach was not so swift as himself; and now Lindsey was not above seven miles
from him, and all things ready for an assault, when (upon what occasion it is
uncertain) almost all the Northern men privately ran away from their Colors,
and going back the way that they came, return into their Country; by which
means that Victory slipped through his fingers, which he had almost grasped in his
hand.

Therefore taking up new resolutions, he sends the Lord Gordon and Mac-donel
to levy more Forces; and now Lindsey pretending to do some famous exploit,
takes a thousand old Soldiers from Baily, leaving him as many new raised men
in their rooms: Montross having notice hereof, desires to fight him, and sends
a Trumpet to offer a set Battle; but Baily answers, he would not receive order
to fight from an Enemy. Yet at last through the rashness of the Lord Balcarise,
a Colonel of Horse, who precipitated himself and the Horse under his command
into danger, he was forced thereunto; whereupon a bloody Fight ensued, wherein
Baily was overthrown, with the loss of the greatest part of his Army. This
Battle was fought at Alford on the 2. of July, 1645.

Montross having obtained this Victory, marches into Angus, where he met his
Cousen Patrick Graham with his Athol men ready to live and dye under his
command, and Mac-donel with a great power of Highlanders; so that being
reinforced with such an Army, he resolves to make his way into the very heart
of the Kingdom: and passing over the Tay at Dunkeldon, encamped in Methfyn
Forest; the Covenanters at that time held a Parliament at Saint John's Town,
but hearing of Montrosses approach, they secured themselves by flight: he to
increase their terror, drew nearer to the Town; but finding it not safe for
him to descend into the Champion Country, having such want of Horse, he
retreated to little Dunkeldon.

But that want was soon supplied by a Party from the North, under the Earl of
Aboine, and Colonel Nathaniel Gordon, the Earl of Airley, and Sir David his
son; so that being now thus recruited, he thought it not good to lose any time,
but marched straight toward the Enemy. And having in vain several times
proffered them Battle, at last it came to a pitched Field in a place called
Kilsythe, where the Covenanters though they overmatcht him in number, yet came
so far behind him in valor, that he obtained over them an absolute Victory,
having the killing of them for fourteen miles; so that of all their Foot it is
thought there did not an hundred come off, nor did their horse escape very
well, of whom some were killed, some taken, the rest dispersed. Their Ordnance,
their Arms, their Spoils came clearly to the Conquerours, who lost only six of
their men, on the other side were slain six thousand, a great disproportion in
number; and did not the effects which followed this Victory make it the more
credible, it might seem to some a falsehood, if not an impossibility.

For presently afterward was a great alteration all the Kingdom over, the
chief of the Nobility who sided with the Covenanters, some fled to Barwick,
some to Carlisle, some to New Castle, others into Ireland; the Marquess of
Douglass, the Earls of Limmuck, Annandale, and Hertfield; the Lord Barrons of
Seton, Drummond, Fleming, Maderly, Carnegy, and Jonston, with many others of
great quality submitted themselves: such as before only privately wished well
unto the King, now expressed it openly. The Cities and Countries that were
furthest off, began to dispatch their Commissioners to profess in their names
their Allegiance to their King, their duty and service to his Vicegerent, and
freely to offer him Men, Arms, Provision, and other necessaries of War. The
City of Edinburgh to ingratiate themselves with the Conquerours, they released
their Prisoners, of whom the chiefest were the Earl of Crawford, and James Lord
Ogleby, son to the Earl of Airly, whom with their Delegates they sent to
Montross to entreat for peace, proffering submission, and promising obedience
for the time to come; yea, the whole Kingdom every where sounded nothing but
Montrosses praise. But what thing on earth is permanent many of his Soldiers
being laden with spoil, ran privily away from their Colors, and returned
home. Presently after their very Commanders desired Furloghs for a little
while, pretending that the Enemy had no Army within the borders of the Kingdom,
and therefore their service for the present might very well be spared; the Earl
of Aboine (whether the Lord Governor would or no) carried away with him not
only his own men, but all the rest of the Northern Forces: yea, Alexander
Macdonel, who had hitherto continued so faithful, departed into the Highlanders
with more then three thousand stout men, and sixscore of the best Irish,
promising with a solemn oath their sudden return, yet he never saw Montross
after.

Montross seeing it would be no better, with his small Army passing by
Edinburgh, (into which he would not enter, by reason the plague then raged in
the City) led them through Lothainshire, and in Strathgale joined with some
Forces raised by the Marquess of Douglass; afterward he marches to Niddisdale
and Annandale, and the Country of Air, that he might there raise what Horse
he could; and coming to Selkirk, he quartered his Horse in a Village, and his
Foot in a Wood close by. His Army consisting of only five hundred Foot, and
those Irish, and a very weak party of new raised Horse.

Lesley understanding of his weak condition, (having been newly sent for out of
England to help the Covenanters in their exigency) with six thousand Horse made
such speed, that before he was discryed by Montrosses Scouts, he was not above
half a mile off; Montross at that present was very busy in dispatching Letters
to the King, but upon news of Lesley's coming he mounts the first horse he
could light on, and gallops into the Field appointed for the Rendezvous, where
he finds a great deal of noise, but no order. The Cavalry being little
acquainted with duty, and lying already dispersed in their quarters, where they
dreamt more of baiting their horses, then maintaining their lives and honors;
yet there were a few, and those were for the most part Noblemen and Knights,
who made all speed thither, and gallantly undertook to make good the right
Wing: but they being not above sixscore in all, and being assailed by so potent
an Enemy, multitude overcoming valor, having twice repulsed their Enemy with
loss, at last they betook themselves to flight, the Foot fighting a good while
stoutly and resolutely, were forced to yield, but found little mercy from the
Conqueror, putting them all to the Sword. Montross seeing his men routed,
(which he never saw before) rallying about thirty Horse whom he had gathered up
in that confusion, he desperately charge through the Enemy, who hotly pursuing
him, to make his flight the more honorable, he charge his pursuers, routs
them, and carries away one Bruce a Captain of Horse, and two Cornets with their
Standards Prisoners.

And now being safe from danger, he makes what haste he could into Athole, to
recruit his Army, Aboine bringing him fifteen hundred Foot, and three hundred
Horse; with some addition of the Athol men, he crosses the Forth, and came
into Leven, which he destroyed without any resistance; but his Forces too weak
to resist so powerful an Army as the Enemy had then in the Field, he returns
back into the Country of Athole, and goes himself in person to Bogie Castle
upon the mouth of Spey, to speak with Huntley; (having by messengers often
fruitlesly solicited him to join with him) as soon as they met, Montross
invited him in smooth and gentle language to associate with him him in the War
for the safety of the King and Kingdom, and gave him so full satisfaction in
all things, that as being at last overcome, he seemed to give him his hand, and
promised that not only all his men, but he himself would come in person in the
head of them, and be with him with all possible speed. And for the better
mannaging of the War, they agreed that Huntley wafting over the Spey, should
make his way on the right hand, by the Sea Coast of Murrey, and Montross was to
go round about on the left hand through Strath-Spey, and so to besiege Innernes
(a strong Garrison of the Covenanters) on both sides.

In the mean time a convention of the Estates was held at Saint Andrews,
wherein were condemned and executed Colonel Nathanel Gordon, Sir Robert
Spotswood, Andrew Gutherey, Son to the Bishop of Murray, and William Murray
Brother to the Earl of Tullibardin. The crimes objected against them was no
less then High Treason; the facts they were guilty of, Loyalty to the King; for
the same cause was beheaded not long before Sir William Rollock, Alexander
Ogleby, of an ancient and honorable Family, and Sir Philip Nesbit.

The death of his Friends troubled Montross exceedingly; yet abhorring their
cruelty by inflicting the like on those Prisoners he had of theirs, he resolved
to revenge their deaths in a more nobler way, and with his Army marched to
besiege Innerness, the most considerable Garrison of all the North, and the
Haven there most commodious for entertaining Foreign Forces. Now had Huntley
with his Army come up to have blocked up that side of the Town he undertook to
do, the Garrison for want of provision had been forced to yield: but he
trifling away his time in Murray, a good way off Innerness, without either
honor or profit, gave Major General Middleton time to raise six hundred Horse
and eight hundred Foot to raise the Siege, and notwithstanding Huntley had
notice thereof by Montross, yet could he receive no answer from him but what
relisht of scornfulness; nay so far off were they from affording him
assistance, that Montross having sent three Troops of Horse to lie at the Fords
of the Spey, to observe the motion of the enemy, and if they came, to send him
often and certain intelligence; Jews Gordon, Huntleys Son, who then commanded
the Castle of Rothes, invited the Captains to a banquet in his Castle,
persuading them to leave off their needless guards, and that the enemy lay very
far off, where with dainty cheer and store of wine he detained them so long
till Middleton with a great Army of Horse and Foot had got over the Spey, and
set footing in Murrey; so that had not Montross had notice of their approach
another way, he had had a sharper bout now then he had at Selkirk; but Montross
knowing them too strong for him in Horse, avoiding the plain, he retreated with
his men beyond the Ness; and notwithstanding their often falling upon his rear,
yet he so well managed his retreat, that with little loss he advanced unto the
Bank of the Spey, safe from his enemies Horse.

And now he resolved without further delay to make his progress over all the
North Country and Highlands, with a considerable party, to list Soldiers, to
encourage the well disposed, to reduce those that were refractory by the
severity of the Laws and condign punishment, and to deal with them as men use
to do with sick children, make them to take Physic whether they will or no;
but whilst he was busy about his design, there came a Herald unto him from
the King (who by I know not what misfortune had cast himself upon the Scotch
Covenanters at Newcastle) whereby he was required forthwith to lay down his
Arms and disband, and to depart into France, and there to wait his Majesty's
further pleasure; he being astonished with this unexpected message, bitterly
bewailed the sad condition of the King, that had forced him to cast himself
upon the mercy of his deadly enemies; yet not to be guilty of that crime, and
especially lest the Covenanters should put his actions upon the Kings account,
and use him the worse for them, seeing they had him in their power, he
according to the Kings command disbanded his Army.

Now it was articled betwixt the King and the Covenanters that Montross should
depart Scotland within a month, and that they should find him Shiping, with
provision and all things necessary when he went; but they seeking to circumvent
him, sent him no Ship for his transportation until the last day allowed for his
stay: the Ship it self ill victualled and worse rig'd, so that when Montross
showed himself ready to depart, the Master of the Ship told him, that he must
have some days allowed him to pitch and righ is Ship, before he durst
adventure himself to the wind and waves: moreover there lay great English
Ships and Men of War every day in sight about the mouth of the River of Esk (by
which he was to pass) attending there in favor of the Covenanters, for their
much desired booty, that by no means he might escape their hands.

But Montross smelling out their designs, had sent some before hand to search
diligently the Havens in the North; who by good fortune in the Haven of
Stanhyve found a small bark of Bargen in Norway, the master whereof was soon
agreed with; thither Montross sent several of his friends whom he knew could
not be safe for never so little a while in that Country, and they on the third
of September 1646. having a good wind put forth to Sea for Norway; and the
same evening Montross himself, accompanied only with one James Wood, a worthy
Preacher, by a small Cock-boat got into a Bark which lay at Anchor without the
Haven of Montross, and being clad in a course suit, the Lord and Patron passed
for his Chaplains servant.

Montross having thus cleared himself out of his enemies hands, went into
France, where by the general consent of the Princes of the Blood, and the rest
of the Nobility, he was designed Captain General of all the strangers in that
Kingdom, a place of great honor and trust; but Cardinal Mazarine thwarting his
designs, (being a professed foe to Scots in that Kingdom) he took his journey
into Holland, where the Prince then was, in pursuit of his former intentitions.
But Duke Hamilton (a name fatal to the House of the Stewards) who formerly was
his irreconcilable enemy was now his competitor; so that Montross seeing no
good there to be done, traveled up into Germany, and so to Austria, where by
the Emperor he was courteously entertained, and amongst many other honors
conferred on him, he freely proffered him the command of ten thousand men for a
standing Army against the Swede: but peace being concluded betwixt these two
Potentates (intending a journey for Scotland) being honorably dismissed, he
addresses himself to the Dukes of Brandeburgh and Holsteyn, and having gathered
together about six or seven hundred men, fearing he should have an express
command to desist from his purpose, because the Treaty betwixt the Prince and
the Scottish Commissioners was now very near a conclusion, made him precipitate
himself and those that were with him into most inevitable ruin; for
considering his small preparation, it was a desperate action to attempt so
mighty a business, but the matter being fatal, he must needs contribute his own
endeavors toward that destruction which his cruel fortune had provided for
him. Nor could the loss of two Ships with all the men and arms therein, (whom
he had sent before to prepare his way) alter his resolution, but with the rest
of his company passes over to Orkney, and having raised what force he could
there, embarcks himself, and in a short space lands upon the point of Cathnes,
which is the farthest land to the Northwest of Scotland, as knowing the world
was much astonished at this invasion; now whilst the King was upon a Treaty, he
published a Declaration, wherein he labored to clear himself of any aspersion
of sinister ends; that his intention was only against some particular persons,
who had against the Laws of the Kingdom, raised and maintained a War against
the Kings Father, and did now by their subtle practices endeavor to destroy
the Son also; but the Country for several causes did not come to second him as
he expected; so that being encountered by the Earl of Sunderland and Colonel
Staughorn, his Army was overthrown, two hundred killed, and twelve hundred
taken. In this skirmish was taken the Standard which he had caused to be made
of purpose to move the affections of the people, with this Motto, Judge and
revenge my cause, O Lord, and the Portraict of the late King beheaded, exactly
well done. The Standard Bearer a very gallant young Gentleman was killed, after
he had several times refused quarter; there was Colonel Hurry taken, the Lord
Frenderick, Sir Francis Hay of Dalgety, Colonel Hay of Naughton, Colonel Grya,
and most of the Officers, and two Ministers.

Montross himself after he saw the day was absolutely lost, having with his
Sword hewn out his way through the midst of his enemies, hoping fortune might
afterward be more favorable to him, he endeavors by policy to save his life,
and forsaking his Horse, throws away his Cloak and Sword, then exchanging
apparel with a Highlander, in that habit keeps himself undiscovered in the
Fields for three or four days together; but such narrow search being made for
him, that he could not long escape, he freely discovers himself to the Lord of
Astron, who had been one of his followers before, thinking to find friendship
at his hands; but he greedy of the reward which was promised to his apprehender
by the Council of State, money having a deeper impression in his heart then
amity, seized on him, and with a strong guard conveyed him to David Lesley.

He being now in the custody of his mortal enemies, from whom he could not
expect the least favor, he yet expressed a singular constancy, and in a manner a
carelessness of his own condition. And now joyful of their prey, they conduct
him to Edinburgh, where by the way lodging one night at the Town of Dundee,
notwithstanding they had suffered more by his Army then any Town else within
that Kingdom, yet were they so far from insulting over him, that they testified
a great deal of sorrow for his woeful condition, and furnished him with clothes
suitable to his birth and person. The Parliament of Scotland being otherwise
affected, who was then informed of his taking, thought fit to give out this
Sentence against him before he came to Edinburgh; That so soon as he should
come to Town, he should be met at the Gate by the Magistrates, and Hangman;
that he should be tied with cords upon a Cart bare-headed, and the Hangman to
ride upon the Horse that drew the Cart, covered before him, amd so to be
brought though the Town; that he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross of
Edinburgh, until he dyed; his History and Declaration hanging about his neck,
and so hang three hours in public view of all the people: after which, he
should be beheaded and quartered. His head to be fixed upon the prisonhouse of
Edinburgh, and his Legs and Arms over the Gates of the Cities of Sterling,
Glascow, St. John's Town, and Aberdeen. All which was executed upon him with a
great deal of insultation, especially of the Ministry, who having him now at
their mercy could never be satisfied with his calamities; they reviled him with
all possible spite, objected frequently to him his former condition, and his
present misery, and pronounced heavy judgments against him; and being asked
why they could not otherwise be satisfied but by so ignominious handling of
him? they replied, They knew no other way to humble him, and bring him home to
God.

The fatal day being come designed to put a period to all his troubles, there
was erected in the middle of the marketplace a large Scaffold, breast high, in
the midst of which, was planted a Gibbet of extraordinary height; to this place
was he conducted by the Baliffs, he was clothed in a Scarlet Cloak richly
laced with Gold lace; as he came along the Streets in great State, there
appeared in his countenance so much Beauty, Majesty, and Gravity, as amazed the
beholders. John Tailors honest Verses will serve for this dishonorable Scotch
expedtion.

In a good cause to dye it is no shame,
Although a Halter do procure the same.
Being come thither, he was much detained with a great many frivolous
questions, of which, partly the Ministers, partly those whom the States
suffered to be about him, desired to be satisfied. He made a short Speech, in
which he was often interrupted; the tenor of which was, That be was satisfied
in his conscience for what he had done for his Royal Master the King, as in
relation to War. That for his own particular sins (which were infinite) he bad
begged pardon earnestly of God, and had an inward hope to obtain it; he freely
forgave all those who had sought his overthrow, and entreated the charity of
all the people to pray both for him and themselves. The Ministers because he
was under the Sentence of excommunication refused to pray for him, and even on
the very Scaffold were very bitter against him. After he had about a quarter of
an hour prayed with his Hat before his eyes, he was ready to go to his
suffering, when his Book, and Declaration, and all other printed Papers which
he had published in his life, being tied in a string together, were hanged a
bout his neck; he was very earnest that he might have the liberty to keep on
his hat, it was denied; he requested he might have the privilege to keep his
Cloak about him, neither would that be granted; in despite of all their
affronts, uncivil, and barbarous usage, with a most undaunted courage he went
up to the top of that prodigious Gibbet; where having freely pardoned the
Execuoner, he gave him three or four pieces of gold; when this was done, and
his arms tied, he asked the Officers, If they had any more dishonor, as they
conceived it, to put upon him, he was ready to accept it. Then commanding the
Hangman at the uplifting of his hands to tumble him over; he was accordingly
thrust off by the weeping Executioner, who with his more honest tears seemed to
revile the cruelty of his Country men. I shall conclude with the Poet.

Nescia men's hominum fati sortisque futurae,
Et servere modum rebus sublata secundi.
Some write that though he had not the courteous invention of an Epitaph by any
of his Friends to memorize him, that he was so zealous of the Fame of his great
Master Charles the first, the with the point of his Sword he wrote these
following Lines.

Great, Good, and Just, could I but rate
My griefs, and thy so rigid fate,
I Would weep the world to such a strain,
As it should deluge once again.
But since thy loud tongued Blood demands supplies,
More from Briareus hands then Argus eyes.
I Will sing thy obsequies with Trumpets sounds,
And write thy Epitaph with Blood and Wounds.
Montross.

One that detested the harsh dealings of the Scots to this Martial Earl, writ
these two Latin Verses.

A Dolor Inferni, frauds Capitis que Rotundi,
Et Judae suavium, det Deus ut Caveam.
The Life of JAMES USHER Archbishop of Armagh.
The Country of Ireland has from old brought forth so many pious and learned
men, that several Writers have termed it, The Land of Sains. Amongst the rest
this worthy Prelate is not the least Ornament unto that Nation; one who was a
person of great Piety, of singular Judgment, learned to a miracle; so
excelling in knowledge, both Humane and Divine, that I cannot write so high of
his worth, as his merits raised themselves above all expression.

He was born at Dublyn, in the Year of our Redemption, 1580. extracted from
honest and able Parents; his Father was one of the Clerks of the Chancery, a
man of excellent parts and endowments. His Mother of the Family of the
Stanihursts, sufficiently famous in Richard Stanihurst, Irelands Cambden, the
most eminent Philosopher of his time. This his good, though seduced Mother
through the subtilty of the Popish Priests was drawn into the Romish
Persuasion, and notwithstanding great means was used for the reclaiming her,
yet continued she therein to the day of her death. His Grandfather by his
Mothers side was chosen three times Speaker of the House of Commons in
Parliament in Ireland. His Uncle by his Fathers side was one of his
Predecessors Archbishop of Armagh. And as he was thus nobly descended, so was
he as well educated; being at eight years old sent to the Grammar School, Sir
James Fullerton being his Schoolmaster, and Sir. James Hamilton (afterward
Lord Viscount Clandeboise) Usher to the School, who were by King James sent out
of Scotland upon another design, but disguized themselves under that
employment. Under these two he so profited, that in four years time he excelled
in Grammar, Rhetoric and Poesy; and was so affected with Chronology and
Antiquity, that in his early years he drew out an exact Series of Times when
each eminent person lived.

The next year, being the thirteenth of his age, he was admitted into the
College of Dublyn, being the first Scholar that was entered into it: and
truly it is a question whether the College received more Honor thereby, in
having so learned a man recorded in the Frontispiece of their Admission Book;
or the from the College in honoring him to be their first Graduate, Fellow,
Procter, etc. At the same time also Sir James Hamilton hitherto Usher of the
School, was chosen Fellow of the College, and so became his Tutour under whom
he attained to a perfection in the Greek and Hebrew Languages, which he wanted
when he came to the College.

He thus increasing in knowledge as in years, looked still further, as he did
account all knowledge vain which tended not to the establishment of his mind,
and to the good of his future estate. For the furtherance of this Achievement
he read many Books, amongst other that of Stapletons, Fortress of the Faith,
wherein he blotteth our Church with Novelty, in dissenting from them, who from
all Antiquity had maintained the same Faith; this plunged our great Scholar
into several doubts, that the ancientest must needs be the best, as the nearer
the Fountain the purer the streams; and that Errors were received in succeeding
Ages, according to that known speech of Tertullian, Verum quodcunque primum,
adulterum quodcunque posterius. For the rectifying of his judgment herein,
with indefatigable pains and industry, he read over most of the Ancient
Fathers, and most Authors writing of the Body of Divinity; whereby he not only
settled his Opinion, but also became able to dispute with the prime of the
adverse party.

Having taken the Formality of Batchelour of Arts, Anno 1598. The Earl of Essex
being sent over Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and Chancellor of the University
of Dublin, there was a solemn Act for his entertainment, wherein Mr. Usher
answered the Philosophy Act with great applause.

And now his Father intended to send him over into England, to the Inns of
Court, for the study of the Common Law; but God who intended him for a Labourer
in his own Vineyard, prevented his intentions by death, leaving his son a good
Estate in Land; but he fearing it might be an hinderance to his studies, gave a
great part of the Estate to his Brothers and Sisters: and devoting himself
wholly to the study of Divinity, was chosen Fellow of the College; soon after
he commenced Master of Arts; about which time he disputed with Henry
Fitz-Symonds the Jesuit, who gave him great commendations for his abilities;
and said, That of those which were not Catholics, he was one of the most
learned.

Soon after was he chosen Catechist of the College, and immediately after
(notwithstanding he was not-twenty one years of age) he was ordained Minister,
and afterward proved mighty powerful in his preaching, converting many Papists
to the Protestant Religion; who came so constantly to hear him, and so admired
his Doctrine, that it was well hoped the Nation would be of one heart and one
mind; but through the connivance of some in Authority, the Statutes made
against Papists were suspended, and they obtained little less then a tolleraton
in their Religion; which caused many of them to withdraw themselves again. This
pious Bishop entertaining an holy Indignation thereat, preached a Sermon to the
State at Christ Church in Dublyn, taking for his Text this passage in Ezekiel,
Chap. 4.6. where the Prophet by lying on his side was to bear the iniquity of
Judah forty days. I have appointed thee day for a year, even a day for a year,
(as the Old Translation of that Bible he then used reads it) making this
application thereof, From this year will I reckon the sin of Ireland, that
those whom you now embrace shall be your ruin, and you shall bear this
iniquity. Now this passage of the Prophet does by consent of Interpreters
signify the time of forty years to the destruction of Jerusalem, and that
Nation for their Idolatry; and this Sermon being Preached in Anno 1601. just
forty years before that horrid Rebellion brake forth in Ireland, Anno 1641.
made it appear that it had something in it of a prophetic spirit.

His first Church preferment was to the Chancellourship of St. Patrick in
Dublin, in which Mr. Cambden found him, An. 1607. at what time he was composing
his most excellent Brittania, of whom he gives this Character in his
observations concerning Dublin. Most of which I acknowledge to owe to the
diligence and labor of James Usher, Chancellor of the Church of Saint
Patrick, who in various learning and judgment far exceeds his years. Soon
after Mr. Cambdens departure be commenced Batchellor of Divinity, and
immediately upon it was chosen Professor of Divinity in that University of
Dublin, which he held about thirteen or fourteen years; during which time the
Provostship of the College falling void, he was unanimously elected by the
Fellows; but by reason of some trouble belonging to it (notwithstanding it it
had a large annual allowance) he refused it: a thing to be taken notice of,
because rare amongst the Clergy men of this latter age.

Soon after he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and now his eminency gained him
enemies, who scandalized him to King James, under the notion of a Puritan; but
what was intended for his downfall proved for his preferment; for the King
entering into a free discourse with him, received from him such abundant
satisfaction of the soundness of his Judgment and Piety, that notwithstanding
the opposition of great ones, without his seeking, made him Bishop of Mead in
Ireland, just then falling void whilst he was in England; upon his entering
into his dignity, a Wit of those times made this excellent Annagram upon him.

James Mead, Anagrama,

I am the same. Which he made good ever after in the whole course of his life,
neither being puffed up with the the windy titles of ambition, nor slacking his
former constancy of preaching; engraving this Motto on his Episcopal Seal, Vae
mihi si non Evangeliza vero, which he continued in the Seal of his Primacy
also. It is credibly reported of him that he was person of so excellent a
memory, that when he has bin distant from his Library many miles, without the
aid of any Catalogue, he has directed his man by the figures of them imprinted
in his mind, to go directly to the several places where they stood, to bring
him such Books as he wanted.

During the time he was Bishop of Mead, he answered that Challenge of the
Jesuit Malone; and coming over into England to have it Printed, during his
abode here, Primate Hampton dying, he was made Primate of Ireland, An. 1624.
And now though he was promoted to the highest step his profession was capable
of in his native Country, yet having some occasion of stay still in England,
he continued his laborious preaching in a little Village called Wicken in
Essex; where upon the request of some Ministers of that County to preach on the
Week days, (because they could not come to hear him on the Sundays) preaching
too often beyond his strength, he fell into a Quartane Ague, which held him
three quarters of a year.

Scarcely had he recovered his sickness, when it pleased God to make him the
instrument of the conversion of an honorable person to the Protestant
Religion, the occasion thus; the Lord Mordant (afterward Earl of Peterborough)
being a Papist, and his Lady a Protestant; both of them being desirous to draw
each other to their own Religion, agreed that there should be a meeting of two
prime men of each, to dispute what might be in controversy between them:
hereupon the Lord chose for his Champion, one Rookwood a Jesuit, (Brother to
Ambross Rookwood one of the conspirators in the Gunpowder Treason) who went
disguised under the name of Beaumont: the Lady made choice of this Archbishop;
Drayton in Northamptonshire was appointed for their meeting place; the Points
proposed were concerning Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, Images,
visibility of the Church. Three days were spent in disputations, wherein the
Archbishop was opponent, and the Jesuit respondent. The fourth day according
to agreement, the Jesuit was to have been opponent, but that morning he
excused himself to the Lord Mordant, saying, That all the Arguments he used, he
had framed within his own head, and thought he had them as perfect as his Pater
Noster, but he had strangely forgotten, and could not recover them again; which
caused him to say, That he believed it was the just judgment of God upon him,
thus to desert him in the defense of his cause for the undertaking of himself
to dispute with a man of that eminency and learning, without the license of his
Superior. This excuse gave so little satisfaction to the Lord Mordant, that
upon some further conference with the Archbishop, he became a Protestant, and
so continued to his dying day. After this Victory over the Jesuit, with the
Canon bullets of his controversial Pen, he dispersed whole Army of the Irish
Catholics, so that they were never able to rally their Forces again.

After some time of tarrying in England, he returned into Ireland, where he was
received with great acclamations of joy: where he continued faithfully
discharging his Office, until the year before the Rebellion brake forth there,
in which he returned into England; not long after was the great business of the
Earl of Strafford in agitation. I have heard it reported by men not over
credulous to believe flying news, that the day before the King signed the Bill
for that Earls death, that when the King for the satisfying of his conscience
desired the opinion of him, as also of the Bishops of London, Durham, Lincoln,
and Carlisle; that those other four for the satisfying of the people, (who were
then grown extraordinary insolent) wished him to sign the Bill. But that this
Bishop advised the King not to wound his Conscience, in seeking to heal State
sores; the truth of this I will not assert, for it is confidently believed by
many, that Doctor Juxon Bishop of London was not assenting thereto; but this is
certain, that when a person of honor had in the Kings presence, spoken words
in effect that this Bishop should advise him to the signing of that Bill, that
he in very great passion, (laying his hand upon his breast) protested his
innocence therein. It is generally reported, how true I know not, that when the
King heard that an honorable Lady had extended her nobleness to the Bishop,
that he should say, That that charity of hers would cover a multitude of her
sins.

Many endeavors, not like the fire-drakes of our late Pulpits, did this
reverend Bishop use to draw the King and Parliament to a Reconciliation; and so
faithfully discharged he hid endeavors, that he won the love of both sides.
Thus after he had holily and peaceably for many years to the honor of God, and
edification of his Church, continued to the time of his death constantly
preaching the word of God, he in the seventy sixth year of his age surrendered
up his soul into the hands of his Maker; his mamory being as a precious
Ointment yielding a sweet savor in the Nostrils of Gods Saints, which gave
occasion to one of our late Poets amongst many others, to write these two
Verses.

Usher remains sustained by the blessed Powers,
A Saint in Heavens bright Orb, a Star in ours.
He deceased the 21. of March 1655. and was honorably buried in Henry the
Sevenths Chapel at the Abbey in Westminster; Oliver then Lord Protector,
dispending two hundred pounds at his Funeral; extending to his the Grant of
some of the Lands of the Primacy of Armagh for twenty one years.

I shall shut up all with this Character given him by a solemn Order in the
Convocation at Oxford, Anno 1644. James Usher Archbishop of Armagh, Primate of
all Ireland; The most skilful of Primitive Antiquity, the unanswerable Defender
of the Orthodox Religion, the Maul of Errors, in Preaching frequent, eloquent,
very powerful; a rare example of an unblameable life.

Of whom may be writ as one does by way of Elegy on the late Martyr of our
times, that admirable Divine Dr. Hewet.

Since he is dead, report it thou my Muse
Unto the world as grief, and not as news.
Hark how Religion sighs, the Pulpit groans,
And tears run trickling down the senseless stones.
That Church which was all ears is now turned eyes,
The Mother weeps, and all her Children cries
In remembrance of him and his incomparable abilities, at Christ Church in
Oxford, there is an Oration spoke constantly once a year. He left many
Monuments of his Learning behind him to posterity. His Book De successione
Ecclesiarum, 4o. Londini 1613. Epistolarum Hibernicarum Sylloge, 4o. Dublini
1630. Historia Goteschalci, Dublini 1631. De Primordiis Ecclesiarum
Britannicarum 4o. Dublini, 1631. the greatest part of which were cast away as
they came by sea. Ignatii Epistolarum annotationibus 4o. Oxoniae 1648. De anno
solari Macedonum, 8o. Londini, 1648. Annals Veteris Testamenti, Folio Londini,
1650. Annals Novi Testamenti, Folio Londini, 1654. both which are since in one
Volumn printed in English; a Work acknowledged by the learned men of this Age
for the admirable Method and Worth of it, not to have hitherto been paralleled
by any preceding Writers. Epistola ad Cappellum de variantibus textus Hebraici
Lectionibus, 4o. Londini, 1652. De Graeca septuaginta interpretum versione
Syntagma 4o. Londini, 1655. His English Works were these; A Sermon preached
before the House of Commons, February 18. 1618. A Declaration of the visibility
of the Church, preached in a Sermon before King James, June 20. 1624. A Speech
delivered in the Castle Chamber in Dublyn, the 22. of November, 1622. An Answer
to Malon the Jesuit, 4o. 1631. The Religion professed by the ancient Irish and
Britains, 4o. 1631. Two Works which routed the Catholics of Ireland. Immanuel
of the Incarnation of the Son of God. 4o. Dublin 1639. A Sermon for the
learning and worth of it never to be sufficiently esteemed. A Geographical
description of the Lesser Asia, 4o. Oxford 1644. Confessions and Proofs of
Doctor Reinolds, and other Protestant Divines concerning the Right of
Episcopacy, 4o. Oxford 1644. His Discourse of the Original of Bishops and
Archbishops, 4o. Oxford 1644. The Sum and Substance of Christian Religion,
being in part his, but published without his consent, Folio London. His small
Catechism reviewed, 12o. London. A Method for Meditation, or a direction for
hearing the Word. I have since had the happiness to peruse several Sermons of
his ordained for the Press; truly worthy of him, they were all of them but one
preached before the year 1626. most of them before he was Bishop. I thought it
for the better knowing of them from others that may be falsely fathered on him,
to be convenient to set down the several Texts, Philip. 3.8. Ephesians. 2.1, 2.
Ephesians. 2.2, 3. John 14.16, 17. His most excellent Sermons on the Sacraments out
of 1 Cor. 11.28. as also on Colos. 1.21. Two Sermons on 1 Pet. 4.17. His Sermon
preached a little before he was made a Bishop, before the King at Greenwich,
June the 25. 1626. his Text was taken out of the 1 Cor. 14.33. the words, For
God is not Author of confusion but of peace, as we see in all the Churches of
the Saints. At that time there was a strange division and clashing one against
another of the great ones of the Court, whom his sharp Sermon touched so near to
the quick, that the Puritanical Bishop, as they then called him, put the
highest spirits of them to a non plus. These Sermons Dr. Bernard of
Grayes-Inne, formerly Chaplain to Bishop Usher, had the perusal of, who said
they wanted nothing but only that Life and Majesty they were adorned with,
when the Bishop himself delivered them. I have ended my discourse as to what
concerns this reverend Father of the Church. I have no more to write, but only
to exprese my sorrow that I could not arrive to a right knowledge of the Lives
of two of our late worthy Divines, Doctor Featly, who died first, as his
spirits were oppressed with the afflictions of our distracted times; as also of
that Contemplative Seraphical Clergyman, Bishop Hall, who was in Heaven
whilst he was on earth: the Life of the former, Doctor Featly, the Champion of
our Church against the Romanists, I at last despaired of, having after a long
search and strict enquiry gained no perfect cognizance from any of his friends:
and concerning Bishop Hall, having no acquaintance with the Heir to his blessed
qualifications, his most accomplished Son, otherwise then from the Pulpit, my
modesty being so much a stranger to him, would not suffer me to make an address.

The Life of Master John Lilburne.
I Question not but that it will be admired that such an inferior person as
Master Lilburne should take up any room in this Volume; I shall only need to
express that I have not inserted him as a Worthy, but rather as a Wonder: the
truth is, whosoever shall diligently mark the transactions of this person, will
find such variety of matter contained in his Life, not only to excuse the
publishing of it, but also so far to transport them that read it, as to believe
him to be a fit object for an entire Volume by himself, rather then this short
relation I shall obtrude on his memory; which considering how his. Life was
shufled and confused, the Reader cannot expect any other then fragments, no
clear nor continued progress of his History.

When Taxaris saw his Countryman Anacharsis in Athens, he said unto him, I
will at once show thee all the Wonders of Greece. So may I say of him, I will
in one show you the wonder of our times; such a Proteus as few ages can produce
such another: he having like Ishmael every man's hand against him, and his
against all. Who more violent against the Hierarchy of the Bishops then he;
none more against King and Kingly Government then he; how violent was he aganst
the House of Lords, and they being down and another Government established
without King and Lords, he sets himself against that too: such an opposite and
Antagonist to all forms of Government whatsoever, that he might fitly be
compared unto the Rainbow, which is never on that side of the world that the
Sun is, but wheresoever it appears it is in opposition against the Sun.

But to come to his Life, he was Son to Richard Lilburne of the County of
Durham; during his miniority an Apprentice in London, near London-stone, to one
Mr. Hewson, a a dealer in Cloth, whom he served about five years; his Master
declining his trade, he moved him that he might have his liberty to provide for
himself; to which purpose he went into the Country, to have the consent of his
friends, and afterward made a voyage into Holland. Before this his
transportation he had made his ends, having been of such an insinuating spirit,
that he won the love of some silly Schismatics, who for his strange though
empty expressions, deemed him, as they have done others, one inspired. So that
by that time he came out of his time, and had served his Apprentiship, who but
Lilburne of note amongst the Sectaries; his approbation desired, and his
counsels followed in all tumultuous and factious transactions.

It happened during the imprisonment of Doctor Bastwick, (censured for
libelling by the Archbishop of Canterbury) diverse persons affecting the said
Doctor, out of their love resorting to him; amongst the rest, one of them took
John Lilburne with him as his associate: after plenty of cheer Doctor Bastwick
to solace his guests, read to them his Lettany, which he had written against
the Prelates, which Book was highly pleasing to them all. Lilburne also hearing
the said Lettany read, and knowing that whatsoever was written in defiance of
that power, then generally hated, would be very acceptable; he desired of
Doctor Bastwick, to have a copy of one of them, with which he would travel
beyond Sea, and cause it to be printed, not doubting to be enriched by it; the
wind of this fancy transported him over Sea, accompanied with a fellow whose
fidelity he doubted not; there he printed many Books, and by them got much
money, selling them even at what rates he pleased; afterward coming into
England, bringing with him his printed trinkets, hoping to have a new Mart, the
fellow that accompanied him was his betrayer, who gave information to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, both where Lilburne and his Libels were, who
immediately dispatched a Pursivant with plenary authority, who attached
Lilburne and seized on his Books, which were all afterward burnt. Lilburne
himself was committed to the Fleet, and refusing to take his Oath in the
Star Chamber, was by them fined five hundred pound; and censured to be whipped
from the Fleet to Westminster, and afterward to stand in the Pillory, which
accordingly was executed; and because he fell into a long speech against the
Bishops and their Hierarchy, they caused him to be gagged, wherein he continued
an hour and a half.

But the times altering, the Bishops being Voted down by Parliament, and a War
ensuing betwixt them and the King, these his sufferings caused him to be looked
upon by the Parliament, who preferred him to the Office of Lieutenant Colonel
in their Army; wherein he behaved himself most gallantly, particularly at
Brainford; where he with about 700. men withstood the Kings whole Army, about
five hours together, and fought it out to the very Swords point, and to the
Butt end of the Musket, and thereby hindered the King from his then possessing
the Parliaments Train of Artillery, and by consequence the City of London; in
which act he was taken prisoner, without Articles or capitulation, and was by
the King and his Party then looked upon, as one of the most active men in the
whole company; and should have been therefore Tried for his life had not he by
his wit avoided the same by sending to the Parliament, who thereupon sent a
Letter to Oxford, threatening them with lex talionis, (they having at the same
time many of their great eminent men prisoners in the Tower, Warwick Castle,
and other places) which put a period to all further proceedings against him,
and freed him by an exchange.

Returning to London, he begins to set abroach his factious opinions, writing a
Pamphlet, wherein he termed the Laws, Norman innovations, with other
unparalled speeches; all which he sent to Judge Reeve, who himself, or some
other for him, made a complaint unto the Lords, who immediately summoned him to
appear before them, which accordingly he did; where being commanded to kneel at
the Bar, he refused, saying. That he had learned both better Religion and
manners, then to kneel to any humane, or mortal power how great soever: with
many other aggravating and ambitious speeches, which committed him close
prisoner, first to Newgate, and afterward to the Tower, where he continued
above twelve months together; but this not a whit calmed his spirit, but was
rather like Oil cast on the fire, finding occasion from these his troubles and
imprisonments, to enveigh more bitterly against the Government and Governors
then in being, terming the Parliament (to use his own words in his scurrulous
pamphlets,) A pack of dissembling juggling knaves, a company of tyrants, the
most perfidious, false, faith and trust-breakers, that ever lived in the world,
and ought by all rational men to be most detested of all men that breathe;
treacherous, self-seeking, usurpers of the name and power of a Parliament, most
treacherously to do what they list. Saying, That Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
were never more against Authority, as the General, (viz. the Lord Fairfax) and
his Council; nor the Anabaptists at Munster, with John of Leidon, and
Knipperdolling, were never more contemners of Authority, nor Jack Straw and Wat
Tyler, nor all those famous men mentioned with a black pen in our Histories.

These, with infinite other railing terms his pamphlets are stuffed and farced
withal, not fit to be bestowed on the most inveterate enemies can be encountered
in this Life; the young Gentleman was very prodigal of such Rabshekah
expressions, as his impudence was most conducing to his desperate designs, etc.
For these, and many other single rapired expressions of the nature, contained
in several Books which he wrote, he was committed to the Tower, and by a
special Commission of Oyer and Terminer tried upon a Charge of High Treason at
the Guild Hall in London; October 24, 25. 26. 1649. Many were the Commissioners
that sat upon his Trial, and multitudes of Spectators that came to behold it.

I have inserted his Trial thus at large, not only as in respect of the
eminency of it, but as many passages in it from his own lips, give further
illustrations of his Life.

The first Trial of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne was at the Guild Hall in
London the 24. of October 1649. being Wednesday.
The Commissioners Names of the extraordinary Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
for the Trial of Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn, were these.

Thomas Andrews, Lord Mayor. Richard Keble, Lord Commissioner. Philip Jermyn,
Judge of the upper Bench; Thomas Gates; Baron. John Pulestone, Justice of the
Common Pleas. Francis Thorp, Barron and Member, Robert Nicolas, Member. Richard
Ask; Justices of the Upper Bench. Peter Warburton, Justice of the Common
Pleas. Alexander Rigby, Baron, but absent. Sir Thomas Fowler. Sir Henry
Holcroft. Sir William Row. Sir Richard Saltonstall. Sir Richard Sprignall. Sir
John Woolistone: Sir William Roberts. John Green. John Clarke; John Parker,
Sergeants at Law. William Steel; Recorder. John Fowke, Thomas Foot, John
Kendrick Thomas Cullum, Simon Edmonds, Samuel Avery, John Dethick, Robert
Tichburn, John Hayes, Aldermen. Henry Proby; Common Sergeant. Thomas
Brigandine, Nathaniel Snape, Edward Rich, Owen Roe, Tobias Lisle, Austin
Wingfield, Richard Downton, Daniel Tailor, William Wibend, Silvanus Tailor

The Court was called, O yes made, All persons that were adjourned to the Court
required to make their appearance.

The Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Colonel Francis West was called, to
bring forth his Prisoner according to the precept.

Whereupon Colonel West Lieutenant of the Tower, brought up the Prisoner out
of the Irish Chamber, where he had been some time before the sitting of the
Court, and was guarded by the said Lieutenant, and a special Guard of Soldiers
besides. And being brought to the Bar, the Sheriffs of London were directed to
take the Prisoner into their custody.

Silence commanded, the Crier said, John Lilburne, hold up thy hand.

Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne directed himself to Master Keble one of the
Keepers of the great Seal, as the President of the Court, and said to this
purpose, Sir, will it please you to hear me, and if so, by your favor thus.
All the privilege for my part that I shall crave this day at your hands is no
more, but that which is properly and singly the Liberty of every Freeborn
Englishman, viz. the benefit of the Laws and Liberties thereof, which by my
Birthright and Inheritance is due unto me; the which I have fought for as well
as others have done, with a single and upright heart; and if I cannot have and
enjoy this, I shall leave this Testimony behind me, that I died for the Laws
and Liberties of this Nation: and upon this score I stand, and if I perish I
perish. And if the Fact that I have done cannot be justified by the Law of
England, let me perish. I mention none of this for the gaining of mercy, or by
way of merit, no I scorn it; for mercy I crave from none but from the hands of
my God alone, with whom I hope, and am assured one day to rest; whom I have set
before my eyes, and so walked, as believing I am always in his presence, in
whose power my confidence is fixed, whom I take and own to be my stay, my
staff, my strength and support, and in whom I rest as the life of my life, and
whom I hope to meet with joy, when this fading and uncertain life shall have an
end, to live with him in glory, and blessedness for evermore. And because I
would not willingly trouble you with many words, to cause you to spend your
time impertinently; therefore Sir, in reference to the Court, I shall crave but
so much liberty from you as was given to Paul, when he pleaded for his life
before the Heathen Roman Judges, which was free liberty of speech to speak for
himself, the which I now humbly crave as my right, not only by the Law of God
and Man, but also by the law and light of Nature: And I shall do it with that
respect, reason, and judgment, that does become a man that knows what it is to
plead for his life. I hope Good has given me ability to be master of my own
passion, and endowed me with that reason, that will dictate unto me what is for
my own good and benefit.

I have several times been arraigned for my life already. I was once arraigned
before the House of Peers for (sticking close to the Liberties and Privileges
of this Nation, and those that stood for them) being one of those two or three
me, that first drew their swords in Westminster Hall against Colonel Lunsford,
and some scores of his associates. At that time, it was supposed, they intended
to cut the throats of the chiefest men then sitting in the House of Commons; I
say for this, and other things of the like nature, I was arraigned by the Kings
special Command and Order, the first of May, 1641. I mention it to this end,
that when I came before the House of Peers, where was about three or fourscore
Lords then sitting at the beginning of the parliament; (who then were supposed
the most arbitrary of any power in England) yet I had from them free liberty of
speech, to speak for my life at their Bar, without check or control in the
best manner, that all those abilities God had given me would enable me; and
when I was at Oxford. I was again arraigned as a Traitor before the Lord Chief
Justice Heath, for levying War at the Command of the then Parliament against
the person of the King: and when I came before him in the Guild Hall of Oxford,
he told me (there being present with him as his fellow Judge) Master Gardener,
(sometimes Recorder of the City of London) now Sir Thomas Gardener, and others
that sat by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer from the King; the which
Commission I did not so well then understand, as I hope I do now. And my Lord
Chief Justice Heath stood up, and in the face of all the Court, and in the face
of all the Country present there told me, Captain Lilburne, you are brought
here before us for High Treason, for leavying War in Oxfordshire against your
Sovereign Lord and King; and though you be now in a Garrison, and were taken in
Arms in open hostility against the King. (yea Sir, and I must now tell you in
such hostility, that we were but about seven hundred men at Brandford that
withstood the Kings whole Army in the field, about five hours together, and
fought it out to the very swords point, and to the butt end of the Musket; and
thereby hindered the King from his then possessing the Parliaments Train of
Artillery, and by consequence the City of London; in which very act I was taken
a Prisoner, without Articles or Capitulation, and was by the King and his Party
then looked upon, as one of the activest men against them in the whole company)
yet said Judge Heath, we will not take advantage of that, to try you by the
rules of Arbitrary Marshal Law, or any other Arbitrary ways; but we will try
you by the rules of the good old Laws of England; and whatsoever privilege in
your Trial the Laws of England will afford you, claim it as your Birthright
and Inheritance, and you shall enjoy it with as much freedom and willingness,
as if you were in Westminster Hall to be tried amongst your own Party; and this
we will do for that end, that so at London your friends shall not have any just
cause to say, we murdered you with cruelty, or denied you the benefit of the
Law, in taking away your life by the rules of our own wills. Nay, further said
he, Captain Lilburne, it is true, I am a Judge made by my Sovereign Lord the
King, according to his right by Law, and so in a special manner am his Servant
and Counselor, and am to act for his good, benefit, and advantage: And yet
notwithstanding it is by the known Laws of this Land my duty to be indifferent
and free from partiallity betwixt my Master and you the Prisoner, and I am
specially bound unto it also by my Oath; and therefore you shall have the
utmost privileges of the Law of England, which is a Law of Mercy. and not of
Rigor, and has the life of a man in tenderest and highest estimation; and
therefore it is the duty of a Judge by Law to be of counsel with the Prisoner,
in things wherein by his ignorance he falls short of making use of the benefit
of the Law, especially when he is upon the Trial of his life. Yea, and to
exhort him to answer without fear, if he perceive him daunted or amazed at the
presence of the Court: Yea, it is my duty to carry my self with all fairness
and evenness of hand toward you; and wherein that there shall seem any
mistakes to appear in circumstances of Formalities, to rectify you: For it is
my duty to help you, and not to use any boisterous or rough language to you in
the least, to put you in fear, or any ways prevent the freedom of you defense:
and according to the Laws of England this is my duty, and this is the Law. And
accordingly he gave me liberty to plead to the errors of my Indictment, before
ever I pleaded not guilty; yea, and also became willing to assign me what
Council I pleased to nominate, freely to come to prison to me, and to consult
and advise with me, and help me in point of Law: This last he did immediately
upon my pleading to the Indictment before any Fact was proved, all which is
consonant to the declared Judgment of Sir Edward Cook that great Oracle of the
Laws of England, whose Books are published by special Orders and Authority of
Parliament for good Law, who in his 3. part Institutes, Chapt. Of High Treason,
fol. 29.34. compared with fol. 137.230. asserts the same.

Truly, Sir, I being now come before you to answer for my life, and being no
professed Lawyer, may through my own ignorance of the practick part of the Law,
especially in the Formalities, Nisities and Puntillio's thereof, run my self
with overmuch hastiness, in snares and dangers that I shall not easily get out
of. And therefore being all of a sudden bid to hold up my hand at the Bar, I
cannot choose but a little demur upon it, and yet with all respect to you, to
declare my desirableness to keep within the bounds of Reason, Moderation and
Discretion, and so to carry my self as it does become a man that knows what it
is to answer for his life.

And therefore in the first place, I have something to say to the Court about
the first Fundamental liberty of an English man in order to his Trial, which
is, that by the Laws of this Land, all Courts of Justice always ought to be
free and open for all sorts of peaceable people to see, behold, and hear, and
have free access unto; and no man whatsoever ought to be tried in holes or
corners, or in any place where the Gates are shut and barred, and guarded with
armed men: and yet, Sir, as I came in, I found the Gates shut and guarded;
which is contrary both to Law and Justice.

Sir, the Laws of England, and the Privileges thereof, are my Inheritance and
Birthright: And, Sir, I must acquaint you, that I was sometimes summoned
before a Committee of Parliament, where Mr. Corbet and several others have had
the Chair; and there I stood upon my right by the Laws of England, and refused
to proceed with the said Committee, till by special order they caused their
Doors to be wide thrown open, that the people might have free and uninterrupted
access to hear, see, and consider of what they said to me; although I think the
pretense that I am now brought before you for, be the very same in substance,
that I was convened before Mr. Corbet for, which was about Books; and I am sure
there I did argue the case with him and the rest of the Committee soundly out
in Law, proving that they were bound in Law and Justice, freely to open their
Doors, for the free access of all sorts and kinds of Auditors: And I did
refuse (as of right) to proceed with them, till by special order they did open
their Doors. For no trial in such cases, ought to be in any place, unless it be
public, open and free; and therefore if you please that I may enjoy that Legal
Right and Privilege which was granted unto me by Mr. Miles Corbet, and the
rest of that Committee, (when I was brought before them in the like case that
now I am brought before you:) which privilege I know to be my right by the Law
of England, I shall, as it becomes an understanding Englishman, (who in his
actions hates deeds of darkness, holes or corners) go on to a trial. But if I
be denied this undoubted privilege, I shall rather dye here then proceed any
further. And therefore foreseeing this beforehand, and being willing to provide
against all jealousies of my escape, the fear of which I supposed might be
objected against me as a ground to deny me this my legal right; and therefore
beforehand I have given my engagement to the Lieutenant of the Tower, that I
will be a faithful and true prisoner to him.

He enlarged himself as to other particulars, but these being the most material
as to the relation of some passages of his Life, I thought it necessary to
insert them. He having these requested freedoms granted him from Judge Keble,
his trial went on, which because of it self it is a large printed volume, I
shall only hint at some things not to be omitted in it.

After he had ended his Speech, Judge Keble told him that his requests were
granted, bid him look behind him, the Doors were open. Mr. Prideaux the
Attorney General excepted against the favor done him of the liberty of his
Speech, as at the beginning of his arraignment he had denied to hold up his
hand; he further expressed that the Commission for the Trial of Mr. Lilburne,
was for differences betwixt the State and him. Master Lilburne desired that
Master Prideaux might be excepted against as his enemy, one of the faction of
the Court against his life. Judge Keble told him that he spoke irrationally and
indiscreetly; he having so fair respect and so free a hearing to except against
so great a Minister of the Court; afterward Judge Jermyn a sound Lawyer, but a
better forenoon then afternoons man, said, That since Master Lilburne begun to
plant his Ordnance against the Authority of the Court, that the Court did sit
by a lawful Authority derived from the Parliament, the supreme Authority of
England, that he was accused of High Treason, had his Jury of Freemen of
London, Citizens, men of religious integrity; he instanced many cases to him,
concluding, that he desired him to put himself upon his Trial by Law, and to
hear with patience those offenses of Treason were laid to his charge. Master
Lilburne notwithstanding continued to use several arguments against the
Commission of Oyer and Terminer, which he knew to be that, by the virtue of
which they did sit; and since he was to be tried for his life, he desired to
hear their Commission read; but since they had denied him that, he desired all
his friends to take notice how contrary to reason and equity they dealt with
him. Judge Keble urged him still, not taking notice of his Traverses, to hold
up his hand at the Bar, which he explained to him was no more but a special
notice that the party is the man inquired for, and therefore if he were John
Lilburne, the man that was charged, he bid him but say that he was the man, and
that he was there, and that should suffice. Lilburne accordingly said, I am
John Lilburne, Son to John Lilburne. Judge Jermyn afterward to persuade him to
hold up his hand, gave him two reasons why that custom had been always used.
First, for notice that those who are called for capital and criminal offenses,
that they should hold up the hand, to declare that they are the men. Secondly,
he said, that a pure innocent hand did set forth a clear and unspotted heart,
for which reason he bid Mr. Lilburne hold up his hand; if he refused to do it,
he deprived himself of the prime benefit of the customs of England. Master
Lilburne still quibling with the Court and refusing, Judge Keble gave order
that the Indictment should be read, to which purpose Master Broughten read,
Hold up your hand Master Lilburne, and hearken to the charge; thou stand
indicted of High Treason, by the name of John Lilburne late of London
Gentleman, for that thou art a false Traitor, not having the fear of God before
thy eyes, but being stirred up and moved by the instigation of the Devil, etc.
-- After he had read it out, Master Broughton said, What say thou John
Lilburne, art thou guilty of this Treason, of which thou stand indicted or
not guilty. Lilburne answered, That by the Laws of England he was not to answer
questions against or concerning himself. Another Judge said, Master Lilburne,
by the Laws of the Land you are to plead to your charge, and it is no accusing
of your self to say you are guilty or not guilty. Master Lilburne instanced the
Petition of Right to the former purpose, he also excused, himself as he was
ignorant of the formalities of the Law, having none of the Law Books in
English; and therefore fore them to take away his life in a Language he
understood not, was extreme hard: therefore he humbly desired to have Council
assigned him to consult with. Judge Keble told him he could not grant him that
favor, it was not consistent with the Law. Master Lilburne still refused to
plead without Council, withal he said, he was not guilty in any of the treasons
in manner or form as they were laid down in the Indictment, pointing to it, and
withal said Now I have pleaded, and crave the Liberties of England that you
will assign me counsel. Master Boughton said, By whom will thou be Tried,
Lilburne replied, By the known Laws of England, and a legal Jury of his equals,
constituted by Law. One of the Clerks said, you must say by God and your
Country. Master Lilburne said, he never read in the Laws of England that he
was to plead in that manner. Judge Keble explained the word Country to him,
saying, By it was meant a Jury of his equals. Master Lilburne desired as he had
bin a prisoner seven months deprived of Books, that he might have a reasonable
time allowed him to prepare himself for his Plea and Defense, or else to knock
him in the head in the place where he stood; for he must needs be destroyed, if
they denied him the means of his preservation. After many of his evasions,
Judge Nichols told him that if he would not be lead by the proceedings of Law
it would be worse for him. Master Lilburne instanced the freedom of his Trial
at Oxford, the Judges in effect told him that he was now at London on a
different manner of fact. He answered, they might murder him if they would,
observing Master Prideaux the Attorney General, whispering Judge Thorpe in the
ear, he said on the Bench, It was not lawful for a Judge to be whispered. To
which Judge Thorpe replied, that as he was the prosecutor of the State against
him, he might confer privately with him. Master Lilburne quoted to the
contrary, Cooks Institutes, the third part, Cap. Treason, upon which Judge
Keble took him up short, and said, that if he would not come to something, and
behave himself according to the bounds of Reason and Law, he would cause his
Jury to be returned. Master Lilburne replied that he desired to have the
privilege of the Laws of God, which he said, he himself must acknowledge to be
the Law of England; and he was sure that the Law of God was, that they should
do as they would be done by; now he said, it could not be by the Laws of God
for his adversaries to have the helps of all manner of councels, by snares,
quirks, tricks, and provocations to take away his life, and for him to be
denied the benefit to consult with any to preserve himself against such potent
malice. Judge Jermyn answered, the question was not, whether the Law of God,
and the Law of reason, and the Law of man may be consonant to each other, and
whether the Court or John Lilburne shall be Judges thereof, that was the
question, Master Lilburne crying for all equity to himself, but allowing the
Court none. Judge Keble said further, that when a man had done such treasonable
things, that it was the Law of God that he should answer directly and
positively whether he were guilty or no; and if he answer not guilty, and they
be not fully proved against him, there is no more to be said, After some other
trifling pro and con, Master Lilburne compared the prerogative that he said the
Judges made use of, to Nebucadnezzar, that endeavored to destroy Daniel by his
prerogative, as he was to be thrown into the Lions Den; making this
application, that if they would not allow him council to consult with, to make
a Plea for his life, it was a vain thing for him to spend any more words. Judge
Keble the afterward President of the High Court of Justice, replied, Mr.
Lilburne this language is but the sparks of that venomous heat that is within
you, and they may burst out to prove you guilty before us, and in our presence
if so be that you are charged with, without any other proof or proceedings, for
you may do it, I tell you that you may do it where you stand; therefore take
heed what you say. Mr. Lilburne replied, Sir, I have cast up my account, and I
know what it can cost me; he blessed God he had learnt to dye, having always
carried his life in his hand, for about twelve years together. Judge Keble
replied, he should not now lay it down, if he did not destroy or cast away the
Commonwealth; but if he went about to destroy the Commonwealth, the
Commonwealth would destroy him. Master Lilburne replied, he desired nothing
but council, and to produce his witnesses. Mr. Prideaux the Attorney General
answered, that if Master Lilburne had these concernments granted to him, it
would be a president for all future times, by means of which there would be no
ends of Trials in criminal cases; and that it was a wonderful strange thing to
him, that when the prisoner had pleaded the usual way, that they did not
immediately proceed to Trial. He did desire that Master Lilburne might be dealt
with all legal, just, and fair preceedings of the Court; he did desire
accordingly the proceedings of the Commonwealth be so too, that Master
Lilburne may be without delay according to the Law proceeded against for his
notorious Treasons. Judge Keble immediately said, well Mr. Lilburne the Court
is very tender, not to take up any of your time, you have heard what was
declared to you there, that Master Attorney has made Process against you
returnable to morrow at seven of the Clock, and therefore to spend more time
would be your loss and damage: the Sheriffs of London are to take care to
return the Jury to morrow morning, and therefore the Court does adjourn till
seven of the Clock to morrow in the morning, in the mean time they commit the
prisoner at the Bar to the Lieutenant of the Tower again a prisoner. Judge
Keble said, that he had more favor then any prisoner in England ever had; for
by the Laws of England, in matters of Treason, whereof Master Lilburne is
indicted, he ought to have been Tried presently and immediately; and because
all the world shall know with what candor and justice the Court does proceed
against him, we deferred time till to morrow morning, which is the Courts
extraordinary favor, and the doors are wide open, that all the world may know
it. Mr. Lilburne said, Sir I can show you a hundred presidents to the contrary
to disprove what you say. Judge Keble bids adjourn the Court. Mr. Lilburne
humbly thanked the Judges for their extraordinary favor, and so the Curtains
were drawn for that day, the Court having adjourned till the next morning, and
the Prisoner was remanded to the Tower.

The 26. of October the Friday following, he was brought to the Bar with his
Brother Colonel Robert Lilburne, his Sollicitour Master Sprat, and some other
of his friends, being hardly admitted; Judge Keble saying, your Brother shall
not stand by you there, I will only have one hold your Papers and Books, and
the rest not to trouble you, therefore let them come out of the Court. Master
Lilburne pleaded for his Council, instancing Major Rolfes Trial at Oxford,
about his intent to poison the King, where he had Council allowed him: to
which Judge Keble subtlely answered, Mr. Lilburne when you come to Trial you
shall see there will be no need of Council: the Court will be instead of
Council to you; nay, the Court, if they see matter of Law for Council, though
you do not ask it, they will give it you, and therefore set your heart at rest;
for if there be any thing Rational in Law that we can spy out as well as your
Council, we will help you in it. Master Lilburne answered, Sweet Sir, I pray but
one word more, if you deny me what the Law affords me, and that which has been
granted to the Law by Cavalier Judges; yea, and by your fellow Judges, who are
now in power at this day, the Lord deliver me from standing in need of you to
be my Councillors. Says Keble, we are upon our lives as well as you. Master
Liburne replied, No by your Favor, not in so eminent a manner. Judge Keble
replied, we are upon our lives and our souls to all eternity. Master Lilburne
desired to be heard one word; Judge Keble said, he would hear no more. Upon
which Master Prideaux desired the Court would proceed, and not prolong time,
being he had pleaded not guilty, and had confessed someting. Lilburne replied,
No sir, you do me wrong, and abuse me, I never confessed any thing, neither did
I plead not guilty; he said, his Plea was conditional, grounded on their
promises not to take any advantages of his ignorance in their Formalities.
Judge Keble exasperated at his obstinacy, cried out, Go on, be silent: Master
Lilburn desired that at least they would let him hear the grand Jury speak; for
he understood from some of themselves, that they never found him guilty, but do
conceive themselves wronged by some words yesterday that passed from some of
the Judges, he desired to hear them speak. Judge Keble desired him to be
rational, a word he often used, and that he would be silent, and hear the
Court; he told him he could lose no more time to hear him; he bid the Crier
call the Jury; the Crier called, and Master Lilburne earnestly pressed to be
heard, but could not, Master Lilburne desired to see their faces. Judge Keble
warned Master Sprat, John's Sollicitour, not to talk to the Prisoner, he said he
might stand and hold the Books, but he should not come near the Prisoner to
talk to him as he had done the day before. Master Lilburne said, that the Law
allowed a stander by to speak in the Prisoners behalf at the Bar, much more to
whisper to him, but more especially if he were his Sollicitour.

The Crier called the names, Miles Petty, William Wormwell, John Sherman,
Thomas Dainty, Ralph Ely, Edward Keiser, Edward Perkins, Ralph Packman, Francis
Woodall, William Commins, Henry Hauson, Roger Jenkenson; Joshua Hammond,
Richard Allen, Richard Nevil, John Main, Henry Jooley, Arthur Due, Roger Sears,
John Mayo, Henry Jooley, Arthur Due, Roger Sears. The Crier, said you good men
of the City appear; Stephen Jues, John Sherman, Ralph Ely, Roger Jenkenson,
Roger Sears, John Mayo, Nicholas Murren. The Clerk of Court says to the Jury,
here is your Prisoner at the Bar presented before the Court, here take your
Jury of Life and Death; if therefore Master Lilburne you will challenge them,
or any of them, you must challege them before that they go to be sworn.

Crier. Every man that can inform my Lords, the Justices, and the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth, against Master John Lilburn Prisoner at the Bar,
of any Treason or Felony committed by him, let them come forth, and they shall
be heard; for the Prisoner stands upon his deliverance: and all others bound to
give their attendance, are upon pain of forfeiture of their Recognizance to
come in. Master Lilburne desired to be heard a few words; the Judge told him he
must talk in his legal time, and take legal exceptions, and then he should be
heard till midnight. Master Lilburne desired to be heard, he said, he did not
know the faces of two men that were read to him, therefore he desired that he
might have time to consider of them. Judge Keeble told him that he ought not to
have it. Master Lilburne desired the Judge that he would at least vouchsafe him
to have some friends by him that are Citizens of London, that knew them, to
give him information of their quality and conditions, without which, he said,
they might as well hang him without a Trial. Mr. Sprat or Master Robert Lilburn
challenged one of the Jury, which the Judge excepted against, and commanded the
Fellow in the white cap should come out there, pull him out. Master Lilburne
replied, that they did not deal civilly according to their own Law; and now
there was a full noise, the whole cry was, to pull down the Stag of the
Petition of Right. The Jury being called, he excepted against several persons
of the Jury; six lived about Smithfield, one in Gosling-Street, two in
Cheapside, two in Broad-street, one in Friday-street.

After his particular exception, Master Broughton proceeds and reads his
Indictment. Hold up thy hand John Lilburne, Thou stand here indicted of High
Treason by the name of John Lilburn, late of London Gentleman; for that thou as
a false Traitor, not having the fear of God before thine eyes, but being
stirred and moved up by the instigation of the Devil, did endeavor not only
to disturb the peace and tranquillity of this Nation, but also the government
thereof to subvert; now established without King or House of Lords, in the way
of a Commonwealth, and a free State, and happily established; and the Commons
in Parliament assembled being the supreme Authority of this Nation of England,
to disgrace, and into a hatred, base esteem, infamy, and scandal, with all the
good, true, and honest persons of England, to bring into hatred; that is to
say, that thou the said John Lilburne, on the first day of October in the year
of our Lord 1649. and on diverse other days and times, both before and after,
in the Parish of Mary the Archess, in the Ward of Cheap, London, aforesaid, of
thy wicked and devilish mind and imagination, falsely, maliciously,
advisedly, and traitorously, as a false Traitor, by writing and imprinting, and
openly declaring, that is to say, by a certain scandalous, poisonous, and
traiterous writing in paper, entitled, A salva liberate: and by another
scandalous, poisonous and traiterous Book, entitled, An Impeachment of High
Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his son-in-law Henry Ireton, Esquires, late
Members of the late forcibly dissolved House of Commons; presented to public
view by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn close Prisoner in the Tower of London,
for his real, true, and zealous affection to the liberties of this Nation: and
by another scandalous, poisonous, and traiterous Book, imprinted and entitled,
An Outcry of the young men and Apprentices of London, or an inquisition after
the lost fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, directed August 29. 1649.
in an Epistle to the private Soldiers of the Army, especially all those that
signed the solemn, Engagement at New Market Heath, the fifth of June, 1647. but
more especially the private Soldiers of the Generals Regiment of Horse, that
helped to plunder and destroy the honest and true hearted Englishmen,
traitorously defeated at Burford, the fifteenth of May 1649. And also by
another scandalous, poisonous, and traitorous Book, entitled, The legal
fundamental liberties of the people of England, revised, asserted, and
vindicated, did publish that the Government aforesaid, is tyranical, usurped
and unlawful; and that the Commmons Assembled in Parliament, are not the
Supreme Authority of this Nation: and further, that thou the said John Lilburne
as a false Traitor, God before thine eyes not having, but being moved and led
by the instigation of the Devil, endeavoring, and maliciously intending, the
Government aforesaid, as is aforesaid, well and happily established; thou the
said John Lilburne, afterward (that is to say) the aforesaid first day of
October in the year of our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and diverse other days and
times, as well before as after, at London aforesaid, that is to say, in the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, London aforesaid, maliciously, advisedly, and
traitorously did plot, contrive, and endeavor to stir up, and to raise
force, against the aforesaid Government, and for the subverting and alteration
of the said Government, and to do those wicked, malicious, and traitorous
advisement to put in execution, etc. and thou the said John Lilburne,
afterward, that is to say, the aforesaid first day of October in the year of
our Lord 1649. aforesaid, and diverse days and times, as well before as after,
at London aforesaid, that is to say, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, of thy
depraved mind, and most wicked imagination, in and by the aforesaid
scandalous, poisonous, and traiterous book, Entitled, An impeachment of high
Treason against Oliver Cromwell, and his son-in-law Henry Ireton, Esquires, late
Members of the late forcible dissolved House of Commons; presented to public
view by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, close prisoner in the Tower of
London, for his real, true and zealous affection to the Liberties of his native
Country; falsely, maliciously, advisedly and traitorously, did publicly
declare amongst other things in the said Book, those false, scandalous,
malicious and traitorous words following: but my true friends (meaning the
friends of the said John Lilburne) I (meaning the foresaid John Lilburne) shall
here take upon me the boldness, considering the great distractions of the
present times, to give a little further advice to our friends aforesaid, from
whose company or society, or from some of them, has been begun and issued out
the most transcendent, clear, rational and just things for the peoples
liberties and freedoms; That the foresaid John Lilburne, has seen or read in
this Nation, as your notable and excellent Petition of May the 20th. 1647.
burnt by the hand of the common-hangman, recorded in my book called Rash Oaths
Unwarrantable, page 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. with diverse Petitions of that
nature; and the Petition of the 19th. of January 1648. recorded in the
following discourse, page 45, 46, 47, 48. and the Masculine Petition of the
eleventh of September, 1648. so much owned by petitions out of several
Counties, yea, and by the Officers, of the Armies large Remonstrance from Saint
Albones, the sixteenth of November, 1648. page 67.68, 69. the subtance of all
which I ( thou the aforesaid John Lilburne meaning) conceive is contained in
the printed sheet of paper, signed by my fellow prisoners, Mr. William Walwin,
Mr. Richard Overton, and Mr. Thomas Prince and my self, dated the first of May,
1649. and entitled, The Agreement of the free people of England; which false,
scandalous and traitorous Book called the Agreement of the people of England,
tends to the alteration, and subversion of the Government aforesaid; the
principles of the aforesaid Agreement, I (meaning your self the said John
Lilburne) hope and desire you (the friends of the aforesaid John Lilburne
meaning) will make the final center, and unwavering standard of all your
desires, hazards and endeavors, as to the future settlement, of the peace and
Government of this distressed, wasted, and divided Nation, the firm
establishing of the principles therein contained, being that only which will
really, and in good earnest marry, and knit the interest, what ever it be that
dwells upon them, unto the distressed or oppressed Commons of this Nation.

Not to instance the particular application how these and his other Books were
stigmatized more at large in the Indictment, as also his traitorous intents,
purposes, and designs to their extent displayed.

The Indictment being reading, and the noise of the people in the Hall great,
the prisoner said he could not hear, and had some few lines before read over to
him. Master Lilburne therefore prayed the people to hold their peace;
Gentlemen, I beseech you, be quiet, (speaking to the people)

Lord Keeble replied, Quiet you your self, we will quiet them for you.

The Crier said, If any man can give any Evidence to my Lords, the Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, against Mr. John Lilburne, let him come in and he shall be
heard.

Master Lilburne desired to be heard to speak two or three words.

Lord Keeble said, It is not a fit time, you shall be heard in your due time,
but hear what the witnesses say first.

Master Lilburne replied, He conceived he was much wronged, in saying that he
pleaded not guilty, for he pleaded no such plea, I appeal to the Court, and to
all that heard me, whether I pleaded any such plea; for before I pleaded, the
Court became engaged to me, to take no advantage of my ignorance of the
formalities of the Law, and promised to give me as much privilege as my Lord
Duke of Hambleton, and others enjoyed, before the Court of Justice. By your
favors said he, I pleaded conditionally, and now I make my absolute Plea to
the Indictment which was this; that he excepted against the matter, and form of
it in matter, time and place, and humbly craved Counccel to assign, and plead
to the errors thereof, He beseecht them to hear him a few words. Sir, with
favor, he humbly craved liberty to speak a few words; he said, I shall keep me
close to that, which is my right and my duty, and that is to the matter of Law
in my Indictment: There are many things put into the Indictment by the
Testimonies of Witnesses now sworn, that are pretended to be acted in several
Countries; whether that be according to Law or no, I do not know, whether you
will judge it so or no, but sure I am, if either those express Statutes, that I
have already cited to the Jury, or the third part of Cooks Institutes be Law, I
ought not to be tried for Treason, but by a Jury of the next Neighborhood, in
the self-same County, the fact is pretended to be committed in: and therefore
it is very questionable to me, whether my Indictment be legal, for that it
charge me with facts of treason, committed in three several Counties, and
that being matter of Law, I desire Counsel to argue that point in the first
place: There are also a great many other exceptions I have to make against the
Illegality of the Indictment, and having particularized one, I humbly crave
that which is my right by Law, that I may have Counsel assigned to me; you have
said, you will do what shall become ingenious and understanding men, and just
Judges in it, and therefore I crave leave according to my undoubted Right, to
have Counsel assigned to plead in matters of Law to the insufficiency of the
Indictment, and particularly to that point I have nominated. There are also a
great many things arise out of the matter of fact, that will be points of Law
likewise, and some of them appear to be so, there were never two clear and
positive witnesses to one fact sworn against me, but to most of the particular
Treasons there is but one a piece, and I cannot yield tha to be legal but
questionable in the Law, which I desire Counsel to dispute: I know not any of
all the Books fixed upon me, but the Outcry, that has two plain witnesses to
it, and yet it is not sworn that I am the Author of it; the state of the first
is this, that I was at the Printers before the Copy was taken away, and that I
gave one of those Books to a Soldier: to sum up the Notes of the matter of
fact, that thereon has been endeavored to be proved, is too hard a task to be
done by me immediately, and therefore I conceive it but just for you to assign
me Counsel, to agree with the Counsel against me, what are the points of fact
upon the proof, from which the points of Law are to be deducted; and whatever
you, that call your selves my Judges, may think of this, yet I hope and verily
believe, that these my honest fellow Citizens, that are the Gentlemen of my
Jury, who have (thereby) as men, the issues of my life and death in their
hands, and will think it but a just and rational motion and request; and
therefore before them again, I desire to have Counsel assigned to plead in Law,
to the errors of the Indictment, and also to the Law arising upon the fact;
this with a larger privilege, was granted by one of your own brother-Judges,
to Major Rolfe last year, as his right by Law; and I do again appeal to Mr.
Justice Nichols, then one of Rolfes Counsel; for the truth of this, I pray
speak Sir. is it not true? but the Judge sitting, as if he had neither life nor
soul, Mr. Lilburne further said, I hope Sir, it does not enter into your
thoughts presently to put me to an undigested extemporary answer, to so large
an Indictment as that is that has been read against me; that it is possible
for any man's brain, if it were as big as the biggest Magazine in London, to
carry it in his head; and Sir, I hope you do not conceive that my memory is of
a greater largeness then the greatest Magazine in this City; you engaged unto
me when I pleaded first to my Indictment, that you would not take exceptions
nor advantage against me, for my ignorance in the formalities of the Law; I
desire you to make good your promise now unto me, and assign me Counsel to help
my ignorance, that so the Counsel against me and my Counsel may agree, as I
have seen it done hereofore in the case of Duke Hambleton, upon the points of
fact, from which Law is to be deducted; and if you please to grant me this
legal and equitable favor, I shall think my self very much obliged unto you;
without which justice, I cannot conceive upon what ground it can be apprehended
I can go on: for my time and strength now it is so far spent, that I conceive
you cannot think my body is made of steel, to stand here four or five hours
together, spending my spirits to answer so many as I have to deal with, and be
able after all this, to stand to return an answer to above five hours charge,
and that upon life, when it seems you will suffer me to mend no blots; I hope
you do not lie upon the catch to weary and tire me out, by putting more upon me
then a horse is able to endure; and then go about to hang me, because I through
tiredness, want bodily strength and abilities to make and pronounce my defense.

Sir, to my apprehension, there does arise upon the matter of fact diverse
disputes in Law; I beseech you therefore allow me my right in Law, by assigning
me Counsel to help me where I am ignorant, and you shall see, I shall do that
which shall become an ingenuous and rational man, and I will put my self
clearly upon the Trial of the Country or my Jury according to the Law.

The Lord Keble replied, Mr. Lilburne, This that you have heard, and that we
have patiently sat to hear, and prepared a stool for you to have sat upon, to
have given you that liberty that no body should interrupt you more then us, you
have heard the fair course that has been taken in it; The Books, the charges
upon the matter, they are but three, they are not hard for your memory; The
particulars of those we do not expect that the Jury should remember them; the
Books are here, they have of them; but amongst them there are many more, but
free your self from the matter of fact, if you can, and these Books; and when
you have freed your self from the matter of fact charged upon you, and then
make it appear that from the matter of Fact Law arises, and then if you can,
when the matter of Fact is clear, and Law does arise, you shall have Counsel;
and you shall have no defect in us to interrupt you, but to help you in what we
may properly know as our right to do; but if you do not first clear and make
out this which is the issue upon the point, to answer the matter ouf Fact, we
cannot allow you any Counsel: the thing that is to be disputed cannot possible
be much on your side, it will be but very short; for it is not possible, I say,
to be much in time, or confusion of your memory, to give an answer to this
particular matter of Fact: the first is the publishing of those Books, and the
owning of them; and the next is the Books themselves; But this must be first
cleared, before you can have any Counsel assigned you at all.

Now it was high time for Colonel John to pretend that he was tired out, he
requested the Court for a Chamberpot, which was granetd him; afterward he fell
to it back and sides.

Says he, Well, seeing I must to it, the will of God be done; but his brother
being next to him, was heard to press him to pause a little more; No brother,
says he, my work is done, I will warrant you by the strength of God, I will
knock the nail upon the head; and so he went into the Bar, and set the Chair
before him, and laid his Law Books open upon it, in order as he intended to use
them, and being ready, said, Sir I humbly crave the favor, since it is my hard
lot and fortune, at least in my own apprehension, to have so much hard measure
and injustice as I have, to know whether or no you will permit me, after that I
have pleaded to a matter of Fact, according to the Law of England, that has
been allowed to the highest Traitors in all the Books that I have read of, that
I may speak in my own behalf unto the Jury, my Contrymen, upon whose
consciences, integrity, and honesty, my life, and the Lives and Liberties of
the honest men of this Nation now lies, who are in Law Judges of Law as well as
Fact, and you only the pronouncers of their Sentence, Will, and Mind; I say,
I desire to know when I have pleaded to matter of Fact, whether you will be
pleased to give me leave to speak to them a few words besides.

Lord Keble. Master Lilburne, quietly express your self, and you do well, the
Jury are Judges of matter of Fact altogether, and Judge Cook says so; but I
tell you, the opinion of the Court, they are Judges of matter of Law.

Mr. Lilburne. The Jury by Law are not only Judges of Fact, but of Law also;
and you that call your selves Judges of the Law are no more but Norman
Intruders, and indeed and in truth, if the Jury please, are no more but Ciphers
to pronounce their Verdict.

Judge Jermyn replied, Was there ever such a damnable blasphemous heresy as
this is, to call the Judges of the Law Ciphers? Sir, I entreat you give me
leave to read the words of the Law then, for to the Jury I apply, as my Judges
both in the Law and Fact.

Says the Lord Keble, We will not deny you a tittle of the Law.

Says Judge Jermyn, Let all the hearers know, the Jury ought to take notice of
it, that the Judges that are sworn, that are twelve in number, they have ever
been the Judges of the Law, from the first time that ever we can read or hear
that Law was truly expressed in England, and the Jury are only Judges, whether
such a thing were done or no, they are only Judges of matter of Fact.

Mr. Lilburne says, I deny it, here is your own Law to disprove you, and
therefore let not me but read it; it is a hard case when a man is upon the
Trial of his life, that you will not suffer him to read the Law to the Jury,
for his own defense; he was sure they have caused to be read at large those
Laws that made against him.

Lord Keble said, But I shall pronounce to clear the righteousness of that Law,
whatsoever others will pretend against it that know it not.

Master Lilburne replied, Sir, under favor I shall not trouble my self with
any thing, but what is pertinent to my present purpose; here is the first part
of Cooks Institutes, it is owned by all the Lawyers that I know, or ever heard
of in England for good Law.

Judge Keble answered, If you can convince us, that matter of Law does concern
you the Jury, you say something.

Mr. Lilburne answered, Sir, I have been shuffled too much out of my Liberties
already, give me leave to read but the Law to the Jury, I will make use of
nothing now to them, but your own words; and when I have done, I will leave my
self to them, and the guidance of God upon their conscience; and having the
Book open in his hand, he said in the first part of Cooks Institutes, sex. 366.
fol. 226, 227, 228. in his Exposition of Ployden has these words.

The Lord Keble answered, Have we dealt so fairly with you all this while, pray
be confident, those that are quotations there, are not for your purpose; but I
thought how good a Lawyer you were, for to set Cooks Commentaries upon Ployden;
when there is no such Book or Commentary: go to your matter of Fact, which is
clear, but for this let it fall down, and spare your self, and trouble your
self no more with Cook; he has no Commentary upon Ployden. But Master Lilburne
pressed to speak.

Judge Iermyn cries out, Hold Sir.

Mr. Lilburne replies, What will not you allow me liberty to read your Law? O
unrighteous and bloody Judges!

Judge Iermyn answers, By the fancy of your own mind, you would puzzle the
Jury, we know the Book a little better then you do, there is no such Book as
Cooks Commentary upon Ployden.

The Lord Keble said, Sir, you shall not read it.

Judge Iermyn says he cannot be suffered to read the Law, he had broached an
erroneous opinion, that the Jury are Judges of the Law, which is enough to
destroy all the Law in the Land; there was never such a damnable heresy
broached in this Nation before.

The Crier cries out, Hear the Court.

Master Lilburne answers, Do your pleasure, then here I Will dye: Jury, take
notice of their injustice; but seeing they will not hear me, I appeal to you,
and say, It is an easy matter for an abler man then I am, in so many
interruptions as I meet with, to mistake Ployden for Littleton; I am surehere
is Cooks Commentaries upon Littleton, and these be his words, In this case the
Recognitors of the Assize may say and render to the Justices their Verdict at
large upon the whole matter, which I am sure is good Law, forasmuch as we see
it continually done in all actions of Trespass or Assault, where the Jury does
not only judge of the validity of the proof of the Fact, but also of the Law,
by assigning what damages they think is just.

Lord Keble said, I am sure you are in an error, in a gross one, as possible a
man can be in; this is so gross, that I thought it could not have come from
Master Lilburne, that professes himself to be a rational and knowing man.

Master Lilburn goes on. And in another place he says, For as well as the
Jurors may have Cognizance of the Lease, they also as well may have Cognizance
of the condition. And further there Cook says, Here it is to be observed, that
a special Verdict, or at large, may be given in any Action, and upon any Issue,
be the Issue General or Special. And in Section 368. Littleton has these
words; Also in such Case, where the Inquest may give their Verdict at large, if
they will take upon them the knowledge of the Law, upon the matter they may
give their verdict generally. Cooks words upon it are fully to the same
purpose, who says, Although the Jury, if they will take upon them (as
Littleton here says) the knowledge of the Law, may give a general Verdict. I
am sure this is pertinent to my purpose, and now I have done Sir.

The Lord Keble replies, You have spent a little time, but you have done your
self no good; I thought you had understood the Law better then I see you do.

Master Lilburne, Now Sir, as to matter of Fact, according to your own desire,
seeing you have broke your promise, and will allow me no Council, but lie at
catch with me, says he, I shall come to it without any Preamble. The Statute
of the 1 Edward 6. Chap. 12. (I desire the Jury may take notice of the
Statutes) and the 5. and 6. of Edward the sixth, Chap. 11. here is the Statute
Book, which does expressly declare, That no man shall be condemned for Treason,
petty Treason, nor any such like Crimes, but by the Evidence and clear proof of
two legal and sufficient Witnesses. Sir Edward Cook in his third part
Institutes, Chapter of High Treason, is absolutely of the same opinion folio
12, In this branch, says he, four things are to be observed.

First, this word (proveablement) proveably, that is upon direct and manifest
proof, not upon conjectural presumptions or inferences, or strains of wit, but
upon good and sufficient proof of two Witnesses, and this is folio 12. And here
in the Adverb, (proveablement) proveably has a great force, and signifies a
direct and plain proof.

And secondly, This word (attaint) necessarily implies that he be poceeded
with, and attainted, according to the due course and proceedings of Law, and
not by absolute power, or by other means, as in former times it has been used.

And folio 24. Chap. Petty Treason, he says, It has been holden, that upon
the Trial of misprision of Treason, there must be two lawful Witnesses as well
upon the Trial as the Indictment, as it was resolved by the Justices in the
Lord Lumleys case. Hill. 14. Eliz. reported by the Lord Dier under his own
hand, and in the margent he has this note upon it, That this is the last
resolution of the Judges upon it: And a litttle below in the same folio, and
folio 25 he says, Therefore upon the Indictment, which is in manner of an
accusation, by the Statutes of 1. Edward 6. Cap. 12. and 5. and 6. Edward 6.
Cap. 11. Two lawful Witnesses are requisite. And in folio 240. he has the
same; his words are these: Attainders of Treason, etc. ought to be upon plain
and direct evidence, (as before is said;) for if the party be executed,
restitution may be had of his Lands, but never can be had of his life. Now I
have done Sir.

Lord Keble. I hope the Jury has seen the Evidence so plain, and so fully,
that it does confirm them to do their duty, and to find the Prisoner guilty of
what is charged upon him.

J. Iermyn, This that you have said, makes much for the Jury.

Afterward there were several witnesses examined, Mr. Thomas Newcomb as to a
Book he printed, the last sheet of it, entitled, The Apprentices Outcry,
which Mr. Newcomb by circumstances acknowledged, was taken before it was
perfected. Afterward John Took, John Skinner, Thomas Lewis, John Hawkins, John
Merriman, the Witnesses were sworn; all which Master Lilburne did so order with
his Queries and confident Questions, that they were at their wits ends; Mr.
Lilburne all this while having the subtlety not to acknowledge his own hand,
which occasioned Master Attorney Prideaux to say, you may see the valiantness
of the Champion for the peoples Liberties, he will not own his own hand. Master
Lilburne said, he denied nothing, but would have them to prove it. For his
other Book, an Impeachment of High Treason against Oliver and his Son-in-law
Henry Ireton, late Members of the late forcibly dissolved House of Commons,
presented to the public view by Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne, close
Prisoner in the Tower of London. Mr. Attorney said, My Lord, I doubt he will
not own it. Mr. Lilburne said again, he should deny nothing he had done; but he
had read the Petition of Right, which taught him to answer no questions against
himself; he said, that he had read that it was practiced by our Savior Christ
and his Apostles, our Savior answering Pilate with only, Thou say it. For
as to his Preparative to the hue and cry after Sir Arthur Haselrig, the
Lieutenant of the Tower said, it was true that Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne
gave him such a Book in the Tower, but he could not say whether that was the
same Book he delivered him. Mr. Nutleigh and Mr. Radny, two Witnesses, put Mr.
John shroudly to his shifts. He was come to St. Francis his equivocation, when
one asked him that was newly robbed, which way the thief went, he stretching out
his arm, said, not this way, meaning through his sleeve.

For his Book called, The Legal Fundamental Liberties of England, the Attorney
General did not put much weight upon that, as also of his Book De salva
liberate; but he proceeded to produce an Act of Parliament of the fourteenth
of May 1649. declaring what offenses should be adjudged High Treason, which
were read over. The chief clauses that Master Attorney insisted upon against
Mr. Lilburne were these; That if any person shall maliciously or advisedly
publish by writing, printing, or openly declaring that the said Government is
usurped, tyrannical, or unlawful, or that the Commons assembled in Parliament
are not the Supreme Authority of this Nation: These, says Mr. Attorney, we
shall join together with Mr. Lilburnes books; to which making particular
application, he inferred, that Mr. Lilburns Books were accordingly traiterous;
to which purpose he caused the Clerk to make particular references to several
pages of his Books. Master Prideaux causing these words to be read out of one
of Master Lilburns Books, That the Parliament are usurping Tyrants, and their
new thing, called their Council of State, undoubtedly the most, if not all of
them, must go to Tyburn or Tower Hill, there by the Halter or Ax to receive
their just deserts, to which he affixed, Amen. There is an Amen pronounced to
us, says Mr. Attorney, let him have it that deserves it, and according to the
Atturneyes direction, several pages of his Books were still quoted and read on;
then Mr. Attorney expressed himself to the Court, to this purpose, says he, My
Lords, if I should say nothing more to the Jury but what has been instanced
and said, there is pregnant proof already; but yet my Lord, further to prove
the malice of Mr. Lilburnes heart, and that he did intend to subvert and
destroy the Parliament, he caused the Clerk to read some other passages of his
Books, out of which he proved that he had blown a Trumpet for all his friends
to take up Arms against the Parliament; to which purpose he went about to
seduce the Army, which he calls his fellow Contrymen. Thus I have already
expressed the particular advantages that might be for the Atturneys Plea to
Master Lilburns detriment, to the proving of no less then High Treason through
several pages, being quoted successively throughout every Book, to that
determined purpose. Mr. Lilburne after he had compared the Judges to the
Scribes and Pharisees, and their usage of himself to Christ, closing to his
former expression, Thou say Mr. Prideaux they are my Books, he bid him prove
it. Mr. Prideaux speaking to the Jury, said, Gentlemen there are proofs enough
and too many; that he had no more to say to them, but that if they respected
the government of the Parliament, the honor of the Council of State, the
honor of the Nation, or of the Army, or the preservation of the Law, they
could not but say that the prisoner was guilty of such crimes and treasons as
he was lawfully accused of, and accordingly they could not but find him so. He
ended, that he desired the Act of Treason might be made use of. Master Lilburne
again pretended himself to be tired and oppressed, but at the present not being
understood, he desired that he might refresh his body with the air, which could
not be obtained. All this while he struggled out a little respite, at last
after these lingerings, the Judge resolvingto be no longer delayed, commanded
the Chair to be taken away, for it grew late. Now it was time for Master
Lilburne to show himself a right Colonel John, after his so long baffling and
fooling of the Judges, he was Counsel to himself; he pleaded his own Cause with
such subtilty, with such a perfect recollection of all the former transactions
of his Trial, and withal indisputably confident of his Jury, he knew he could
not tread awry; he being left invulnerable, except in the heel, which was only
in his own most necessary inscrutable reservations; he closed his long speech
of clearing himself with some necessary insinuations to the Jury, where the
strength of this Sampson did chiefly lie. To them he declared the integrity of
his life, his merits, and the hard usage he had received from the present
Government; being interrupted, he earnestly desired the Jury to take notice of
the blood-thirsty cruelty and malice of his enemies, all the while, soundly
clawing of his Jury with such words, that he was happy in the care and
conscience of his honest Jury, fellow Citizens, and Freemen of England, who
were to be the Conservators and Judges of his life, having in themselves the
Judicial power of the Land, the Judges that sit there, being no more if they
pleased, but as Ciphers to pronounce the sentence of their Clerks, to say Amen.
They being at the best in their originals, but the Norman Conquerers Obtruders.
He called his Jury the keepers of his life, at whose hands if they did not do
him justice, the Lord would require his blood; he desired the Lord God
omnipotent to direct then, the Governor of heaven and earth, and all things
therein contained, to go along with them, and give them counsel to do that
which is just for his glory: the people with one voice crying, Amen, Amen.
Which made the Judges look untowardly about them, and caused Major Genesis Skippon
to send for three fresh Companies more of Foot Soldiers. After which, Mr.
Attorney General told the Jury, that they had heard the evidence, in the behalf
of State, laying the business to their conscience, that they should be careful
to do justice. Mr. Lilburne enforced this as his main argument to the Jury,
that there were none that swore as to his hand, that there was no Book proved
his; and if that of the agreement of the people were his, it was before the
Acts had a being or were in print. Master Attorney replied, Mr. Lilburne, these
are but your own glosses, the Jury answers to the matter of Fact, they are upon
their Oaths sworn to do things that are just and right. My Lords, said he, I
leave the evidence to them; all that he had more to say, was, that Mr. Lilburne
since he came before the Lords, had not so much as owned the Power of the
Court, but often called them Ciphers and the like. Mr. Lilburne desired that
the Jury might read the first Chapter of Queen Mary in the Statute Book, and
the last Clause of the Chapter in the 13. of Queen Elizabeth; but Judge Keble
when according to the custom he was to speak to the Jury, said, That Mr.
Lilburne had cited two Statutes to prove that there must be two Witnesses,
whereas if there were but one Witness to each Fact, it were enough in Law; and
therefore he said, Gentlemen of the Jury, what you have heard must not stick
with you, you are not bound affirmatively to have two Witnesses, but that one
Witness where the circumstances concur, that is sufficient; that which should
prevail with you, was, to consider the strength of the accusation which rested
in the Books, and did consist of three heads, which were laid down in the Books
themselves. First, the so far vilifying the Parliament and State, as it was now
established in England. The second looked on the counsels and incitations of Mr.
Lilburne for the stirring up of Tumults, Motions, and Wars in the Nation. The
third are the things cited in the Books to that end and purpose to divide the
Army. These he said were the three main charges, and these the Books that came
from him did so plainly testify: that the Books were proved to be his, they
were fit Judges of, and it clearly appeared by those his Books that these
things were his invention. He coucluded, that these Books being admitted, he
said, that never man that acted the highest of Treasons as he had done, had so
much liberty as he; nor any man of his condition, or any condition in England,
that was indicted in such case, ever had a Trial in such a Court, such an
Auditory, such a Presence as he had. Mr. Lilburne replied, the more was his
sorrow, he had rather it had been any where else. The Judge enlarged himself,
that his plot was of such a nature, that it struck at no lefs then the
subversion of the Commonwealth, that there was never such another did proceed
from a private man as he was; and therefore he desired the Masters of the Jury
to look into their consciences, as he said to them; they having plainly before
their eyes that there was not in one particular a single testimony but was
aggravated with several circumstances. Therefore as he said, they being proper
Judges of matter of Fact, being of the same Country, if they fully apprehended
the dangerous things plotted in Mr. Lilburnes Books, they would elearly find
that never was the like Treason hatched in England; so in Gods name, as the
prisoner did lead to their consciences, he desired them to go and do. Other
petty transactions and cross answers passed betwixt Mr. Lilburne and his
Judges, not worth the taking notice of; the Jury went forth at four of the
Clock, the Court adjourned till six, the Court commanded the Lieutenant of the
Tower and the Sheriffs to carry the prisoner to the Irish Chamber, which they
did; the prisoner staid about three quarters of an hour, and the Jury being
come to the Court again. the prisoner was sent for; and after the Crier had
caused silence, the Jurors names were called over again, the Clerk asked them if
they were agreed, the Jury answered, yes; the Clerk asked who should speak for
them; the Jury said, the foreman. The Crier said, John Lilburne hold up thy
hand, what say you, look upon the prisoner? is he guilty of the Treasons
charged upon him or not guilty? the foreman answered, not guilty of all of
them. The Clerk replied, not of all the treasons, or of any of them that are
laid to his charge. The foreman answered, No, not of all, nor of any one of
them. The Clerk said again, did he fly for the same, the foreman replied, No.
Which no, he pronounced with a loud voice; immediately the whole multitude of
people in the Hall for joy of the prisoners acquittal gave such a loud and
unanimous shout, as is believed was never heard in Guild Hall, which lasted for
about half an hour without intermission; the Bells being rung, and Bonefires
made in most Streets in London. That night, diverse of Master Lilburnes friends
went to the Judges, the Parliament, and Council of State, by whose
importunities and by the help of the Lord Gray of Groby, Colonel Ludlow, Mr.
Robinson, and Colonel Martin, his discharge was procured. I shall close up the
large particulars of this so eminent a Trial, with what I heard reported, one
merrily said, That the Jurymen very well deserved the Medalls that Colonel
John presented them with, and that their own Pictures needed not to be cut, for
they had engraven them themselves, and had questionless made admirable draughts
for future Juries, to copy out the Liberties of the Subject.

Lilburne having thus gotten his liberty, with some repute for practice,
attended the Committees in nature of a grand Informer or Sollicitour, pleading
in all causes, where he might have any advantage thereby; yea, some report him
so corrupt in his practice, as his own Party were ashamed of him; which if
true, he was the more inexcusable, having vehemently cried out against the same
in the Lawyers, and might with shame apply the Poets words to himself,

Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Unto a Teacher it is no small disgrace,
When his own faults reprove him to his face.
About the same time were dangerous insurrections, and horrible riots committed
in the North, the occasion thus: at the expense of 175046. pounds, or
thereabouts; there was drained or laid dry, 160000 Acres of land, lying
contiguous within the Counties of York, Lincoln, and Nottingham, not worth
before three shillings and four pence an Acre one with another; the which was
made worth some ten, other twelve, yea some twenty shillings an Acre; in the
Manor of Epworth was 7400. Acres, which had been peaceably possessed by the
Drainers, and their assigns, the space of ten years; but several persons
envying them the benefit accrewing thereby, in a tumultuous manner came into
the level, and breaking down the fences, destroyed and laid waste above 4000.
Acres of drained Land, and pulled down several houses standing thereon.

Others afterward, several days (during the flowing of the spring tide)
violently forced open a Sewer called Snow-Sewer, planted upon the River of
Trent, purposely to let in the Waters; the which course they continued, till
they had drowned 8000. Acres of Corn and Rape then growing, and the Corn stacks
generally half way, with the greatest part of men's houses and habitations, by
the space of ten weeks. Now fearing they should be punished for these
insolences, and desirous to keep what they had thus gotten, they drew to their
assistance Mr. Lilburne, J. W. and one Noddel a Solicitour; who notwithstanding
the Court of Exchequer, made a decree for establishing the possession again
with those from whom they had wrested it, and that this decree was published
upon the place in presence of diverse of the inhabitants; they openly declared,
That they would not give any obedience thereunto, nor to any order of the
Exchequer, or Parliament; and said, they could make as good a Parliament
themselves; some said, It was a Parliament of Clouts, and that if they sent
Forces; they would raise Forces to resist them: moreover from words they
proceeded to action, so that within ten days time, they totally demolished the
whole Town of Stantoft, and other houses thereabouts, to the number of eighty
two habitations, defaced the Church, burnt Stables and Outhouses broke in
pieces a Windmill, destroyed all the Corn and Rape on the ground, no less then
3400. Acres, so as the damage at that time was estimated to be 80000. pounds
or more.

Moreover Lilburne with his associates, agrees with several men of Epworth,
that in consideration of 2000 Acres of Land for him and J. W. and 200. Acres to
Noddel, they would defend them in all those riots, and insurrections, and
maintain them in possession of the rest of the Land; this bargain being made,
Lilburne with Noddel and others, came to Stantoft Church on the Lords day, and
forced the Congregation from thence, employing the same to the use of a Stable,
Cow-house, Slaughterhouse, and to lay his Hay and Straw therein.

For these tumultuous practices (as also for joining with one Mr. Primate, in
seeking to defraud the Commonwealth of the Collory of Harraton in the County of
Durham, the sequestered estate of Thomas Wray Esquire, which Mr. Primate
pretended a right unto, though upon examination it proved otherwise) this
following Act for his Fine and Banishment, was published against him.

Whereas upon the fifteenth day of January, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred fifty one, A Judgment was given in Parliament against the
said Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburne for high Crimes and Misdemeanors by him
committed, relating to a false, malicious, and scandalous Petition heretofore
presented to the Parliament by one Josiah Primate of London, Leather-seller, as
by the due proceedings had upon the said Petition, and the Judgment thereupon
given at large appears: Be it therefore enacted by this present Parliament;
and by the Authority of the same, that the fine of three thousand pounds
imposed upon the said John Lilburne to the use of the Commonwealth, by the
Judgment aforesaid, shall be forthwith levied by due process of Law, to the
use of the Commonwealth accordingly. And be it further enacted, that the sum of
two thousand pounds imposed by the said Judgment upon the said John Lilburne,
to be paid to Sir Arthur Hesilrige for damages, and the sum of two thousand
pounds likewise imposed by the said Judgment upon the said John Lilburne, to
be paid to James Russel, Edward Winslow, William Molins and Arthus Squib, in
the said Judgment named; that is to say, to each of them five hundred pounds
for their damages, shall be forthwith paid accordingly: And that the said Sir
Arthur Hesilrige, James Russel, Edward Winslow, William Molins and Arthur
Squib, their Executors and Administrators, shall have the like remedy and
proceedings at Law respectively, against the said John Lilburne, his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the recovery of the respective sums
so given to them by the said Judgment, as if the said respective sums had been
due by several Recognizances in the nature of a Statute Staple, acknowledged
unto them severally by the said John Lilburne, upon the said fifteenth day of
January, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred fifty one. And be it
likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the said John Lilburne shall
(within twenty days to be accounted from the said fifteenth day of January,
one thousand six hundred fifty one) depart out of England, Scotland, Ireland,
and the Islands, Territories and Dominions thereof: And in case the said John
Lilburne at any time after the expiration of the said twenty days to be
accounted as aforesaid, shall be found, or shall be remaining within England,
Scotland, Ireland, or within any of the Islands, Territories or Dominions
thereof; the said John Lilburne shall be, and is hereby adjudged a Fellon, and
shall be executed as a Fellon, without benefit of Clergy. And it is lastly
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every person and persons, who
shall after the expiration of the said twenty days, wittingly relieve, harbor,
or conceal the said John Lilburne, he being in England, Scotland, or Ireland,
or any the Territories, Islands, or Dominions thereof, shall be hereby adjudged
accessory of Felony after the Fact: And all Judges, Justices, Majors,
Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and all other Officers, as well Military as Civil in their
respective places, are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in
apprehending the said John Lilburne, and in putting this Act in due execution.

Lilburne hereupon sets Sail for Holland, with a resolution as he set forth in
print, Never to see England so long as Cromwels hateful and beastly tyranny
lasted, unless it were in a way to pursue him as the grandest Tyrant and
Traitor that ever England bred; some report that during his abode there, he
negotiated with the Lord Hopton, Colonel Charles Lloyd, and others of the
Royal Party, that for the sum of ten thousand pounds he would destroy the Lord
General Cromwell, the Parliament and Council of State, that then sat at
Westminster, and settle Charles Stuart in his Throne in England, or else he
would have a piece of him nailed upon every post in Bruges. But for the truth
of this (besides his own denial) I cannot conceive he should have any thought
that Party would trust him (especially with such a sum of money) having before
declared himself so great an enemy to the late King. But what ever were the
motives that induced him, resolved he was to come into England again; to which
purpose he sent Cromwell this introducing Letter.

For his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell. These present.
My Lord,
At my discourse with you in your Gallery, about four or five months ago, I
had thought I had given your Lordwip so full satisfaction in every thing, that
might remove all jealousies from you, of my disserving you in any kind; that
of all men in the Parliament, I little imagined to have found your honor to be
the principal man to banish me into a strange Country, where for the fafety of
my life I am forced to print an Apology; and because you are named in it, I
judge it but man-like to send you a Copy of it. And, if I had not been
traveling last post-day, I had sent to you then. And I have also by this post
sent to a friend three sheets of paper in writing to communicate to your
Lordship. The which, if you please to read them, you will find that you are
deeply concerned in them.

I have no more to say to your Honor, but to desire God for you (if it be his
pleasure) to make you speedily as righteous in actions, as you were some years
ago in declarations, and to take leave to say, I am yet as much honest.

John Lilburne, as ever I was in my life, that neither loves flattery, nor
fears greatness or threatenings.


His Wife also sollicites the General for a pass, which though not granted, yet
over he comes; so confident he was, that at Canterbury, in his way to London,
he presently begins to boast of his own interest in England, saying, He had no
need of a pass, being as good a man as Cromwell, and that he did not fear what
he could do unto him.

Yet notwithstanding his monstrous confidence, he was committed to prison, and
by order of Parliament, tried for his life, at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bailey, August the 20. 1653. where he pleaded that the Act whereupon he was
Indicted, was a lie, a falsehood; that it had no Law nor Reason in it. That the
Parliament could not make any Act of Parliament since the Kings head was cut
off; that by the same Law they voted him to death, they might vote his honest
twelve Jury men; calling Jehovah to witness, and protesting before God, Angels,
and Men, that he was not the John Lilburne intended in the Act; whereupon this
Jury, following the example of the former, satisfied with his answers, and not
questioning the validity of the Act, found him not guilty.

Thus you see what endeavors were used to rid the Nation of him, by trials,
banishment, and what not, though in vain, when as many a more heroic spirit
and gallant heart far transcending him in birth and parts, have fallen by the
Sword of Justice, in the twinkling of an eye: truth it is, he was a man of a
restless and invincible spirit, that could never be deterred with threats, nor
won with favors though (as it is reported) 3000. pounds was given out of the
sale of Theobalds as a sop to stop his mouth; he was questionless of a most
implacable spirit, working and restless as the Sea, not to be appeased but with
the blood of his adversaries; nor can I deny but some of those things he aimed
at were honest and useful for the people, but he steered not the right course
to attain those ends.

It may be admired at by some how such an illiterate person as Lilburne, one
whose breeding promised him more skill in his last trade of Soap, then in Cook,
or to have had better judgment in rusticity in a Plow, then in Plowden; who
from this low rise mounted no higher then to inferior employments, until in
the late Wars he somewhat advantaged and preferred himself by his Sword; I say
it may seem strange to some how this person thus qualified, should come to have
so much knowledge and understanding in the Law? for answer to which, it is to
be understood that Mr. Lilburne had formerly turned over some Statute Books, in
which he had made a small progress, and that afterward, at such time as he was
committed in the Tower, there remained a prisoner there (though for a different
Cause) that heart of Oak, and a pillar of the Law, Judge Jenkins; who finding
Lilburne of an accute Wit, and one who dared to speak what some pusilanimous
spirits were afraid to entrust their thoughts with, he selected him as fit
person to bandy against the present Government, and by weakening their power,
to advance his Masters interest; hereupon he helps him with tools wherewith to
let up his trade, so that in short space Magna Charta and Cooks Institutions
were made his familiars; by which means he quickly grew so cunning a gamester,
that like unto a cat, throw him never so high, he would be sure to pitch upon
his feet. Thus the old Judge and another reverend Divine in his learned volume
of prophesying, published, to hook in the Independent party, so strangely
mistook themselves, as that they could not have done their own cause a greater
mischief.

But the Squib is now almost run to the end of the Rope, we shall in the last
place present our Proteus in the shape of a Quaker; the person that converted
him was a singlehearted Shoemaker, as he terms him in his Letter to his Wife,
which he writ to her from Dover Castle, whither he was committed by the
Parliament, part whereof (for your further satisfaction) I have transcribed,
though curtailed, you have Mr. John's own words to his Wife. It is not much
material what part of it I begin with, such Quaking Cantings being to be read
backwards like the Hebrew. The contents follow.

And so in much mercy and endeared loving kindness, as God did in my great
straits in the Bishops time, provide and send unto me a poor despised (yet
understanding) Priscilla, to instruct me in, or expound unto me his ways more
fully, and perfectly; (whom I am compelled now to tell thee I shall love and
respect therefore, the longest day I live upon the earth, let her continue by
whomsoever to be judged never so rigid or contemptible) so here at this place
he has also provided for me an Aquila, being a contemptible, yet understanding
spiritually, knowing and single-hearted Shoemaker, to do the same now to my
spiritual, and no small advantage, refreshment, and benefit, by means of all
which I am at present become dead to my former bustling actings in the world,
and now stand ready with the devout Centurion spoken of, Acts 10. To hear and
obey all things that the lively voice of God speaking in my soul, shall require
of me; upon the further manifestation of whose glorious presence, my heart with
a watching fear and care, desires to wait, and to walk faithfully, and
tenderly, and humbly in that measure of light already received, etc. In another
place he thus insinuates with his Wife to gain her to his opinion; And now my
dear love, for whom my soul travels with God for thy eternal good, with the
same sincere heartedness as for my own, hoping that thy late out-fall and mine,
was but for a set season, that so as Divine Paul in another sense speaks,
Philem. 15. thy reconciliation and mine again might now remain firm in love
for ever. And a little after, I therefore earnestly entreat thee not to cumber
thy self in thy many turmoylings and journeyings for my outward liberty, but
sit down a little, and behold the great salvation of the Lord. Subscribing his
Letter thus,

Thine in the strength of renewedness of true love, John Lilburne.
From Dover Castle, the place of the present enjoyed, delightful dispensations
of the eternal, everlasting love of God unto my soul, the 4th. day of the 10th.
month, 1655.

Tempora Mutantur. Thus the Protector first made him tremble, and the
single-soul'd Shoe maker afterward made him quake; and now he resolves, never
hereafter to be an user of a temporal Sword more, nor a Joyner with those that
so do. And accordingly he made good his resolutions, living in his strict way
of opinion to the day of his death, which happened not long after, whilst he
remained a prisoner in Dover Castle. His body was seized upon by the Quakers,
and conveyed from thence to London, and at the Bull and Mouth in Saint Martins
(their meeting place) was put into a plain Coffin, without any covering, and
from thence, (with his head forwards, that his burying might be as preposterous
as his actions) carried through Moor Fields (where formerly he had received a
hurt on his eye) to the new Churchyard in Bedlam, where it was put into the
earth; that as his turbulent life came near to madness, so the place of his
burial was near to the distracted crew. I shall conclude this relation of our
Wonderful, Impetuous, Magna Charta, Petition of Right, Lieu. Colonel John,
with these merry verses which a choice Wit bestowed on him.

Untimely cause so late, and late because
To save much mifchief it no sooner was;
Is John departed, and is Lilburne gone,
Farewell to both, to Lilburne and to John:
Yet being dead take this advice from me,
Let them not both in one Grave buried be;
Lay John here, lay Lilburne there about,
For if they both should meet, they would fall out.
There are many Anagrams upon him, but being they are too abusive, remembering
the old Saw, de mortuis nil nisi bonum, (though to John Lilburne himself) I
thought in more civil to omit them.

The Life of OLIVER CROMWELL late Lord Protector.
THe sweet-lipt Poet Ovid sings of Icarus, and of a Phaeton, that would ride in
the Chariot of the Sun, to whom his displeased father gave this advice.

-- Non est tua tuta voluntas,
Magna petis Phaeton, and quae non viribus istis
Munera convenient; nec tam puerilibus annis,
Plus etiam quam superis contingere fas est.
Which the incomparable Translatour, Mr. Sandyes renders thus.

-- What Is so desired by thee,
Can neither with thy strength nor youth agree;
Too great intentions set thy thoughts on fire,
Thou Mortal, do no mortal thing desire;
Through ignorance, affecting more then they
Can undertake, that should Olympus sway.
In our Modern Histories we read of some men, otherwise Wall-flowers for their
growth, that have had the luck to be strangely active in Political Affairs,
such as have boldly adventured to cut down all trees of State that have hindered
their own prospect, taking the Reins of the horses of the Sun into their own
hands, which in their managements of, they have either been too slack, or else
pulling them too hard in, by over-winding the strings of Authority, have
rendered themselves unfortunate, slowly perceiving the errors of their
ambitions, till at last too late they were forced to pluck down those stairs by
which they intended to ascend to their own greatness; so dangerous is an
unlimitted power, a sail too great for a vessel of Mortality to bear, though it
were never so well ballasted with Justice, Moderation, and Piety. It shall be
my enterprise, void of all partiality, neither inclining to the right hand or
left, scorning so much as to reflect on the flatteries, much less as they are
under my feet, to take up any of the dispersed Libels; the one party by their
adulations, as the Papists and Puritans did Mary Queen of Scotland, making him
to be more then a Saint; the other desperately malicious, as we have taken it
up on Tradition from some Writers, rendering him to posterity more deformed
then Richard the Third: it shall be my care to wave these petty factions, the
flies that gilded themselves in his sunshine, as also those other mice, which
whilst this Martial Lion seemed to them to sleep, yet without their large
distance they dursts not approach him. I am resolved, though in this Epitome,
to search the Cabulla of our late Affairs, to keep close to the unbyassed
truth, though I shall be forced to take up that old unavoidable excuse,
Bernardus non vidit omnia.

He was born at Huntington, descended of the ancient Family of the Williams's,
of the County of Glamorgan; and by adoption into that of the Cromwels, the more
noble Family, as descended of Thomas Cromwell Earl of Essex, the axe that hewed
down the Abbeys in the time of King Henry the Eighth.

His education in his youth was for a time at the University of Cambridge,
where though he attained to no great perfection in learning, yet with his other
additionals, the Foxes tail with the Lions skin, his strength of reason with
the sharp edge of his sword, stood him in great stead in his after
Transactions; and which, together with his indefatigable industry, rendered him
so fortunate, that he never fell short of what he undertook.

After his return from the University, without any extraordinary respects from
the Muses, whose unkindeness he afterward most severely retaliated, he
resolved for the future upon the first advantage to try the fortune of Mars;
but long it was ere the blind goddess provided him any action; during which
time he married a Gentlewoman of the ancient Family of the Bourchiers, (whence
the Earls of Essex were descended) by whom he had two sons which survived him,
Richard and Henry, and three daughters, Bridget, Mary, and Frances.

For his private fortunes they were competent, a mediocrity betwixt riches and
poverty; the one blunting the edge of wit and industry, the other by its
hardship whetting it quite away. But what was wanting in his Estate was
supplied in the greatness of his mind, which put him upon high attempts, which
proved so successful, that at last they placed him at the Helm of Government.

He took his first rise from the long Parliament, whereof he was a Member,
being chosen Burgess for the University of Cambridge; in this Parliament that
fire burst forth which had been long before in kindling, that fatal division
betwixt King and Parliament; with which last he wholly sided: what motives
induced him thereunto, I know not, nor will I determine of the integrity of his
choice; this I am sure of, he took the more fortunate, or by his manhood made
it so.

When he delivered his mind in the House, it was with a strong and masculine
eloquence, more able to persuade then to be persuaded; his expressions were
hardy, opinions resolute, asseverations grave and vehement, always intermixed,
Andronicus-like, with Sentences of Scripture, to give them the greater weight,
and the better to insinuate into the affections of the people; he expressed
himself with some kind of passion, but with such a commanding wise deportment,
that at his pleasure he governed and swayed the House, as he had most times the
leading voice.

Those who find no such wonders in his speeches, may find it in the effect of
them; most of the people he was concerned in, being as they term it, enemies to
book learning; and whosoever should endeavor with an eloquent oration, or
otherwise go about to reconcile them, and make them friends, should make them
enemies; such great adorers are they of the Scripture phrase, though but little
practisers; such as our late times have brought forth. Indeed he usurpt his
holy oil quotations very frequently, which was so advantageous to his designs,
that Cicero and Demosthenes with all their Tropes and Figures, could never have
so persuaded and moved the people, as he with one Text of Scripture aptly
applied; the Dove, and the Serpent, of Scripture, and some small parcel of
policy, to what he intended, slily intermixed.

But his side standing in more need of action then eloquence, he quitted the
House, and betook him to the Field; to manifest his courage as well as his
eloquence, maintain by his deeds what his words had introduced.

Having raised a Troop of Horse at his own costs and charges, he marched
against the Muses to Cambride, (whereof he was Burgess) seizing on a very
considerable sum of money and plate, which the Colleges had raised, and were
sending away unto Oxford; which as it was very advantageous to his own side
(money being the very life and sinews of War) so d d it much weaken the adverse
party, who had always great want of it. The Parliament having on their side
the rich City of London, that inexhaustible bank of treasure. By this means he
strengthened himself with sufficient aids to oppose the Lord Capel, who was to
have been seconded by Prince Rupert, and should have seized on Cambridge,
thereby to have impeded the association of the adjoining Counties for the
Parliament.

He being advanced from a Captain to a Colonel, having completed a Regiment
of Horse, to the full number of a thousand men, in the Spring of the year, he
marches to Lowerstoft in Suffolk, where he suddenly surprised Sir Thomas
Barker, Sir John Pettas his Brother, with above twenty other persons of note,
who were entering into an association for the King; several persons of quality,
and diverse Noblemen hourly flocking to that rendezvous, this other service was
very seasonably rendered to the Parliament, the Kings Party both in Suffolk and
Norfolk, being much discouraged by this success.

Having by new raised aids enforced his Army to a very considerable strength,
he marched into Lilcolnshire, with a resolution to assist those Forces which
lay about Newark, a very strong and stout Garrison of the Kings; where, by
their daily excursions they kept all the Country thereabouts in awe; which he
not only blocked up, but also defeated part of the Earl of Newcastles Army
which came to relieve them. I shall not need to particularize all his actions,
his other intervening Achievements are more at large related in the Life of
King Charles. To look forwards, only to mention the Battle of Marston Moor,
where by his valor he turned the scales of Victory, which at the first
inclined to the Kings side; as also at that fatal Fight at Naseby, where the
Kings Foot were all cut in pieces or taken Prisoners. His memorable
discomfiture of the Kings Forces at Preston in Lancashire over Duke Hamilton
and Sir Marmaduke Langdale; the last of them as valiantly faithful to the King,
as the other was disloyal: their united Forces amounting to twenty five
thousand, his not above ten thousand at most; (although indeed he found little
opposition, save only of those few Forces of Sir Marmaduke Langdales, who
fought it out courageously to the last man. Should I thus continue to signalize
his Trophies, I might tire out the Reader with his strange Successes; let it
suffice then, that his actions with such fame arrived at the House, that in
recompense, they first bestowed on him the Generalship of the Horse and
afterward the Lieutenant Generalship of all the whole Army. Certainly if his
ambition had terminated here, and his wonderful successes had not raised his
thoughts higher, if he could not for his Martial merits have been beloved, he
had power enough to have rendered himself-safe, and for his valiant
Achievements feared, honored, and admired.

Raised to this degree of Command, he was more careful of hazarding his person
then before; well knowing the loss of a General is the most irreparable of all
losses; for him to expose his person to trivial hazards, in the breath of whose
nostrils the victorious Achievements of the Soldiers remains, is too
impertinently adventerous, as if 'twere more glorious to fight then command:
whereas that is more especially the virtue of a common Soldier, this other of a
Leader, whose principal talent lies more in direction then execution, more in
the brain then hand; thus that ever to be deplored Laureat of our times, the
Gentleman of the long Robe, the Oracle of the Kings Councels, the Lord
Faukland, was as unfortunately lost, as unnecessarily engaged in the Field.

But to proceed, he grew so subtly careful, as to maintain a fair
correspondency; there was no place taken, no Battle won, but he was the first
that brought or sent word to the House; by which he insinuated himself into the
affections both of the Parliament and People: expressing his own actions in
such terms, as whilst he seemingly attributed much to others, he drew the
whole commendation thereof to himself,

One thing that made his Brigade so invincible, was his arming them so well, as
whilst they assured themselves they could not be overcome, it assured them to
overcome their enemies. He himself as they called him Ironside, needed not to
be ashamed of a Nickname that so often saved his life.

These were his acts whilst Lieutenant General, by which he got so great a
name in War, as Essex, Waller, and those other great names before him,
excepting only Sir Thomas Fairfax's Laurels, which were interwoven with his,
the rest were swallowed up in his most inimitable successes, even as great
Rivers are swallowed up by the Ocean.

For the rest of his actions whilst he was General, Itis conquering Ireland,
his subduing Scotland, the many other Battles he fought till his finishing the
War in England. To treat also largely of these his Trophies, would weary the
pen of a serious, though industrious Writer, that sadly considers the
incivility of those late Civil Wars, howsoever they were strange successes, and
so many, that as a Modern Poet agrees with what I have expressed;

-- It were a work so great,
Would make Olympus bearing Atlas sweat.
I shall therefore summarily relate the most notable Occurrences then
happening, leaving the less Affairs to be related by more voluminous Authors.

No sooner were the Civil Wars of England terminated by the discomfiture of all
the Kings Armies, the taking of his own person, and putting him to death: but
the Parliament by a solemn Vote and Ordinance changed the Monarchical
Government into a Commonwealth. The Kingdom of Ireland discontented at this
change, uniting themselves, wned the late Kings eldest Son, and solemnly
proclaimed him King, no place considerable standing out for the Parliament
saving only Dublyn, and London Derry; the first whereof was immediately
besieged by an Army of two and twenty thousand men, commanded by the Marquess
of Ormond, and the other by a considerable party of the Natives of the
Country. To the reducing of this Kingdom was Oliver Cromwell nominated
Governor of Ireland by the Commonwealth; who with a well appointed Army set
sail for Dublyn: where although he found things in an indifferent good posture,
the Marquess of Ormond having been beaten off by the valor of Michael Jones
the Governor, yet he met with work enough for his Army: for Droghedah, one of
the best and considerablest places in all Ireland, held out stiffly against
them, and having a strong party, bid defiance to his Army: yet notwithstanding
after many assaults and much valor shown on both sides he at last took it,
putting therein to death three thousand Irish; who though enemies, yet for
their valor and undaunted resolution might have been looked on with a more
merciful eye, as they were men, and more especially Christians. Soon after
followed the surrender of Trim, Dundalke, Nury, Wexford, Rove, Bandonbridge,
and Kingsale; yet notwithstanding the reducing of these Towns, many of the
Irish retreating to their Bogs, and inaccessible places, held out for a long
time in despite of the English.

To proceed, not only the Irish showed their dislike of this change of
Government, but also the Collonies in Virginia, and the Carybde Islands; to the
reducing of whom the Parliament sent Sir George Askue with a Fleet of ships,
who brought them again into obedience.

In the mean time the Scots were very busy, they had commenced a Treaty with
Prince Charles at Breda, which at last was concluded on, he assenting to their
Presbyterian Government; and they to install and reestablish him in that
Kingdom, and in the other accordingly as they questioned not but Fortune would
answer their blind zealous Covenant expectations.

The Prince puts forth to sea, and in despite of foul weather, and the English
King fishers that lay there to intercept him, he landed safely at the Spey in
the North of Scotland; now though the Scots had a King, yet (as if they had
none) every one did that which was right in his own eyes; and as if they
intended him only the Title, being now in their power, they forced him to
follow the dictates of their haughty Clergy, in all their fanatic humors and
imperious decrees. First then they bereaved him of all his old Friends,
Councillors, and Confederates, whether of the Clergy or Layety, as those who
adhered to Episcopal Government, and so not pure enough for so reformed a
people. Thus they hamstringed him not as what was formerly in the sign-post
only of printed papers. Next they make him take the Solemn League and
Covenant, that strange fire which the Scotch believe descended from Heaven, and
by which they at their pleasures kindle those Wars wherewith they infest
England: then these Horse Farriers of the Conscience gave him another drench;
he is taught to renounce the sins of his Fathers house, and of his own, the
Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the cause of God, according
to the Covenant, in the firm establishment of Church Government, as it is laid
down in the Directory for public Worship, Confession of Faith, and Catechism.
These with diverse others of the like nature, they wrought so on his necessity,
they obtruded, or rather rammed into his conscience (although with much
reluctance) he signed to, making many strange faces at these bitter pills he
swallowed; yet it bettered not his condition, which was like that of a child
under Tutours and Governors; for there was not an Officer in that Kirk or
Commonwealth, how vile and abject soever in place or person, but enjoyed more
freedom both in body and mind then he. Guarded indeed he was, but no otherwise
then he was surrounded with the ignis fatuus of their zealous suspicions of
him, so that move he must not but in the Sphere of the Kirk, their primum
mobile: whereby its apparent, that the Government of that Nation might be
almost questioned whether it ever were truly Monarchical, (though they had
Kings.)

To proceeed, the Parliament having notice of all their proceedings, recalled
General Cromwell out of Ireland making him Generalissimo of the Commonwealths
Armies in the Lord Fairfax his stead, who at the same time laid down his
Commission; he with a choice Army marches into Scotland, and after many petty
defeats, gives them a great overthrow at Dunbar, September 3. 1650. and
prosecuting his victory takes Leith, a very considerable and advantageous
place, as also Edinburgh the Metropolitan City of all Scotland. Thus he set
firm there his sword, hewing his way for him to conquer that Country, which
the King lost by his pen.

Now were the Scots truly miserable, for besides a raging enemy in the very
heart of their Kingdom, they were miserably divided amongst themselves, even to
the killing and slaying of one another; one party in the North, was for the
King without the Kirk; another party in the West, was for the Kirk without the
King; a third party was for King and Kirk: yet notwithstanding these losses and
divisions, they assumed new courage, levied more men, and Crowned their King
with the greatest magnificence as the indigency and necessity of their Affairs
would permit. The English on the other side, being resolved to terminate this
War with Scotland, passed over into Fife, and having defeated four thousand
Scots, they soon became Masters of Inchigravy Brunt-Island, and St. John's Town;
mean while the Scots Army consisting of 16000. abandoned their own Territories,
and by the way of Carlisle entered England. General Cromwell advertised hereof,
leaves Colonel Monk with 7000. men in Scotland, to perfect the conquest of
that kingdom, and with the rest of the Army pursues the Scots; who wheresoever
they came, proclaimed their King, to be King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc. But few stirred unto their aid, amongst others the unfortunate
Earl of Darby, who having assembled 1200, men in Lancashire, was defeated by
Colonel Lilburne, and to save himself was constrained to flee to Worcester;
where the Scots after a long and tedious march, had pitched their Camp, whither
General Cromwell soon pursued them; and having the aid of the Train Bands of
several Counties, gave them Battle, which proved fatal unto the Scots; their
whole Army being overthrown. The King in a disguise escaped into France, not
without much difficulty and danger; the Parliament having promised five hundred
pounds to any one that could discover his person. Such a list of prisoners as
were then taken, we shall seldom meet with in any Battle but Cromwels. The
Earl of Darby, the Earl of Lauderdale, Duke Hamilton General of the Scotch
Army, who afterward dyed of his wounds, the Earl of Rothe, the Earl of
Cornwarth, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Packington, Cunningham, and Clare, Knights.
The Lord Spine, and Sinclear, the Earl of Cleaveland, of Kelley, and Colonel
Greaves, six Colonels of Horse, thirteen of Foot, nine Lieutenant Colonels of
Horse, eight of Foot, six Majors of Horse, thirteen of Foot, seven and thirty
Captains of Horse, seventy and three of Foot, fifty five Quartermasters, eighty
nine Lieutenants of Foot, Major General Biscotty, Major General Montgomery, the
Lieutenant General of the Ordnance, the Adjutant General of the Foot, the
Marshal General, the Quartermaster General, the Conductor General of the
Baggage, seventy six Standards, ninety nine Ensigns; all which were hung up in
Westminster Hall, for successive Parliaments to understand what vigor of
spirits they by their influence can infuse into those they please to authorize,
only the want of the allay of their ambitions often works them high, where it
is impossible to set limits to generous minds. To continue the other
Appendixes to this victory, there were also taken nine Ministers, nine
Chyrurgions, one hundred fifty and eight Colors, and all the Cannon and
Baggage generally, the Royal Standard, the Kings Coach and Horses, the Royal
Robe, the Collar of the Order of the Garter, thirty of his domestique Servants,
and that admirable Poet, his Secretary Fanshaw. Several other persons were also
afterward taken in the remotest Countries, as Major General Massey, (who being
committed to the Tower, afterward made an escape,) Major General Middleton,
Lieutenant General David Lesley, and several others; insomuch as that it may be
said, the gleanings of this victory were as considerable as the whole harvest
it self. Many of the common Soldiers were transported into the Barbados, and
other Plantations, this mercy extended to them in saving their lives, causing
much gain to accrue thereby unto the Commonwealth, in selling the poor
heathenish Highlanders to the Plantations. I shall only end these sad
transactions with what Mr. Wharton chronologized in these words, since English
Hoggs eat our dear Brethren up. He only reflects on the half graves were made
for them in Tuttle Fields.

Of all this long list two only suffered death, viz. Sir Timothy Featherstone
Knight, and the Earl of Darby, who on the 15. of October following was beheaded
at Bolton in Lancashire, being conducted thither by sixty Foot, and eighty
Horse, about two of the Clock he was brought forth to the Scaffold, which was
built at the Cross, part of it with the Timber of his own house at Latham,
there was not above an hundred lookers on, besides Soldiers; presently after
his coming upon the Scaffold there happened a great tumult, (the occasion
thereof not being certainly known,) in appeasing of which there were some cut,
many hurt, and one child killed. The Earl was no eloquent orator, and the
tumult put him out of his speaking what he intended: at last after some silence
made, he began as follows.

Since it has pleased God by this untimely death to shorten my days, I am
glad it is in this Town, (where some have been made believe I was a cruel
person) that I might vindicate my self from this aspersion, it was my desire
the last time I came into this Country, to come hither as to a people that
ought to serve the King, as I conceive, upon good grounds: it was said, that I
was accustomed to be a man of blood, but it does not lie upon my conscience, I
was wrongfully belied; I thank God I desired peace. I was born in honor, and I
shall dye honorably, as I suffer for my Sovereign. I had a fair estate, good
friends, and was respected, and did respect; those that were ready to do for
me, I was ready to do for them; I have done nothing, but as my generous
predecessors acted to do you good. It was the King that called me in, and I
thought it my duty to wait upon his Highness to do him service. Here he was
disturbed by the noise of the people, after some pause he said; I intended to
have expressed my self further, but I have said. I have not much more to say to
you, but as to my good will to this Town of Bolton, I can say no more, but the
Lord bless you, I forgive you all, and desire to be forgiven of you all, for I
put my trust in Christ Jesus. Looking about him he said, I did never deserve
this hard measure. Honest friends (you that are Soldiers) my life is taken
away after quarter given, by a Council of War, which was never done before.
Walking up and down the Scaffold, he said, The Lord bless you all, the Son of
God bless you all of this Town of Bolton, Manchester, Lancashire, and the rest
of the kingdom; and God send that you may have a King again, and Laws. I dye
like a Christian, and a Soldier, Gods and my Sovereigns Soldier. Causing his
Coffin to be opened, he said, I hope when I am imprisoned here, armed men shall
not need to watch me. Looking upon them that were upon the Scaffold, he said,
What do you stay for? it is hard that I cannot get a Block to have my head cut
off. Speaking to the Executioner, he said, Thy coat is so troublesome and
cumbersome, that I believe that thou can not hit right, the Lord help thee,
and forgive thee. Other words he used, which to avoid prolixity I willingly
omit. At last submitting his neck to the Block, he had his head severed from
his body with one blow; his sorrowful Son, who was a sad spectator of this
woeful tragedy, out of a pious care, and filial duty, conveyed his Corpse back
with him that night to Wiggan, and afterward gave them honorable burial.

Not long before at London was Colonel Eusebius Andrews apprehended, who
having formerly practiced the Law, changed his Gown into a Coat of Armor, and
ventured his life in the Kings service, having received a Commission from the
King of Scots, for the raising men in England, he was tried in Westminster Hall
at the High Court of Justice, then again newly erected, being the first
unfortunate Gentleman that hanselled the Court. To pass over the large
particulars of trial he was acknowledged by all that were understanding
Auditors of his Plea, that he behaved himself like to a right English man,
spoke as good, sound, and as honest sense, as any person before him upon such
limitations as he was confined too; he showed himself an excellent Orator, an
expert Lawyer, and a person of strong and clear reason: he acknowledged himself
guilty as to the power of that present Government, that his life was at their
disposal. He was condemned, and the 22. of August, 1650. brought to the
Scaffold on Tower Hill, where he expressed himself to the people in these his
last words.

Christian Gentlemen and People, your business hither to day is to see a sad
spectacle, a man to be in a moment unmanned, and cut off in the prime of his
years, taken from further opportunities of doing good either to himself, his
friends, the Commonwealth, or more especially as to my continued services to my
Creator. Truly, if my general known course of life were but enquired into, I
may modestly say, there is such a moral honesty upon it, as some may be so
saucy as to expostulate why this great judgment is fallen upon me; but know I
am able to give them and my self an answer, and out of this breast am able to
give a better account of my Judgment and Execution then my Judgers themselves,
or you are able to give: It is Gods wrath upon me for sins long unrepented of,
many judgments withstood, and mercies slighted; therefore God has whipped me
by his severe Rod of Correction, that he might not lose me. I pray join with me
in prayer, that it may not be a fruicless Rod, that when by this Rod I have
laid down my life, by his staff I may be comforted and received into Glory. I
am very confident by what I have heard since my sentence, there is more
exceptions made against proceedings against me, then I ever made. My Triers had
a Law, and the value of that Law is indisputable; and for me to make a question
of it, I should shame my self and my discretion. In the strictness of that Law,
something is done by me, that is applicable to some clause therein, by which I
stand condemnable: The means whereby I was brought under that interpretation of
that which was not in my self intended maliciously, there being testimony given
(by persons whom I pity) so false, yet so positive, that I cannot condemn my
Judges, for passing sentence against me, according to Legal Justice, though
Equity lies in the higher breasts.

As for my Accusers, or rather Betrayers, I pity, and am sorry for them; they
have committed Judas crime, but I wish and pray for them with Peter's tears,
that by Peter's repentance they may escape Judas his punishment; and I wish
other people so happy, they may be taken up betimes, before they have drunk
more blood of Christian men, possibly less deserving then my self.

It is true, there have been several addresses made for mercy, and I will put
the obstruction of it upon nothing more then upon my own sin; and seeing God
sees it fit, (having not glorified him in my life) I might do it in my death,
which I am contented to do; I profess in the fear of God, particular malice to
any one of State or Parliament, to do them a bodily injury I had none.

For the cause in which I had long waded, I must needs say, my engagement or
continuance in it has laid no scruple upon my Conscience; it was on Principles
of Law, the knowledge whereof I profess, and on principles of Religion: my
Judgment satisfied, and Conscience rectified, that I have pursued those ways
which I bless God I find no blackness upon my conscience, nor have I put it
into the Bead-roll of my sins.

I will not presume to decide controversies; I desire God to honor himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and
plenty, beyond all you possess here. In my Conversation in the world, I do not
know where I have an enemy with cause, or that there is such a person whom I
have to regret but if there be any whom I cannot recollect, under the notion of
Christian men, I pardon them as freely as if I had named them by name, I freely
forgive them, being in free peace with all the world, as I desire God for
Christ's sake, to be at peace with me. For the business of death it is a sad
sentence in it self, if men consult with flesh and blood: But truly without
boosting, I say it, or if I do boast, I boast in the Lord, I have not to this
minute had one consultation with the flesh about the blow of the Axe, or one
thought of the Axe, more then as my passport to Glory.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they sent me hither to a place, however of punishment, yet of some
honor, to dye a death somewhat worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth and
qualification, and this courtesy of theirs has much helped toward the
pacification of my mind.

I shall desire God that those Gentlemen in that sad Bead-roll to be tried by
the High Court of Justice, that they may find that really there, that is
nominal in the Act, an High Court of Justice, a Court of High Justice, high in
its Righteousness, though not in its severity. Father forgive them, and forgive
me as I forgive them.

I desire you now that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till
the hour of my death, not till the moment of my death, for the hour is come
already, the instant of time approaches, that as I have a great load of sins,
so I may have the wings of your prayers, to help those Angels that are to
convey my soul to Heaven; and I doubt not but I shall see my Savior, and my
gallant Master the King of England, and another Master whom I much honored, my
Lord Capel, hoping this day to see my Christ in the presence of the Father, the
King in the presence of him, my Lord Capel in the presence of them all; and my
self there to rejoice with all other Saints and Angels for evermore.

After the uttering of these and many the like words, declaring his faith and
confidence in God, with as much undaunted, yet Christian courage, as possibly
could be in man, he exposed his neck to the fatal Axe, commending his soul into
the hands of a faithful and merciful Creator, through the meritorious Passion
of a gracious Redeemer; and having said, Lord Jesus receive me, the Executioner
with one blow severed his head from his body.

For such a collateral design, not long after one Master Benson was executed at
Tyburne, one that had some relations to Sir John Gell, who was tried for the
same Conspiracy, with his man: Sir John's former services to the Parliament,
being his best and most assured intercessours for his life, and at that time
were more then ordinary advantages to him.

And now being entered into this Tragical Scene of blood, I shall in the next
place give you an account of the beheading of Sir Henry Hide: He was by the
Scots King commissionated as Ambassador to the Grand Signior at
Constantinople, and stood in competition with Sir Thomas Bendish (then
Ambassador for the English) for his place: whereupon they had a hearing before
the Vizier Bassa; the result whereof was, that Sir Thomas Bendish should
dispose of the said Sir Henry Hide, as he thought good; who was to the same
purpose sent to Smyrna, thence into England, and there condemned and executed
before the Royal Exchange in London, March 4. 1650. I have inserted his Speech,
which reflects on his Transactions; this unfortunate Gentleman's end, being by
the divine disposal, from the foregoing part of his life as strange as ever I
have read in History. His last words were to this effect.

Christian People, I come hither to dye, I am brought hither to dye; and that I
may dye Christian like, I humbly beseech the assistance of your Christian
prayers, that by the benefit of them my passage may be the more easy: Yet
because men in that condition, which it has pleased God to reduce me to, give
the more credit to Speech; in the discharge of my duty toward God, I shall use
a few words, and so conclude.

I pray all of you join with me to praise this Almighty God, to whom I desire
to render all hearty thanks; as for all his mercies, so in particular for this,
that he has brought me hither: that whereas I owe a debt to sin and to nature,
that now I can pay the debt to nature, I can pay it upon the account of Grace.
And because it is fit to render the blessed account of that hope that is in me,
I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty God, that I have been born and bred
up in the Doctrine of the Church of England, I have no negative Religion,
believing to be saved by the only merits of my Savior Jesus Christ, and
whatsoever else is professed in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England, authorized by Law; humbly beseeching Almighty God to restore unto this
Church her peace, prosperity and patrimony, whereof I have been an obedient and
a loving (however an unworthy) Son: and now both my hope being confident, and
my faith perfected, there remains only Christian Charity; Charity we carry
into heaven, Charity on earth, that I leave; beseeching all whomsoever I have
offended to forgive me, as I from the bottom of my heart do all whomsoever;
blessing Almighty God for the happy advantage he takes to bring me the sooner
to heaven; I bless Almighty God that he has given me this advantage, as he
has been merciful to me before the foundation of the world, in my Savior, so
that now he has in mercy honored me, with a suffering for his name, in
obedience to his Commandment.

On this day sevennight I was summoned before that Justice, which condemned me
on Friday last, praised be Almighty God, that by this way he has brought me
nearer to himself. My charge I presume is public as my punishment is visible;
if there have been any thing in the management of my part, being unskilful,
having discontinued my own country many years, I shall beseech the Christian
Charity of all you my beloved Contrymen, to impute it rightly to the
ignorance of my unskilful ways of managing of affairs: it was objected unto me
there, that I had a vanity of delighting in strange tongues; I do acknowledge
that I was best skilled in the Italian (but free from that vanity, I thank
Almighty God) and therefore I would in defense of my life (if it had been the
custom here, or the Judges favor) have used that language, which was almost as
natural to me as my mother tongue.

It was objected, that I did not so freely as a thorow-paced Cavalier, own my
Master: I was told since I came into England (this skill I have in our Laws)
that a legal denial in Law might be tolerable; I hope I did not exceed the
bounds of that in any thing, for God forbid that I should be ashamed of serving
so good, so pious, so just a Master; (putting off his hat) for this I rejoice,
and I humbly beseech Almighty God to fill my heart and my tongue, and all that
hear me this day, with thankfulness for it.

As to the business, that another construction had been made and believed here,
then what was there, the righteous God knows it; if any weakness were in the
management, that was mine: I was sent to serve and protect, not to injure any,
as God acquits me of the intention of matter of fact, as having not done any
manner of evil that way, however here understood, blessed be his holy name
(again putting off his hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turkey Company, if they
would might acknowledge, for they know it very well, the impossibility of my
doing them any manner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassy objected against me,
that my Master honored me with it, though I was never worthy of it; I was his
messenger and Internuntio for the conservation only of his good Subjects, of
all the Merchants, until such time as he could confirm that Gentlemen now
Resident, or to send any other; and they themselves know that there was an
unpossibility (as I bless God there was an innocence in me) unto any such
intention to do them harm; for my Masters commands were point blank the
contrary: I was only sent for their good; as I never owned the title, so the
very letters themselves speaking no other: I never did so much as think of any
manner of address to the Grand Signior, but gave him the letter from my Master;
the rest of the English Nation that were there present, may, when they please,
assert so much. This I would insert, that those Gentlemen, as they have been
losers by the miscarriages of others, may now have a breach of their charity
with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Country, a sin to be
loyal, I hope my God has forgiven that, when it is upon harmless employment,
not invading any, according to my just Masters order; for indeed I have been
always bred up in the Religion of Loyalty, my Allegiance has been
incorporated into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the
service due from me to Almighty God, to serve the King (again putting off his
hat.) He said, I need not make any apology for any thing in relation to the
present Affairs in England, for were I (as I spoke beformy Judges) were I as
evil as my sentence here has made me black, it were impossible for me to have
prejudiced any body in England, or to England belonging, in that employment;
but I bless God for his infinite mercy in Jesus Christ, who has taken me to
himself by this manner of way, it was the best Physic for the curing of my
soul, and those that have done it, have no more Power then that of my body; I
leave nothing behind me, but that I am willing to part withal; all that I am
going to, is desirable: and that you may all know that Almighty God has
wrought in me a total denial of my self, and that there is that perfect
reformation of me within, of my own corruptions, by the blessed assistance of
his holy spirit; I desire Almighty God in the abundance of the bowels of his
mercy in Jesus Christ, not only to forgive every enemy, (if any such be in the
world, here or wheresoever) but to bring him into his bosom, so much good and
particular comfort, as he may at any time, whether the cause were just or
unjust, have wished me any manner of evil; for I take him to be the happy
instrument of bringing me to heaven. I am tedious, but I have an inward
comfort, I bless Almighty God: (pray Gentlemen give leave, speaking to some
that pressed upon him) I should never do it but to give satisfaction to all
charitable hearts. I have been troublesome. Here he made a pause, as
discontented at the disturbance of those on the Scaffold, when the Sheriff said
to him, Sir, you have your liberty to speak more if you please, at length he
proceeded.

But as to that part, Mr. Sheriff, that did concern the denial (as it was
affirmed by Master Attorney General) of my Masters employment; truly, landing
at White Hall, I told that Council, there was warrantable Commissions to an old
Officer, which by the blessing of God, I have by me, and I have other
acceptable things that God has blessed me withal; we that are Merchants
abroad, we allow our selves any sufferance that may induce to our own safety,
enlargement of trade, or preservation of what is ours. Why I had by the favor
of my gracious Master, a confirmation of my old Commission of Consulage in
Greece: but as to the Embassy, no more then my credential Letters did speak,
nor no more then that I attempted, an Internuncio they call it in those places,
which is a messenger between the one and the other King, they both unhappily
dyed of several deaths, and both violent too: and it is a custom not unknown to
you, Master Sheriff, and other Gentlemen that practice in the world, that
Princes of course, for the continuation of amity do send messengers where there
is peace, that the transaction of those public expressions of reciprocal
affections may be performed; but for Embassy, God forbid I should own it, I
never had it, however they have used it as the happy means to bring me to God
this day, whom I in the Bowels of my Savior beseech to forgive those people
that have done it; I owe them no harm, God return better things into their
bosoms with all the good of this, and an everlasting life.

As for my part, I have been long absent, I have meddled with no affairs in
England; sufficient to me is Gods grace to the salvation of my soul.

I have been always fearful of offending Almighty God, according to the grace
he has given me: but to learn a new Religion, or new ways, (that I must say
Mr. Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me) I could never dispense with my
conscience to give offense to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your
Commission Master Sheriff) to pour out my soul to Almighty God in two or three
words (the place is straightened) if I knew wherein to give any satisfaction to
any person whatsoever that imagines I have offended him, or he me, I am here in
the fear of God to do it. I forgive them with all my soul, and my forgiveness
is clear, as I am now going to receive happiness at the hand of my Savior: if
I thought it were satisfaction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the company, or
any who think they have offended me. I am come, Master Sheriff, to pay that
debt I owe to nature, to pay it upon the score of a Loyal Subject; my
conscience within me informing me, that for the intentions of serving my
Prince, I could not deserve such a death, though ten thousand times more other
ways.

Having expressed himself to this effect with much meekness, he submitted his
neck to the Axe, having first said, Lord Jesus receive my soul, the Executioner
at one blow severed his head from his body.

Not long after Brown Bushel was beheaded under the Scaffold on Tower Hill, one
who had formerly done great service to the Royal Party both by Sea and Land;
crimes of such a nature, as brought him into compass of Piracy, and then of
high Treason.

These Funerals were still accompanied with more mourners. Soon after ensuing
the deaths of Mr. Love and Mr. Gibbons, who were beheaded on Tower Hill the 22.
of August, 1651. their Crimes objected, were, for combining with the Scots to
reestablish Charles Stuart. Mr. Loves Trial, with his Speech, and manner of his
death, are in a large printed volume, to which I refer my Reader; all that I
shall insert, will be no more then what has been by another already observed
in print, that there was a monstrous storm about the time of Mr. Loves
suffering, another about the time of the Protectors death; that Mr. Love,
though with a late assent to Regal power, suffered as a Presbyterian Divine;
Doctor Hewit as one always established and confirmed as a Primitive; after
whose Execution within a short time after, great Cromwell expired: many others
were apprehended upon the same account, but these two only suffered.

Passing over these Golgotha's, the reader may be pleased to understand, that
all these persons here mentioned, (save only the Earl of Darby) suffered death
before that memorable Battle at Worcester, though in our History we have
related them after, as not willing to discontinue the series of our affairs
with Scotland by such diversions. I shall only insert without any reflection
what I have read, of a person remarkable for his cruelties, that he, being told
of a Comet Leiger Star of heaven, that one said portended his death; answered,
That he was very glad that the heavens were so merry as to make Bonefires for
his triumph before he dyed. This miscreant entertaining this for a Maxim, that
he that had put out so many eyes, if he stood in need should scarcely find a
friend to close up his own. But to return to matters of more public
concernment, the Isles of Jersey, Jernsy, and Man, who had hitherto held for
the King, submitted themselves; so that now all seemed quiet, when suddenly a
War brake forth with Holland, begun only at first upon points of, Honor at
Sea, Van Trump the Dutch Admiral refusing to vail his Flag, a Ceremonial Honor
which the English appropriate to themselves, as being Lords of these narrow
Seas; whereupon a sharp Fight ensued betwixt them, wherein the Dutch were
discomfited, one of their ships sunk, and another of thirty Guns taken, with
the Captains of both, and about a hundred and fifty Prisoners.

This Skirmish produced open War betwixt the two Nations, notwithstanding
Overtures of Peace made by the Hollander, so that now both sides prepare to
offend each other. General Blake, the English Admiral surprises twelve Dutch
men of War toward the Isles of Orkney, Sir George Ascue in the Road betwixt
Dover and Calice, sets upon their Fleet, being thirty in number, of which ten
were taken and burnt, the rest hardly escaping. Soon after near Plymouth he
gave them another fight, wherein the Dutch went again by the worst. These
successes were seconded by others very remarkable, General Blake steering
Northwards, took six Holland ships of a great value about the Downs. Captain
Pen also took six more upon the Coast of France, as they were returning
homewards from the Venetian service, richly laden being all men of War, of
considerable burdens.

Soon after so great their feud was, that the Navies engaged in another Fight
at a place called the Kentish Knock, wherein the Dutch were again defeated,
eleven of their men of War set upon four of the English in the Straights, took
the Phoenix Frigot, and much damaged the other. In a short space after another
Sea Engagement ensued on the Backside of Goodwin Sands, wherein the English
were worsted, four ships taken and a considerable loss of men. The greatest
fight of all was near the Isle of Wight and Portland, wherein the Dutch
received a great overthrow, fifty Merchants being taken, nine men of War, above
two thousand slain, and fifteen hundred taken Prisoners. But this great Victory
soon after received a check, the English Fleet in the Levant Seas being again
worsted by the Dutch, with the loss of diverse ships and men.

But leaving off these Sea Affairs for a time, let us come to General Cromwell,
from whom I have already been enforced to digress; who pretending for the
better accomplishing of his own designs, the dilatory proceedings, pernicious
and arbitrary actings in the Parliament, to perpetuate their Session, to be
very dangerous, and enthrall the Nation; this train of his he knew would take
well with the people who were great adorers of the name of liberty and desirous
of change; he therefore resolved to put a period to the Parliament, and
accordingly accompanied by the chief Officers of the Army, he entered the
House, and having declared his intentions, some by force, some through fear,
and others not without a great deal of reluctance and murmuring, departed the
House. To set a fair gloss upon what he had done, and to give some satisfaction
to the people, he publishes a Declaration, the substance whereof follows.

That after God was pleased marvellously to appear for his people, in reducing
Ireland and Scotland to so great a peace, and England to perfect quiet; whereby
the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the harvest of all their
labor, blood, and treasure; and to settle a due liberty in reference to Civil
and Spiritual things: whereunto they were obliged by their duty, engagements,
and those great and wonderful things God has wrought for them. But they made
so little progress therein, that it was matter of much grief to the good people
of the Land; who thereupon applied themselves to the Army, expecting redress by
their means, who (though unwilling to meddle with the Civil Authority) agreed
that such Officers as were Members of Parliament should move them to proceed
vigorously, in reforming what was amiss in the Commonwealth, and in settling it
upon a foundation of Justice and Righteousness; which being done, it was hoped
the Parliament would have answered their expectations.

But finding the contrary, they renewed their desires by an humble Petition in
August, 1652. which produced no considerable effects, nor was any such progress
made therein, as might imply their real Intentions to accomplish what was
petitioned for; but rather an averseness to the things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the people of God, and his spirit acting in them:
insomuch, that the godly party in Parliament were rendered of no further use,
then to countenance the ends of a corrupt party, for effecting their desires of
perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what remedy might be applied to
prevent the same; but such endeavors proving ineffectual, it became evident,
that this Parliament, through the corruption of some, the jealousy of others,
the non-attendance of many, would never answer those ends which God, his
people, and the whole Nation expected from them: But that this cause which God
had so greatly blessed, must needs languish under their hands, and by degrees
be lost; and the lives, liberties, and comforts of his people be delivered into
their enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest people of the
Nation, as well as by the Army, it seemed a duty incumbent upon us, who had
seen so much of the power and presence of God, to consider of some effectual
means whereby to establish righteousness and Peace in these Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, that the Supreme Government
should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons fearing God, and of
approved integrity for a time, as the most hopeful way to countenance all Gods
people, reform the Law, and administer Justice impartially: hoping thereby the
people might forget Monarchy, and understand their true interest in the
election of successive Parliaments; that so the Government might be settled
upon a right Basis, without hazard to this glorious cause, or necessitating to
keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possibly to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
conference, with whom we plainly debated the necessity and justness of our
Proposals: The which found no acceptance, but instead thereof it was offered,
that the way was to continue still this Parliament, as being that from which we
might probably expect all good things. This being vehemently insisted on, did
much confirm us in our apprehensions: That not any love to a Representative,
but the making use thereof to recruit, and so to perpetuate themselves, was
their aim, in the Act they had then under consideration.

For preventing the consummating whereof, and all the sad and evil
consequences, which upon the grounds aforesaid must have ensued, and whereby at
one blow the interest of all honest men and of this glorious Cause had been
endangered to be laid in the dust, and these Nations embroyled in new troubles,
at a time when our enemies abroad are watching all advantages against, and some
of them actually engaged in War with us; we have been necessitated (though with
much reluctance) to put an end to this Parliament.

This Declaration was seconded by another for settling a Council of State, to
give some satisfaction to the people what Government they intended; which
Declaration, for the Readers further satisfaction, take as follows.

Whereas the Parliament being dissolved, persons of approved fidelity and
honesty are (according to the late Declaration of the 22. of April last) to be
called from the several parts of this Commonwealth to the Supreme Authority;
and although effectual proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those
Resolutions, yet some convenient time being required for the assembling of
those persons, it has been found necessary for preventing the mischiefs and
inconveniences which may arise in the mean while to the public Affairs, that a
Council of State be constituted, to take care of and intend, the peace, safety,
and present mannagement of the Affairs of this Commonwealth: which being
settled accordingly, the same is hereby declared and published to the end all
persons may take notice thereof, and in their several places and stations,
demean themselves peaceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Nation as
heretofore; in the exercise and administration thereof, as endeavors shall be
used, that no oppression or wrong be done to the people, so a strict account
will be required of all such as shall do any thing to endanger the public
peace and quiet, upon any pretense whatsoever.

O. Cromwell.
April 30. 1653.
Certainly Parliaments, if rightly chosen, are the best physic to cure and
redress the distempers of the Body Politic, which might overflow in their
intervals. King James after his dissolving of three Parliaments did comply with
the last; he said he, should be in love with Parliaments, having learnt so many
things by them, which otherwise he should never have known. His Son afterward
dissolved three, whereof one of them proved fatal to him; whereas the Virgin
Queen, that was well enough acquainted with the constitution of the Body of the
Nation, called Parliaments frequently, but continued none very long, by which
as she came to be Mistress of the affections of the people, so she was
Commandress in chief of their purses. Whereas the connection of Great Cromwells
Affairs, as he was inveloped in designs, forced him, as they were to be read
like to Hebrew backwards, whatsoever he dissembled otherwise, to use the
subtlest of his endeavors, like the Mole to undermine and render Parliaments
odious to the people, which afterward were no extraordinary friends to
himself, though they may possibly be civil to his posterity.

These domestic revolutions put new life into the Dutch, who hoping from these
distractions to reap a Victory over the English, with great confidence put
forth again to Sea; thinking upon nothing so much as Chapmen for the English
Fleet, saying: It was to be cried out by the sound of trumpets and horns. But
they were deceived in their expectations; for coming to a fight, on the North
Foreland, near unto the South point of the Gober, their Fleet was defeated,
eleven men of War, and two water Hoyes being taken, besides six Captains and
fifteen hundred Prisoners, and six men of War which were sunk.

Certainly this War with the Dutch which the Parliament so successively drove
on, had not without great advantages been ended by them, only the Protector
at the present, as a leading Card to his other Treaties, entertained the Dutch
tenders, he being forced to take the first opportunity to signalize his Honor,
as also to please the more timorous sort of people with a sudden alliance of
friends.

Not long after, to set the better face on his resolute proceedings, Cromwell
calls another Parliament convened at Westminster, who met July 4. 1653. to whom
General Cromwell made a long speech, declaring the wonderful mercies of God
toward this Nation, the progress of Affairs since the famous Victory at
Worcester, and the clearness of the Cull given them to take upon them the
Supreme Authority, intermixed with sundry phrases of Scripture to make it the
more plausible. Then he produced an Instrument under his own Hand and Seal,
whereby the Supreme Authority of the Nation was devolved upon them, unto whom
all persons were to yield obedience and subjection. He declared that they were
to sit no longer then the third of November 1654. and three months before
their dissolution they were to make choice of other persons to succeed them,
who were not to sit above twelve months, and then to take care for a
succession in Government.

Now was the time come for the train to take the Dutch, having, as has been
expressed, cast the urine of the present Affairs, being quite tired with their
continual losses, sent Commissioners over into England to treat of Peace. It
has been the result of the opinions of those that had their eyes in their
heads, that the Dutch thought to have made up their mouths, to have taken our
Navy napping in the time of the Treaty, the Fight happening betwixt them and
us; but they found it otherwise, their whole Fleet was put to flight, their
Admiral Van Trump, a man of eminent valor being slain, about thirty men of War
sunk and fired, six Captains, and about a thousand men taken prisoners, and
about six thousand slain. This great Victory did not a little conduce to hasten
the conclusion of the peace, but on such terms as were (as one writes) at that
time more honorable for his present designs, then advantageous to the English
Nation. For this service, gold chains were presented to the Generals, Blake,
Monk, Pen, and Lawson, and to the other Flag Captains; and silver Medals to
the other Officers of the Fleet.

Of the puissance of our Navies, and the Dominion of the English at Sea, accept
what the Laureat of this Nation to the life expresses.

Lords of the Worlds great waste, the Ocean, we
Whole Forests send to reign upon the Sea,
And every Coast may trouble or relieve,
But none can visit us without our leave;
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our happy seat arrive,
While we descend at pleasure to invade
The bad with vengeance, or the good to aid:
Our little world, the image of the great,
Like that amidst the boundless Ocean set,
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves,
And all that is rare as Tribute from the waves.
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to her Nyle owes more then to the Sky;
So what our Earth, and what our Heaven denies,
Our ever constant Friend, the Sea supplies.
The taste of hot Arabia's Spice we know,
Free from the scorching Sun that makes it grow;
Without the Worm, in Persian silks we shine,
And without planting drink of every Vine;
To dig for wealth we weary not our limbs,
Gold, though the heavy'st Metal, hither swims;
Ours is the Harvest where the Indians mow,
We plough the deep, and reap what others sow.
To reckon up the several opinions which about this time, like Hydra's heads,
continually sprung up one upon the neck of another, were a task ad infinitum,
and those of several kinds; some for imposition of hands, anointing with oil,
and washing of feet; some against them, Brownists; others, Millinarians,
Arminians, Seekers, Ranters, Enthusiasts, Arians, Pelagians, Quakers, cum
multis aliis, of all which, I shall only say thus much, God knows his own
time, who suffers the Tares and the Wheat to grow together till Harvest; there
ought to be a great care, least in plucking up the tares we pull up the wheat;
we ought not to invade men's consciences but to wait God Almighties leisure.

The Parliament having sat about as many weeks as the other had done years,
they dissolved themselves, immediately making way for General Cromwell, by their
dissolution, to be chosen Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and of all the Islands and Territories thereunto
belonging, December the 16. 1653. Thus all men in their right wits may perceive
how he laid down his first principles of self-denying; he having before waved
many advantages of the times to make certain his Protectorship, which was to
grasp all at once. The Articles of the Government to which he signed are as
follows.

1. That his Excellency be chief Protector of the three Nations of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

2. That he will call to his assistance Councillors, not under the number of
thirteen, nor above twenty one.

3. That he shall not act without the advice of his Council.

4. That there shall be every three years a Parliament called, freely chosen,
to begin in September next, viz. four hundred, and the number for every County
proportionable.

5. That no Parliament shall adjourn till they have sat above five months.

6. When ever any Bill is passed in Parliament, the Lord Protector shall have
twenty days to advise with his Council; if he sign it not in twenty days, it
shall pass without, unless contrary to these Articles.

7. That no Parliament be dissolved by the Protector, but end every three
years, and the Protector to issue out Warrants.

8. All the Crown Revenues left, to go to the maintenance of the Lord Protector.

9. To make Peace or War as he pleases, with the advice of his Council, in the
intervall of Parliaments; but not to raise money without the Parliament, unless
in extraordinary causes.

10. Whatsoever goes out in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of
England, to go out in the name of the Lord Protector.

11. That it is treason to speak against the present Government.

12. That all forfeited and confiscated Estates go to the maintenance of the
Lord Protector.

13. That all Acts of Parliament made, and Estates sold, stand good and be
enjoyed.

14. That the Lord Protector have power to confer titles of Honor, and to
dispose of the great places of trust.

15. That in the intervall of Parliaments, the Lord protector, with his
Council, do order the Affairs of the Nation.

16. That all Articles of War be kept.

17. That the known Laws of the Commonwealth be continued.

18. That a standing Army be maintained of ten thousand Horse, and twenty
thousand Foot.

19. That Christian Religion be maintained, such as is contained in the Word of
God.

20. That all persons shall have Liberty of Conscience, provided that they
disturb not the Civil Government, except the Popish and Prelatical party.

21. That no Papist or Delinquent in Arms since the year 1649. elect, or be
elected, a Parliament Man, under penalty of forfeiture of one years revenue,
and the Moiety of his personal Estate.

22. That the Lord Protector have power to pardon all offenders, except Murder.

23. That Writs be issued out in July next for summoning the Parliament, either
by the Protector, or in course.

24. That when the Protector dies, the Council then sitting shall summon all
the members of the Council, the Major part to elect one to be Protector before
they stir out of the Council Chamber, and the person so chosen, not to be under
the age of twenty one years, nor of the family of the Stuarts.

These Articles sworn to, he was proclaimed Lord Protector in the Palace-yard
at Westminster, and by the Lord Major and Aldermen in their Scarlet Gowns at
the Royal Exchange; who to ingratiate themselves with their new Governor,
bestowed on him a costly feast at Grocers Hall: it is an usual observation that
persons that make their ways with their Swords, that their shows to take the
people, generally are more stately then those of successive Princes; what he
admitted of, as with his own permission, was nothing to those dutiful
solemnities that pursued his memory; without dispute he had studied the art and
ordinance of selfdenying, insomuch that the Parliament perceiving that he did
but complement his Generalship, which he might with fafety and most right have
accepted, they pressed him the less, as he seemed to push away that with his
little finger that they were certain he was ready to grasp with both his hands:
this was not so miraculous in him according to that of Ovid.

Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
The greatest admiration that has surprised me, has bin what in the compass
of a year I have observed, the tides and streams of petitions out of most
Counties, that at the first rise or promise of greatness have pursued every
alteration, as party-colored as Joseph's Coat, and as variable as the Rainbow;
it is not to be depictured how Janus-faced they have been on all occasions,
with how many religious expressions and wishes they have made their addresses
and masqued their self-interests, if it were possible in so short an interim of
time, at once adoring so many rising Suns. I shall reflect no otherwise on such
confused transactions, then in the citation of a Verse which the Reader may
understand as he pleases.

Pope Innocent the chief of all the rout,
Answered his name, but how if In were out.
Since I have so strangely digressed, it will not be amiss to take notice of a
book lately come forth, entitled, History and Policy reviewed, concerning the
political transactions of the Protector, published in a strange name, written in
the style of the holy Court, in which, the Author undertakes a prodigious
enterprise, to compare Cromwell to Moses; his pen is too palpably fraught with
flattery, yet not without unparalleld subtilty; he having like the little
Indian Gentleman, in the short jacket, picked the verminout of Nic. Machiavels
head for his use; throwing of one side principals honester then this own;
Machiavel never so disguising himself with the vizard of Religion, that he
appears to be an arranter devil then the Florentine; certain I am, that I never
read a book that more pleased or dispeased me.

But to proceed, at his first instalment, Heavens bless us, immediately follows
a plot, miraculously discovered, eleven of the grand conspirators being
apprehended, were committed to the Tower; where having remained a while, they
were again set at liberty. This web was not well spun, his spies and informers
which he entertained at a vast expense, put on their spectacles that they might
see better against the next occasion.

In the interim, the Scots under the Earls of Glencarne and Kenmore, raised
another Army of 4000. Horse and Foot, but were soon dissipated by the vigilance
of Colonel Morgan, who after a short but smart fight, killed one hundred and
fifty of them, and defeated all the rest. Suspicions are necessary allarms, as
they at least suffer persons not to be overtaken with too much security of
their affairs.

Another great plot was now again discovered, the chief conspirators were said
to be Mr. Thomas and John Gerrard, Brothers, John Jones an Apothecary, and
Thomas Tender, Somerset Fox, and Master Peter Vowel; who were all condemned,
but two only suffered, viz. Mr. Vowel who was hanged. Also about the same time
the Portugal Ambassadors Brother was brought to his trial for the pistolling of
one Mr. Greenwood by a Knight of Malta, one of his high spirited followers; the
tumult being afterward occasioned from his retinue, he having been first very
uncivilly treated by Mr. Gerrard in his expatiating of the New Exchange, as he
termed it in his Declaration; for which Mr. Gerrard received a prick with his
Dagger, and afterward had the honor to dye the same death. The young
unfortunate stranger suffered a very high favor to please the New Exchange
Chevaliers.

Mean while the Scotch Highlanders impatient of bearing the English yoke,
resolved to try the other bout; to which purpose, they assembled together in
great numbers, having General Middleton to their leader, who was newly come to
them out of Holland: but all their endeavors vanished into smoke, General Monk
on the twentieth of July, 1654. at a place called Loughberry, gave them such a
charge as utterly defeated them, and made them incapable of ever after thinking
of appearing in Arms again.

Soon after was a Parliament called, who no sooner were set, but fell upon
questioning the power by which they were convocated; and doubting of its
lawfulness were soon dissolved by the same power which they distrusted. The
Protector at the dissolution of this short Parliament, made a very long speech,
wherein amongst many other passages he has this expression; This one thing I
speak as thus advised, and before God, as having been to this day of this
opinion, and this has been my constant judgment, well known to many that hear
me speak, if this one thing had been inserted, that one thing, that this
Government should have been, and placed in my family hereditary, I would have
rejected it. And a little after, If this be of humane structure, and invention,
and it be an old plotting and contrivance to bring things to this issue, and
that they are not the births of providence, then they will come to nothing.

But notwithstanding his speech was candied over with Scripture phrases, and
great expressions of his zeal for the good government of the Land; yet these
his actings much discontented the common people, whereupon ensued risings in
Shropshire, Montgomery, Nottinghamshire, Northumberland, and Yorkshire; but the
most considerable was at Salisbury, where Sir Joseph Wagstaff, Penruddock, and
Jones, who had formerly been Officers in the late Kings Army, having gotten
together about 200. armed men, entered Salisbury, seized on all the Inns and
chief Houses; and the Assizes being holden there at that time, they took away
the Judges Commissions and Pattents, and all their Horses, and so marched away.
Sir Henry Slingsby and Sir Richard Malleverer assembled some Forces also in
Yorkshire; but not being seconded according to their expectation, they dispersed
themselves on their own account. For these actings were put to death Master
Lucas, Thorp, Kensey, Graves, and Penruddock, Sir Henry Slingsby was taken and
imprisoned, and afterward beheaded upon another account, as I shall show you
in its due place. About this time the great headpiece of Europe joins his
Foxes tale to our Lions skin; correspondencies are held betwixt the French and
us, which occasioning some jealousies with some other bitter pills that had
before been swallowed, but not digested by the Spaniard, caused some
heart-burnings; which soon broke forth into an open War, first managed by the
Generals, Pen and Venables, who on the 27. of December 1654. with a gallant
Fleet set sail from Portsmouth, and on the 28. of January following, arrived at
the Barbados, where they seized on 18. Holland Merchant men, who contrary to
the Ordinance of the long Parliament traffiqued in those parts; from thence
they sailed to Hispaniola, arriving near to the port of Sancta Domingo, where
by the deepness of the sands, and heat of the climate being infinitely tired,
they were by the Spaniards put to flight, and enforced to march back again to
their Ships; from thence they set Sail to the Island of Jamaica, which after a
little resistance they mastered, and have since preserved, notwithstanding the
Spaniards to regain the same, landed there with two or three thousand men, but
were discomfitted with the loss of all their Cannon and Baggage.

In the interim General Blake with a considerable Fleet of Ships, having cast
Anchor before Tunis, April, 18. 1655. sent unto the Die of the place, demanding
satisfaction for some English Ships, which the Pirates of those parts had
carried away, and the liberty of the English slaves they had detained; but his
message and himself was refused with scorn and derision: the Turks making this
answer, Behold our Castles of Galleta, and our Castles and Vessels of Porto
Ferino, do your worst against them, and do not think to brave us with the sight
of your great Fleet. This answer so exasperated the English Admiral, that
notwithstanding there were one hundred and twenty Guns planted on the shore,
and in the Castle against them; yet regardless of all danger, he set upon their
Men of War which lay in Porto Ferino, and in less then four ours space, burnt
all their Ships; being in number nine, to their very Keels, which enforced the
King of Tunis to seek to the English for their friendship, and restored all the
Prisoners for little or nothing.

These successes were seconded by two other great Victories obtained over the
Spaniards at sea; the one by General Mountague about nine Leagues from Cadiz,
where he destroyed six of their ships, whereof two were taken, two run aground,
one sunk, and another burnt, and therein the Marquess of Badex, his Wife and
Daughter; the young Marquess and his Brother, with a great deal of wealth being
taken, and brought into England. This Fight being incomparably related by the
Laureat of our times, I thought fit to insert it, not to deprive the Reader of
so Elegant a Poem; let him wave the Poetical flattery of it as he pleases.

Upon the present War with Spain, and the first Victory obtained at Sea.
Now for some Ages had the pride of Spain,
Made the Sun shine on half the World in vain;
While she bid War; to all that durst supply
The place of those, her Cruelty made dye.
Of Nature's Bounty men forbear to taste,
And the best Portion of the Earth lay waste.
From the New World, her Silver and her Gold,
Came like a Tempest, to confound the Old.
Feeding with these the bribed Elector's Hopes,
She made at pleasure Emperors and Popes:
With these, advancing her unjust Designs,
Europe was shaken with her Indian Mines.
When our Protector looking with disdain
Upon this gilded Majesty of Spain;
And knowing well that Empire must decline,
Whose chief support, and sinews, are of Coin:
Our Nation's sollid virtue, did oppose
To the rich Troublers of the World's repose.
And now some months encamping on the main,
Our Naval Army had besieged Spain.
They that the whole Worlds Monarchy designed.
Are to their Ports by our bold Fleet confined:
From whence our Red Cross they triumphant see,
Riding without a Rival on the Sea.
Others may use the Ocean as their road,
Only the English make it their abode:
Whose ready Sails with every Wind can fly,
And make a covenant with the unconstant Sky.
Our Oaks secure, as if they there took root;
We tread on Billows with a steady foot.
Mean while the Spaniards in America,
Near to the Line, the Sun approaching saw;
And hoped their European Coasts to find
Cleared from our ships, by the Autumnal Wind.
Their huge capacious Gallions stuffed with Plate,
The laboring winds drives slowly toward their fate.
Before Saint Lucar they their Guns discharge,
To tell their Joy, or to invite a Barge.
This heard, some Ships of ours, though out of view,
As swift as Eagles to the Quarry flew.
So heedless Lambs which for their mothers bleat,
Wake hungry Lions, and become their meat.
Arrived, they soon begin that Tragic play,
And with their smoaky Cannon banish day.
Night, horror, slaughter, with confusion meets,
And in their sable Arms embrace the Fleets.
Through yielding Planks the angry Bullets fly,
And of one Wound hundreds together dye.
Born under different Stars, one Fate they have,
The Ship their Coffin, and the Sea their Grave.
Bold were the men, which on the Ocean first
Spread their new Sails, whilst shipwreck was the worst,
More danger now from men alone we find,
Then from the Rocks, the Billows, or the Wind.
They that had sailed from near the Antartick Pole,
Their Treasure safe, and all their Vessels whole;
In sight of their dear Country ruined be,
Without the guilt of either Rock or Sea.
What they would spare, our fiercer Art destroys,
Excelling storms in terror and in noise.
Once Jove from Hyda did both Hoasts survey,
And when he pleased to thunder, part the Fray:
Here Heaven in vain that kind Retreat should sound,
The louder Cannon had the thunder drowned.
Some we made Prize while others burnt and rent,
With their rich Lading to the bottom went.
Down sinks at once (so fortune with us sports)
The Pay of Armies, and the Pride of Courts.
Vain man, whose rage buries as low that store,
as Avarice had dug for it before.
What Earth in her dark bowels could not keep
From greedy hands, lies safer in the deep:
Where Thetis kindly does from Mortals hide
Those seeds of Luxury, Debate, and Pride.
And now into her lap the richest Prize
Fell, with the noblest of our Enemies.
The Marquis glad to see the fire destroy
Wealth, that prevailing Foes were to enjoy:
Out from his flaming. Ship his Children sent,
To perish in a milder Element.
Then laid him by his burning Ladies side,
And since he could not save her, with her died.
Spices and Gums about them melting fry,
And Phenix-like, in that rich nest they dye.
Death bitter is, for what we leave behind,
But taking with us, all we love, is kind.
What could he more then hold for term of life,
His Indian Treasure, and his more prized Wife?
Alive, in flames of equal love they burned,
And now together are to ashes turned.
Ashes more worth then all their Funerals cost,
Then the huge Treasure which was with them lost.
These dying Lovers, and their floating Sons,
Suspend the Fight, and silence all our Guns.
Beauty and Youth, about to perish, finds
Such noble pity in brave English minds;
That the rich Spoil neglecting, and the Prize,
All labor now to save their Enemies.
How frail our passion's? how soon changed are
Our wrath and fury to a friendly care?
They that but now to gain the Spanish Plate,
Made the Sea blush with Blood, forget their hate;
And their young Foes, while sinking, they retrive,
With greater danger then they fought, they dive.
With these returns Victorious Mountague,
With Laurel in his hands, and half Perue.
Let the brave General divide that Bough.
Our great Protector has such Wreaths enough.
His conquering Head has no more room for Bays,
Then let it be as the whole Nation prays:
Let the rich Oar forthwith be melted down,
And the State fixed, by making him a Crown:
With Ermins clad, and Purple; let him hold
A Royal Scepter, made of Spanish Gold.
That these Poetical Addresses may not seem too full of flattery, it will not
be amiss to insert what I have found under one of his Pictures engraven beyond
the Seas.

Cernimus hic omni caput admirabile mundo:
Regibus hic Frater; Populis Pater, Host is multum,
Nullius ille timet quam summi Numinis Arma.
Quis dubitat sacro hoc si pergat Flamine Victor,
Quod Reges, Populi, Barbariesque stupent.
Barbariem, vera Religione domat
Non timet; at Pacem cuillibet esse parat.
Quin subito Meretrix de Babylone cadet.
These were the then glosses of several persons; he came nearest the mark that
said, He was a Prince in his time. I shall wave these Hyperbole's even to the
Antipathy of what Vir quintae Monarchiae sets down, That as he was Protector,
he had a more unlimited power then any King before him.

About this time Christina Queen of Sweden made a resignation of the Crown, (a
president seldom heard of) putting her self into the condition of a Lady
Errant; to which purpose she made these propositions to the Prince her
successor. 1. She will retain the best part of the Kingdom, and the Custom to
her self. 2. She would not be subject, but free of her self without control.
3. That she would travel whither she pleased. To which the Prince returned this
answer. 1. That he would not be a King without a Kingdom. 2. He would have no
more Rival then she a Supericur. 3. He would not hazard himself about her
designs abroad. How these different Proposals were composed, I know not: but in
a short time she resigned up all, leaving her self only the bare title of, the
Queen of Sweden, traveling up and down according as her wild fancy led her;
and for the total finishing of this Comic Scene, she at length also resigned
up her Religion, and was received into the bosom of the Church of Rome.

This Christina being first undermined with money, which she wanted, having
lived at a great height, Carolus Gustavus having a Regal aim, so supplied her
occasions, as to the engaging of her Heroic Person to look more directly upon
those respects; which though she was the Daughter of Great Gustavus, of a
Masculine spirit, yet in respect of the constitution of the Nation which could
not admit of a Feminine conduct, she was as it were forced to surrender; he was
suddenly afterward proclaimed King, the Queen having first formally resigned
all to him. The Swede being now in his full power, the Protector honoring of
his Martial spirit, comparing their somewhat resembling rises, ballancing in
his mind the Swedes monstrous successes, none in Europe being so like his own,
either for the Discipline of the Sword, or to the future interests of Princes,
as to their consternation and fear, more especially as he had poized in his
discretion the Danish Affairs, he sends the Picklock of the Law, a Gentleman of
admirable parts, and inimitable Civilities, the Lord Whitlock, who as his
Ambassador, perfected an Offensive and Defensive League with the Swede, which
is still continued, the death of the Protector, whose cordial assistance in
his late Coppenhagen Affairs he could never have wanted, having been a great
obstruction to that Kings Affairs.

About this time the blasphemies of many Sectaries in England were horrible;
particularly of one James Nailor, who under a seeming Sanctity, and pretended
illuminations, vented most horrible blasphemies, for which he was cast into
Excester Goal; yet had this wretched Impostor so bewitched his followers to the
committing of strange absurdities, that they ascribed to him Divine Honors, and
gave him in Scripture phrase, the same titles which are applicable to none but
Christ himself.

In a Letter of one Richard Fairman to him, are these horrid expressions, [I am
filled with joy and rejoicing when I behold thee in the eternal unity. O my soul
is melting within me, when I behold thy beauty and innocence, dear and precious
Son of Zion, whose mother is a Virgin, and whose Birth is immortal.] One of his
she-Converts writes of him thus. [All the wise men shall seek for him, and when
they have found him, they shall open their ears, and shall give unto him of
their Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.] The same woman in another Letter to him
proceeds thus, [ O thou fairest of ten thousand, thou only begotten Son of God,
how my heart pants after thee; O stay me with flaggons, and comfort me with
wine; my well-beloved thou art like a Roe, or young Heart, upon the Mountains of
Spices. Then by way of Postscript her Husband Thomas Stranger adds this, Thy
name is no more to be called James, but Jesus. Also a Maid named Dorcas Erbury,
being examined, declared James Nailor to be the Holy one of Israel, the only
Son of God, and that she pulled off his stockings, and put her clothes under
his feet, because he is the holy Lord of Israel, and that she knew no other
Savior but him; affirming moreover, that the Spirit of the Lord within her
commanded her to call him Lord and Master, and to serve him. That in Excester
Goal he had raised her from the dead after she had been dead two days; and
that he should sit at the right hand of the Father, and judge the world.

Having seduced these silly souls into such damnable opinions, and gotten
releasement out of Excester Goal, he began immediately to play his pranks at
diverse places in the West; particularly at Wells and Glastenbury through which
Towns he rode on Horseback, a man going bare before him, some walking afoot on
each side of his stirrup, and others strewing their garments in the way; from
thence he took his journey toward Bristol, and coming to a Village called
Bedminster, about a mile from Bristol, rid through it in the same presumptuous
blasphemous manner, as he did before at Wells and Glastenbury. There
accompanied him two men, with each a woman behind on Horseback, which alighted
when the came to the Suburbs of Bristol, and footed it along on each side of
Nailors Horse, the man still bare-headed leading the Horse, and all the way
they went, they sung, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Israel, and then the women
led the horse with the reins in their hands, up to the high Cross of Bristol,
and from thence to the Whitehart-Inne in Broad-street: by this time the
Magistrates hearing of their doings, sent for Nailor and his companions, who
came singing all the way Hosanna, and Holy, Holy, Holy, etc. The Magistrates of
Bristol having examined him, sent him up to the Parliament (together with the
narrative of his actions committed in those parts,) to receive his sentence
which was as follows.

That James Nailor be set with his head in the Pillory, in the new Palace at
Westminster, during the space of two hours, on Thursday next, and shall be
whipped by the hangman through the streets from Westminster, to the Old
Exchange London; and there likewise be set in the Pillory, for the space of two
hours, between the hours of eleven and one, on Saturday next; in each of the
said places, wearing a paper containing an inscription of his Crimes: and that
at the Old Exchange his Tongue shall be bored through with a hot iron; and that
he be there also stigmatized in the forehead with the letter B. and that he be
afterward sent to Bristol, and conveyed into, and through the said City on a
horse bare-ridg'd, with his face backward; and there also publicly whipped,
the next market day after he comes thither. That from thence he be committed to
prison in Bridewel, London, and there restrained from the society of all
people, and kept to hard labor, till he shall be released by Parliament; and
during that time be debarred the use of pen, ink, and paper, and shall have no
relief, but what he earns by his daily labor, which accordingly was executed
upon him, December 17. 1656.

His flies and familiars were still useful to him for the discovering of more
strange designs; the revealing of which, no question kept many conspiracies
from being attempted, to which effect there is yet another plot, against the
Protectors life, intended by Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, one who had formerly
been a Parliament Soldier, under the command of Sir John Reynolds, together
with one Cecil; induced thereunto, as is said by Don Alonso, the late Spanish
Ambassador: to the effecting their designs, they are said to have hired a house
at Hammersmith, adjoining by the Highway side, to have shot him in his Coach,
as he passed by; but that failing, they intended to have shot him in Hide-Park,
and to that purpose that they filed off the Hinges of the Gates, for their
better escape; and this miscarrying, that they intended to have fired White
Hall. For these offenses Sindercomb was arraigned at the Upper Bench Bar in
Westminster Hall, February, 9. 1656. where being found guilty by the Jury, he
was condemned to be hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburne; but before his
Execution he was found dead in his bed, and several presumptions of a violent
death appearing on him, it was concluded he poisoned himself. Afterward he was
drawn from the Tower unto Tower Hill, at a horse tail, with his head forward,
and there under the Scaffold, turned into a hole stark naked, and a stake
spiked and plated with iron, driven through him into the earth. It is to be
observed that whatsoever the vigilance of the Guard of the Tower was over this
Gentleman, that he dyed with as fresh a color as Sir Thomas Overbury is said
to have expired with.

But to return where we left, that successful Seaman General Blake, the
Protectors indended Drake, an honest stout incomparable Seaman, he sailing
with his Fleet to Sancta Cruza, in the Island of Teneriff, in which Port lay
sixteen great Spanish Vessels, laden with rich Merchandises from the Indies, or
stored with provisions and other manufactures to be transported thither. He on
the 20. of April, 1657. set upon them, and notwithstanding the Castle and six
or seven forts which commanded the place, in less then four hours time he
destroyed them all, to their inestimable detriment, not sixty of his own men
being lost.

But to return into England, June the 20. 1657. the Protector with great pomp
and magnificence was installed at Westminster, the Parliament then sitting; to
which purpose at the upper end of Westminster Hall, a rich Cloth of State was
set up, and under it a Chair of State placed upon an ascent of two degrees,
covered with Carpets, and before it a Table with a Chair appointed for the
Speaker of the Parliament, and on each side of the Hall upon the said structure
were Seats raised one above another, and decently covered for the Members of
Parliament, and below them, Seats on one side for the Judges of the Land, and
on the other side for the Aldermen of the City of London.

About two of the Clock in the afternoon, the Protector met the Parliament in
the Painted Chamber, and passed such Bills as were presented to him; after
which they went in order to the place appointed in Westminster Hall; the
Protector standing under the Cloth of Estate, the Lord Widdrington Speaker of
the Parliament, addressed himself to him in this Speech.

May it please your Highness,
You are now upon a great Theater, in a large Chore of people; you have the
Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland, before you; on your right hand my
Lords the Judges, and on your left hand, the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs
of London: the most noble and populous City of England. The Parliament, with
the interposition of your sufferage, makes Laws, and the Judges, and Governors
of London are the great dispensers of those Laws to the people.

The occasion of this great convention and intercourse, is, to give an
investiture to your Highness in that eminent place of Lord Protector; a name
you had before, but it is now settled by the full and unanimous consent of the
people of these three Nations assembled in Parliament: you have no new name,
but a new date added to the old name; the 16. of December, is now changed to
the 26. of June.

I am commanded by the Parliament, to make oblation to your Highness of four
things in order to this Inauguration.

The first is a Robe of Purple, an Emblem of Magistracy, and imports
righteousness and justice; when you have put on the vestment, I may say, (and I
hope without offense) that you are a Gown man. This Robe is of a mixed color,
to show the mixture of justice and mercy, which are then most excellent when
they are well tempered together. Justice without Mercy, is wormwood and
bitterness, and Mercy without Justice is of a too soft a temper for government;
for a Magistrate must have two hands, Plectentem and Amplectentem.

The next thing is a Bible, a Book that contains the holy Scripture; in which
you have the honor and happiness to be well versed. This is the Book of life,
consisting of two Testaments, the old and new. In the first we have Christum
velatum, Christ in Types, Shadows, and Figers; in the latter we have Christum
revelatum, Christ revealed. This Book carries in it the grounds of the true
Christian Protestant Religion; its a Book of Books, it contains in it both
precepts and examples for good government.

Alexander so highly valued the Books of his Master Aristotle, and other great
Princes other books, that they have laid them every night under their Pillows.
These are all but Legends and Romances to this one Book; a Book to be had
always in remembrance: I find it said in a part of this Book which I shall
desire to read, and it is this. Deuteronomy. 17. And it shall be when he sits upon
the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write a copy of this Law in a Book,
out of that which is before the Priests and the Levites. And it shall be with
him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear the Lord God, and to keep all the words of his Law and those Statutes, to
do them. That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren; and that he turn
not aside from the Commandment, to the right hand or to the left, to the end he
may prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of
Israel.

The next thing that I am to offer to your Higness, is a Scepter, not unlike a
staff, for you are to be a staff to the weak and poor; it is of ancient use in
this kind; it is said in Scripture, in reference to Judah, the Royal Tribe,
That the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of like use in other
kingdoms and governments: Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, calls Kings and
Princes Scepter-bearers.

The last thing is a Sword, not a Military, but a Civil Sword; a Sword rather
for defense then offense; not to defend your self only, but others also: the
Sword is an Emblem of Justice. The noble Lord Talbot, in Henry the Sixths
time, wrote upon his Sword, Ego sum Talboti, propter occidendum inimicos meos;
This Gallant Lord was a better Soldier then a Critic. If I might presume to
fix a Motto upon this Sword, it should be this, Ego sum Domini Protectoris ad
protegendum populum meum.

I say, this Sword is an Emblem of Justice, and is to be used as King Solomon
used his, for the discovery of truth in the points of Justice. I may say of
this Sword as King David said of Goliah's Sword. There is none like this,
Justice is the proper virtue of the Imperial Throne, and by Justice the Thrones
of Kings and Princes are established. Justice is a Royal virtue, which as one
says of it, does employ the other three Cardinal Virtues in her service. 1.
Wisdom to discern the nocent from the innocent. 2. Fortitude, to prosecute, and
execute. 3. Temperance, so to carry Justice that passion be no ingredient, and
that it be without confusion, or precipitation.

You have given ample testimony in all these particulars, so that this Sword in
your hand will be a right Sword of Justice, attended with Wisdom, Fortitude,
and Temperance.

When you have all these together, what a comely and glorious sight is it to
behold, A Lord Protector in a purple Robe, with a Scepter in his hand, a Sword
of Justice girt about him, and his eyes fixed upon the Bible.

Long may you prosperously enjoy them all, to your own comfort, and the comfort
of the people of these three Nations.
The Speech being ended, Master Speaker came from his Chair, took the Robe, and
therewith vested the Protector, being assisted therein by the Earl of Warwick,
the Lord Whitlock and others. Which done, the Bible was delivered him; after
that the Sword girt about him; and last of all he had the Scepter delivered
him. These things being performed, Master Speaker returned unto his Chair, and
admimistred him his Oath, in haec verba.

I do in the presence, and by the name of God Almighty, promise and swear, that
to the uttermost of my power I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to the uttermost of my power and
understanding: and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same; and
that to the utmost of my power I will endeavor as Chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of the Peace and Safety, and
just Rights and Privileges of the People thereof: and shall in all things,
according to our best knowledge and power, govern the people of these three
Nations according to Law.

These Ceremonies being performed, a Herald of Arms by sound of Trumpet
proclaimed him, Lord Protector of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Dominions thereto belonging; hereupon the Trumpets sounded again, and the
people (after the usual manner) gave several acclamations, with loud shouts,
crying, God save the Lord Protector. His Higness had scarce accepted of these
Honors, but as if the ill affected would not let him breath, yet another Plot
is discovered, Colonel Edward Sexby is said to have conspired against the Lord
Protector; for which he was committed to the Tower, where having continued
about half a year, he died.

But to reflect a little back, Mazarine that great Minister of State, on which
hinge all the grand Affairs of France turn, perfects a Peace with England; the
Protector having no regard to those advantages that Spain might render him as
to Commerce, the places of Hostage which she proffered to put into his hands,
as Gravelin, Dunkirk, and others, he was swayed with other Interest which he
best understood himself, to prefer an Alliance and League with France before
all those advantages, except his civillity induce't him (which seldom had such
power over him) to look more lovingly upon France as the weakest at that time,
being abandoned by some of her Allies, as quite disordered by an Intestine War
in her own Bowels, her Navigation totally ruined, as the Pirates of Dunkirk had
blockt up all her Sea Ports; whereas the English scowred those Seas, chaste away
the Pirates, and reduced the Mounsieur and Diego by their successes to their so
likely advantageous peace. Indeed (as one writes) it was a high generosity,
since the English caused the French to lose Graveling and Dunkirk, to help
France again to take those places. In the mean space was not here rare bandying
of Interests?

France having thus perfected a Peace with England, they jointly resolve to
unite against the Spaniard; hereupon Sir John Reynolds with six thousand Foot
was sent into Picardy, to join with the French Cavalry, which completed as
gallant an Army as had been seen in France for many years together. These
jointly besiege and take Mardike; a strong Fort of the Spaniards in Flanders,
whereof Major General Morgan took possession for the English, as the earnest of
further Conquests; which the Spaniards attempting for to regain, were twice
repulsed with very great loss.

But the joy of these Successes was mitigated by the death of Admiral Blake,
who as he got his Honor by the Sea, died on it, and that within sight of
Plymouth. He was a man who had deserved of his Country, and might justly be
styled the Neptune thereof. His Body was brought with a Naval pomp by water
from Greenwich to Westminster, being a suitable Ceremony to his employment, and
was there buried in Henry the Sevenths Chapel. Upon whom an Ingenuous person
bestowed this Epitaph.

Here lies a man, made Spain and Holland shake,
Made France to tremble, and the Turks to quake:
Thus he tame'd men, but if a Lady stood
In's sight, it raised a Palsy in his blood;
Cupids Antagonist, who in his life
Had Fortune as familiar as a Wife.
A stiff hard Iron Soldier: for he
It seems had more of Mars then Mercury;
At Sea he thundered, calmed each raging wave,
And now he is dead, sent thundering to his Grave.
Soon after was St. Venant taken by the English, the Lord Henry Cromwell made
Deputy of Ireland. Sir John Reynolds, Colonel White, and some other Officers
drowned upon Goodwin Sands, as they were coming out of Flanders into England.

One writes, that the subtilty of discovering of Plots, though but in the
Embrio, or before they are hatched, in the time of peace, is the most succinct
way of letting of blood. March 24. (the last day of the year accounted for)
1657. a great Conspiracy was again discovered in London, several Regiments' (as
was said) being enrolled; who on the first day of May in the night time should
have set fire on several parts of the City, and whilst the confusion and
horror thereof had seized all men, they should have made a general masacre of
all who opposed them. Hereupon several persons were apprehended, as Doctor
Hewet, Sir Henry Slingsby, Colonel Asbton, etc. and a High Court of Justice
erected for the trial of them; and first they began with Sir Henry Slingsby,
the Articles charged against them will in part discover themselves in their
several speeches made just before their deaths. In short, they were both
condemned, Dr. Hewet (professing himself to be ignorant of such Law, though
amongst the most learned Divines few of them were more knowing in the Gospel)
being taken in three defaults upon formalities of the Court, was proceeded
against as mute.

June 8. 1658. was the day appointed for their beheading, Sir Henry Slingsby
first mounting the stage, spoke in effect as follows.

That he stood condemned by the Court of Justice, as contriving and
endeavoring to withdraw diverse Officers of the Garrison of Kingston upon Hull
from their duty, and persuading them to a surrendering and yielding up of that
Garrison, and one that held correspondence with some beyond sea to that end.
That it was true, he had conference upon that account with the Officers of that
Garrison; and that he gave Major Waterhouse a Commission signed Charles R. But
that it was but an old one that had lain by him, though he thought fit to make
use of it to the Major. Many passages he said there were which he would not
insist on; that some friends of his had made application to his Highness for
the saving his of life, but it seems it was thought fit not to be granted, and
therefore he submitted, and was ready to dye, etc.

Having uttered these and the like words, he took off a Ring from his
Bandstrings, wherein instead of a Seal engraven, was the Picture of the late
King exactly done, and giving it to a Gentleman that stood by him, he said,
Pray give this to Harry. Then he addressed himself to prayer, wherein he
continued some time; taking leave of his friends, he submitted his neck to the
Block, and had his head severed from his body at one blow by the Executioner.
This at one blow by the Executioner, the Reader may observe has been very
often repeated in this Volume.

His Tragic Scene being acted, that Religious and Reverend Divine Doctor
Hewet, the golden-tongu'd Chrysostom, entered the Lists of Death. In this
warfare the Doctor put on the spiritual armor of a blessed confidence,
delivering his mind to the people in these following words.

I am now become a public spectacle to men and Angels, and (I hope) God who is
omniscient, is now beholding me with much pity, and great mercy and
compassion; and the more, because I am now come to that end that his own Son
came into the world to, to bear witness to the Truth; he himself said, For this
end was I born, for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear
witness to the Truth. I was brought into the world (the Christian world) for to
bear witness to the truth of the Gospel, as a common Christian; I was brought
into the world (the Church) as a Minister of his blessed Word and Sacraments;
[Blessed be his name for that great honor and dignity;] and I came into the
world to dye more immediately for the testimony of Jesus, which God has now
called me to. I came into this world (this Commonwealth) to be a member
thereof, to bear witness to the truths of the Customs, the Laws, the Liberties,
and Privileges thereof; so I am a Member of the Commonwealth. And methinks it
seems to me a strange thing, that in as much as we all plead for Liberty and
Privileges, and I pleading for the Privileges, the Laws, the Statutes, and
the Customs of this Land, yet I should dye by those that should stand for the
Laws, the Statutes, and Privileges of the Land. And I am here beheld by those
that plead for their Liberties, and I hope I am pitied, because I here give up
my self willingly and freely to be a State-Martyr for the public good; and I
had rather dye many deaths my self, then betray my fellow-freemen to so many
inconveniences that they might be like to suffer, by being subject to the wills
of them that willed me to this death.

And it is worthy remembrance that Master Solicitor having impeached me of
Treason to the Commissioners of the Court against his Highness, I did often
(when brought before those Commissioners) plead for the liberties of the people
of England, though I had no knowledge of the Law, yet I had instructions from
those that were learned in the Law, and had several Law-cases and Presidents
put into my hand, though not by them, and urged several Law-cases, and made my
appeal. First, for the Judicature that I was to be tried by, Whether it were
according to Law? Whether it were according to the Act? and whether it were
according to the words of the said Act? I did appeal to have the said Act
argued by learned Lawyers on both sides, and then to be resolved by his
Highness own Council, which was denied me. [This by the by.] I pressing the
Argument, made a second Appeal, that those Judges, if they would give singly
their several judgments that it was a just and lawful Court of Judicature, I
would answer to my Charge. I did make another Appeal to those that were his
Highnesses Council, and pleaded against me. That if they would deliver it to me
under their hands to be according to Law, I would then go on to plead, and
answer to the Charge. What was then said further my spirits being faint, I
shall not say much, but only this, I was taken in three defaults upon
formality of the Court. It seems it is a custom in all Courts, (which I did not
know before) that if they answer not the third time speaking by the Clerk, that
then they are guilty of three defaults, and proceeded against as mute: [I had
no such knowledge of the Law.] So they found me guilty of those defaults; and
when I would have pleaded, and resolved to begin to plead, I was taken from the
Bar. I did the next day make my Petition to the Court in the Painted Chamber,
two Petitions were presented, the same in effect; the former, the Title was
mistaken. Yet because the title was mistaken, and no answer given, therefore it
was that another Petition was drawn up to the same effect, with a new title
given, (as I remember) presented by the Sergeant at Arms; and one writ it over
in such haste, lest they should be drawn out of the Painted Chamber into the
Court, that I had not time to read it over, only I subscribed my name, and
there was in the front of the Petition a word left out, but what the word was,
I know not; and this was taken so ill, as if I had put an affront and contempt
on the Court: And it was thought they would have heard me plead; and then
because of that mistake, they sent word, I should have my answer when I came
into the Court, and my answer was the sentence of condemnation. And therefore I
pray with all my soul, that God would forgive all those that occasioned the
charge to be drawn against me, to give such unjust things against me: I pray
with all my soul, that God would forgive all those that upon so slender and
small grounds adjudg'd me to dye, taking advantage of such simple ignorance as
I was in. And I had at the very beginning of my pleading, engaged their Honors
no advantage should be taken against me to my prejudice, that in as much as I
understood nothing of the Law: And having heard that a man in the nicety of the
Law might be lost in the severity thereof, merely for speaking a word out of
simple ignorance, I made it my prayer to them that no advantage might be taken
against me to the prejudice of my person: And there was to me a seeming
consent; for the President told, there should be no advantage taken against me;
and upon these Considerations I am afraid there was too great uncharitableness:
but I pray God forgive them from the very bottom of my soul, and I desire that
even those that shed my blood, may have the bowels of the God of mercy shed for
them.

And now having given you the occasion of my coming hither, it is fit I should
give you somewhat as concerning my self as I am a Christian, and as I am a
Cleargy-man: First, as I am a Christian, I thank God I was baptized to the Holy
Church, so I was baptized to be a Member of the Holy Catholic Church, that
is, the Church of England, which I dare say for purity of Doctrine, and orderly
Discipline, till a sad Reformation had spoiled the face of the Church, and made
it a query whether it were a Church, or no; I say, it was more purely Divine
and Apostolical, then any other Doctrine or Church in the Christian World,
whether National, or Classical, or Congregational. And I must tell you, That as
I am a Member of this Church, so I am a Member of the holy Catholic Church,
and shall give a most just confession of my Faith both negatively, and
affirmatively: negatively, I am so a Member of the holy Catholic Church, that
I abhor all Sects, Schisms, Sedition, and Tyranny in Religion. Affirmatively
so, that as I hold communion with, so I love and honor all Christians in the
world that love the same Lord Jesus in sincerity, and call on his name agreeing
with those truths that are absolutely necessary, and clearly demonstrated in
the Word of God, both in the Old and New Testaments; though in Charity
dissenting from some others that are not necessary. And I, as I am thus a
Christian, I hope for salvation through the merits of Christ Jesus; his blood I
rely on, his merits I trust to for the salvation of my own soul. Though to this
Faith, good works are necessary, not meritorious in us, but only made
meritorious by Christ his death; by his all sufficiency, by his satisfaction,
and his righteouss, they become meritorious, but in us they are no other then
as defiled rags. And truly as I am a Member of the Church, so I told you I was
a Member of this Community, and so pleaded for the Liberties and Privileges
thereof. I must now answer something I am aspersed withal in the world.

They talk of something of a Plot, and a Treasonable design, and that I had a
great interest in the knowledge and practice thereof, and that for the saving
my life, I would have discovered and betrayed I cannot tell what: I hope my
conversation has not been such here in this City, where I have been a long
time very well known, as to make one imagine I should intermeddle in such an
action, and go so contrary to the practice of my profession; and I hope there
are none so uncharitable toward me, as to believe I had a knowledge of that
design.

Here I must come to particulars for a Plot, of having a design upon the City
of London for the firing of it: I so much tremble at the thought of the thing
that should have been done, as they say, for the carrying on of such a design,
(if my heart deceive me not) had I known it, I so much abhor the thing, I
should have been the first discoverer of it: nor ever had I correspondency or
meetings with such persons as would have carried on such a design. It is said
likewise, I entertained the Earl, the Marquess of Ormond; to my remembrance I
never saw the face of that honorable person in my life. It is said, One Lords
day I did preach at Saint Gregory's and the next Lords day I was at Brussels or
Bruges, and kissed the Kings hand, and brought I cannot tell what orders and
instructions from him: this I shall say, For these three years last past
together, I have not been sixty miles from this City of London, and I think it
is somewhat further to either of those places then threescore miles. It is said
that I kept correspondence with one Barrow and Bishop: they are persons I have
heard of their names, but never saw their faces, and to my knowledge I do not
know they know me; nor do I know them at all, but only as I have heard of
their names. And whosoever else has suggested such things against me, I know
not.

His Highness was pleased to tell me, I was like a flaming Torch in the midst
of a sheaf of Corn: he meaning, I being a public Preacher, was able to set the
City on fire by sedition and combustions, and promoting designs. Here truly I
do say, and have it from many of those that are Judges of the High Court, that
upon examination of the business they have not found me a meddler at all in
these Affairs. And truly, I must needs say therefore, that it was a very
uncharitable act in them (who ever they were) that brought such accusations
against me, and irritated his Highness against me. I will not say it was
malice, it might be zeal, but it was rash zeal which caused me to be sentenced
to this place: the God of mercy pardon and forgive them all, and truly as I am
a Member of the Church, and as a Member of the Community whereon behalf I have
been speaking, I cannot but do as our Savior himself did for his Disciples
when he was to be taken from them, he blessed them, and ascended up to heaven.
My trust is in the mercy of the most High, I shall not miscarry; and however my
days are shortened by this unexpected doom, and shall be brought untimely to
the grave: I cannot go without my prayers for a blessing upon all the people of
this Land, and cannot but bless them all in the Name of God, and beseech God to
bless them in all their ways, and his blessing be upon them.

Let us pray.

O most glorious Lord God, thou whose dwelling is so far above the highest
Heavens, that thou humblest thy self but to look upon the things that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, and thou do whatsoever thou will both in
heaven, in earth, in the sea, and in all deep places; in thy hands are the
hearts of all men, and thou turnest them which way soever thou will, O Lord
look in mercy and compassion we beseech thee, on this great and innumerous
people of this Land; look upon them O Lord, with an eye of pity, not with an
eye of fury and indignation; O look not upon all those great and grievous sins
that have provoked thee most justly to wrath and displeasure against us.
Gracious God, who can stand in thy sight when thou art angry? when thou with
rebuke do correct man for sin, thou make his beauty to consume away like
as it were a Moth fretting a Garment. O Lord, thy indignation and wrath lies
heavy upon us, and thou have vexed us with thy scourges, thou have made us a
reproach and a byword amongst our Neighbors, and the very heathen laugh us to
scorn. O that thou would turn us again, O Lord God of Hosts; that thou
would show us the light of thy countenance, that we may behold it; that thou
would humble us for all those sins and grievous transgressions that are
amongst us; for those Atheisms, for those infidelities, horrid blasphemies, and
profaneness; for those sacriledges, for those Heresies, for those Schisms,
Errors, and all those blindnesses of heart, pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy;
for that envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness, that has set us
one against another, that we are so dashed one against another, even to destroy
each other; Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both
against Judah. O Lord we are like those Moabites and Ammonies, etc. -- This
thou have done to us O Lord, because we have rebelled against thee: O how
greatly and grievously have we sinned against thee, yet for all this, thou have
not requited us according to our ill deservings, for thou might have brought
us to desolation and destruction: fire might have come down from heaven, and
destroyed us; our foreign enemies, and the enemies of thee, and thy Christ our
Savior, might have swallowed us up. What have we not deserved! yet O the
long-suffering, and patience, and goodness of our God! O Lord our God, we pray
thee that thy patience and long-suffering might lead to repentance that thou
would be pleased, thou who delightest not in the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should turn from his sins and live, that thou would turn us
unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned: draw us, and we shall run after thee:
draw us with the cords of Love, and by the bands of loving kindness, by the
powerful working of thy holy spirit in our souls, working contrition in our
hearts, and a godly sorrow for all our sins, even a sorrow to repentance, and a
repentance to salvation never to be repented of. Lord break those stony hearts
of ours by the hammer of thy word, mollify them by the oil of thy grace, smite
these rocky hearts of ours by the rod of thy most gracious power, that we may
shed forth rivers of tears for all the sins we have committed. O that thou
would make us grieve because we cannot grieve, and to weep because we cannot
weep enough; that thou would humble us more and more in the true sight and
sense of all our provocation against thee; and that thou would be pleased in
the blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse us from all our sins; Lord let his blood
that speaks better things then that of Abel, cry louder in thine ears for
mercy, then all those mischiefs and wickednesses that have been done amongst us
for vengeance. O besprinkle our polluted, but penitent souls, in the blood of
Jesus Christ, that we may be clean in thy sight, and that the light of thy
countenance may shine upon us. Lord be pleased to seal unto our souls the free
pardon and forgiveness of all our sins: say to each of our souls, and say that
we may hear it, that thou art well pleased with us, and appeased toward us.
Lord, do thou by the Spirit assure our spirits, that we are thy children, and
that thou art reconciled to us in the blood of Jesus Christ. To this end, O
Lord, create in us new hearts, and renew right spirits within us. Cast us not
away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from us; but give us the
comfort of thy help, and establish us with thy free spirit. Help us to live as
they redeemed ones; and (Lord) let us not any longer by our wicked lives deny
that most holy faith whereof our lips have for so long time made profession,
but let us that call on the name of the Lord Jesus, depart from iniquity, and
hate every evil way. Help us to cast away all our transgressions, whereby we
have transgressed, and make us new hearts. Carry us along through the
pilgrimage of this world, supplying us with all things needful for us; thy
grace alone is sufficient for us: Lord, let thy grace be assistant to us, to
strengthen us against all the temptations of Satan, especially against those
sins whereunto we are most prone, either by custom or constitution, or most
easily provoked. O Lord, with what affliction soever thou shall punish us, do
not punish us with spiritual judgments and desertions. Give us not over to our
own hearts lusts, to our vile, lewd, and corrupt affections: give us not over
to hardness and impenitency of heart, but make us sensible of the least sin,
and give us thy grace to think no sin little committed against thee our God,
but that we may be humbled for it, and repent of it, and reform it in our lives
and conversations: and Lord keep us from presumptuous sins, O let not them get
the dominion over us, but keep us innocent from the great offense, O Lord our
strength and our Redeemer. And Lord sanctify unto us all thy methods and
proceedings with us, fitting us for all further tribulations and trials
whatsoever thou in thy divine pleasure shall be pleased to impose upon us: Lord
give us patience, constancy, resolution and fortitude to undergo them, that
though we walk through the valley of the shadow of death, we may fear none ill;
knowing that thou O Lord, art mercifully with us, and that with thy rod as well
as with thy staff thou will support and comfort us; and that nothing shall be
able to separate us from thy love which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.

And (gracious God) we beseech thee be thou pleased to look mercifully and
compassionately on thy holy Catholic Church, and grant that all they that do
confess thy holy Name, may agree together in the truth of thy holy Word, and
live in unity and godly love. Thou have promised O Lord, the gates of hell
shall not prevail against thy Church; perform we beseech thee, thy most
gracious promises both to thy whole Church, and to that part of it which thou
have planted, and now afflicted in these sinful Lands and Nations wherein we
live: arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon our Sion, for it is time that thou
have mercy upon her, yea, the time is come, for thy servants think upon her
stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the dust. Lord maintain thine own
cause, rescue the light of thy truth from all those clouds of errors and
heresies which do so much obscure it, and let the light thereof in a free
profession break forth and shine again among us, and that continually, even as
long as the Sun and Moon endures.

To this end, O Lord bless us all, and bless him, the posterity -- which in
Authority ought to rule over, and be above us: Bless him in his soul, and in
his body, in his friends, and in his servants, and all his relations: Guide him
by thy Counsel, prosper him in all undertakings, granting him a long,
prosperous, and honorable life here upon earth, and that he may attain to a
blessed life hereafter. And gracious God, look mercifully upon all our
Relations, and do thou bring them to the light of thy truth that are wandering
and ready to fall. Confirm them in thy truth that already stand, show some good
token for good unto them, that they may rejoice. O let thy good hand of
providence be over them in all their ways. And to all orders and degrees of
men that be amongst us, give religious hearts to them that now rule in
Authority over us: Loyal hearts in the subjects toward their Supreme and
loving hearts in all men to their Friends, and charitable hearts one toward
another. And for the continuance of thy Gospel among us, restore in thy good
time to their several places and callings, and give Grace O Heavenly Father to
all Bishops, Pastors, and Curates, that they may both by their Life and
Doctrine set forth thy true and lively word, and rightly and duly administer
thy Holy Sacraments. And Lord bless thy Church still with Pastors after thine
own heart, with a continual succession of faithful and able men, that they may
both by Life and Doctrine declare thy truth, and never for fear or favor
backslide or depart from the same: and give them the assistance of thy Spirit
that may enable them so to preach thy word, that may keep the people upright in
the midst of a corrupted and corrupt generation. And good Lord bless thy people
every where with hearing ears, understanding hearts, conscientious souls, and
obedient lives especially those over whom I have had either lately or formerly
a charge, that with meek heart and due reverence they may hear and receive thy
holy word, truly serving thee in righteousness and holiness all the days of
their lives.

And we beseech thee of thy goodness and mercy to comfort and succor all those
that in this transitory life be in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness or any other
adversity; Lord help the helpless, and comfort the comfortless, visit the sick,
relieve the oppressed, help them to right that suffer wrong, set them at
liberty that are in prison, restore the banished, and of thy great mercy, and
in thy good time deliver all thy people out of their necessities: Lord do thou
of thy great mercy fit us all for our latter end, for the hour of death and the
day of judgment; and do thou in the hour of death and at the day of judgment,
from thy wrath and everlasting damnation, good Lord deliver us, through the
cross and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In the mean time, O Lord teach us so to number our our days, and me my
minutes, that we may apply our hearts to true wisdom; that we may be wise unto
salvation, that we may live soberly, godly, and righteously in this present
world, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts: Lord teach us so to live,
that we may not be afraid to dye, and that we may so live that we may be
always prepared to dye, that when death shall seize upon us it may not
surprise us, but that we may lift up our heads with joy, knowing that our
redemption draws nigh, and that we shall be for ever happy, being assured that
we shall come to the felicity of the chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of
the people; and give us such a fullness of thy holy Spirit that may make us
steadfast in this faith, and confirm us in this hope; indue us with patience
under thy afflicting hand, and withal a cheerful resolution of our selves to
thy divine disposing; that so passing the pilgrimage of this world, we may come
to the Land of promise the heavenly Canaan, that we may reign with thee in the
world to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose blessed name and words
we further call upon thee, saying, Our Father, etc.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be the defense of me and
all other thy servants, thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ our
salvation, thy true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy Spirit
our comfort and consolation, to the end, and in the end, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen,

His Speech and Prayer ended with much meekness and spiritual consolation. He
submitted his neck to the stroke of the Axe, to as great a loss of the Church
of Christ, and of all good men, as has happened in our times. I have the more
enlarged my self, that my Reader might not without a kind of a consternation
or possession of strange amazement pass by the concernments of this blessed
Hero.

The same day of Doctor Hewets trial, was also tried John Mordant of Clement
Danes Esquire, with whom he was a fellow-prisoner; the charge against him, was
for combining with Henry Bishop of Parham in Sussex Gent. Hartgil Baron, and
Francis Mansil, with diverse others, for raising War against Oliver Lord
Protector, in the behalf of Charles Stuart, and confering with J. Stapely, Esquire;
Henry Mallory, and others, how to effect the same: and delivering Commissions
to several persons in the name of, and as from the said Charles Stuart, etc. He
stood long upon it (as did the Doctor before) to have Council assigned him, and
that he might be tried by a Jury; but finding it would not be granted, he at
last pleaded not guilty, many witnesses deposited against him; yet he by his
ingenuity so cleared himself; that notwithstanding many endeavors to the
contrary, he was discharged.

July the 17. following, Colonel Ashton and John Betley were executed, the one
in Tower-street, the other in Cheapside: Colonel Ashton was the first, being
drawn on a Sled, that Worthy Divine Doctor Warmestry submitting for the good of
a poor Christians soul to lie along with him upon the Sled, that he might lose
no time for his spiritual converse. They were drawn from Newgate to Towerstreet
over against Mark-lane end, where a Gibbet was erected. As he ascended the
Ladder, Doctor Warmestry said, Almighty God, who is a strong Tower, be with
thee, and make thee know and feel, that there is no other name under heaven,
whereby to attain everlasting life, but by the name of Jesus. The Blessing of
God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost be with you henceforth and for ever,
Amen.

He being upon the Ladder, expressed a great deal of confidence he had in the
merits and mercies of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; not doubting but that
through the red Sea of his blood he should arrive at the heavenly Canaan, and
in little space behold his Savior, whom his soul so much longed after. Then
fixing his eyes upon the multitude, he spoke to this effect.

I am brought here to a shameful death; I am an English man borne, and (as many
know) a Gentleman born; I was drawn into this business by several persons, and
am now brought here for my former sins: God has delivered me several times
from several judgments, he has visited me at this time; because I slighted,
and did not pursue that repentance that I promised. Therefore I desire all good
people to leave off their sins for Christ his sake, and become new men, for it
is that that brings all men to ruin: I beseech God of mercy have mercy upon my
soul, Lord God I come to thee, Lord the Father of heaven have mercy upon me, O
God the Son Redeemer of the world have mercy upon me, O God the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son have mercy upon me. Remember not my
offenses, but spare me, good Lord God; I beseech thee spare thy servant whom
thou have redeemed, for thy dear Sons sake. I have no more to say, but desire
the prayers of all good people. Having ended his Speech he committed his spirit
into the hands of God, and having said, Lord have mercy upon my soul, he was
turned off the Ladder, and instantly cut down, his belly ripped up, and his
bowels burnt in a fire ready prepared for that purpose; he being not yet dead:
then was his head cut off, and his body divided into four quarters, put into a
basket and conveyed back to Newgate.

Next they proceeded and fetched John Betley (for there was a great deal of
business done by the Executioner that day) into Cheapside, where formerly the
Cross stood; where was likewise a Gibbet set up: being come to the place with a
Minister, the Minister read, and the people sung with him a Psalm, beginning
thus, O Lord, consider my distress, etc. Then he went up the Ladder, and said
as follows.

Lord receive my soul, and be merciful to me, I commit my soul into Almighty
Gods hands: for he is my Protector and Redeemer. I am not ashamed to live, nor
afraid to dye; for my conversation has been such, in Christ Jesus I hope I
shall find mercy. As concerning them that are my enemies, I pray God forgive
them their sins, I freely forgive them all that have done me wrong. As for the
late Plot, I was never but once in company with them concerned therein: I did
know of such a thing, but deny that I acted therein. Shall I damn my soul at
this instant? I will speak the truth. One Brandon, that was one of them, drew
me into the business, and his man. I carrying work to him, could not refrain
his house, he so often enticed me thereto, and would not let me alone, till he
had got me into a house, where we drank together. I have no more to say as to
the Plot, but desire mercy from God. Having this said, the Executioner turned
him off, and the rest of the Sentence was executed upon him, as before upon
Colonel Ashton, and his Head and Quarters were conveyed also to Newgate.

Some two days after, one Edmund Stacy also about the same Conspiracy was
executed in Cornhil over against the Exchange; as also a Youth in Smithfield
having the rope about his neck, the horror of death being worse then death it
self, but for his souls health, was reprieved, the torrent of Blood being for a
while stayed.

Whilst these Tragedies were acting on the Land, a strange accident no less
prodigeous happened on the water; a Whale of a monstrous bigness, at least
sixty foot, and of a proportionable breadth, was cast up on the River of Thames
near London; which by the common people was accounted a Prognostication of the
Protectors death, which ensued not long after.

But to return to Flanders, where we formerly left, the Sea whereof like a
sharp humor did always nourish the wounds of incurable evils; nor was the
French their letting of her blood sufficient, she wanted an English Physician
to treat her. Our Armies, whose valors made not a stand at Mardike, but with a
gallant Resolution besieged Dunkirk, which being a place of great importance,
the Spaniard intended to relieve; and with an Army of sixteen thousand, came
within an English mile and a half of the French Quarters; whereupon the English
and French uniting their Forces, leaving some part of them before Dunkirk, to
make good the approaches, and guard the trenches; with fifteen thousand men,
and ten Pieces of Cannon, set upon the Spaniard, whom after a long and sharp
Fight, they put to a total rout and confusion, with the loss of three thousand
five hundred men; which Victocy was in a manner wholly attributed to the valor
of the English. The loss of this day lost the Spaniard Dunkirk, who quickly
after surrendered up the Town upon these following Conditions.

1. That the Town shall be yielded up, with all their great Guns, their stores
of Victuals, Magazines of Arms, and Ammunition, without any embezlement.

2. That all Officers and Soldiers shall have liberty to march out with their
Arms, Drums beating, Colors flying, two Pieces of Ordnance, and their Baggage.

3. That they shall have the liberty to march with a Convoy to conduct them to
Saint Omers.

4. That the Inhabitants should remain indempnified in their persons and goods,
and enjoying their former customs and privileges for two years, and not be
molested touching the exercise of their Religion.

The Articles signed, the Spaniards marched out, being about one thousand Horse
and Foot, and seven hundred more that were wounded; the French (according as it
was articled before) put the English in possession thereof, which ever since
they have maintained.

I have heard of an expression of the Governors of Ostend. A little before the
Massacre there, a person of quality being sent thither about the exchange of
Prisoners, after he was civilly treated, the glasses of wine going freely
about; the Governor being in a safe place began to throw forth words to this
effect; Sir, is this the mode of your Mushrom Protector, has he no other way
to pay my Master the King of Spain for his Bullion, but with Bullets.

Soon after the taking of Dunkirk deceased the Lady Cleypoll, second Daughter
to the Protector; a Lady whom posterity will mention with an honorable
Character, who often interposed, and became an humble Supplicant to her Father
for many persons designed to dye; her last requests as it was thought, for some
eminent persons being denied, was a means of hastening her death, which much
sadned her fathers spirits; nor did he long survive her, her death causing more
wounds in his heart, then all he received in the Wars.

But as his severity was great toward his enemies, so did he excel in
gratitude unto his friends; amongst other examples, I shall instance in the
person of one Duret a Frenchman, who attended him during his Generalship, and
served him with so much fidelity and zeal, as that he entrusted him with the
mannaging and conduct of the greatest part of his Domestic Affairs, always
retaining him nigh his person, bearing so great an affection toward him, and
reposing so entire a confidence in him, that during a great sickness which he
had in Scotland, (and whereof it was thought he would have died) he would not
be served by any one, nor receive any nourishment, or any thing else that was
administered unto him, save from the hands of Duret, who both day and night
continued to watch by his Master; tending him with a special care and
assiduity, not giving himself a moments rest until his master had recovered his
perfect health: which long and continual watches of Duret, and the great pains
he had taken, drove him into a sad fit of sickness; to recover him, his
endeared Master in retribution of his great services, spared no cost, but
applied all the possible means that could be procured, not only by his
commands, but by his personal visits (so often as his urgent Affairs would permit
him.) Duret dying, he sends over into France for his Mother, Sister, and two
Nephews, to requite in them the obligations he owed to his deceased Friend and
Servant; and whereas by reason of the continuance of the Stotch Wars, he was as
it were confined to the North, he wrote unto his wife, That she should
proportion that kindness which during his absence she should show unto them,
unto the Love which she bare unto him. Insomuch, that Durets mother was
admitted into her own Family, and seated at her own Table; his Sister was
placed in the rank and quality of a Maid of Honor, and his two Nephews were
admitted to be her highnesses Pages, which love of his he extended toward them
to the day of his death.

One writes, that when he came to have more absolute power toward the latter
end of his days, that he has been heard often to wish, that those that had
been put to death were yet alive; protesting solemnly, that if he could not
have changed their hearts, he would have changed their Dooms, and converted
their deaths into Banishment.

Waving this digression, as in respect of the distance of time, we are now come
to his own approaching Catastrophe. His death was ushered in by an
extraordinary Tempest, and violent gust of Weather, which blew down some houses
tore the trees up at the roots, one in the old Palace Yard by the Parliament
House, which by the event has signified no otherwise then the root and branch
of his Government. It was a horrid Tempest, as if Nature would have the
Protectours death to be accompanied with a general horror. The same is
elegantly set forth in a Poem by the same Laureat. I shall set down his smooth
Poem, which was answered as roughly in respect of the single rapier'd sense,
though otherwise in the same Virgil style, line for line; the latter as too
Satirical I have omitted, the other follows.

We must resign, Heaven his great soul does claim
In Storms as loud as his immortal fame.
His dying groans, his last breath shakes our Isle.
And trees uncut fall for his funeral Pile;
About his Palace their broad roots were tossed,
Into the Air, so Romulus was lost:
New Rome in such a Tempest mist their King,
And from obeying fell to worshipping.
On Aetna's top, thus Hercules lay dead,
With ruined Oaks, and Pines about him spread,
Those his last fury from the mountain rent,
Our dying Hero from the continent.
Ravished whole Towns, and Forts from Spaniards reft,
As his last Legacy to Britain left.
The Ocean which so long our hopes confined,
Could give no limits to his vaster mind:
Our Bounds enlargement was his latest toil,
Nor has he left us Prisoners to our Isle.
Under the Tropic is our Language spoke,
And part of Flanders has received our yoke.
From Civil Broils he did us disengage,
Found nobler objects for our Martial rage;
And with wise conduct to his Country showed
Their ancient way of conquering abroad.
Ungrateful then it were no tears to allow
To him that gave us Peace and Empire too:
Princes that feared him grieve, concerned, to see
No pitch of Glory from the Grave is free.
Nature her self took notice of his death,
And sighing swelled the Sea with such a breath;
That to remotest shores here Billows rolled,
The approaching fate of their great Ruler told.
September the third, 1658. he marched off from his earthly honors, and
received his Writ of Ease from all his labors, as death alone was able to
encounter him, which was on a day, one year after another, Anno 1650. and Anno
1651. rubrickt with two of his remarkable Victories; as Antipater died the same
day of his rising. But as concerning the manner of his death, after he had been
sick about a fortnight of the Disease, which at the beginning was but an Ague,
of which Tamberlain died; on Friday being the third of September 1658. in the
morning he gave all the signs of a dying person; he remained in that manner
till three of the clock in the afternoon; he had to his last a perfect and
entire understanding, his greatest and most important Affair was to name a
Protector to be his successor, which after his decease was consentaneously
confirmed on his eldest Son Richard: he died in the midst of his Victories and
Triumphs, and in a bed of Bucklers. On his deathbed he dispatched several
businesses of consequence, answering the Physicians who reproved him, as the
Emperor did, That a Governor ought to dye standing.

Alexander the Great was born on the sixth day of April, on the like day the
famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus was burnt, presaging that fire which this
Conqueror should kindle in Asia. The same Gnatho, from whom I borrow this
example, who has many more, but at last, says he, to look no further then our
own Country, into our own Histories; it is observed that the late Richard the
succeeding Protector was installed in his Protectorship the third day of
September, when as Richard the First so much spoken of in our Histories, begun
his Reign: an accident, says he, which cannot but promise him a most
favorable omen, and good token: But a blunt Fellow in two rustical Verses has
since, as to the event, better specified.

That his Successors Government never staid,
A strayed Sheeps time, not to be year'd and day'd.
As to the remarkable passages which happened on the like days of Olivers
Life, some have observed, that on the third of September he was confirmed in
his Protectorship by the Parliament; on the third of September he gained that
Battle of Dunbar; on the third of September he gained that great Battle of
Worcester; and on the third of September he died at White Hall. with all the
comforts that good hopes could give in his posterity.

His Corpse being embalmed, and wrapped up in a sheet of lead, were September
the 26. about ten of the clock at night, privately removed from White Hall to
Somerset House, where it remained till the 23. of November, lying in the mean
time in so great state, as would puzzle Antiquity to show such a President;
which by some was accounted an unnecessary vanity, the Commonwealth at that
time being so involved in debts both to the Soldiery, the Navy, and others.

The three first Rooms at Somerset House where the Spectatours entered, where
hung with black, having in each of them a Cloth of State, with a Chair of State
under the same, at the head of each cloth of State was fixed a large Majestic
Scutcheon fairly painted and gilt upon Taffaty, and all the Rooms furnished
with Scutcheons of his Arms, crowned with the Imperial Crown.

The fourth Room where both the Corpse and the Effigies did lie, was completely
hung with black Velvet, the Roof ceiled with Velvet, and a large Canopy or
Cloth of State of black Velvet fringed, was plated over the Effigies made to
the life in wax. The Effigies it self being apparel'd in a rich suit of uncut
Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple Velvet, laced with a rich gold lace,
and furred with Ermins; upon the Kirtle was the Royal large Robe of the like
Purple Velvet, laced and furred with Ermins, with rich strings and tassels of
Gold: the Kirtle being girt with a rich embroidered Belt, wherein was a fair
Sword richly gilt and hatched with Gold, hanging by the side of the Effigies.
In the right hand was the golden Scepter, representing Government; in the left
hand the Globe, denoting Principality; upon the head a Purple Velvet Cap furred
with Ermins, signifying Regality: Behind the head there was placed a Rich
Chair of State of tissued Gold, and upon the Cushion which lay thereon was
placed an Imperial Crown set with precious stones The Body of the Effigies lay
upon a Bed of State covered with a large Pall of black Velvet, under which
there was spread a fine Holland Sheet upon six stools of tissued Cloth of Gold:
on the sides of the Bed of State was placed a rich suit of Complete Armor, and
at the feet thereof stood his Crest.

The Bed of State whereupon the Effigies did thus lie, was ascended unto by two
steps covered with the aforesaid Pall of Velvet; at each corner whereof there
was placed an upright Pillar covered with Velvet, upon the tops whereof were
the four Supporters of the Imperial Arms, bearing Banners or Streamers crowned.
The Pillars were adorned with Trophies of Military Honor, carved and gilt; the
Pedestels of the Pillars had Shields and Crowns gilt, which completed the
whole work. Within the Rails and Ballasters which compassed the whole work, and
were covered with Velvet, stood eight great silver Candlesticks, or Standerts,
almost five foot high, with Virgin-wax Tapers of a yard long; next unto the
Candlesticks there were set upright in Sockets the four great Standards of his
Arms, the Guydons, great Banners, and Banrolls of War, being all of Taffety
very richly gilt and painted. The Cloth of State which covered the Bed and the
Effigies, had a Majestic Scutcheon; and the whole Room adorned with Taffety
Scutcheons, several of his servants attending bare-headed, to set out the
Ceremony with the greater luster.

After this (to show there is no intermission of this vanity) his Effigies was
several days shown in another Room. standing upon an ascent under a rich
Cloth of State; vested in Royal Robes, having a Scepter in one hand, and a
Globe in the other, a Crown on his head, his Armor lying by him at a distance,
and the Banners, Banrolls, and Standards being placed round about him, together
with the other Ensigns of Honor, the whole Room being adorned in a Majesticall
manner, and his servants standing by bare-headed, as before.

November the 23. was the day appointed for the Solemnization of the Funerals,
multitudes were the Spectators, which from all places came to behold it, so
much are we taken with Novelty, that we think no cost too much for the
beholding a two or three hours vanity. The Effigies being a while placed in the
middle of a Room, was carried on the Hearse by ten Gentlemen into the
Courtyard, where a very rich Canopy of State was borne over it by six other
Gentlemen, till it was brought and placed in a Chariot; at each end whereof was
a seat wherein sat two of his late Highness Gentlemen of the Bedchamber: the
Pall which was made of Velvet, and the White Linen was very large, extending
on each side of the Carriage and was borne up by several persons of honor. The
Chariot wherein the Effigies was conveyed, was covered with black Velvet,
adorned with Plumes and Scutcheons, and was drawn by six Horses covered with
black Velvet, and each of them adorned with Plumes of black Feathers.

From Somerset House to Westminster the streets were railed in, and strewed
with sand; the Soldiers being placed on each side of the streets without the
Rails, and their Ensigns wrapped up in a Cypress mourning Veil.

The manner of the proceeding to the interrment was briefly thus. First, a
Knight Martial advanced on Horseback with his black Truncheon tipped at both ends
with Gold, attended by his Deputy and thirteen men on Horseback to clear the
way.

After him followed the poor men of Westminster in mourning Gowns and Hoods,
marching two and two.

Next unto them followed the servants of the several persons of all qualities,
which attended the Funeral.

These were followed by all his own servants, as well inferior as superior,
both within and without the Household, as alfo all his Bargemen at Watermen.

Next unto these followed the Servants and Officers belonging to the Lord
Major, and Sheriffs of the City of London.

Then came several Gentlemen and Attendants on the respective Ambassadors, and
the other public Ministers.

After these came the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods.

Then followed the Clerks, Secretaries, and other Officers belonging to the
Army, the Admiralty, the Treasury, the Navy, and Exchequer.

After these came the Officers in Command in the Fleet, as also the Officers of
the Army.

Next followed the Comissioners for Excise, those of the Army, and the
Committee of the Navy.

Then follwed the Commissioners for the approbation of Preachers.

Then came the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks belonging to the Privy Council,
and the Clerks of both Houses of Parliament.

Next followed his late Highness Physicians.

The Head Officers of the Army.

The chief Officers and Aldermen of the City of London.

The Masters of the Chancery, with his Highness learned Council at Law.

The Judges of the Admiralty, the Masters of Request, with the Judges in Wales.

The Barrons of the Exchequer, the Judges of both Benches, and the Lord Major
of London.

Next to these the persons allied in Blood to the late Protector, and the
Members of the Lords House.

After them the public Ministers of Foreign States and Princes.

Then the Holland Ambassador alone, whose Train was born up by four Gentlemen.

Next to him the Portugal Ambassador alone, whose Train was held up by four
Knights of the Order of Christ.

And thirdly the French Ambassador, whose Train was also held up by four
persons of quality.

Then followed the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal.

The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.

The Lords of the late Protectors Privy Council.

After whom followed the Chief Mourner, and those persons of quality which were
his Assistants, and bare up his Train. All the Nobles were in close mourning,
the rest were but in ordinary, being disposed in their passage into several
divisions, being distinguished by Drums and Trumpets, and by a Standard or
Banner born by a person of Honor, and his Assistant, and a Horse of State
covered with black Velvet, and led by a person of Honor, followed by two
Grooms: Of which Horses there were eleven in all, four covered with black
Cloth, and seven with Velvet. These being all passed in order, at length the
Chariot followed with the Effigies, on each side of which were born six Banner
Rolls, twelve in all, by as many persons of honor. The several pieces of his
Armor were born by eight Officers of the Army, attended by a Herald and a
Gentleman on each side. Next followed Gartar principal King of Arms, attended
with a Gentleman on each side bare-headed.

Then came the chief Mourner, together with those Lords and other Personages
that were Supporters and Assistants to the chief Mourner.

Then followed the Horse of Honor in very rich Trappings embroidered upon
Crimson Velvet, and adorned with white, red, and yellow Plumes, and was led by
the Master of the Horse.

Finally, in the close of all followed those of his late Guard, and the Warders
of the Tower.

At the West Gate of the Abbey Church in Westminster, the Hearse with the
Effigies thereon was taken off again from the Chariot by those ten Gentlemen
who placed it thereon before, and in their passing on to carry it into the
Church, the Canopy of State was by the former six Gentlemen born over it again:
In which stately manner it was carried up to the East end of the Abbey, and
there placed in a magnificent Structure purposely erected there to receive it;
being interred amongst the Kings and Queens at Westminster: for all which vaste
expenses, his Son Richard might have taken up that sad expression in Virgil;

Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem, had not the Parliament since dealt so
generously with him, as to order the payment of his debts contracted by his
Fathers Funeral. Certainly the Gentleman expressed noble and truly dutiful
respects to his memory, fit for brave minds to imitate. Thus as great Oliver
lived victoriously, so he was buried honorably, Sic exit. It was a report that
his Effigies was taken down and preserved from a threatening multitude of the
rascally people; even he that had swayed and governed these three Nations five
years, his Reign being troublesome, was necessitated after his death to be
protected in his Picture; his Posterity after him being suddenly levelled.

Thus after many a weary step, having traversed so many Crowns, I must now set
my Reader down at a Commonwealth. I shall end all with a glimpse rather then a
Character, some gleaned observations on this great Favorite of Fortune, I hope
in terms agreeing to truth, such as are neither below nor above his estate.

In his person he somewhat exceeded the usual middle stature, proportionable
without any unevenness either of lineaments or parts, accordingly being of a
becoming fatness, well shaped, his aspect having somewhat of the Soldiers,
inclining to redness, his usual posture in his walking was his hand upon his
sword; he had a sparkling fierce eye, nevertheless his usual deportments were
both courteous and harsh at once in his encounters, where he found the least
opposition. He was hardy and resolute in his reprehensions, subtle, temperate,
and meek in his Councels; he was of a strong constitution, and of an active
body, an enemy both to ease and excess; being ever suspicious, circumspect, and
over vigilant, of a notable headpiece; yet if he had any spare time, he
disdained not to confer though in matters of least moment; he delighted to read
men more then books, his eloquence being Masculine and Martial, rather a
natural gift then an effect of Art, in which he did not want his holy
vestments, always mannaging some passages of the sacred Writ, to which most
charming part (as well as that of the Sword) he owed most of his victories. He
was always accustomed to exhort his Soldiers at the undertaking of any great
enterprise, or before a Battle: He had a strict eye over his Army, his greatest
care being to see them provided of all necessaries, by which foresight he was
the better able to execute severe punishment on them for their misdemeanors.
He took great delight to discourse of the Affairs of the World, of the
interests of other Princes, in which his judgment did so guide him, that
without entering into their Cabinets, or partaking of their secret Councels, he
could discourse very pertinently of their Affairs, and foresaw their several
issues and events; he was an excellent Physiognomer, having once seriously
considered any one, he was seldom deceived in the opinion he had of him. He was
no friend to the vain-gloriousness of habit, and though he was always as it
were fierce, of a passionate constitution; yet he was so sly, as to keep his
passions in; but when there was occasion to carry a business on, he exposed
himself with so much vigor, as gave those he had to do withal to understand,
that he was not easily persuaded from the thing he had once resolved. He had
one knack above all the rest which stood him in much stead, he had a deep
insight into the natures and dispositions of the common people, who as they are
impatient of servitude, so are they incapable of entire liberty; frighted with
the sight of the rod, but mutinous in the feeling of it, none talking more of
liberty, nor understanding it less then they; more troubling themselves then
their heads with their grievances, considering nothing, but repining at every
thing; bold talkers so you suffer them but to talk: Above all, most tenacious
of their liberty of Conscience, rather to follow any new fangled opinion, then
to remain constant to the old; his policy herein was to allow them something to
induce others to their dear liberty (or license rather) of their tongues, which
he knew he could not help, but so as that he had his Eves-droppers every where,
who seldom brought him word of what they said, except they also gave an account
of what they had, and then their Estates paid for the malepertness of their
tongues, and for their chiefest darling of all to err in their opinions: He
permitted them to follow and embrace what Sect they pleased, so that they all
remained in obedience to Civil Government. This was his Method, whilst men's
reasons did comprehend so little, as that they needed their own experience to
believe how he (Atlas- like) could support so mighty a Frame and Mathin,
composed of so many different and disjoynted parts, yet to keep them from
slipping and falling in pieces; which he did, rivetting them so fast together,
and making them all firmly cohere amongst themselves, as so many pieces of soft
wax melted and molded all in one could not cleave faster in a Ball or Globe:
this was the great work he had begun, which had not death prevented him, he was
on point of finishing, as he was a person indefatigable both of body and mind.

Politicians hold, that in the changing the Government, all things, if it were
convenient and possible, ought to be changed; the very Religion it self, if any
were profane enough to meddle with it. To wave their Atheistical opinions,
this may be observed, that both in respect of his policy and fortunes, he might
very well, having so many advantages over the present distractions of the
times, raise his thoughts to more then ordinary ambitions: It is only for God
to search the heart, and try the Reins, he knows what our religious affections
are, we ought to conjecture charitably of what we cannot determine: this we are
certain of, he could so well see through Superstition (as in these times they
term it) for his better advantage, as that his political conscience could
dispense with more then ordinary Transactions: nevertheless he was still under
the privilege of the Sanctuary, some of the Clergy (as they have ever done)
stuck close to him, to raise him and themselves; whereas the late King undid
himself for the then flourishing Clergy, and they themselves for him. It Is
true, his actions were complying with a military soul, so that he had the less
leisure to dispute cases of Conscience; only he might with the Emperor, as he
did, cite Saint Paul, The good that I would, I do not; but the evil that I
would not, that I do: now if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it,
but sin that remains in me. The truth is, he made no haste in the settlement of
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as he was too crafty to disturb the powerful party,
those that were unsettled in their opinions.

As to his State Employments he took several Oaths, which for the present might
stand him in some stead, yet certainly they might have endangered him to much
loss in his after enterprises, which depended upon faith. In his Youth I have
heard he was so uncircumspect, as not to rise, experience having taught him in
his latter time wisdom to repair himself, his better fortune miraculously
making up all his breaches; his Martial spirit advancing him in times as it
were set apart for his designs, full of mutations and rare accidents; for it is
with times as it is with ways, with some they are up hill, and with some they
are down hill: nor could he have made good his footing, had he not been full of
suspicions, of secret thoughts, of serious observations, full of notes and
memorials, especially as he was well read in the men of his time; whom to
employ, whom to reward, whom to enquire of, whom to beware of; what were the
dependancy, what were the factions, as it were keeping a Journal of his
thoughts. Indeed one can scarcely write that he was too suspicious, too
apprehensive; though questionless he was by reason of his restless jealousies a
trouble to himself as well as others, so that which did him good one way, did
him hurt another.

Although, as has been already said, his Flies and Familiars were useful to
him for the discovering of Conspiracies, the revealing of which no question
preserved him from many dangers from being attempted, his nature being almost
married to troubles, his confidence made him successful; to go through them;
his cunning always winding him out, he being the more ready, and sharpened by
the occasions of perils; howsoever the dazelings of his suspicions gave his
industries enough to do to save himself and help others. Questionless he had
wisdom, and a strange kind of rule and strain of Government, which all men
acknowledged in the bitterest of times. His Armies neither in Civil nor
Foreign Wars were ever unfortunate. As his great judgment in leading as well
as preserving them, in courage personally fighting with them, determined him to
be both a daring Soldier, and an expert Commander; which indeared his
Soldiers so much to him, as that they suffered him to act for the future for
himself what they did not so well disgust. Many Battles he fought with them, in
all which he triumphed, his fortunes being ever inviolable; thus as he appears
strangely successful to posterity, so likewise most unhappy for those bloody
Conquests he obtained, they being in the bowels of his own Country. He
signalized the magnanimity of his mind by putting his Soldiers on miraculous
attempts, as well in the Christian as the other Heathen parts of the world; the
question is, so much honorable blood being shed in his time, whether future
Histories will wash his memory clean from it, though malice it self cannot
charge him that he was actually nocent, yet posterity will hardly believe but
that he was in some degree guilty. But to come closer to him, of those three
things which either should or ought to tie the hearts of the people to those
that govern, Love, Fear, and Reverence; he only purchased of them chiefly to
himself Fear, which is furthest from the heart; which forced him, being
sometimes straightened in his Affairs, to retire much to his Cabinet Council, with
whom he sat often in person, where he was always fair spoken, not without his
sweetnesses and blandishments of words; but his Rhetoric was not so vainly
spent, but that before he went he informed his Judgment; and though those were
cunning that he employed, yet he had still a Reserve to himself, as he had the
Master-reach; such an extent his Judgment had, though it was not much assisted
by his former learning, or bettered by his future studies; the Trumpet and Drum
sounding so loud in his ears, that he had little leisure to admit of the sober
Councels of Philosophy. He was nevertheless well enough furnished, as his wit
had long before purchased Lewis the Eleventh's so well known slights, which he
left to his Son as Maxims for his practice, as one in another case writes of
Secrets, that they should be kept till the breath stinks. Questionless his
dissimulation in transactings, together with his privacy and silence in his
mannagements were to him assistances beyond all Arts and Sciences. In his time
there were many that suffered, the more blood was drawn; the less love he
found, the less Treasure, which with a good will he never received. One writes,
that he distributed forty thousand pounds a year in charitable uses out of his
own purse; he might have been more plain in his expressions, certainly he meant
out of the Commonwealths Moneys. We may conclude thus much, that his annual
incomes were not so great as malice has given out, considering all his
necessary expenses; without dispute they had been more enlarged, if the people
had loved him but half so well as they feared him, though I must still
acknowledge it to be hard to distinguish of his liberality, his necessities
having so much limited his rewards; though his mind was high, and he pursued
his own way as one that always revered his own will. If we look on his careful
or rather politic liberality, somewhat may be said, as he was at vaste
charges, as he made good his dexterity to impropriate himself with Foreign
Instruments to obtain good intelligence from all parts abroad; from which spies
all wise men conclude, that he received more Articles of Inquisition then
Negotiation, as he was still working and casting up others, not to be
undermined himself. Some are so humbly minded as to believe his designs were
too high for foreign parts, certain it is Carolus Gustavus lost a dear friend
of him; and for other Princes howsoever they might look a squint on him, he was
courted by two of the greatest, and was a friend (as if fortune attended him)
to either of them both when he pleased, they having as much as they could
allied themselves to his Interests, when they once found him to be at leisure
to be helpful to them. It Is true for some time they stood at a distance,
certainly if they did not so soon see into the passages of his Affairs, they
did at last pass their Judgments on the issue of them; perhaps they at the
first saw him only at strife, but they were afterward forced to acknowledge
him to be always aloft, so fortunate he was in all his enterprises. The Royal
Party were once of opinion, that he having past his Laurels, he had a mind to
reach at the Crown; they were somewhat mistaken, it had too many thorns in it,
which of themselves are sharp enough to fetch blood, if we should not otherwise
accept of the interpretation of the Fifth Monarchy Gentleman, who means by them
the displeased Soldiery, to whom such lustres could never have been
acceptable, as some other of our late Pamphletters have libelled him to be
another Henry the Fifth; that he would have stolen the more then protested
against Diadem off from the Pillow; if he had a mind to it, it is more then
they know, the worst they could have said of him had been, that he entertained
somewhat more then self-denying thoughts, or rather as the Poet has it, Magnis
tamen excedit ausis. Indeed outwardly he seemed to have little of vain glory in
him, or else he turned his dark Lanthorn to himself, his closeness being
always such, that this great Politician walked invisible; others stood in the
light to him, but he in the dark to all, only for his most grand Transaction
there was no vizzard could disguise it, that he should after so many selfish
refusals, (a word lately put into the new canting Dictionary of the
Enthusiasts) that he should after the slighting as it were of so many tendered,
forfeited, and sequestered Estates presented to him by the Parliament for his
remarkable services; after that in parts and piecemeals he had denied the pomps
and vanities of this wicked world, he made it his master-design to take in all
at once, as he knew well enough how to cog a die, he had thrown for all, won
all, and swept all at once; rendering his Motto, Pax quaeritur Bello, into that
English which pleased him best, the Protectorship.

To reflect briefly on his Domestical Affairs, he was not uxorious, but
respectful to his Wife, to his Children he had a paternal affection, careful of
their educations, and of their aspirings to advancement; he endeavored to cast
a luster on them, which did not take with the people, though as to his Son
Richard there was a more then ordinary consent. For his pleasures there is no
extraordinary news of them, some Frolicks I have heard of, with those he was
most familiar, the truth is, he had too little leisure for trivial repasts; he
did with them as great persons do with Banquets, come and look upon them, and
so turn away. As he begun from a private fortune, as I have already intimated,
that fortune quickened in him all seeds of observation, being always more
prosperous in himself, then confirmed from the affections of others. For the
imputations against him of moneys in his Treasury, certainly if he had been
such a hoarder, the urgency of his pressing Affairs would never suffer him to
be so poor as to stand still, and admire his riches. Before I end, I cannot
choose but remark his hard dealings with Parliaments, which he formerly so
vindicated against the late King for his breach of privilege about the five
Members, whatsoever fine thread he did twist for himself, in all his religious
speeches, those that are right Englishmen will never clear him from his
violations, though he managed those actings as that they were to him but short
tempests, or small over-castings, as whatsoever injury the Nations endured, he
had one pretense or other to shift it off from his own shoulders, extremely
mistaking himself, as the people look less on the failings of those who have
been their own choice, then on those who have taken on them to be earvers for
themselves; he thought himself crafty enough for Parliaments, and from his
deathbed he determined himself cock sure, as he was flesht with his former
fortunes; he could never have imagined his posterity should ever have been
lean. It Is true, we may be so political, as on this earth to endeavor to grasp
these humane Affairs to our own Interests, but we must lay down our greatest
wisedoms when we come to sleep in the silent grave, as after death there is no
providing against the cross blows of fortune.

To conclude, as far as we can conjecture, his Confederates continuing alike
victorious, and fortunate with him, he might if he had lived to it, extended
his victories to some other parts of the world; if he did no more, it was
either through the disturbances of the times, or long of himself, for what he
minded he compassed. Certain it is, that he so husbanded his successes, that he
did not live to see himself unfortunate, who having assumed or rather snatched
his honors, showed himself to be one of the strangest sort of wonders that our
late times have produced. One writ a strange Epitaph on him, Here lies Oliver
Cromwell, who that he might be Protector himself, first brought the English
Monarchy on its knees.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader. These Books following are printed for Nathanael Brook, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversy,. Sermons, Devotions
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in Answer to Dr. Vane's lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale, Esquire; Octavo. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio. 3. The
Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome, in tataking away the sacred Cup from
the Laity at the Lords Table, by D. Featley, D. D. Quarto. 4. The Quakers Cause
at second hearing, being a full Answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of
Grace: Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel: a Reply to Mr.
Anthony Burghess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Ruthford: by Robert Town. 6.
Anabaptists anatomized and silenced: or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs, by Mr. J.
Crag; where all may receive clear satisfaction in that Controversy. The best
extant, Octavo. 7. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an explication of some
passages exhibited to the Commissioners at White Hall for approbation of
Public Preachers, against J. Harrison of Land Chapel, Lancashire. 8. The
zealous Magistrate; a Sermon by T. Threscos. Quarto. 9. New Jerusalem, in a
Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, Quarto, in the year 1651. 10. Divinity
no enemy to Astrology. A Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in the Year
1643. by Dr. Thomas Swaddling. 11. Britannia Rediviva. A Sermon before the
Judges, August 1648. by J. Shaw Minister of Hull. 12. The Princess Royal, in a
Sermon before the Judges, March 24. by J. Shaw. 13. Judgment set, and Books
opened, Religion tried whether it be of God or Man, in several Sermons: by J.
Webster, Quarto. 14. Isreal's Redemption, or the Prophetical History of our
Saviors Kingdom on Earth: by K. Matton. 15. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance,
Error and Profaneness; or, a more hopeful way to Grace and Salvation: by K
Young, Octavo. 16. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring to
settle the wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by
J. Brinsley of Yarmouth. 17. Comforts against the fear of death; wherein are
discovered several Evidences of the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich.
18. Jacobs Seed; or, the excellency of seeking God by prayer: by Jer.
Buroughs. 14. The sum of practical Divinity: or, the Grounds of Religion in a
Catechistical way, by Master Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a
useful Piece. 20. Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and
Princes, and all other Governments are turned and changed: by J. Davis Minister
in Dover, admirably useful, and seriously to be considered in these times. 21.
The Treasure of the Soul, wherein we are taught by dying to sin, to attain to
the perfect love of God. 22. A Treatise of Contentation, fit for these sad and
troublesome times: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. 23. Select thoughts: or,
choice helps for a pious spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: by
J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. 24. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in
Zion; to which is added, songs in the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions:
by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. 25. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every
distressed soul from the depth of everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.
Admirable, and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Phisiognomy, and Chyromancy.
26. Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren. 27. Lux veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted: by W. Ramsey, Gent. 28. An
Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the Original
of the soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter House in Cambridge. 29. Cornelius
Agrippa his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical Elements of
Peter de Abona, the nature of spirits: made English by R. Turner. 30.
Paracelsus Occult Philosophy of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy. 31. An Astrological Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations;
proving the influence of the Planets, and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies:
by Sir Christ. Heyden Knight. 32. Merlinus Anglicus Junior: the English Merlin
revived; or, a Prediction upon the Affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644.
by W. Lilly. 33. Englands Prophetical Merlin; foretelling to all Nations of
Europe, till 1663. the actions depending upon the Influences of the Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, 1642. by W. Lilly. 34. The Starry Messenger, or an
Interpretation of that strange Apparition of three Suns seen in London, the 19
of November 1644. being the Birthday of King Charles; by W. Lilly. 35. The
Worlds Catastrophe; or Europes many Mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly. 36. An
Astrological Prediction of the Occurrences in England; part of the Years 1648,
1649, 1650. by W. Lilly. 37. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England; the Prophecy
of the White King, Grebner his Prophecy concerning Charles, Son of Charles,
his Greatness; illustrated with several Hieroglyphics: by W. Lilly. 38. Annus
Tenebrosus, or the Dark Year; or, Astrological Judgments upon two Lunary
Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W. Lilly.
39. An easy and familiar way, whereby to judge the effects depending on
Eclipses: by W. Lilly 40. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in London.
June 30. 1644. by W. Lilly; as also all his Works in one Volume. 41.
Catastrophe Magnatum: an Ephemerides for the Year 1652. by N. Culpeper, 42.
Teratologia; or, a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody Rain and
Waters: by J. S. 43. Chyromancy, or the Art of divining by the Lines engraven
in the hand of man, by dame Nature, in 198. Genitures; with a learned Discourse
of the soul of the World: by G. Wharton, Esquire;. 44. The admired Piece of
Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical Proportions, and
signal Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of Dreams; to which is added the
Art of Memory illustrated with Figures: by R. Sanders, folio. 45. The no less
exquisite then admirable Work, Theatrum Chymicum Britannicum; containing
several Poetical Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have written
the Hermitick Mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully collected
into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable Industry of
Elias Ashmole, Esquire; illustrated with Figures.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
46. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious
manner, together with the Naural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison, and
in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Demension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of Measures and Weights, observations on gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metricald: by T. Wybard. 47. Tectonicon, showing
the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stones, Steeples,
Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to
be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters. Joyners, Carpenters, and Masons: by L.
Diggs. 48. The unparalleled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, The Exact
Surveyor, or the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all manner
of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champian, Plain, Wood-lands or Mountains,
by the plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any Land, to
Protect, Reduce, or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Chart, to make
a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other eminent
Surveyors Method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or
are otherwise employed about Buildings: by J. Air. 49. The Golden Treatise of
Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the Theory and Practice
united in a simpathetical Proportion, betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their
Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and
Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of Examples in every Species; made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by Th. Wilsford Corrrector of
the last Edition of Record. 50. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it
has been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by
them practiced, and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest
Method; the meanest capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours
practice may attain to a perfection in this Art: by J. Rich Author and Teacher
thereof, dwelling in Swithins-Lane in London. 51. Milk for Children; a plain
and easy Method teaching to read and write, useful for Schols and Families: by
J. Thomas D. D. 52. The Painting of the Ancients, the History of the beginning,
progress, and consummating of the practice of that noble Art of Painting: by F.
Junius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving. etc.
53. Culpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from
the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding out
the cause, change and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to
live or dye, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected, according
to the judgment of Hypocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers censure of Urines. 54. Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his Wife for
the public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets in
Physic and Chyrurgery, which whilst he lived, were locked up in his breast, and
resolved never to be published till after his death. 55. The Yorkshire Spaw;
or, the virtue and use of that Water in curing of desperate Diseases, with
directions and Rules necessary to be considered by all that repair thither. 56.
Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in the body of man: by A.
Read Doctor in Physic. 57. The Art of simpling, an Introduction to the
knowledge of gathering of Plants, wherein the definitions, divisions, places,
descriptions, differences, names, virtues, times of gathering, temperatures of
them, are compendiously discoursed of: also a discovery of the lesser World: by
W. Coals. 58. Adam in Eden, or Natures Paradise: the History of Plants, Herbs,
and Flowers, with their several original names, the places where they grow,
their descriptions and kinds, their times of flourishing and decreasing; as
also their several signatures, anatomical appropriations, and particular
physical virtues; with necessary Observations on the Seasons of planting and
gathering of our English Plants. A Work admirable useful for Apothecaries,
Chyrurgeons, and other Ingenuous Persons, who may in this Herbal find
comprised all the English Physical Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their
two voluminous Herbals have discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent
occasions their own Physicians, the Ingredients being to be had in their own
Fields and Gardens: Published for the general good, by W. Coals, M. D. 59. The
Complete Midwives Practice, in the high and weighty concernments of the body of
Mankind: the second Edition corrected and enlarged, with a full supply of such
most useful and admirable secrets which Master Nicholas Culpeper in his brief
Treatise, and other English Writers in the Art of Midwifry have hitherto
wilfully passed by, kept close to themselves, or wholly omitted: by T.
Chamberlain, M. P. illustrated with Copper Figures. 60. The Queens Closet
opened: incomparable Secrets in Physic, Chyrurgery, Preserving, Candying, and
Cookery; as they were presented to the Queen by the most experienced persons of
our times; many whereof were honored with her own practice.
Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
61. Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry
in Arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior, etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor: by R. Brathwait, Esquire; 62. Oedipus, or the Resolver of the
Secrets of Love, and other natural Problems, by way of Question and Answer. 63.
The admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
Plantation there in the Year 1628. brought down to these times: all the
material passages performed there, exactly related. 64. The tears of the
Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel proceedings of the Spaniards
in the Island of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of
the West Indies; in which to the life are discovered the tyrannies of the
Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully managed against
them. 65. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother: written
originally in Spanish by that Incomparable Wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans;
translated at the requests of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess
of Stafford: by E. P. 66. The History of the golden Ass, as also the Loves of
Cupid and his Mistress Psiche: by L. Apuleius translated into English. 67. The
Unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N. 68. The Rebellion: a Comedy by T.
Rawlins. 69. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N.
Richards. 70. The Floating Island: a Trage-Comedy acted before the King, by the
Students of Christ's Church in Oxon: by that Renowned Wit W. Strode; the songs
were set by Mr. Henry Laws. 71. Harvey's Divine Poems, the History of Balaam,
of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangelist. 72. Fons Lachrymarum, or, a Fountain
of tears; the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah in Verse, with an Elegy on
Sir Charles Lucas: by J Quarles. 73. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with other witty
Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R. Chamberlain. 74. The Admirable ingenuous Satyr
against Hipocrites.
Poetical, with several other accurately ingenuous Treatises, lately Printed.
75. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those
admirable Accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most
acceptable Qualifications of Discourse or Writing. An Art of Logic, accurate
Complements, Fancies, Devices, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and A
la mode Letters: by J. C. 76. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Poems: by Sir
J. M. M. L. M. S. W. D. 77. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment; a new Spring of
Drollery; Jovial Fancies, etc. 78. The Conveyancer of Light, or, the Complete
Clerk and Scriveners Guide; being an exact draught of all Presidents and
Assurances now in use; as they were penned, and perfected by diverse Learned
Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Coveyancers, both Ancient and Modern:
whereunto is added a Concordance from King Richard the Third to this present.
79. Themis Aurea, The Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which the
occult Secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by
Count Mayerus. and now Englisht by T. H. 80. The Iron Rod put into the Lord
Protectors hand; a Prophetical Treatise. 81. Medicina Magica tamen Physica;
Magical but Natural Physic, containing the general Cures of Infirmities and
Diseases belonging to the Bodies of Men, as also to other animals and domestic
Creatures, by way of Transplantation: with a Description of the most excellent
Cordial out of Gold: by Sam. Boulton of Salop. 82. J. Tradiscan's Rarities,
published by himself. 83. The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice against
the late King Charles, with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other
proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648. 84. The perfect Cook: a right Method in the Art of
Cookery, whether for Pastry, or all other manner of Al a Mode Kick-shaws; with
the most refined ways of dressing flesh, fowl, or making of the most poinant
Sawces, whether after the French, or English manner, with fifty five ways of
dressing of Eggs: by M. M.
Admirable Useful Treatises newly Printed.
85. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries shop, and Chyrurgions Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a correction of most Dispensatories now extant, with a Judicious
Censure of their defects: and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases: as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
Work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what Language soever. 86. Cabinet of Jewels,
Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury. etc, in eight excellent Sermons:
with an Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel: with the expediency
of Marriage in public Assemblies: by J. Crag. Minister of the Gospel. 87.
Natures Secrets: or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors: describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes
and influences of Stars, the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodigies of Precedent times: with presages of the weather: and
descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford. 88. The Mysteries of Love
ane Eloquence; or, the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; as they are managed in
the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New Exchange; and other eminent places: A
work, in which is drawn to the life the Deportments of the most Accomplished
Persons: the Mode of their Courtly entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at
Balls, their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies, the Witchcrafts of their
persuasive Language, in their Approaches, or other more Secret Dispatches, etc.
by E. P. 89. Helmont disguised: or, the vulgar errors of imparcial and
unskilful Practicers of Physic confuted: more especially as they concern the
Cures of Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases by way of
Dialogue, in which the chief rareties of Physic are admirably discourcoursed
of: by J. T.
Books very lately Printed, and in the Press now Printing.
1. Geometry demonstrated by Lines and Numbers: from thence, Astronomy,
Cosmography, and Navigation proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and
Spherical Triangles: by T. Wilsford. 2. The English Annals, from the Invasion
made by Julius Caesar to these times: by T. Wilsford. 3. The Fool transformed:
A Comedy. 4. The History of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Trage-Comedy.
5. The Chaste woman against her will; a Comedy 6. The Tooth-drawer. a Comedy.
7. Honor in the end: a Comedy. 8. Tell-tale: a Comedy. 9. The History of
Donquixiot, or the Knight of the ill favored face: a Comedy. 10. The fair
Spanish Captive: a Trage-Comedy. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other Persons of Honor,
their rare and incomparable secrets of Physic, Chyrurgery, Cookery,
Preserving, Conserving, Candying, distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils,
compounding of the costliest Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and
select Experiments, as they offered themselves to their Observations, whether
here or in Foreign Countries. 11. The soul's Cordial in two Treatises, the
first teaching how to be eased of the guilt of sin: the second discovering
advantages by Christ's Ascension; by that faithful Labourer in the Lords
Vineyard, Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of Lawrence Jury: the third
Volume of his Works. 12. Jacobs seed, the excellency of seeking God by prayer:
by the late Reverend Divine, Master Jeremiah Buroughs. 14. The Saints
Tombstone: or, the Remains of the Blessed. A plain Narrative of some
remarkable Passages in the holy Life, and happy Death of Mistress Dorothy Shaw,
Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull, collected
by her dearest Friends, especially for her sorrowful Husband and six Daughters
consolation and imitation. 15. The so well entertained Work, the New World of
English Words; or, a general Dictionary, containing the Terms, Etymologies,
Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of the proper significations of hard
English Words, throughout the Arts and Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanic; as also
other subjects that are useful, or appertain to the Language of our Nation: to
which is added the signification of Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical
Fictio^s, Historical Relations, Geographical Descriptions of the Countries and
Cities of the World; especially of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest
Antiquities, Battles, and other most memorable Passages are mentioned: A Work
very necessary for Strangers, as well as our own Contrymen, for all persons
that would rightly understand what they discourse, or read. Collected and
published by E. P. for the greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and
Artists that have been assistant in the most Practical Sciences, their Names
are presented before the Book. 16. The so much desired, and learned Commentary
on Psalm the fifteenth, by that Reverend and Eminent Divine, Mr Christopher
Cartwright, Minster of the Gospel in York; to which is prefixed a brief account
of the Authors Life, and of his Work: by R. Bolton. 17 The Way to Bliss, in
three Books, being a learned Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, made public
by Elias Ashmole Esquire; 18. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly
published: by Sir John Mennis, Mr. Smith and others. 19. The Judges Charge,
delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Justice Hall, and Mr. Sergeant Crook, Judges
of the Assize, at St. Mary Overies in Southwark, by R. Purre, M. A. Pastor of
Camerwel, in the County of Surrey: a Sermon worthy of the perusal of all such
persons, as endeavor to be honest and just Practitioners in the Law. 20. The
Modern Assurancer, the Clerks Directory, containing the Practick part of the
Law, in the exact Forms and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for Bargains,
and Sales, Grants, Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Joyntures,
Indentures; to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries, with good Proviso's, and
Covenants to stand seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases, Releases,
Surrenders, etc. And all other Instruments and Assurances now in use, intended
for all young Students and Practicers of the Law: by John Hern. 21. Moor's
Arithmetic, the second Edition much refined and diligently cleared from the
former mistakes of the Press. A Work containing the whole Art of Arithmetic,
as well in Numbers as Species. Together with many Additions by the Author, to
come forth at Machaelmas Term.
Likewise.
22. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the
Oval Figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Midorgius his Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical
sections may be easily understood; a Work much desired, and never before
published in the English Tongue: by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great
Level of the Fennes, to come forth at Michaelmas Term 27. Naps upon Parnassus;
a sleepy Muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened: such voluntary and Jovial
Copies of Verses as were lately received from some of the Wits of the
Universities, in a Frolic; dedicated to Gondibert's Mistress, by Captain Jones
and others. Whereunto is added for D monstration of the Authors Prosaick
Excellencies, his Epistle to one of the Universities, with the Answer; together
with two Satirical Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary,
with Marginal Notes by a Friend to the Reader. 24. America painted to the Life,
the History of the Conquest, and first Original undertakings of the advancement
of the Plantations in those Parts, with an exquisite Map: by F. Gorges, Esquire;
25. Culpeper's School of Physic, or the Experimental Practice of the whole
Art; so reduced, either into Aphorisines, or choice and tried Receipts, that
the free born Students of the three Kingdoms may in this Method find perfect
ways for the operation of such Medicines, so Astrologically and Physically
prescribed, as that they may themselves be competent Judges of the Cures of
their Patients: by N. C. 26. Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the Year
1659. 27. The Joys of Heaven promised to the Saints on Earth, Christ's sermons
on the Beatiudes preached on the Mount. An Exposition on the fifth Chapter of
St. Matthew, delivered in several sermons by Master Jeremiah Buroughs, being
the last sermons he preached a little before his death at St. Giles Cripple-gate
London; printed with the approbation of those godly and learned Divines, who
were entrusted for the publishing of his Works. 28. Dr. Martin Luthers Treatise
of the Liberty of a Christian: an useful Treatise for the stateing of the
Controversies so much disputed in these times about this great point. 29. The
Key of Knowledge, a little Book by way of Question and Answer, intended for the
use of all degrees of Christians, especially for the Saints of Religious
Families: by John Jackson. 30. The true Evangelical temper, a Treatise modestly
and soberly fitted to the present grand concernments of the State and Church:
by John Jackson. 31. The Book of Conscience opened and read: by John Jackson.
32. Williams Clowes his Chyrurgical Observations for those that are burned with
flames of Gunpowder, as also for the curing of wounds, and of the Lues
venerea, etc. 33. The Moderate Baptist. in two parts showing the Scripture way
for the administering of the Sacrament of Baptism, discovering that old error
of orignal sin in Babes: by William Baitten. 34. History and Policy Reviewed in
the Heroic Transactions on Oliver late Lord Protector, declaring his steps to
princely perfection drawn in lively Parallels to the Ascents of the great
patriarch Moses, to the height of thirty degrees of Honor: by H. D. Esquire.
35. J. Cleaveland Revived; Poems, Orations, Epistles, and other of his Genuine
Incomparable Pieces: a second Impression with many Additions. 36. The Exquisite
Letters of Master Robert Loveday, the late admired Translatour of the Volumes
of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating his memory; published by
his dear Brother, Mr. A. L. 37. England's Worthies, Select Lives of the most
Eminent Persons from Constantine the Great to the death of Oliver Cromwell late
Protector: by W. Winstanley, Gent. 38. The Accomplished Cook, the Mystery of the
whose Art of Cookery revealed in a more easy and perfect Method then has been
published in any Language; expert and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh,
Fowl and Fish, the resing of Pastes, the best directions for all manner of
Kickshaws, and the most poinant Sauces, with the terms of carving and sewing:
the Bills of Fare, an exact account of all dishes for the season, with other
Ala mode Curiosities, together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary
figures, as are referred to practice: approved by the many years experience,
and careful industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several
Persons of Honor. 39. A Character of France, to which is added Gallus
Castratus; or, an Answer to a late slanderous Pamphlet, called, the Character
of England; as also a fresh Whip for the Mounsieur, in Answer to his Letter, in
vindication to his Madam, the second Edition. 40. The History of the Life and
Death of Oliver late Lord Protector; wherein from his Cradle to his Tomb are
impartially transmitted to posterity, the most weighty Transactions, Foreign
and Domestic, that have happened in his time, either in Matters of Law,
Proceedings in Parliament, or others Affairs in Church or State: by S.
Carrington. 41. The Scales of Commerce and Trade, the Mystery revealed as to
traffic with a Debtor or Creditor, for Merchants Accounts after the Italian
way, and easiest Method; as also a Treatise of Architecture, and a computation
as to all the charges of Building: by T. Wilsford, Gent.
FINIS.
These are to give notice, that the true and right Lozenges and Pectorals so
generally known and approved of for the cure of Consumptions, Coughs, Astama's,
Colds in general, and all other Diseases incident to the Head, are rightly made
only by John Piercy, Gent. the first Inventor of them; and whosoever makes
them besides, do but counterfeit them: they are to be sold by Nathaniel Brook
at the Angel in Cornhill.


