AN ALLARM TO The Inhabitants of the Earth, That they all may be awakned and
shake off their poluted garments, and meet the Lord with speedy repentance,
before his wrath break out against them, and none be able to quench it.
And here is a true declaration of the wrath and indignation of God, which
shall certainly fall upon the Priests and all that join with them.
And here is a warning to all Rulers, Magistrates, and men in Authority, that
they all do that which is just and right, and that they all take heed how they
join in persecution (with the Priests and Dragon) against the Lambs of Christ
lest they perish together.
Also a salutation to the children of Light, who are turned to the Lord
especially to them in Dorcet shire.
By T.W.
A Wake, awake, O inhabitants of the earth, (high and low, rich and poor, noble
and ignoble) and prepare to meet the Lord, your maker, by speedy repentance,
and cast off all those filthy garments wherewith you have long been covered,
even with the robes of darkness, Cains robes, and Ishmaels robes, and Hammons
clothing, have your hearts been covered with, for all you Priests, Rulers, and
people of all degrees that live in envy, and wrath, and cruelty, and
oppression; you in whom these things abound, you live in Cains nature, and with
his robes you are covered, and even as he was a fugitive driven from God, so
are you fugitives, and alienated from the pure innocent life of God: and all
you that live in scoffing and scorning, and in light-mindedness, and in whom
vanity and folly is found, you are of Ishmaels stock, and in his nature you are
standing, and in his race you are swiftly running, and your end will be
destruction, woe and misery except you speedily repent and turn to the Lord,
and forsake the evil of your doings, for your sins have ascended upon high and
the just is grieved with your wickedness! O how scorning, tearing, and
reviling, and wickedness abounds, in all cities, towns, and streets in England,
it is even grievous to behold! and the people both old and young delight in
vanity, and their tongues talk of folly, and their lips and mouth utters forth
perverse and foolish things, and their minds are grievously corrupted through
wicked devises, and their hearts are gone a whoring (from the pure fear of the
Lord) after evil inventions! O how pride, and hautiness, and high mindedness
abounds, and superabounds through all parts of the Nation, in all cities and
towns, steeplehouses, and through all parts of the Nation, in all cities and
towns, steeplehouses, and markers, it is even woeful to behold, yea even as Lots
righteous so I was grieved with the Sodomites wicked conversation; even so is
the souls of the children of the Lord grieved at this day, to see and behold
the wicked conversation, of the people, who profess themselves to be
Christians, but walk quite contrary to the life of a Christian; for they that
are Christians they have received the spirit of Christ, and by it they are led
and guided, and through the effectual working of the same spirit in them they
are become new creatures. But with the Priests, and they that are under their
discipline, and such as own the hirelings to be their Ministers it is not so,
for among them the old sin of Sodom is found, yea all manner of uncleanness is
found among the Priests Congregations, in which they pray and sing: yea all
people that are not bewitched and blinded with their sorceries may see the
wickedness of the Priests, for their fruits do demonstrate what spirit they are
of, and their covetous practices and their casting into prisons, and suing at
the law, such as cannot put into their mouths, does plainly manifest that they
are not of God, nor sent by him, neither is the people come to the knowledge of
the truth by hearing them; and therefore let all who have desires after God and
his truth turn away from them, and not partake with them in their sins, lest
you partake with them in their plagues, for certainly they have a terrible cup
to drink, yea the cup of the sore vengeance and fiery indignation of the
Almighty God of heaven and earth is prepared for them to drink, and drink it
you must priests as sure as God is true, yea the rod of God you shall feel
assuredly, for by you have the souls of many been starved, and their blood will
the Lord God require at your hands, and your portion shall be in the lake that
burns for ever and ever, and your sorrows shall greatly increase, and of your
pain there shall be no end, and this shall surely come upon you, as surely as
ever you were born into the world except you repent, and humble your selves
before the Lord God of heaven and earth, whose name is greatly dishonored by
you, (both Priests and people) that take the name of the Lord into your
mouths, and live in wickedness, and in unrighteousness, in pride, and vanity,
and in covetousness, envy, wrath, and bitterness, fraud and deceit, and all
manner of wickedness; yea what sin was there in Sodom, but that there is the
like in the Priests and their hearers? they are the spiritual Sodom and Egypt,
in whom the Lord Jesus is crucified a fresh, and put to open shame, ye the pare
witness of God in them they trample upon, and when it arises at any time to
judge or to condemn them for any of their wickedness they kick against it, and
call it a temptation, and so put light for darkness, and darkness for light,
and bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter; but now is the pure day dawned unto
many, and the true light shines, (glory be to the Lord for ever) and with it
you are seen (Priests) and comprehended from whence you sprung and what stock
you are of, and you and your father the Pope must go down into the pit from
whence you did arise, for I bear forth my testimony before all people, that the
hand of the Lord is against you, (and my testimony is true and shall stand for
ever) and all your prayers you offer up from your corrupted hearts are an
abomination unto the Lord, and all your singing in your steeplehouses and
assemblies is an odious thing unto the Lord, it is even like the yelling of
Draggons in the desert, and the Lords soul is burdened with it: and he is now
arisen, and arising to take vengeance upon his adversaries that oppress his
seed, and he will power forth his wrath and indignation upon all them that will
not have his son Christ (the light of the world) to reign over them, but do
still go on in the frowardness of their ways, surely the Lord will be avenged
on such a people as this.

And therefore all people high and low, rich and poor, men of all degrees
return unto the Lord with speedy repentance, lest he suddenly break forth upon
you in his wrath and fiery indignation and none be able to quench it, for
verily, verily a great and terrible controversy has the Lord God determined
against the inhabitants of the whole earth, and woe, woe, will be unto all them
whose hearts are fixed in the earth and erathly things, and take delight
therein, more that in the Lord that made them and gave all men life and being,
and therefore consider all people, and see what your hearts are taking delight
in, whether in the Creator or in the creatures, which will fade as the grass
and perish in one day, for all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is
as the glory of the field, and suddenly vanishes away even as the smoke before
the wind, and all the proud and haughty ones, and all the careless ones, who
are at ease in the flesh, whose hearts takes pleasure and delight in vanity,
they shall all be as stubble ready dried before a mighty and unquenchable fire
in that great and notable day which now draws nigh, wherein the Lord God will
reveal himself from heaven in flames of fire, rendering vengeance upon the head
of his enemies and upon all them that slight and neglect the day of their
visitation, wherein the Lord waits to be gracious, and has mercy for all those
that return unto him in the true integrity of their hearts, and do in meekness
and in lowliness of mind, in the pure fear of the Lord wait upon him, them the
Lord will deal graciously with, he will take care for them, he will feed them
with pure food, and he will water them with sweet and pleasant does, he will
fight their battles for them and he will subdue their enemies, both within and
fight their battles for them and he will subdue their enemies, both within and
without; he will break down the mountains, and he will make the rough ways
plain before them, and they shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty,
neither shall the heat smite them, nor the sun make them faint, for the Lord
who has compassion on them, he will lead them to the springs of water, where
they shall drink and be refreshed, and their souls satisfied: and this is
already witnessed by thousands of them who are returned (out of the darkness
vanity, and pollutions of the world) unto the Lord, and are joined unto him in
the covenant of light, life, and peace, and are now become followers of the
Lamb of God, (who is the light of the world) and do follow him through the
suffering state, mockings and reproaches, and revilings of wicked and ungodly
men, yea moreover cruel whippings, bonds and imprisonments, casting into
dungeons and filthy noisome holes; and in all this we feel the word of
patience, which carries us through all tribulations, and so are willing to
suffer with him who is a man of sorrows, that with him we may also reign, and
this I certainly know that none can reign with him but they that suffer with
him, yet every one according to his own measure, and not all alike, but every
one according to the proportion of the gift that God has given unto them, so
all (who are in the covenant of life joined unto God) do feel and witness the
measure of the sufferings of Christ fulfilled in them, and as their sufferings
do abound, so they feel the joy and the peace much more to abound, and the
pure love of God they feel wherewith they are relieved, and comforted in the
time of great adversity when wicked and ungodly men rage and fret, and the
enemy makes his assault both within and without, then the Lord he reveals his
pure power (into his children who trust in him) and with it they are made bold
and valient to the amazement and confounding of their enemies, and so it is not
by their own strength that they get the victory but by the power of God only,
by which the Lord God keeps and preserves his children and servants, that
diligently in his fear do wait upon him, (who by the world are called Quakers)
to receive of his wisdom, and to be filled with his power, which is the sword
with which they make war in righteousness, and with it strong holds are broken
down and principalities are spoiled, and with (this sword) the power of God
they do prevail, and shall prevail, and no weapon formed against them shall
prosper, for they are the seed which God has blessed, and all that do or shall
rise up against them shall be broken, and snared and confounded, for of a truth
the Lord is with them, and his arm compasses them about, and though all the
powers of darkness be stirred up against them, (in the Priests and ungodly
Rulers) yet they shall never be overcome, nor the gates of hell shall never be
able to prevail against them, for the Lord he is with them who is greater then
all and hath-power over death and hell and woe will be to all them that seek to
quench the appearance of the Lord in his people, and therefore all people take
heed how you strive against the Lord and against his truth, which is now made
manifest and declared by his children, who are hated and reviled and evil
spoken of, and all take heed how you join any longer with the Priests, and seek
to hold them up, for all that strive to build up them, they strive to build up
that which the Lord will throw down, ye this will the Lord do whether you can
hear it or not, the thing shall certainly come to pass, and their downfall
hastens, and the day draws on wherein they shall fall, and shall never be
able to rise any more.

And therefore all you rulers of the earth, and ye that are in the place of
Magistrates, and men in authority, be you all warned that you all do that which
is just and equal unto all men, even as you would that men should do unto you,
for this is right, and this does the Lord require of you all, and I warn you
all in the fear of the Lord God, that you all take heed how you join your
selves (and your power) with the Prince of darkness, (and the Priests whom the
wrath of God is against) to persecute these innocent people (called quakers)
that has done you no harm, neither have they done any violence or wrong to any
man but for the testimony of a good conscience, and for witnessing and
declaring against the ungodliness of the Priests and people, and for testifying
against that great abomination (Tithes) which was first instituted by the Popes
authority, (among those called Christians) have we suffered all this grievous
oppression and afflictions which have been inflicted upon many of us, by
casting into prisons, and dungeons, and filthy places, not fit for good dogs
(as the jayler of Evesham said to H. S. and I who were at that time in the
dungeon, (which was not a fit place for a good dog he said) besides cruel
whippings, stockeing and stoning, in your streets, and many have had their
goods spoiled, and in all this the Priests have had a hand, and the Rulers have
been very ready and attentive to the Priests, to help them with their
assistance, as your steeple houses, stocks, and prisons, will manifest to all
sober people, that are honest hearted: but this do you all know assuredly that
the Lord God who is just and righteous in all his ways, (and will not suffer
the oppressor to go unpunished) he will call you to an account for these
things, and will give unto every one of you a just reward, according to your
doings, yea even as you have afflicted, and scourged the innocent lambs of
Christ, so shall you be afflicted with a sore affliction, and shall be scourged
with the rod of Gods wrath yea even as you have thirsted after blood, blood
shall you drink and even as you have cast the members of Christ into dungeons
and filthy holes; so shall you that join with the Priests, and the old Dragon
(their Master) against the Lords people be cast into the lake that burns for
ever, except you repent and turn from your wicked ways, and own the light of
Christ (in you) which reproves for sin and ungodliness, and will lead into
soberness and meekness (if you obey it) and to do unto all men as you would
they should do unto you, and to this pure light of Christ Jesus (in all your
consciences) which judges and reproves you in secret, when you do that which
is evil, unto this must you all bow and bend if ever you know peace with God,
or salvation from sin: and in vain do any expect salvation who are not turned
to the light of Christ (in them) which makes manifest sin in its first
appearance, and it does not only discover sin, but it also leads out of sin
all them that love it and obey it; and now all them that are not yet turned to
the light, they are in the darkness and in the alienation, and are strangers to
the light of righteousness; and these are them that hate, and persecute those
that do walk in the light (unto which they themselves are not joined) for
darkness cannot have any communion with light, but they that walk in the light
they have unity one with another, and they persecute none, neither envy they
any man, for the children of light never persecuted any but they were always
in all ages persecuted by Cains generation; and out of the same nature that was
in Cain (in which he slew his brother) does all the persecution arise from the
foundation of the world even unto this day; for there is but two generations
(to wit) the children of light and the children of darkness, and the children
of darkness always persecuted the children of light, and therefore look back
all ye persecutors, and see whose stock ye are of, and the witness of God in
you, will tell you that you are of Cains generation, whose offspring you are;
you are of Hamons seed whose envy was almost as great against the poor
scattered Jews, as yours is against the Quakers, yet the Lord he delivered them
out of his hand, and brought destruction upon their enemies, and the Lord he is
the same God as he was then, and as mighty in power as he was then, and he will
deliver his people out of their enemies hands, and will assuredly bring his
plagues and judgments upon all them that seek their ruin, as ever he did upon
Hammon, and the more you strive to overcome them, the more shall they increase
and flourish, for as the persecution does abound, so much the more their
consolation with Christ does abound, and the more abundantly is the power of
the Lord made manifest in them, and in it, they lie down in rest and peace, in
a quiet habitation, into which the unclean cannot come, for the power of the
Lord compasses them about, and in it they rest in safety and none can make
them afraid.

From him who is a^ one of the lest of the Lords servants is this written and
sent abroad among all people as a warning to them all, that they all repent and
turn to the Lord with speed, before the wrath of God breaks forth upon them;
for these things which are here declared, shall certainly fall upon all the
unrepented ones. Thomas Woodrove.

A Sallutation to the Children of light who are turned to the Lord especially
to them in Dorset-shire.
ALL you children of the light who are turned to the Lord, lift up your heads
and rejoice and be you bold and valient for the Lord and for his truth, and all
walk wisely and circumspectly in all times and in all places, that the name of
the Lord may be honored by you all, and all keep down to the pure, meek and
lowly principal in you all, and then shall you never want bread to feed upon,
nor water to drink, but your bread shall be sure, and your springs shall never
be dry, and your light shall always shine, and your sun shall never go down,
and your moon shall never be e^lipsed nor be hid, but the Lord will be your
everlasting light, your rock and your strong fortress, and the Lord God
Almighty, who is rich and large, and bountiful unto all his children that
hunger and thirst after him, he will crown you with strength and honor, as you
keep faithful unto him, and all the powers of darkness shall never prevail
against you, for the Lord is with us, and he is greater then all, and his power
rules over all, and he has the hearts of all men in his own hand, and he can
do with them as he pleases, and unto him all shall bow, and all the high Oaks,
and all the tall Cedars shall bend themselves; before the Lords pure presence,
who is now arisen for the redemption of his own seed: from under its grievous
oppression and cruel bondage, and now must that which has held (the Lords
seed) captive, go into captivity, and this is the mighty work that the Lord
has, and is bringing to pass, and therefore let all the living praise his name
for ever and ever, and all walk worthy of your calling whereunto the Lord has
called you, and all prize the Lords rich love toward you, in that he has
visited you, and made known the way of life and salvation unto you, and has in
a great measure redeemed you from the pollutions of this world, and from under
the chains of darkness, (under which you had long been bound) and has pulled
the feet of many out of the mire and clay, and has set them upon a rock where
they stand sure; O endless rich love! glory, glory, honor and praises be unto
thy name Lord God Omnipotent, for thou art worthy.

And all friends every where let not the gracious dealings of the Lord toward
you be forgoten, but let it be had, in a perpetual remembrance, and all walk
worthy of the Lords rich love and mercy toward you, and let not the name of
the Lord nor his truth be dishonored by any disorderly walking, but all keep
in the fear of God, and there the power of God you will feel, and in it be
preserved, but out of the fear of God, out of the power of God, so all dwell in
the fear of God, and here the power is known.

From him who is a Babe in Christ, or as one of the lest of all that have
believed, yet to the truth and all that live in it I know my love is not the
lest. T. W.
Written in the 3d. month 1659.
London, Printed in the 3d. month, for M. W. 1659.


