TO ALL PRESBITERIAN MINISTERS, Who own themselves to be MINISTERS of Christ's
GOSPEL, and say they Suffer Persecution for his Names sake, to Read and
Consider in this day, in which they may see themselves with the Light within,
and also measure themselves with their own Rule the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 9 14,
16. For necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is me if I Preach not the Gospel.
FRIENDS,
IT is in my Heart, and that in pure Love to your Souls, and to all theirs that
have long heard you, to ask you a few plain honest Questions, concerning your
Ministerial Office.

First, Whether your Ministry has been received of Man, and by Man upheld, or
from God and his pure unlimitted Spirit, and by him upheld? If you say of God,
and the Gospel ye have Preached all this while be not of Man, nor in man's Will
and Time received; then I query, Whether ye ought not to obey God rather than
Man, and follow his unlimitted Spirit in Preaching the Gospel of him received,
rather than to leave Preaching as ye do, when commanded by the Powers of the
Earth.

Again, If your Commission were received of God or Christ, as the true Prophets
and Ministers was of Old; then, Whether the same mind would not be in you as
was in Christ Jesus, and his true Ministers and Prophets; who when being
beaten, and after that straightly Charged and Commanded to Preach no more in the
Name of Jesus, Act. 4, and Acts 5. went straightway and spoke boldly in the
same Name, even all the Words of that Life? And now, whether all that do
observe your fearful and unbelieving Hearts, in being obedient to those
Commands and Precepts of men, even those Commands which you your selves say are
Unjust, and do oppose the Work of the Gospel of Christ, have not just cause to
believe that ye have not received your Power from on High, nor been with Jesus
as they had before mentioned; whose Boldness in the Lord became the confidence
of the Brethren, which had believed their report, who had no Arm of Flesh to
trust in (but only the Name and Arm of the Lord) as ye have sometimes had, when
in your Zeal which was not good, ye caused the Innocent Lambs and true
Ministers of Christ, to be shut up in Prisons until Death? This I charge not
upon all but upon some, yet let all consider the Righteousness of the Lord, who
rendereth unto every man according to his Deeds?

And now even all that fear God in any measure, are ready almost to question
the truth of your Ministry it self, seeing your Practices are so contrary to
the true Ministers, and also to the Scriptures which ye say is your Rule; read
it and see your selves, and measure your selves therewith, Acts 4. 17, 18, 20.
to the end, also Acts 5. 25. to the 41. And seeing almost all have turned from
their own Faith and Principle, for fear of Man that must die, or for love of
something that must perish or come to naught; and this does stagger many to see
such tall Cedars as you, now fallen so low, even you that seemed to be Pillars
in the Church, to bear so small a Testimony in a day wherein Iniquity does so
abound; many say you ought not to put your Candle under a Bushel, if lighted by
the Lord; and if that which ye have preached all this while, had been seen and
learned of Him, ye could not but speak it forth now; and also, that if for well
doing they should put you into Prison, it would be a Witness against them, and
a Testimony in their Hearts that you have wrought for God, and not for your
selves all this while; and then would you be no ways guilty of silencing your
selves, as now they judge you are; and then you would make it manifest that ye
live of the Gospel and its Maintenance, as the true Prophets and Ministers of
Christ did when all carnal Props and Helps were taken away.

Again I ask you, Whether it be the Way, or ever was of the true Ministers and
Keepers of Christ's Flock, when they see the Woolf come to devour the sheep and
tear the Lambs, then to go into a corner and be silent there as ye are, for
fear of him? Or, whether this be not rather the Way of the true Shepherds and
Ministers of Christ, to lay down their Lives for the Sheep, not with carnal
Weapons, as too many have done of late; but in appearing most eminently for
them with the Spiritual Weapons and Sword that proceeds out of the Lamb's
Mouth, when eminent Danger does nearest approach them? and whether Christ's
Words, John 10, to the 14. be not fulfilled by you, He that comes not in by
the Door, is a Thief and a Robber, and cares not for the Sheep?

Again, Whether this be not a good and suitable day for you to search and try
your selves in, and also the Ministry, of which, thousands with you have taken
part? Whether ye were sent out in your own Time, or in the Times and Wills of
some other Men like your selves, or in the Time and Will of God, which is
contrary to Man's Will and Time? and if ye say in the time and will of God,
then how is it that your time to Preach and to be silent also, is in man's time
and will, as your actions make manifest to be?

And lastly, If your Time be in the Father's hand, as the true Ministers was,
and your Speaking as the unlimitted Spirit gives you utterance, as theirs was,
Acts 2. and 4. Then whether the Spirit of the Father in any, whom he sends to
minister it, was ever subject to the Worlds Spirit in any of its Precepts and
Commands, contrary unto good Conscience, though in high Places and
Principallities of this World, yea or nay?

Staffordshire, the 21st. day of the 7th. Month, 1662. Humphry Woolrich.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.


