THE VVonder of Wonders, OR, A TRUE RELATION OF A Late Strange and Miraculous
Accident that happened to one that dyed in the Ship called, the Dunbar, who
after he had been buried one shore above five days, rise again, and standing
upright in his Grave, called to the Fleet with a shrill Voice at Noonday,
telling them the Events that should happen to all those ships that went toward
the Sound.

With the several Speeches made by him, to the wonderful astonishment and
admiration of diverse of the Fleet, who were both Hearers and Eyewitnesses, and
will justify the truth of this great Miracle.

With a great and strange Apparition of two Armies that appeared in the North
of England on Thursday last, with the exact manner of their engaging one
another at Noonday with the thundering noise hoth of great and small shot.

LONDON, Printed for J. Jones, Anno Dom. 1659.

THE VVONDER OF Wonders, BEING A true Relation of the wonderful rising again of
one (in the Ship called the Dunbar) who had been buried on shore above 5 days,
and stood upright in his Grave, and cried out with a shrill Voice, calling to
the Fleet several times.
THis being one of the strangest and most miraculous of all Wonders that has
happened in this our age, before I come to the matter of this much to be
admired accident, I shall instance two or three of the like nature very
pertinento the same.

Pliny writes in the Wars of the Danes, what signs and Wonders, what miserable
cries of men, clashing of Swords and Armor and neighing of horses were heard,
in so much that the same day that Caesar fought his battle with Pompeus the cry
of an Army, and the sound of Trumpets were head at Antioch in Syria. Diverse men
that were in the battle of Marathonia against the Medians affirmed that they
saw the soul of Theseus armed before the host of the Greeks as chief General
and Captain, running and setting on the Barbarous Medians, whom the Atherians
afterward for that cause only honored as a God.

Hector after he was slain by the hand of Achilles, appeared and desired him
not to throw his Carcass to be devoured by Dogs, but rather to deliver his
body to be buried. So Patrochus appearing in like manner after he was dead to
Achilles, desired, him to bestow upon his body all Funeral solemnityes.

Many such like visions we read of in the Scripture; But let us take notice of
the Athenians who presaged that when Miltiades joined in battle against the
Persians, hearing a terrible noise, and beholding certain Spirits before the
battle, to have Victory over the Persians, judging those sights and visions to
be the shadow of Pan.

Likewise the Lacedaemonians before they were vanquished in the battle of
Leuctris, their Armor clashed together, and made an exceeding great noise in
the Temple of Hercules, so that at that time the Temple of Hercules being fast
shut with Iron bars, opened suddenly of their own accord, and the Armor which
hung fastened before on the wall, was found on the ground.

But now to come to this strange and much to be admired appearance it self,
which was as follows, viz: The Fleet being now safely arrived from the Sound
into their desired Harbors where they lie in safety, and the Soldiers being
paid off, some who were in the ship called the Dunbar, do credibly report a
strange and wonderful accident which happened to one in that ship, who after
he was dead and buried on the shore above five days, he to their great
amazement rose again, and there stood upright in his Grave several days
together about Noontide, and cried out to the Fleet with a most shrill voice,
saying unto them, that they should take up his Corpse and bury him some where
else further from the shore, otherwise he should disturb and molest all
shipping that should come up that Road: upon which his doleful cries, some of
the Seamen of the Dunbar considering thereof; were commanded out and went on
shore, (after he was vanished again) and took up his Corpse, and buried it again
further in the Land, after which he was seen no more, to rise or disturb them
in the least with these dismal exclamations, for the further satisfaction of
the Incredulous, those that will not put confidence hereto may enquire of any
Seamen who were in that Vessel, who will maintain the truth thereof, and
de^lare the particulars more exactly being eyewitnesses of the same.

One thing more above the rest is also observable, That the party before he was
buried came also from the Grave into the room he died out of among the sick
men, a woman all in black walking before, and there told them by what token
they should know his Grave which was by the lying of a white Wond cross the
grave, the Seamen that went after his departure found the Wand according to
this direction.

In the next place I shall give you an account of as strange an appearance as
the former, which was thus, viz.

Another of the Ship called the Dunbar, being a shore in a Village where
several sick men of their Vessel lay, and he standing at a Window reading a
Book, was suddenly conveyed away out of the place, and being gone, several
persons missing him searched both Ditches and Wells, thinking he had made
himself away; but their long search proved to little purpose, for they could
never hear of him more; At the same time many were in the same room, but
neither saw nor heard the least noise or disturbance at his departure, or how
he went from thence, which seemed as miraculous to them as the former accident.

Now to the strange and wonderful appearance in the Air, which happened in
the North part of England, it being very true and apparent to the sight of
several spectators, I shall give you a brief account thereof, thus, viz.

On Thursday September. 7. in the afternoon there was seen at Markfield in
Leicestershire extraordinary flashes of lightning, which breaking from the
angry Clouds made way for the ensuing thunder, the claps whereof were terrible,
and continued ch^ding and roaring in the Air for the space of an hour: At every
silence and respite of the Thunder, the lightning during this dreadful storm
did break forth with great force: And the next voice of the Thunder was louder,
and more affrighting then that which was before; There were no showers of
rain, but at the last there was a most black and dreadful storm of Hail, and
instead of Hailstones there fell rattling down from the Air, Halberts, Swords,
and Daggers, which being taken up were found to be of the same nature, and to
be begotten of the same extremity of Cold as were the Hailstones, and after a
little time, both the sight and the fright which the sight brought with it, did
melt away at once.

Many of the Town of Markfield, and places adjacent were much amazed at this
prodigious spectacle, which to increase their wonder, was seconded by another
terrible noise in the Air, as if two great Armies had been on their march, and
advancing one against the other; The Canons were heard to play with importunate
fury, and the Muskets on both sides in repeated volleys did discharge their
choleric errands: During this encounter there were beheld many prodigious
eruptions of sire, which with great violence did fly in the Air, and running
lower, did tear in pieces many strong Houses, and laid great Trees on their
backs, which in an instance were plucked up by the roots. There was not far off
a Lime-kiln, on which some part of the tempest did fall with so great violence
that all the Lime was blown up in the Air, Just as in a high storm the waters
of the Sea are blown, when the winds and the waves do wrestle for supremacy.
This being done, that part of the fiery tempest which came so low, was seen by
all to take its course up the hill, where it vanished away, and was heard here
no more noise of it.

It is certified by several letters, that this Tempest at the first did appear
like a thick and rolling Smoke, and sometimes it would cast it self into a
great Circumference, like to a great wheel, or an Orb, not easy to be
compassed.

The like storm also happened in Derbyshire, and more particularly in Darby
Town, where although the Church stand upon an advantage of higher ground then
any other place, yet some part of of the Church yard and Church it self, has
been coverred by the insolence and usurpation of the waters, and the lower
parts of the Town being almost drowned, the Inhabitants are compelled to betake
themselves, and take their goods along with them into the upper rooms for their
present safety, diverse herds of Cattle have been destroyed by these inundations
both there and in other parts.

In Scotland also they have lately suffered very much and in very many places
by the late glut of rain, and immoderate weeping of the Clouds, which has
swelled the waters to so great a highth that about Leith the Mills are drowned,
and three thousand pounds will nor make good the loss, or repair the outrages,
which the violence of the inundations have committed there.

By these and other great Floods in diverse parts, whereby both harvest, and
Cattle have been carried away at once, all the hopes of the lamenting
husbandman is lost.

Saint Matthew witnesses, that Moses and Elias, after they were dead many
hundred years before Christ, yet they appeared bodily and ghostly in Mount
Tabor to Christ, where they spoke and communion together.

The soul of Lazarus did not only appear, as John says, but he came again both
soul and body in token of our rising again. But as the appearing of those
sights at Gods appointment were most true, so it is most absurd to give credit
that the souls of men after death do either by visions or by bodily appearance
show themselves: but the Devil is well beaten in experience of things, and
knows best how he may deceive the wisest, for he is subtle and crafty. If
the Mariner does know when storm and tempests arise, if the Physician judges
by the Urine the state and danger of the Patient, if the skilful Astronomer can
many years before exactly fortel the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, in fine, if
the soldier knows where the victory will happen, no marvel it is that the
Devil an old Soldier, can foreshew things to come, and make things apparent of
nothing.

Thus have several miraculous appearances been in all ages, which have produced
strange alterations, but the event of these time will make manifest.

FINIS.

