The Women's Petition, To the Right Honorable, his Excellency, the most Noble
and Victorious Lord General CROMWELL.
The humble Petition of many thousands of the poor enslaved, oppressed and
distressed Men and Women in this Land, who by these their subscribed
Representators, most humbly complaining,
Show,
THat the Norman Yoke of Bondage and Oppression is still continued upon this
Nation, by the impious, oppressive, delatory, and most chargeable practice of
the Law, and destructive Imprisonment of Men and Women for Debt, in the
several prisons, Goals, Counters, holes and Dungeons of Cruelty in this Land.

That prisons are none other then Sanctuaries and places of Freedom to all
unconscionable, rich, obstinate, and wilful Debtors; and most cruel
Slaughter-houses to all poor Debtors, that have nothing left to pay their
Creditors, or to Fee Lawyers and Goalers.

That the two Acts set forth for release of poor Debtors not worth five pounds,
are of little or no benefit to any hitherto; but rather are become a snare to
all that have reaped any benefit by them.

That the present intricate, delatory, chargeable, oppressive, endless practice
of the Law, is become an abettor, encouragement and prop to all Oppressors and
Defrauders, and an Egyptian reed and discouragement to most men; but in
especial to all the poor: who thereby are utterly disabled and disheartened from
suing for their Debts, Rights, and Inheritances, violently held from them by
the rich and mighty: And if at any time (by the Law) their Debts and Rights are
seemingly recovered, yet then their able Debtors have freedom (by the Law, and
strength of their purses) to vacate Judgments, to Arrest and Imprison their
poor Creditors upon false and fained Actions (for many years) thereby enforcing
some of them to compound with them at their own rates; others of them to perish
miserably in Goals, and so to lose both their-Debts and Lives; whereby their
Wives and Children are exposed to unexpressible misery; besides the many other
unexpressible oppressions daily practiced by the Rich and Mighty, on poor and
simple hearted Men and Women in this Land, by Sons of Belial.

What shall we say? Our hope is even departed, and our expectation of Freedom
(the fruits of our blood shed, and expense of our estates) is removed far away;
yea, the hope of our Liberty is cut off like a Weavers thrumb. We have for many
years (but in especial since 1647.) chattered like Cranes, and mourned like
Doves; yea, with many sighs and tears have we presented our several complaints
against God's and our enemies; but are hitherto so far from gaining redress, as
that our eyes behold them still exalted to bear Rule over us; and thus for
felicity, we reap bitter grief; for freedom, slavery; for true judgment,
justice and mercy, injustice tyranny and oppression; because the Head of
Tyranny being cut off in 1648 (was expected to die, and be dead) still lives
in and by his ordained members of Injustice and Oppression; and the Norman Laws
of the Oppressors still bear Dominion over us.

Thus are we covered with Wrath, and persecuted, oppressed and destroyed by
Cruelty: These our enemies have opened their mouths wide against us; fear and
the snare of slavery has taken hold of us; unless Your Excellency (into whose
hand the sword is put for that very end and purpose) as a faithful Joshua in
the zeal of Nehemiah, stand up for us in the gap, and make up the breach; by
ca^^^^g do^n the strong holds of Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression; and
building up the righteous Lovers of true Judgem^n^, ^u^^^ce and Mercy.

So (...), Then shall this great Nation have cause to (...) God in You, and
praise God for You their great and faithful Captain, and Deliverer from
Oppression and Slavery; and shall esteem Your Name and Memory (as already bound
for the manifold deliverances the Lord has wrought by You for us, in especial
that at Worcester, never to be forgotten as a most precious Balsome pou^ed
forth on all the Land; whose odoriferous perfume and blessed operation extends
it self to the expelling of the poisonous maladies of Injustice* Tyranny, and
Oppression; and to the advance of God's glory in true Judgment, Justice, and
Mercy, and Restoration of this Nations fundamental Laws, Rights and Liberties.

The premises piously considered, and for that the other weighty affairs of
this Land will not permit the speedy accomplishment of these particulars (by
Your Excellency) as Your petitioners humbly conceive, in gaining a new
Representative; from which Lawyers, and all ill affected persons to be excluded.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray, That in the mean time there may be
such a course established, as that the Poor may by some easy and speedy way
reap the fruit of Justice, and that their Persons may be acquitted from
continual vexatious and destructive Arrests and Imprisonment; by such a way as
Your Excellency (in that portion of Wisdom assigned You) shall think meet.

In expectation whereof, Your Petitioners and Subscribers do in all humility
remain, and for the accomplishment whereof,

Your Excellencies most humbly and faithfully devoted Servants and Handmaids
shall ever pray. etc. E. Bassfield, E. Cole.

THis Petition was presented on Monday the 27th of October, 1651. by K. Frese,
D. Trinhale,



