THE Wonderful Deliverance AT SEA: OR, The miraculous Preservation of several
Persons belonging to the Ship called WILLIAM and DOROTHY, lately cast away in a
Voyage to NEW CASTLE.

Who by a most Gracious Providence were kept alive for the space of Twelve Days
and Nights without any Food, in a Small Boat, on the Main Sea: In all which
time, only one Child Perished, being Starved to Death with Cold and Hunger,
and the rest were at last taken up, and carried into Holland On the 28th. of
November Last.

And Several of them are now safely arrived in ENGLAND.

With Allowance, Roger L'Estrange.

Printed for Benjamin Pier^^.

The Wonderful Deliverance at SEA.
IT is an Observation in sacred Scripture, That those that go down to the Sea
in ships see the wonders of the Lord in the deep; which was fully made good in
this miraculous deliverance, that we are here to relate; which happened but the
very last month in our own Seas, and to persons of our own Nation.

IN the second Week of the month of November last past, a small Vessel called
the William and Dorothy, fell down out of the River intending to steer along
the Coasts to New Castle, having on board of Seamen and Passengers about five
and twenty persons; They sailed with a fair wind and good weather till they
came off of Flamborough-Head (a small Promontory in Yorkshire) where being
surprised with a storm, they were driven out to Sea, and the rough (...) among
them, chewing of it in their mouths, which (providence so ordering of it)
nourished them so as to preserve their lives, but continuing floating up and
down thus eight days and Nights, the poor Child starved with cold and hunger;
upon which a great dispute arose amongst them whether they should not devour
its raw flesh being in that excessive exigency; but at last the entreaties of
its Mother, and considerations of humanity prevailed so far with 'um as to
suffer it to be flung over board to be buried in the vast abiss of Waters.

It would be easy here to draw Tears from every compassionate Readers eyes by
a pathetical description of these poor forlorn Wretches condition, but indeed
Words are too little to express it to the Life, and we must leave it to his
imagination to draw a true Idea of their misery, which none can fully do, but
such as are sensible by experience of the tormenting effects of Famine, and a
prospect of Inevitable Death continually before their eyes, and have themselves
born a share in some such like grievous calamity. It may sound like a Romantic
action, but it is a most serious and well known Truth that they continued
driving forwards and backwards as the wind shifted its points, in this manner
for the space of eight days longer. And it cannot be denied, that nothing but
the special and extraordinary providence of Heaven could have so long preserved
them, that they were not overturned by the Winds, s^allowed up by the Waves, or
dashed to pieces against Rocks, or at least that they were not utterly pined
and famished for want of ^ood is next to a miracle if we may not truly count it
one: but that overruling power that stills the rageing of the Sea, and bounds
it at his pleasure, was graciously pleased to hear their cry, to support
languishing nature even against hope, and calm the Ocean for their safety.

Insomuch that after eight days fluctuation they were cast upon the Coast of
Holland, and driven ashore on the Isle, where the inhabitants seeing so small a
Boat come off from Sea, with persons in it, concluding them to be the remnants
of some wrack, charitably went down to receive them; they were all exceeding
weak, not able at first to speak or go; but being taken in by the people, and
put into warm Beds, and supplied with Cordials to restore their spirits, they
in short time recovered, and related all the particulars of their distress in
manner aforesaid; and from thence after some space of refreshing were carried
in a ship to Harlingen, and so came to Rotterdam, where the young man
continues, but the three women took the opportunity of a Vessel bound for
Scotland, to go thither, being of that Nation; and the old man came over to
England in the Pacquet-Boat; and does with much thanksgiving relate Gods
Wonderful Mercy in this great and miraculous deliverance.

As for the rest of their ships crew, which were taken up before by the
Dutch-Caper, they were set on shore in Lincolnshire, and diverse of them were
several days ago arrived at London, confidently reporting these five persons to
have been cast away, as they had all the reason in the world to imagine, till
the sight of the old man convinced them of that mistake.

Thus may we from this certain Relation take occasion to magnify the Lord for
his mercies, and learn to put all our trust in the Arm of his might, when
surrounded with the greatest straights and distresses; when Art is baffled, and
nature finks, and the spirits faint, and hope it self dispairs, then can he
command relief and deliverance. Oh! who would not trust in so great a God? who
would not love and adore so good a God?

FINIS.

