LONDON, Anno Dom. 1647. A Brief DECLARATION of those that have accepted the
Trust of Receiving and Distributing such Sums of money as well-affected Persons
shall Subscribe toward the Maintenance of hopeful STUDENTS at both the
UNIVERSITIES, for the speedy supply of the Church of GOD in England with godly
and able Ministers. Together with RULES which they among themselves have agreed
to observe therein; and some Motives to incite well-affected Persons to be
assistant thereunto.
THE mature and serious consideration of the present sad condition of the
Church of GOD within this Kingdom, has put us (whose Names are hereunto
annexed) upon a joint Debate and Consultation, both touching the Causes of it is
Misery, and the proper Means of Remedy.

For the first; We find, that the scarcity of a Godly, Learned, and Orthodox
MINISTRY, is one great cause of the woeful Ignorance, Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, and Profaneness spreading and abounding throughout the Kingdom, to
the dishonor of God, reproach of the Gospel, hinderance of the happy work of
Reformation, and hazard of the eternal loss of many thousand precious Souls.
And we perceive how improbable it is that the want of such a Ministry should
in any reasonable time be competently supplied in those many Congregations that
are for present destitute, unless some extraordinary course be speedily taken:
Being certainly informed that there are many hopeful young Students already in
the University of Cambridge, disabled to continue there any longer; and many
pregnant and hopeful Scholars ready for the Universities, discouraged and
hindered from going thither; through lack of maintenance toward their
subsistence there, whose Parents are either destroyed by these unnatural Wars,
or miserably impoverished and undone by want of Trading, heavy Taxes,
Free Quarter, Plunderings, and such other Calamities as these sad Times have
produced.

And as touching the second; We conceive, that one of the most speedy, proper,
and probable Remedies against this evil (next unto the care of providing for
those who are there already) will be, forthwith to replenish both the
Universities with store of hopeful and promising Plants, addicted to Learning
and Piety; and to supply them there for a convenient season with some necessary
maintenance: whereby Learning may be encouraged; Knowledge, Piety, and all
Church-Reformation promoted; and a Generation trained up, who (through the
blessing of our God) may become Pastors according to Gods own heart, to feed
the Sheep and Lambs of Christ with knowledge and understanding.

Whereupon we have thought it our duty, not only to do something our selves to
this excellent End; but also to commend so good a Work as this is, to all those
in and about LONDON or elsewhere, whose hearts the Lord shall incline to the
furtherance thereof, by a free and voluntary Subscription of several Sums of
money, to be paid in (either at one or more entire Payments, Yearly or
Quarterly, as shall seem best to the Vnderwriters) unto such Treasurers as are
herein named, and shall from time to time be appointed by the Trustees (or
seven of them at least, viz. one Alderman, two Ministers, and four Commoners)
by whose consent and advice the said Treasurers may still issue out the same to
the End above propounded. Wherein also these Rules shall be observed.

I. THis Charity shall be extended to such Students or Scholars only, as by
reason of their Religious education, pregnant Natural parts and Learning,
inclinablenesse to Piety and to the calling of the Ministry, are hopeful to
prove able and fit Instruments for advancing Gods glory, and his Churches good.

II. Care shall be had, that none of this Money shall be conferred upon any,
but such only whose Parents and Friends are in whole or in part disabled to
send them to the Universities, or maintain them there: And that more or less
shall be allowed to every one, according to the proportion of their wants and
necessities respectively who shall receive it.

III. Overseers shall be appointed to have an eye to, and enquire after their
carriage in the Universities; and if it shall be found either idle, or
offensive, and after admonition not reformed, the Exhibition allowed to such
person or persons so delinquent, shall be withdrawn.

IV. The Exhibition allowed to any one shall only so long be continued, till he
shall be judged, by the Trustees, or (seven of them at least, as abovesaid) to
be competently fit for the service of the Church, or be otherwise provided for.

V. Six of the Trustees, viz. Two Aldermen and Four Commoners, shall be
Treasurers to Receive and Disburse such sum or sums of money as shall be
subscribed. Whereof three shall be New chosen every Year by the Trustees, on
the 25. day of March, or within 14. days after. The Treasurers at present
elected and appointed, are James Bunce Alderman. George Witham Alderman.
Christopher Pack Deputy. Walter Boothby Deputy. Mr. Alexander Jones and Mr.
Daniel Androwes.

VI. The Treasurers that now are, or shall hereafter be chosen, may not admit
any person or persons whatsoever to partake any of the said Contribution or
Exhibition, without the advice and approbation of the Trustees, or seven of
them as before; and that declared in writing under their hands at a Public
meeting, and Recorded. And there the Treasurers shall be accountable four times
at least in every Year, both touching their Receipts, and their Disbursments:
And to that end shall have Books of Accounts to be faithfully kept for the
satisfaction of the Trustees and Others as often as need shall require.

VII. Whenever it shall fall out that any of the Forty Trustees shall die, or
remove his habitation out of the City of London; The rest of the Trustees
surviving or remaining, or the major part of them, shall meet together and
elect another in his place, from time to time: And diligent heed shall be
taken, that such Persons only may be chosen, as are apprehended to be men of
active, faithful, public, and unanimous spirits; Men of sound Judgment, and
godly Conversation, cordially affected to the Church, and to a thorough
Reformation.

And for the better encouragement of all well-affected persons to so good and
necessary a work, We offer to their prudent and pious thoughts these ensuing
Considerations.
1. Acts of charity and bounty, though but to the outward man, are an odor of
a sweet smell to God, and such sacrifices wherewith he is well pleased, having
many precious promises entailed upon them: How much more sweet and acceptable
to God shall those acts of charity be, which tend to the relief of Souls, and
may have influence into Eternity!

2. Hereby a learned and godly Ministry will be speedily prepared, for the
many thousand Congregations in this Kingdom now destitute thereof: whereupon,
Gods glory will be advanced; his Truth and Gospel dispersed; Ignorance, Heresy
and Impiety extirpated; the life of Religion and Reformation increased; the
Church of God built; and multitudes of poor Souls that sit in darkness and
shadow of death, furthered in their way to Heaven, both at present and
i^cceeding Ages.

3. Hereby the subtle devices of Satan, strongly working in these days, to
overthrow Truth, Godliness, Reformation, the Kingdom of Christ, and all the
Churches happiness at once (by the extirpation and subversion of the godly and
learned Ministry) shall be countermined and disappointed, whilst through Gods
blessing upon these our endeavors an able Ministry is set up and increased.

4. These days of Reformation promise to us, that young Students in both the
Universities shall be more religiously trained up there, and also better
provided for when they return thence, then in former times they have been;
which consideration may much encourage us.

5. The honor and credit of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, whereof England has
had so long, sweet, and full enjoyment, should much incite our zeal to count no
worldly treasures dear unto us, that we may support the same in its Spiritual
glory, and so propagate it to Posterity. Did our Predecessors sacrifice their
lives for the Truth, and shall we grudge a small pittance of our estates for
the furtherance thereof? Yea, shall Papists be so bountiful to maintain
Superstition; Heretieks, to advance and propagate their blasphemous Heresies;
and the very Heathens to uphold their vanities; And shall not we much more be
open-hearted and open-handed to advance the true Reformed Religion?

6. How famous has LONDON been in former times, for erecting and maintaining
Lectures in the dark corners of this Land? How active of late, in adhering to,
and in adventuring their All in this great Cause of GOD? And how will it add
to their honor, peace and comfort, to be exemplary in this so good a work
also? Who knows, but such an example of Zeal and Piety may have an influence
upon other Cities and rich places of this Kingdom, to stir up their imitation
of them herein; which may cause exceeding many thanksgivings to God, both in
the present and succeeding Generations.

7. Finally, it is clearly evident upon manifold experience, That as poor men's
sons for most part do more seriously devote themselves to learning then others
do: So God has pleased not only to open men's hearts by charitable
contributions to encourage their studies, but also to make much use of them in
the work of the Ministry within this Kingdom, and that in the worst of times,
for Conversion of Souls, edification of his Church and advancement of the glory
of his own most holy name.

The names of the TRUSTEES.
Sir John Wollaston Alder. Tho. Adams Alder. John Warner Alder. Jo. Langham
Alder. James Bunce Alder. Tho. Foot Alder. Jo. Kendrick Alder. John Bide Alder.
George Witham Alder. Tho. Vyner Alder. Mr. Steph. Marshal. Mr. Edm. Calamy. Mr.
Jer. Whitaker. Mr. Obad. Sedgwick. Mr. Sim. Ash. Mr. Thomas Case. Mr. Laz.
Seaman. Mr. Sam. Clark. Mr. Fran. Roberts. Mr. Will. Jenkin. Col. Fran. West.
Mr. Rich. Turner Deputy. Mr. Christoph. Pack. Dep. Mr. Walt. Boothby Dep. Mr.
Tho. Arnold Dep. Col. Rob. Manwaring. Col. Edw. Hooker. Col. John Bellamie. L.
Col. Lawr. Broomfield. Mr. Alex. Jones. Mr. Andr. Kenrick. Capt. Rich. Vennour.
Major Joseph Vaughan. Mr. Steph. White. Mr. James Martin. Mr. William Kendal.
Mr. Dan. Androwes. Mr. Tho. Bewley. Mr. Temp. Milner. Mr. Lawr. Brinley.



