JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH: OR, A CONFUTATION Of that ANTINOMIAN ERROR, That
Justification is before Faith;

BEING The SUM and SUBSTANCE Of a SERMON Preached at SARUM;

By Benjamin Woodbridge, Minister of Newberry in BARKSHIRE.

May 26. 1652.
Imprimatur, Edmund Calamy.

GAL. 3. 16. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by
the Faith of Christ. London, Printed by John Field for Edmund Paxton, and are
to be sold at his Shop in Pauls-Chain, over against the Castle-Tavern, near to
the Doctors Commons. 1652.

Christian Reader,
THe Doctrine of the Gospel concerning the Justification of a believing Sinner
(because it exceedingly illustrates the glorious riches of Gods free Grace, and
magnifies his Justice, because it is the only support of comfort to a wounded
conscience, and takes away from man the cause of boastings, and is so much
above the invention and credulity of reason) is most plainly delivered, and
often inculcated by the holy Ghost in Scripture, in that we learn all the
causes of Justification. The efficient Romans 3. 24, 25. 26.
God; The inwardly movings, his rich mercy, great love; The meritorious Jesus
Christ; The material, the obedience of Christ; The formal, the imputation of
Righteousness without Works; The instrumental, by which it is received Faith;
The final, the glory of the grace of God, and the salvation of the believing
sinner.

This Doctrine has in all ages been opposed, obscured, sometimes by manifest
enemies, and that (...) professedly, sometimes by professed friends, and such
as would be accounted the great pleaders for free Grace.

What errors Papists, Socinians, Arminians, err in this weighty Doctrine, I
relate not; This short and learned discourse which thou art presented with,
deals not with these, but with Antinomian Error.

It is a true observation of godly Mr. Shepherd, Mark Sound believer p. 96.
those men that deny the use of the Law to lead unto Christ, if they do not
fall in time to oppose some main point of the Gospel: For it is a righteous
thing, but a heavy plague, for the Lord to suffer such men to obscure the
Gospel, that in their judgments zealously dislike the use of the Law: This
thing these men have done, asserting That all the elect before their Conversion
and Faith, stand actually reconciled to God, and justified before him: A
strange Assertion (as reverend Dr. Downam rightly terms it) to be uttered by a
godly man. Covenant of Grace. p. 292.


This is the Opinion in this Treatise confuted, and proved contradictory to
Scripture, fit only 1. To sew pillows under the elbows of profane men: 2. To
overthrow the comfort of Believers, destroying the ground, nature, use and end
of Faith.

Curcellaeus judges the differences amongst Christians Prefat. in op. Episcopij.
in this Point of Justification, of so small concernment, as that they ought
not to breed a controversy: But Reader, When the glory of God and comfort of
thy soul lies at stake (as in these matters) do not thou think either that men
wrangle about a Goats wool, or that the matter does not concern thee.

Thou art beholding to the learned Author for the penning of this Tract; but
for the publishing of it, to another, into whose hands it came: That thou
may read it and weigh it without prejudice, and profit by it, is the Prayer
of

James Cranford.

Justification by Faith.
Worthy Sir,
ACcording to your desire and my own promise, I here send you the Copy of the
Sermon which I Preached lately at Salisbury, against the Opinion so much
prevailing amongst you, of Justification before Faith: I have made several
additions to several Arguments, and annexed a large Answer to the two Arguments
which Mr. Air made use of against me, after the Sermon was ended. The
Introduction to the Text, and the Applicatory part of the Sermon, I shall not
trouble you with, but only with that which is Doctrinal and Controversal.

HAving then read those words in Romans 5. 1. The Point observed was this, That
we are justified by Faith.

To write down all the places that give evidence to this truth, were to
Transcribe almost the whole New Testament, Gal. 2. 16. We have believed in
Jesus Christ, that we may be justified by the Faith of Christ, where
Justification is expressly made a consequent of Faith: And as Glory follows
Justification, so does Justification follow Vocation unto Faith, Romans 8. 30.
and Righteousness (says the Apostle) shall be imputed unto us if we believe,
Romans 4. 24. so Acts 10. 43. and 13. 39. and 26. 18. with multitudes of other
places.

The only Answer which is given to these and the like Texts, is this, That by
Justification we are to understand, a Justification in the Court of Conscience,
or the Evidence and Declaration of a Justification already past before God; so
that Faith is said to justify us, not because it does justify us before God,
but because it does declare to our Consciences that we are justified: Against
which Gloss I have several things to oppose.

1. That it is a contradiction of the Holy Ghost: It is well known that the
Apostle, in the Epistle to the Romans and to the Galatians, sets himself on
purpose to assert the Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in opposition to
Works: The question between him and the Jews was not, Whether we were declared
to be justified by Faith or Works; but, Whether we were justified by Faith or
Works in the sight of God, or before God; and he concludes that it is by Faith
and not by Works: Thus Romans 3. 20, 21. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there
shall no flesh be justified (in his sight) But now the righteousness of God
without the law is manifested; etc. The righteousness of God without the Law,
is the righteousness of Faith; and by this we are Justified in the sight of
God, and not by the deeds of the Law. Again, Gal. 3. 11. But that no man is
justified by the Law (in the sight of God) it is evident, For the just shall
live by Faith; where the Argument is clearly this: If we are justified by Faith
in the sight of God, then we are not justified by Works in the sight of God:
But we are justified by Faith in the sight of God, For the Just shall live by
Faith: Ergo, not by Works: From which places we may safely infer, that where
else the Apostle speaks of Justification by Faith in opposition to
Justification by Works, he is to be understood of Justification before God, or
in the sight of God, and not only of Justification in our own Consciences.

2. It is also a most unsound assertion, that Faith does Evidence our
Justification before Faith: The word (Evidence) may be taken improperly, as
signifying no more then an Argument; and so Faith may be said to Evidence
Justification, as an effect does argue the cause: As laughing and crying may be
said to evidence reason in a child, not that it is necessary they should
evidence it to the child it self, or to any body else; but because they are
Arguments affected to prove, that Reason must be where they are: If Mr. Air
will say that Faith does evidence Justification after this manner; then 1.
Justification by Faith is not necessarily so much as a Justification in
Conscience; for as a child may laugh and cry (actions that will argue reason
in the subject where they are) and yet not have the evidence or clear knowledge
that himself has reason; so may it be supposed, that a Christian may have
Faith (which will argue Justification) and yet not have the evidence that
himself is justified: We know by daily experience, that many Christians have
that in them, which if it were rightly understood, would prove that they are
justified; whiles yet they want the evidence of this Justification within
themselves, their consciences for long time together accusing and condemning
them, whiles there is ground and reason that they should excuse and absolve
them. 2. If Faith evidence Justification as an effect of it, then may we as
truly be Faithed by our Justification, as to be justified by our Faith, and we
must invert the order of the Gospel; and instead of saying, Believe and thou
shall be justified; we must say henceforward, Thou art justified, therefore
believe. 3. It will unavoidably follow that we are justified by Works as well
as by Faith; forasmuch as our Adversaries themselves I think will not deny,
that works are an effect of their supposed Justification as well as Faith: I am
sure Christ redeemed us, that we should be Zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. 14.
And whether these works be the first effect or the second, and by consequence
the first evidence or the second, is not at all material in this case; because
the Apostle, when he denis Justification by Works, he excludes Works
altogether, To. 3. 28. and 4. 5.

But I suppose this is not Mr. Eyre's meaning; the word (Evidence) therefore
may be taken more properly, and so Faith may be said to evidence our
Justification, either Immediately and Axiomatically, or Remotely and
Syllogistically. Faith does evidence Exiomatically, as it is an assent to the
truth of a Divine Testimony, concerning such or such a thing: Thus the Apostle
says, that Faith does evidence to us, That the world was framed by the word of
God, Heb. 11. 1, 3. to wit, as it is a firm assent to the Divine Testimony of
Scripture, That God made the Heavens and the Earth. And thus Faith must be said
to evidence Justification Axiomatically, as it is an assent to this
Proposition, I am justified: But thus Faith cannot evidence Justification. For
first, There is no such thing written, Ergo, it cannot be evidenced by Faith
immediately; Where does the Scripture say, Thou Paul, or thou Peter, or thou
Thomas art justified? And where there is no Divine Testimony, there can be
neither Object nor Evidence of Divine Faith. It is the carnal, presumptuous,
damning Faith of the world, to believe that they are justified by an
Axiomatical assent, though they do not come within the compass of any general
Truth or Promise, from which they may infer such a particular conclusion. 2.
The Faith by which we are justified, is the Faith which the Apostles and
Ministers of the Gospel are to preach to the whole world, and to press upon
their Consciences, Acts 20. 21. and 13. 38, 39. But we cannot press it upon
every man in the world to believe that he is justified, and that if he does not
believe this, he shall be damned, unless we should press men to believe a lie:
of all men Mr. Air cannot do it, unless he would persuade men to believe
himself to have Preached falsehoods in all the Sermons which he has formerly
made against the avouchers of Universal Redemption; Ergo, Faith does not
evidence Justification Axiomatically.

Nor yet can it evidence our Justification Syllogistically: Such a
Syllogistical Evidence, is the Evidence of a particular Conclusion, drawn out
of some general Proposition by the discourse of Conscience, in which way a
Believer does evidence his justification, by the discourse of his Conscience
after this or the like manner: He that believes, is justified. But (says the
Conscience) I believe: Therefore (says the same Conscience) I am justified.
The two first Propositions of which Syllogism (which they call the major and
minor) must first be evidenced, before Faith can bring in the main Evidence
which lays in the conclusion: I affirm then, That it is impossible for a man by
Faith, to evidence Syllogistically that he is justified before Faith, because
there cannot be found out a Medium before Faith it self, that will agree with
both parts of the Question, and so there will be always wanting a major or
minor, and the conclusion (in which lies the strength of the Evidence) cannot
follow: For all particular Conclusions of personal Justification, must be drawn
out of some general Promise or Proposition which Faith does first assent to and
evidence, before it can bring in the Conclusion; which universal Proposition
must contain that sort or kind of persons, of whom Justification may be
affirmed: But there is no sort or kind of persons of whom Justification may be
affirmed Universally, but only such as do believe, which I prove thus; All the
world is distributed into Believers and Unbelievers, Mark 16. 15, 16. John 3.
17, 18. But Justification cannot be affirmed of Unbelievers universally; Would
it not be accounted a mad evidencing of Justification by Faith, to argue thus,
All Unbelievers are justified: But I am an Unbeliever, Ergo, I am justified?
where the major is false confestly; and the minor also must needs be false,
because he is supposed to be a Believer that makes the Syllogism, and therefore
the conclusion must run mad: And if Faith can only evidence that he that
believes is justified, then can it not evidence any Justification before
Believing.

Peradventure it may be said (which only can be said) That Faith may evidence
Justification Syllogistically, thus, All the elect are justified: But (says a
Believers Conscience) I am elect, Ergo, (says the same Conscience) I am
justified: To which I might answer, That the major is utterly false; but
because that is the Question, I meddle not with it. To the minor I answer by
denying it, Because we speak not now of what is true in it self (in which sense
I acknowledge it to be true, that he that believes is elected) but of what is
truly evidenced by Faith; and Faith cannot truly evidence Election before it
has evidenced Justification: For I renew the same Argument thus, Faith does
evidence Election Axiomatically or Syllogistically; not Axiomatically, for the
Scriptures no where speak to particular persons, Thou Peter or Thomas, etc. art
Elected: If Syllogistically, then either by something before Election, or by
the consequences and effects of it. Before Election there is nothing to
evidence it by; and if Faith must evidence it by its effects, then it
evidenceth Justification before Election, because Justification is one of the
effects of Election. In the mean time, what a miserable circle is the poor
restless doubting soul conjured into, through the want of its Evidence, and
knows not where to find it! his Faith must first evidence his Justification by
his Election, and then it must evidence his Election by his Justification, till
in the issue this new Gospel leave him without all Evidence of Eternal Life.

2. But the very truth is, it is not Faith which does evidence Syllogistically,
and it is most absurd to say we are justified by Faith, because Faith does
evidence our Justification Syllogistically; let the Argument be this, If we are
said to be justified* by Faith, because Faith does evidence Justification
Syllogistically, then we may be said to be justified by sense and reason, as
well as by Faith, which is absurd: The reason is, because sense and reason
concur with Faith in a Syllogistical evidence; for clearing of which, let us
again set before us the former Syllogism, He that believes is justified; But I
believe, Therefore I am justified: The major only is the assent or act of
Faith: The Assumption, an act of sense or spiritual Experience: The Conclusion,
an act of Reason, That he that believes is justified; this Faith does evidence:
That I believe, is evidenced to me by mine own Spiritual Experience: That
therefore I am justified, is the evidence of reason, inferring the Conclusion
out of the premises; wherefore Faith must be said to justify in some other
respect, then that it does evidence Justification, or else we cannot be said to
be justified by Faith at all.

A third Argument to prove that the Justification by Faith is not merely a
Justification in our Consciences, is this.

That Interpretation of the Phrase which makes us, at least concurrent causes
with God, in the formal act of our own Justification, is not true: The reason
is, because our Justification by Faith in regard of the formal act of
pronouncing us just, is in Scripture attributed wholly unto God: It is God that
justifies, Romans 8. 33. that imputes Righteousness, Romans 4. 6, 8. We do no
more justify our selves then we glorify our selves: It is God alone does
both, and we are passive in both, Romans 8. 30.

But to interpret our justification by Faith, merely for a justification in our
own Conscienes, is to make us (at least) concurrent causes with God, in the
formal act of our own Justification; This is so clear that it needs no proof:
For us to be justified in our own Consciences, what is it, but for our own
Consciences to pronounce us just? and what is this but for our selves to
justify our selves? And so our Justification by Faith is not Gods act only,
but our own also in part: It is true that the Spirit of God does justify us in
our own Consciences, but not without the concurrent testimony and justification
of our Consciences: The Spirit ((...)) bears witness (not to our Spirits,
but) with our Spirits; verily if our hearts condemn us, we can have no evidence
nor assurance before God, 1 John 3. 19, 20, 21.

You know what was here excepted, viz. That if we were altogether passive in
being justified, then we are justified before we believe: An Exception so
childish, That if all Error were not a piece of witchery, I should wonder it
should proceed out of that mouth. To believe, is indeed a formal vital act of
the soul, in genere physico; but the use of it in Justification, is to qualify
us passively, that we may be morally and orderly capable of being justified by
another, even by God, the great Judge of life and death: Will any sober man
impute to us, that because we maintain Justification by Faith in this sense,
therefore we set up our selves as Judges together with God of our own souls? or
that we have therefore a joint concurrence with him, in making that gracious
Law, by and according to which we are justified, or in pronouncing a sentence
of Absolution upon our selves? He would be thought more worthy to be derided
then disputed with, that should infer, Because some Offenders against our Laws
are not capable of Pardon, unless they can read the Book; therefore he that
reads, must needs be one of the State in making that Law, or a Judge with his
Judge in absolving himself according to that Law: If a Magistrate grant a
pardon to an Offender upon condition that he accept it, his acceptance is
indeed his own act; yet in a Moral consideration, it is only a passive
condition making him capable of being pardoned according to the Magistrates
will (though a man have in himself more ability to read and accept of a Pardon,
then a sinner has to believe) and no man (I trow) will say that by his
acceptance, he is a concurrent cause in the formal act of his own Absolution:
In like manner we say, we are not social causes with God, either in making the
law of Grace, or in pronouncing our selves just according to that law (and
therefore Justification by Faith, cannot be only justification in Conscience)
yet Faith is required on our part, which, though Physically it be an act, yet
morally it is but a passive condition, by which we are made capable of being
justified, according to the order and constitution of God: It is God that
glorifies us, and not we our selves, yet surely God does not glorify us before
we believe.

I shall add but one thing more, which I wish may be seriously considered: If
justification by Faith must be understood of justification in our Consciences,
then is not the word Justification taken properly, for a justification before
God, in all the Scriptures, from the beginning to the end; We read of no
justification in Scripture but by Faith or Works; when the Scriptures speak of
justification by Works, Mr. Air says it must be understood of a justification
before men; when it speaks of justification by Faith, he says in like manner, it
must be understood of a justification before our own Consciences, and neither
of these the justification before God, and verily, neither of them of much
worth in the Apostles judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. And yet of any other
justification before God, which is neither of these two, we do not read in all
the Scripture; The Antinomians may read their eyes out before they produce us
one Text for it: And what a most incredible thing is it, that a word so often
used, should never be read in its most natural and true signification? and that
so glorious a Blessing as Justification before God, should never be mentioned
by its own name in all the Bible? yea verily, the whole comfort of this
inestimable Blessing will be utterly taken from us; for if the Scripture does
not say that any man is justified before God, then no man's Faith can evidence
to him that he is justified before God: And if justification by Faith be not
justification before God, then is there no justification before God for any man
living promised in Scripture: peradventure they may grant that Justification in
this or that place is meant of justification before God; but their grant does
neither make nor mar, if the evidence of the Text do not compel and convince
the understanding.

Having thus cleared the coast of this Exception, which for ought I can see is
the only Obstruction in the way; I pass on to propound some Arguments, by
which it may be proved, That we are justified by Faith in the sight of God, and
not before.

The first is drawn from the nature of Justification, which is an Absolution of
a Sinner from Condemnation, by that gracious Sentence and signal Promise in the
Gospel, He that believes shall not enter into condemnation: We are not to
conceive of Justification as an internal immanent act of God, resolving
privately in his own breast, not to prosecute his right against a Sinner; but it
must be some declared, promulged act, which may be our legal discharge from the
accusation and condemnation of the Law; for as sin is not imputed where there
is no Law, Romans 5. 13. so neither is Righteousness imputed without Law. And as
our condemnation is no secret act or resolution of God to condemn, but the very
voice and sentence of the Law, Cursed is he that sins (and therefore he whom
God in his eternal Decree has purposed to save, may yet for the present be
under the sentence of condemnation, as the Ephesians, whom God had chosen to
eternal Life, Ephesians. 1. 4. were yet sometimes the children of Wrath, chap. 2. 3.)
so on the contrary, our Justification must be some declared, promulged act or
sentence of God, which may stand good in Law, for the discharge of the sinner
from condemnation. Indeed to our private forgiveness one of another, it being
merely an act of Charity, there is no more required, then a Resolution within
our selves to lay aside our thoughts of revenge, and not to prosecute our right
against him that has injured us. But the forgiveness of a Magistrate being an
act of Authority, must be by some formal Act of Oblivion, by which all former
Acts and Orders against Delinquents may be invalidated; A Vote in the House, or
a Declaration that such an Act shall come forth, is no legal security to a
Delinquent. So then, Gods forgiveness being an Act of Authority, must neither
be an hidden secret purpose in his own heart, nor a mere promise or Declaration
of an Act of Pardon that shall be made hereafter; but a formal Act of Pardon it
must be, that shall make the Law of condemnation to be of no force against him
that pleads it. And this formal Act of Pardon can be no other then the sentence
of the Gospel, He that believes shall be saved, which is sometimes called the
Law of Faith, Romans 3. 27. sometimes the Law of Righteousness, Romans 9. 31. in
reference to which it is that the Lord says, He that believes, is passed from
death to life, John 5. 24. so that as every man is then condemned when the Law
condemns him (whatsoever the purposes of God may be, unknown to us) so on the
contrary, a man is then justified when the Gospel justifies him, and not before.

The Argument then is in sum this,

If there be no Act of Grace declared and published in the word, which may be a
legal discharge of the Sinner while he is in unbelief; then no unbelieving
Sinner is justified: The reason is, because Justification imports a legal
discharge of the Sinner, by some Act of Grace declared and published in the
Gospel.

But there is no Act of Grace declared and published in the Word, which may be
a legal discharge of the sinner whiles he remains in unbelief. Ergo. If there
be any such Act, let it be produced.

2. The second Argument is this: They that are under condemnation, cannot at
the same time be justified; but all the world is under condemnation before
Faith, Ergo, none of the world are justified before Faith: The major must needs
be true, because Justification and Condemnation are contraries, and contraries
cannot be verified of the same subject at the same time. Justification is a
moral life, and Condemnation a moral death; a man can no more be in a justified
Estate and a state of Condemnation both at once, then he can be alive or dead
both at once, or a blessed man and a cursed man both at once. What? that the
Apostle describes justification by non-condemnation, Romans 8. 1. and opposes it
unto condemnation, as inconsistent with the same person at the same time, ver.
33, 34. and are at as mortal enmity one with another, as good and evil, light
and darkness.

But now that all the world is under condemnation before Faith (which is the
minor) are the very words of the Lord Jesus, John 3. 18. He that believes not,
is condemned already: The Lord is proving that he came not into the world to
condemn the world; he proves it by a disjunction thus, Then either he must
condemn them that believe, or them that do not believe; not them that believe,
For he that believes is not condemned; nor them that do not believe, For he
that believes not is condemned already, to wit, by the sentence of the Law,
Cursed is every one that sins; so that Christ should not need to come into
the world to condemn it, which is also the meaning of that other phrase, verse
36. He that believes not, the wrath of God abides on him; that is, the wrath
of God by the Law is upon every sinner, yet not so necessarily, but that by
believing he may escape it; but if he believes not, then the wrath of God
abides on him, the sentence of the Law shall stand good against him for ever.
If then it be objected, that when it is said, He that believes not, is
condemned; condemnation must be understood of the condemnation of Conscience,
not before God; I Answer, 1. The condemnation here spoken of* is the
condemnation of the Law, and that pronounces all men guilty, not only in
their own conscience, but before God, Romans 3. 19. That all the world may become
guilty before God. 2. The condemnation in conscience of the unbelieving world,
is either true or false; If true, then it is according to the judgment of God,
and speaks as the thing is, and so God condemns as well as the conscience; and
in this case we may say as John does, 1 John 3. 20. If our hearts condemn us,
God is greater then our hearts and knows all things, and by consequence does
much more condemn us; If false, then (seeing all the unbelieving world is under
the same condemnation) the conscience of an unbeliever when it condemns him for
drunkenness, adultery, swearing, etc. is erroneous; and the way to comfort
them, is to persuade them so, and thereby to blind their eyes, and harden
their hearts, and sear up their consciences, that they may never see nor be
affected with sin, till they fall irrecoverably into everlasting flames. 3. The
condemnation with which the unbeliever is condemned, is expressed verse 36. by
the abiding of the wrath of God upon him. 4. It is also opposed unto salvation,
verse 17. God sent not his Son to condemn the world, but to save it; and surely
the condemnation which is opposed to Salvation, is more then the condemnation
of a man's own conscience; for that may very well consist with Salvation; yea
they that are saved, are for the most part more subject to it in this life,
then they that perish.

3. A third Argument is drawn from the several comparisons by which
justification by Faith is illustrated: Sometimes it is compared to the
Israelites looking up to the Brazen Serpent for healing, Joh. 3. 14. and Number.
21. 8, 9. As then they were not first healed, and then looked up to see what
healed them; but they did first look upon the Serpent and then they were
healed: Even so is it the will of God, That whosoever sees and believes the
Son, shall be justified, John 6. 40. He is not first justified and then sees
the Son; sometimes Faith is compared to eating, and Justification to the
nourishment which we receive by our meat, John 6. 51, 52, 53, 54. We are not
first nourished and then eat the meat that nourishes us; but we eat our meat
that we may be nourished by it. In like manner we are not first justified, and
then believe on Christ that has justified us; but we believe in Christ that we
may be justified.

4. A fourth Argument is drawn from the perpetual opposition between Faith and
Works, from whence the Argument is this, What place and order Works had to
justification in the Covenant of Works, the same place and order Faith has to
our justification in the Covenant of Grace: But Works were to go before our
Justification in the Covenant of Works, Ergo, Faith is to go before our
Justification in the Covenant of Grace: To the minor I say nothing, because
there is not a man in the world that does deny it as I know of, and that being
granted, the major also must be out of question: If the tenor of the first
Covenant, Do this and live, by the consent of all People and Nations, Jews and
Gentiles, will undeniably evince that Works were necessary Antecedents of
justification in that Covenant; why then should not, Believe in the Lord Jesus
and thou shall be saved (which is the tenor of the New Covenant, Romans 10. 6,
9.) plead as strongly for the like necessity of the Antecedency of Faith to
justification in this Covenant? 2. Faith and Works have the like order to
justification in their respective Covenants, or else justification by Faith and
justification by Works are not opposed; for Opposita sunt circa idem. The Jews
looked after Righteousness by the works of the Law, The Apostle tells them they
must seek it by Faith; Now, if they say we must be justified by Works, to wit,
formally and before God; and the Apostle say, Nay, but we must be justified by
Faith, to wit, declaratively, and before Conscience; then the establishing of
justification by Faith, will not destroy justification by Works; and so there
will be nothing but falsehoods and equivocations, in all the Apostles
Disputations against Justification by Works: And how easily might the Jews and
the Apostle have been reconciled? They say, We must be justified by Works; and
he says, We must be justified by Faith; it is but distinguishing; Works do
justify us before God, but Faith must evidence and declare this to us, and
they are agreed.

5. Add further what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you,
but you are washed, but you are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus: Where
the opposition between the time past and the time present, does evidently argue
that the words have this sense, Such and such you were in time past
(Fornicators, Idolaters, etc. and therefore must have been shut out of the
Kingdom of God verse 10.) But ( Now) you are washed: (Now) and not before, you
are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, that is, through Faith in his
name: compare Acts 3. 16. and 10. 43. If then the Corinthians were not
justified before Faith, Why are Englishmen? It is to no purpose to say here,
That now they were declared in their own Consciences to be justified, and so
they were not before, whiles they lived in those abominable sins. For 1. Why
may not we understand the word (Sanctified) in the same sense, seeing we are
said to be sanctified by Faith, Acts 26. 18. and 15. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 22. as well
as justified by Faith? And so suppose that these Corinthians had a seed of
Grace before, but buried under the dirt and rubbish of vile sins, till by Faith
they came to see that they were sanctified: There is nothing can be alleged
for Justification before believing, which will not hold as strongly for
Sanctification before believing; nor any reason why Sanctification should not
be understood for a Sanctification declared, as well as Justification for a
Justification declared. 2. The Justification which they now had, was that which
gave them right and title to the Kingdom of God, which right and title they had
not before, no more then others that did yet continue in Idolatry, Fornication,
Uncleanness, and the other sins specified: It is acknowledged of all hands,
that Justification includes an adjudging of us unto life, or a giving us a
right to the Heavenly Kingdom; if then these Corinthians had this right before
they believed, then did their Faith give them no more security of Salvation in
point of right then they had before, or then might be affirmed of them who did
yet abide in their sins; and by consequence, if they had lived and dyed in
their sins, they might have gone to Heaven notwithstanding; though for want of
Faith, to see this their right, they could not have departed with so much
comfort of Spirit: For if faith do only declare that we have a Title to the
Heavenly Kingdom, then it makes no relative change in our condition, from a
state of death into a state of life; and so whether we believe or no, all is
one as to the certainty of our Salvation, though we want the evidence and
persuasion of it. If it be here said, that all whom God in his secret
justification has adjudged unto life, shall have the evidence thereof by
Faith. I Answer, This evidence is of such necessity, as that if they have it
not, they shall lose that life to which they are adjudged, or no; If not, then
whether they believe or do not believe, they shall be saved: If it be, then is
there no absolute justification before Faith, and justification must be
conditional, and the immediate and absolute right to life must be acknowledged
to be a consequent of Faith, which will at once overthrow Mr. Eyres Opinion,
and confirm this Argument without any more ado.

What remains to be done, is to remove those Objections which seem of weight to
Mr. Air for confirmation of his Opinion.

The first is drawn from those Scriptures which seem to hold forth an immediate
actual reconciliation of sinners to God upon the death of Christ, without the
intervention of Faith: As Matthew. 3. 17. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; viz. with sinners, and Romans 5. 10. We were reconciled unto God by
the death of his Son.

Answ. To the former of these places I answer: 1. That the well* pleasedness of
God need not be extended beyond the person of Christ, who gave himself unto the
death, an offering and a sacrifice unto God of a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.
2. 2. If we should extend it also unto men (which is neither necessary nor
probable) yet will the words prove no more, then that it is through Christ that
God is well pleased with men, whenever it be that he is well pleased: Verbs
and Participles of the present Tense (though the Verb in this place be not the
present Tense, but the first Aorist) have sometimes the signification of the
future Tense, as John 4. 25. The Messiah comes, that is, will shortly come;
and chap. 5. 25. The hour is coming, and now is, that is, will shortly be; and
14. 3. If I go, I come again (so in the Greek) that is, I will come again, 2
Cor. 3. 16. When it (namely Israel) shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be
taken away: The Verbs in the Greek are both of the present Tense, hundreds of
the like instances are obvious; sometimes they are Notes of affirmation without
reference to any determinate time, as Romans 8. 24. By hope we are saved; not
presently, for it follows immediately, hope that is seen is not hope, for what
a man sees, why does he yet hope for? Ergo, to be saved by hope, imports that
a man is not yet saved; but the meaning is, That it is in the way of hope and
patient expectation that men are saved, whenever it be that they are saved:
So 1 Cor. 15. 57. Thanks be unto God that gives us the victory, to wit, the
victory over death by and in the Resurrection; and the meaning is, That it is
through God that we have the Victory, be it when it will be that we have it;
for if the words must needs be understood as if we had the Victory presently,
then Paul, and the Christians of his age were raised before they were dead, and
the Christians of following ages before they were born: So Heb. 10. 35. Your
confidence has a great recompense of reward, that is, shall have, Jam. 1. 17.
Every good gift comes down from above, not as if it must needs be coming down
when the Apostle spoke those words; but that whenever any receives a good
gift, it is from God: But why do we fight against God? Is it not the testimony
of the holy Ghost as express as words can deliver it, That without Faith it is
impossible to please God, or to be pleasing unto God, as Enoch was by Faith,
Heb. 11. 5. 6. It was a poor answer that Mr. Air gave to Mr. Good, when he
asked him, Whether God were well pleased with unregenerate men, to say, He was
well pleased with unregenerate men, but not with their unregeneracy; as if God
were well pleased with unregenerate men whiles unregenerate, but afterward
were well pleased with their unregeneracy also.

The like Answer I give to Romans 5. 10. we were reconciled unto God by the death
of his Son, to wit, That Christ's death was the price of our Reconciliation, and
and so it is through the death of Christ that we are reconciled, be it when it
will be that we are reconciled: Here then we must distinguish, as it were, of
three Periods of the will of God. 1. As it may be conceived, immediately after
sin committed, before the consideration of the death of Christ: And now is the
Lord at enmity with the sinner, though not averse from all ways and means, by
which he may return to Friendship with him again. 2. As it may be conceived
after the consideration of the death of Christ; and now is the Lord not only
appeasable, but does also promise that he will be reconciled with sinners, upon
such terms as himself shall propose. 3. As the same will of God may be
considered after an intercession on Christ's part, and Faith on the sinners
part, and now is God actually reconciled and in Friendship with the sinner;
when then the Apostle says, We are reconciled through the death of Christ, he
does not mean, That immediately upon the death of Christ we are actually
reconciled unto God (for in the very next verse he says, That through Christ
we have now (and not before) received the atonement, or reconciliation, which
in plainer terms is this, That now, that is, since we are Believers, we are
actually reconciled unto God.) But his meaning is, That through the death of
Christ it is, that the promise of reconciliation is made, by and according to
which we are actually reconciled unto God after we believe, suitable to that of
the Lord Jesus, This is the new Testament in my blood (obtained and sealed by
my blood) which was shed for the remission of the sins of many, Matthew. 26. 28.
The ground of all this is, because the death of Christ was not solutio ejusdem,
but tantidem, not the payment of that which was in the obligation, but of the
equivalent, being not the payment of the debtor, but of the surety; and
therefore it does not deliver us ipso facto, but according to the compact and
agreement between the Father and him, when he undertook to be our surety: If a
debtor bring me what he owes me, it discharges him presently; but the payment
of a surety, is a payment refusable of it self, and therefore effects not the
discharge of the principal debtor, but at the time, and according to the
conditions agreed upon between the Surety and the Creditor. If then our
Adversaries could prove, either that it was the will of God in giving up Christ
to the death, or the will of Christ in giving himself to the death, that this
death of his should be available to the immediate and actual Reconciliation and
Justification of the sinner, without any condition performed on the sinners
part, it were something to the purpose: But till this be done (which indeed can
never be done) they were as good say nothing: When Christ gives us an account
both of his own and his Fathers will in this matter, he tells us, That this is
the will of him that sent him, That whosoever sees the Son and believes on
him, may have everlasting life, John 6. 40. without which Faith, Christ shall
profit us nothing, Gal. 5. 4. 1 John 5. 11, 12. He that has not the Son has
not life. So much for that Objection.

The next (which was one of the two made use of against me after Sermon) is
this.

Object. 2. If we are justified in Christ, then we are justified before we
believe: But we are justified in Christ. Ergo.

Answ. We may conceive of a Threefold Justification. 1. a Justification
purposed in the decree of God, Gal. 3. 8. The Scriptures foreseeing that God
would justify the Gentiles through Faith. 2. A Justification purchased and
impetrated in the death of Christ, who by his death has obtained eternal
Redemption for us, Heb. 9. 12. which Redemption is the Remission of sins, Ephesians*
1. 7. 3. There it also a Justification exemplified in the resurrection of
Christ, who himself was justified in his own resurrection, and thereby became
the exemplary cause of Justification to believers, by virtue of which
themselves shall also be justified in such time, and upon such terms as shall
be agreed upon between the Father and Christ! (I use the term of an exemplary
cause, rather then of a common person, because a common person may be the
effect of those whom he represents (as the Parliament of the Commonwealth) but
Christ is such a common person, as that he is the cause of those whom he
represents in every thing in which he represents them) so that when we say, We
are justified in Christ, the meaning is no more but this, That Christ is made
the cause and pattern, according to which Justication shall certainly follow on
them that believe: But what is this to our deliverance from condemnation? or
what benefit do we receive by it before we believe? Should a man argue thus in
any other benefits we receive by Christ and from Christ as the exemplary cause,
he would make himself deservedly ridiculous. For example, We are said to be
risen with Christ, Christ himself being risen from the dead, and become the
first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20. So that Christ in his
resurrection, is the exemplary cause of our resurrection, in which we are
therefore said to bear the image of the heavenly Adam, verse 49. Would any
sober man infer; Therefore our own personal resurrection is past already, to
wit, before our selves are dead; or that we are not to be raised at all,
because we are risen already in Christ? Yet no man living can show any reason
of difference why we may not as justly infer that our resurrection is passed
already, because we are risen in Christ; as that our Justification is past
before we believe, because we are justified in Christ: No doubt but most men
would account the just contrary a necessary consequence. Again, We are
sanctified in Christ as well as justified in Christ: Our old man is crucified
with him, Romans 6. 6. and he is said to be made Sanctification to us as well as
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. And why then may we not inveigh against
Regeneration and personal Sanctification, as well as against personal
Justification? for if we are sanctified in Christ, then we are sanctified
before Faith, and we need not mortify sin and dye to the world, etc. all this
is done already in Christ, in whom we are sanctified before Faith, we need
only to have it declared to us, that we are sanctified. To draw up the Answer
more close; Justification is either causal and virtual, or actual and formal:
The former is no other then a Justification of Christ himself, with a
connotation of others, who by virtue of this Justification of his, are
themselves to be justified in due time; as our resurrection in Christ is
nothing else but Christ himself risen, as the first fruits of them that slept,
and so become the exemplary cause of a resurrection afterward to follow us;
but as the resurrection of Christ makes no real change in us till our selves be
risen; so neither does the justification of Christ make any moral change in us
from death to life, till our selves be justified: Actual and formal
justification is, when we are acquitted from the guilt of sin by the gracious
sentence of the Gospel, He that believes shall not enter into condemnation: Now
then if we speak of Justification formal, then* I deny that we are justified in
Christ (which is the opponents Assumption.) And if we speak of Justification
causal, then I do utterly deny the Proposition; viz. That if we are justified
in Christ, then we are justified before we believe; the Reason is, because to
be justified in Christ, is not to be justified simply (no more then to be risen
in Christ, is to be risen simply, or to be glorified in Christ, is to be
glorified simply) and therefore the inference is a dicto secundum quid, ad
dictum simpliciter: They are credulous souls I Will assure you, that will be
drawn by such Decoys as these into Schism and Faction, to the hardening and
discomforting of more hearts in one hour, then the Opinion it self (should it
obtain) will do good to, while the world stands.

Object. 3. The last and great Argument succeeds, and that is this: If we are
in Covenant before we believe, then we are justified before we believe: But we
are in Covenant before we believe. Ergo.

Answ. Were it supposed that we were in Covenant before Faith, yet would the
Proposition be faulty: The Reason, because the Blessings of the Covenant have
an order and dependence one upon another, and are enjoyed successively one
after another: God in his Covenant promises Holiness and Glory as well as
Justification; yet he would argue most absurdly that should say, We are
sanctified and glorified before Faith, because we are in Covenant bfore Faith:
But I am unwilling to multiply quarrels: If the great difference lay here, it
were an easy matter to be reconciled.

2. I do utterly deny the Assumption; viz. That we are in Covenant with God
before we believe; if at least the Phrase of being in Covenant be understood,
properly, for such an interest in the Covenant as gives a man right and title
to the Blessings of the Covenant: That in this sense we are not in Covenant
before we believe, is that which I shall prove by and by. But first, I shall
give Mr. Air a fair hearing, though he would not give it me, and I believe is
resolved to give it to no body else, whiles the judgment of the cause must be
left to the people.

The proof of the Assumption stands thus: If the Spirit be given us before we
believe, then we are in Covenant before we believe: But the Spirit is given us
before we believe: Ergo, the proof of the minor is from the tenor of the New
Covenant, Heb. 8. 10, 11. I will put my laws into their mind, and they shall
all know me, which is a promise of giving the Spirit to work Faith.

Answ. The Explication of the terms of this Argument is a sufficient refutation
of it: God is said to give in Scripture, sometimes when no receiving follows;
and thus the Word (Give) signifies no more then the will of God, constituting
and appointing: Thus God (gave) his Son unto death, that is, constituted and
appointed that he should die: There is no other name (given) under Heaven, Acts
4. 12. that is, no other name appointed; so Ephesians. 1. 22. and 4. 11. and a
hundred other places: In this sense, the giving of the Spirit is no more then
the sending, and as it were the constituting of the Spirit, to be by way of
specialty the worker and cause of Faith. 2. The word (give) does sometimes
include a receiving and possession of the thing given, as in the ordinary use
of the word; and thus the Spirit is given when we receive him, and are as it
were possessed of him, and he becomes ours, and dwells in us: Thus the Lord
promises to give the Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13. and we are said
to receive the spirit by Faith, Gal. 3. 14. and the Spirit is said to dwell in
us by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. with Romans 8. 10, 11. and of this latter way of
giving the Spirit, is the Question to be understood.

2. The Spirit may be said to be given three ways. 1. Essentially. 2.
Personally. 3. In reference to his operations: The Spirit is not given to us
essentially, for so he is God, and is equally every where, nor can he be more
peculiarly in one, then in another. Nor 2. Personally; for that cannot be
conceived without a personal union, which would denominate us as truly to be
the Spirit of God, as the like union in the man Christ Jesus, did denominate
him to be the Son of God. 3. The Spirit therefore must be said to be given to
us, in regard of some peculiar operations which he works in us, which are
incommunicable to those which have not the Spirit: so that common convictions,
illuminations, humiliations, some joys of heart, and the like, which are
transient Works of the Spirit, common to them that are saved and to them that
perish, Heb. 6. 4. Matthew. 13. 20. and all other works which may either go
before or be without Faith; these are none of them such kind of works, as that
in respect of them the Spirit should be said to be given to us: wherefore there
being no peculiar work of grace before Faith it self, which may not be wrought
in a Hypocrite (which has not the Spirit) as well as in a child of God;
therefore the Spirit is neither given nor received before Faith be wrought, but
is given and received together with Faith in the same instant of time, and not
before. Indeed, as every cause is in nature before its effect; so the Spirit
also in order of causes is before Faith, but that he is therefore given to us
in the least atome of time before the being of Faith, is a mere non-sequitur,
and contrary to the received maxim, Posita causa in actu, ponitur effectus;
which rule Mr. Air has often abused, to prove a Justification immediately upon
the death or resurrection of Christ, and yet here he cannot understand it; so
that as a man does first build himself an house, and then dwells in it: So the
Lord Jesus by his Spirit does (...) Heb. 3. 3. build, and organize, and
prepare, (as we render the Greek wood, Luke 1. 17.) the soul to be a house unto
himself, and then by the same Spirit dwells in it immediately. And this is that
which I would have spoken publicly in answer to this Argument, if Mr. Air
had not been beyond measure obstreperous.

Yet here it may be demanded, Whether Faith it self be not given to us by
virtue of the Covenant made withus.

Answ. Faith is not given to us by virtue of the Covenant made with us, but by
virtue of the Covenant made with Christ; that is, God has promised and
covenanted with Christ, that if he will lay down his life for the redemption of
sinners; those sinners shall be drawn to believe in Christ, and thereby to
partake of the benefits of his death: That this is so, the Scriptures are
plain, Isa. 53. 10. When thou shall make his soul an offering for him, he shall
see his seed: He shall see of the travel of his soul, by his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many; so Isa. 55. 4. 5. Behold thou shall call a
nation that thou know not, and nations that knew not thee, shall run unto
thee, because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel, for he has
glorified thee, Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, etc. So Psalm. 110. 3. Matthew. 12. 21. And why did the Lord
appoint Apostles and Ministers to carry the sound of the Gospel from one end of
the earth to the other, and subdueth Nations to the obedience of the Faith, but
that he may accomplish his promises made to his Son? such as are recorded in
Psalm. 89. 25, 26, etc.

Now to the words of the Covenant, Jer. 31. 31. repeated by the Apostle, Heb.
8. 10. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel: I will
put my laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts, and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a people. From whence Mr. Air infers, That
the Spirit and Faith is given by virtue of the Covenant made with us.

But I answer. 1. That if Mr. Air will urge the words of this Text rigorously,
they would prove more then he would have: For it is manifest, That this
Covenant contains a promise of sending Christ into the world, and giving him up
to death for our sins; as the Apostle does directly prove, Heb. 10. 14, 15, 16.
and why then may it not be inferred, That the elect are in Covenant with God,
not only before they believe, but also before the death of the Mediator, and
so his death was not to obtain all or any of the blessings of the Covenant, but
only (as the Socinians) to declare and confirm to us, That we may believe,
that God of his own mere good will, without expecting any satisfaction, will do
all this good for us; for if it be a good consequence: We are in Covenant
before we believe, because the Covenant promises to give us Faith: Then is
this also a good consequence, We are in covenant before the death of Christ,
because the Covenant promises to give Christ to death. And what answer Mr.
Air will give to avoid this consequence (for I presume he will not grant it)
and to defend his position, that we are in Covenant with God upon the death of
Christ, and not before, notwithstanding the Covenant Promise to give Christ;
the same Answer will serve my turn for the vindication of my Assertion; That we
are in Covenant with God upon believing, and not before, notwithstanding the
same Covenant promise Faith.

2. But upon a most serious perusual of this Text, I find it so contradictory,
to Mr. Eyr's purpose, that I cannot but wonder what he means to shelter his
Opinion under the protection of it: If we read the words in Heb. 8. 10. or Jer.
31. 33. and compare them with other places of Scripture, we shall find three
things of distinct consideration, the conclusion of which, is the only support
of this feeble Argument. 1. There is the matter and blessings of the Covenant
on Gods part: I will be their God, and they shall be my people: In which words,
as many blessings, temporal and eternal are promised: so peculiarly pardon of
sin, mentioned in the words next following (for which the Covenant on Mount
Sinai, to which this opposed, made no provision) and therefore when the Apostle
mentions this Covenant again, he leaves out those words, I will be their God,
etc. and takes notice of the great blessing contained in them, namely, Pardon
of sin, Heb. 10. 17. 2. There is expressed the bond and condition of it on our
part, and that is, Faith; which is confessedly signified in those words, of
putting Gods Laws in our minds, and writing them in our hearts: In these two
things is the tenor and formality of the New Covenant: They that believe, the
Lord will be their God, and they shall be his people; and this is the Covenant
so long before promised, but most expressly Enacted in the days of the New
Testament. But thirdly, There is also a Promise and Declaration that God will
work this condition, by which, men shall have an interest in this Covenant, and
a right and title to the blessings thereof: I will put my laws into their
minds, that is, I will give them Faith; which Faith is not promised as an
effect of the Covenant already made, but as the means by which we are brought
into Covenant, and thereby invested in a right to all the blessings of it: So
that the words are in this sense, This is the Covenant which I will make with
the house of Israel, when I shall write my Laws in their hearts, I will be
their God, etc. I do not herein give the Grammatical Translation of the words;
though if a man should read the words thus, This is the Covenant which I will
make, says the Lord, that gives his Laws into their minds, and writes them
in their heart, etc. he would be so far from offering violence, either to the
Greek Translation of the LXX, which the Apostle follows, or to the Hebrew Text
in the Prophet; as that he might justify it by many examples. But the matter
is of no consequence at all to either side: You see the sense which I give of
the words.

And that this is the true sense of the place, is most evident, if we compare
it with other Scriptures where this Covenant is mentioned: For example, Jer.
24. 7. I will give them an heart to know me that I am the Lord; and they shall
be my people and I will be their God: for (or when) they shall return unto me
with their whole heart, where we have the very same Arguments as here; viz. The
blessings promised: I will be their God: The condition on the peoples part,
which is their returning with their whole heart, and the cause of this return:
I will give them an heart: The Apostle is yet more distinct, Heb. 10. 14, 15,
16, 17. He proves that Christ has for ever perfected them that are sanctified;
whereof (says he) the holy Ghost is a witness to us; for after that he had
said before, This is the Covenant that I will make with them, I will put my
laws into their heart -- And their sins and their iniquities I will remember no
more: Before which last words must be repeated these ( Then he says) or ( Then
it follows) and so the whole sentence runs thus: For after he had said
before, I will put my laws into their hearts; then he says, Their sins and
their iniquities I will remember no more; which clause (as is already observed)
is one of the special and noble blessings contained in that general promise, I
will be their God, and they shall be my people; from which distribution of the
words of the Covenant, we may (as before) observe: 1. Where begins the grand
promise of the Covenant, to wit, in those words, I will be their God, and they
shall be my people. 2. The Qualification of the persons to whom this promise is
made: They are such in whose hearts Gods Laws are written, that is, such as
believe. 3. The efficient cause of this their Faith, and that is, God himself:
I will write my laws in their hearts: The same Covenant is delivered in other
terms in Scripture, in all which the giving of the first Grace is promised, not
as a part of the Covenant, but as the means and qualification on man's part for
his entrance into Covenant, as Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. I will put a new spirit within
them, that they may walk in my statutes and do them; and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God, which is the sum of the Covenant on Gods part;
so in Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28. Again, the Lord promises, That he will cleanse
and purify them; and so they shall be his people, and he will be their God,
Ezekiel. 37. 23. which is the grand promise of the New Testament, as the context
makes it manifest: And after he had promised that they should walk in his
judgments, and observe in his statutes; it follows, Moreover, I will make a
Covenant of peace with them, it shall be an everlasting Covenant, which in sum
is this, I will be their God, and they shall be my people, verse 24. 26, 27.

The premises being considered, it is an easy matter to take the elevation of
all the strength which our opponents can gather out of this Text: If they will
argue rightly, they must cast their Argument into some such form as this. They
concerning whom God has promised that he will give them Faith, they are in
Covenant before they believe: But concerning the elect, God has promised that
he will give them Faith. Ergo. Here the major is utterly untrue; for the
promise of Faith (which in reference to us is rather a Declaration, de futuro,
of what God will do, then a promise) is the promise of the condition by which
we are brought into Covenant; and therefore, though God has declared that he
will give Faith, it will by no means follow, that we are in Covenant before
Faith: But let them frame their Argument how they please, it concerns not me to
be solicitous about that. I shall advance one Argument against them from this
their place of refuge, and pass on: If God be not the God of any, nor they his
people before they believe, then none are in Covenant with God before they
believe: But God is not the God of any before they believe. Ergo. For the
proposition, he is destitute of common sense that shall deny it: The being of
the Covenant consists in that properly which God has in us, and we in him. The
Assumption is proved thus: If God promise to give Faith, that we may be his
people, and he our God; then till that Faith be given, he is not our God, nor
we his people; for it is in vain for God to give Faith for an end, which may be
well enough attained without Faith: But God promises to give Faith, that he
may be our God and we his people, Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 8. 10. Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20.
and 36. 25, 26, 27, 28. and 37. 23, 24, 26, 27. besides multitudes of other
Scriptures. I have only one observation to add, which the most learned
amongst the Jewish and Christian Writers do often take notice of, and that is
this: That God is never said to be our God in reference to his giving of the
first grace, but only in reference to the blessings which he promises to them
that have Faith, Heb. 11. 16. He is not our God that he may give us Faith, but
is every where said to give us Faith, that he may be our God: In times past you
were not a people, but are now the people of God, 1 Pet. 2. 10.

And now I might spare the pains of further proof of the position last
defended; Viz. That we are in not Covenant before Faith.
yet to the Scriptures already advanced, let me add a few more, Isa. 55. 3.
Come unto me (that is, Believe in me, John 6. 35.) and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you. 2. The voice of the Gospel (which is the
Covenant of Grace) is every where, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be
saved; in opposition to the Covenant of Works, which says, Do this and live,
Romans 10. 5. 6. 9. This is the Covenant whereof Christ is Mediator, Heb. 9. 15.
That they that are called (unto Faith) shall receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance. 3. The Covenant of Grace is preached to every man, and every man
called upon to fulfill the conditions of it, that he may receive the blessings
of it, which condition is Faith, Heb. 4. 1, 2, 10. Is there an absolute promise
made to every man that God will give him grace? or is it sense to exhort men to
take hold of Gods Covenant (as the phrase is, Isa. 66. 4, 6.) or to enter into
Covenant with God, if the Covenant be only an absolute promise on Gods part?
or to exhort men to be steadfast in the Covenant of God, to hold fast the faith,
and their confidence in Christ? as the Scriptures are wont to do, Heb. 3. 12,
13, 14. and 10. 23. or to accuse, and blame, and damn men for unbelief, and
rejecting of the Gospel? Was it ever known that men should be counted worthy of
death, for not being the objects of an absolute promise? 4. If the Covenant of
grace be an absolute promise, then no men in the world but wicked and ungodly
men, are in covenant with God: When a covenant is fulfilled, it cease to be
any more a covenant. In this life we are properly said to be in covenant with
God; when we shall be perfected in glory in the heavenly kingdom, we cannot
properly be said to be in covenant: Now absolute promises of grace are made
only to wicked men; when grace is given them, then is the covenant so far
forth fulfilled, and so far forth they cease to be in covenant; and so none but
wicked men shall be perfectly in covenant with God: But it is beside my purpose
and work to follow this pursuit any further.

Thus then you have with advantage, the copy of the Sermon you have often
desired; to which, though it is likely, something is or will be said (which at
this distance I am never like to hear of) yet sure I am that nothing can be
answered consistent with the truth of Scriptures. I am sorry for the breaches
that are amongst you, for the grief of the godly, and the hardening of
multitudes to their own destruction. The God and Father of* the Lord Jesus
restore you to peace, and quiet that spirit of Division that is gone abroad
amongst you: to his Grace I commend you, and rest,

Imprimatur, Edm. Calamy.

May 26. 1652.
Yours in the nearest bonds, Benj: Woodbridge.

FINIS.

