TO THE Inhabitants of LONDON, This is, a MESSAGE, in the Name of the LORD.
THus says the Lord, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one jot or
tittle of my Word shall pass away unfulfilled; even my living Word is
established for ever, and stands fast in all Generations: That which no man
made, can no man alter nor change.

And this is it to London and the Inhabitants thereof; Open your ears to hear,
and your hearts to understand the Lord's Controversy with you: even this is my
Controversy, says the Lord, and my determination says the Almighty; who am
mighty to perform that which I have spoken, and to bring to pass the thoughs of
my heart in all Generations.

Thy Decrees made in thee shall not stand, the unrighteous Precepts prescribed
by thy Lawmakers shall not continue, they that make them are like unto them,
the thoughts of their hearts are altogether vain; they shall not abide nor
continue, but pass away as their own dung, and as the untimely Birth of a
Woman: They shall never see the perfection of that Day they look for; a Cloud
shall cover it, and a Night from the Lord, that livethfor ever and ever, shall
dwell upon it; that which is unto the wicked, as the shadow of Death, shall
dwell upon it.

Woe be unto all treacherous hearted in thee, that pretend Liberty, while they
are whetting their Swords to slay, and pointing their Arrows to shoot at the
Innocent. Their Swords shall enter into their own Bowels, and Arrows stick in
their Reins, the Pit they are digging for the Anointed of the Lord, and Holes
to fling his Jewels into, they themselves shall fall in. This is my
Controversy and my determination says the Lord of the whole Earth.

But, they that make the Lord their Refuge, even the Lord their Hidingplace (at
all times) and fear not man, that must die, and perish as his own dung, but
wait on the Lord, and in all things that befall them, acknowledge him able to
save out of all: Your hearts shall live, that seek the Lord, even him alone,
and his face continually; in his Salvation shall ye rejoice, and your souls in
it shall delight world without end.

Live in God, the Fountain of Love, Life and Power; there is an end of all
Sufferings, there the Weary be at rest, there the Prisoners rest together out
of the reach of the Oppressor. Judge self in every state, strait, and
condition; give not your power to the Beast, neither strengthen the Wicked,
(nor give them ease) by looking or seeking unto them for help and deliverance,
that are your Persecutors; But with David, let your souls and minds say, Our
Help stands in the Name of the Lord, that made Heaven and Earth.

And so, The Lord God visit thy Own in every one, that we that love it, may
rejoice with it, now and ever more.

Humphrey Wollrich.

London, Printed in the Year 1663.


