A LETTER Concerning the COIN.
6. Dec. 1695 SIR,
OUR Silver Coin in England being so very bad, and growing every day worse, it
is high time by Recoining of it to recover it to its former goodness and value,
which I hope to make appear is not so difficult a thing as some Persons believe
it to be.

In the first place, as to Guineas, I humbly conceive the best way will be to
settle them by Act of Parliament to pass Current at thirty Shillings for one
year, from the date of the said Act to the last day of the next Session of
Parliament; by which time, if the Silver Coin be settled, there will be better
judging how to proceed further concerning them.

As to the Silver Money, That it be Coined the same Weight and Goodness as
formerly, but to be valued higher as shall be thought fit; And that it may be
declared in the Act for Coinage how much Plate persons of all Qualities shall
keep in their Houses.

That the Large Money (so that the Hundred Pounds weigh Twenty Five Pounds,)
Together with all superfluous Plate be brought in at the day, and to such
Places as the Commissioners for the Coinage shall appoint: the said
Commissioners to be assisted by all the Commissioners, Assessors, and
Collectors of the Land Tax, and all Civil Officers.

In order to which, that there be appointed, by the said Act for Coinage,
Twelve Commissioners for the City of London, and the same number in each County
in England and Wales, to manage the Affair of the Coinage in their respective
Counties: of which Commissioners His Majesty to choose Six, and the House of
Commons Six for London, and each County.

That the Commissioners so appointed for London, and those for Twenty of the
next adjoining Counties to London, do choose our one Person from amongst
themselves to be of the Grand Committee for Coinage at London, to sit and
manage that Affair at their Office in London.

That the said Commissioners, in their several Counties, shall receive the
Plate and Money, and send it to London, to the Grand Committee at their Office,
to be Coined, and by them to be returned in Money.

That if the said Commissioners are informed, or do believe that any Person
has concealed, and not brought in his Money and Plate as he ought to have done,
the said Commissioners to have power to Assess every such Person 20. l. per
Cent. for his Large Money, and the like for his Plate; the said Person for
relief, to discharge himself by Oath.

That the Money so brought in to be Recoined be received by Tale, to prevent
such Persons getting who have laid up great Quantities of Large Money, and the
loss of others who shall at last have the smallest Money in their Hands: And the
Plate to be received by Weight at an appointed Price.

That the Money and Plate be received at three times, and delivered in Money at
six times, the Heavy Money and Plate first, the rest at twice. That County that
sends first Money and Plate in, to have it first in course as fast as the Money
can be Coined: And all such Money as shall be refused at the Office as Bad from
any County, shall be Melted, and the Loss to be abated upon the whole Money of
that County, as it shall amount to by the Pound Serling.

That the Grand Committee at London do give out their Orders to the
Commissioners for Coinage in the several Counties, and receive from them the
Money and Plate at their Office in London, and cause it to be melted into
Ingots, and delivered to the Mint in the Tower; and when Coined to receive the
Money and pay the same to the several Agents for the said Commissioners for
Coinage in the Country.

Goldsmiths-Hall in London will be a very good place for the Office or Treasury
for this Affair, there being convenience for the said Grand Committee to Sit,
Rooms for the telling of the Money and weighing of the Plate: and strong and
safe Rooms to fecure it all in; and also in the Hall and adjacent places may be
made good Melting-Rooms. It lies convenient for Carriers and others who shall
bring the Money and Plate to London.

That there be a Tax laid upon (...) To be raised in three Years, to bear the
Loss and Charge of Recoining the Money. The said Tax Money will be easily
gathered and received by the said Commissioners, for the Coinage in their
several Counties. The said Commissioners to be Accountable to the Grand
Committee at London, and they to Account to the Exchequer, and if there be any
overpluss of the said Money to pay it into the Exchequ^er for Public Use.

I shall be ready to Answer to such Objections as are made in Writing, if by
Order, and shall add such other things as shall occur to my mind that may be of
Use.

December 1695. Tho. Woods, Refiner.


