A Brief TREATISE OF Religious Women's MEETINGS Services and Testimonies.

According to the Scriptures of Truth.

Also, something concerning Women's Prophesying and Teaching, etc.

With some other observable things, (distinguishing the Holy from the Unholy)
in the Scriptures cited. And an Objection answered, which is commonly raised
from Paul's words, 1 Cor. 14. 34, etc. and 1 Timothy 2. 12. etc.

W^itten for the Satisfaction of all that desire to be informed, by one, who by
the free Grace of God is become a Searcher of the Scriptures, and a lover of
Truth in the inward parts, both in the Male and Female, and is made a Witness
in his day that God is pouring out of his Spirit both upon Sons and Daughters,
Servants and Handmaids, according to his Promise, Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18.

Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, 1684.

Women's Meetings in the Practice there of, proved out of the Scriptures of
Truth; and also something concerning Women's Prophesying and speaking in the
Church, and who is permitted, and who not; with other observable things, as
they fall in from the Scriptures cited.
MAry and Elizabeth did meet in the Name of the Lord, in the house of
Zacharias, as you may read, Luke 1. 39. And you may see what a blessed Meeting
it was, Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost, and did prophecy; and Mary
did magnify the Name of the Lord, and her Spirit rejoiced in God her Savior,
and did likewise prophecy; so both of them had the Testimony of Jesus, which
is the Spirit of Prophecy, (Rev. 19. 10.) Here was the blessed Order, Ye may
all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all be comforted, (1 Cor. 14.
31.) This was the Order of Christ's Church, who walked and lived in the comely
Order, the Spirit of Truth dwelling and living in their hearts, who led and
guided them, and and brought them into this Order of the Gospel: But when
Antichrist came to be set up in man's heart, he led them from this Order, and
preached against this Order, and forbad this Order, and persecuted, and does
persecute them who are found in this Order, calling Christ's comely Order
Disorder. In Christ's blessed Order Women met together as well as Men, and
preached and prayed together, and prophesied one by one as well as Men.

In this Meeting there is no mention made that there was any man at it; and yet
you may see they were filled with the holy Ghost, and did prophecy and speak
blessed words one to another, as you may read at large in that first Chapter of
Luke. And though Zacharias was a Priest, and righteous before God, walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, yet we do not read
that he reproved them, nor that he forbad them. But the Dragon and his Servants
are wrath with the Woman, the true Church, and makes war with them which keep
the Commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ, (Rev. 12. 17.)
And the testimony of Jesus Christ is the Spirit of Prophecy, as before is
said, which the Lord God has promised to pour forth upon Daughters as well as
Sons, upon Handmaids as well as well as Menservants (Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17,
18.) But the seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, will bruise the serpent's head,
and is a bringing his sons and daughters, servants and hand-maidens into the
order of his own Gospel again; Where two or three are gathered together in my
Name, there am I (said Christ) in the midst of them. Here was but two (that we
read of) at this Meeting, Mary and Elizabeth, and we see he was in them; it is
he in them that preaches and prophesies, it is he in them that speaks, or
else the Serpent speaks; but it was Christ Jesus that spoke in those holy
women, for they were filled with his holy spirit of Truth, and prophesied
sweetly in his Name.

It was the serpent that instructed Eve when she taught her husband, Adam, to
break God's command, and to eat of the fruit of the forbidden Tree; and you may
see what was the end of such eating; O cursed Doctrine! for they were both
driven out of the Garden of God, to the ground that brought for thorns and
thistles; it is to be lamented that we have too many teachers, such as Eve was,
in this our Age, Day and Generation, both of men and women, as clearly
appears by the fruits their inward ground brings forth, to wit, Briars,
Thorns and Thistles; but such Earth (said Paul, Heb. 6. 8.) is rejected, and is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Such Teaching as this, such
Doctrine as this is forbidden both by Law and Gospel, whether it proceed from
men or women. The Women who live in Pride and in the Vanities of their Minds,
cannot be teachers of good things: But Women who are turned to Christ Jesus,
and by him redeemed out of the vanities of this present evil World, out of the
Lusts of the Flesh, out of the Lusts of the Eyes, and out of the Pride of Life,
being filled with the spirit of Truth; such women's teaching, such women's
praying and prophesying in the Church is not forbidden neither by Law nor
Gospel; they being first taught themselves by the eternal and free spirit of
God, which is poured forth upon daughters as well as sons, upon handmaids as
well as upon menservants, upon the female as well as upon the male; for the
man and the woman is all one in the Lord, it was the serpent that at first made
the difference, and it is the serpent and his instructed that keep up the
difference.

And you who are against Women's speaking in the Church, what do you think of
Anna, the Prophetess, that good old Wid^ow, who spoke of Christ to all them
that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem: Do you think this good old Woman did
right in so doing? This Woman knew him, and gave thanks to the Lord, even in
the Temple, and spoke in the Temple of him, even publicly to them all, and yet
we do not read that she was judged, and rebuked for so doing, neither was she
hurried and put out of Doors, nor put in Prison, nor banished out of the Town;
good old Simeon, who was inspired with the Spirit of God, reproved her not,
neither did he forbid her; but they joined in their Testimony, being filled by
the same Spirit, and gave thanks to the Lord together, and spoke of Christ one
by one, both being in the Temple together, the one spoke after the other, as
they were moved by the same Spirit of God, and as the holy Ghost revealed unto
them, so they brought it forth, they neither added nor diminished: And here was
the good Order, the comely and lively Order, the Man and the Woman in the
Restoration by Christ Jesus, made Meet-helps one to another in the work of the
Gospel, joining their Testimony together, speaking and prophesying of Christ in
the Temple to all them who looked for Redemption in Jerusalem; they are both
recorded in holy Scripture, and their Testimony set down, as you may read, Luke
2. from ver. 25. to 39. the Spirit of God seeing it meet so to do, that the
Mouths of Gainsayers may be stopped.

But such teaching as Potiphars Wife taught Joseph (Genesis 39. 12.) is to be
resisted and denied, for she enticed and taught him to commit Adultery, and so
to defile the Temple of God; read 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. and chap. 6. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19.

But such teaching as King Lemuels Mother taught him, is to be obeyed; for she
taught him, not to give his strength unto Women, nor his ways to that which
destroys Kings: It is not for Kings, O Lemuel! it is not for Kings to drink
Wine, nor for Princes strong Drink, lest they drink and forget the Law, and
pervert the Judgment of any of the Afflicted, etc. Such Doctrine as this, such
Teaching as this, such a Prophecy as this is to be believed, and obeyed, and
not slighted nor quenched; such a Woman as this might be permitted to speak and
prophecy in the Church, though even before Kings and Princes. And O that our
King and Rulers would follow her Advice, it would be better with them then it
is! read Prove. 31. from ver. 1. to 10.

Such teaching as Jezebel taught the Elders and Nobles (so called) but they
proved ignoble in their proceedings, in the receiving the Testimony of false
Witnesses against Naboth, and in murdering of him: I say, the counsel and
advice she gave these Elders and Nobles that lived in outward Jezrel with
Naboth, is to be denied and resisted, and will be denied and resisted by all
them who live and dwell in inward Jezreel (to wit, in the Seed of God) for she
taught them to set up false Witnesses, and to murder Naboth, to fulfill the the
covetous desire of her Husband, King Ahab; And also she taught Ahab to take
possession of Naboth's Vineyard, when she had caused him to be murdered. This
Jezebel slew the Prophets of the Lord, and maintained many false Prophets, the
Prophets of Baal, and of the Groves, at her own Table, they fed upon the fatest
of things at the Queen's Table, while the Prophets of the Lord, even those of
them that had escaped her murdering Arm, had nothing but Bread and Water, fed
by Obadiah secretly in Caves. Such teaching as this, that teaches People to
slay and murder, and shed Blood for covetous ends and practices, and to
maintain their Pride and Galantry, or for any other Selfish-ends, is to be
denied and testified against.

It is to be lamented, that we have too many Jezebelians in this our Age, who
teach People to slay and murder, and shed Blood, maintaining her Prophets with
large allowances at her Table, while the Mediator of the New Testament, Christ
Jesus, the heavenly Prophet, has nothing amongst them, but the fruitless
Fig Tree, and has not whereon to lay his Head in all the Earth of their
Hearts: And his Servants, both Men and Women, who follow him the heavenly
Light, are accounted by those Jezebelians, not worthy to live in the Earth. But
Jezebel's day is near an end, and her Night is fast approaching, wherein she
will be cast into a Bed, and them that commit Adultry with her, into great
Tribulation, except they Repent of their Deeds, the Sword is drawn against her
Children, and has drunk some of their Blood already. O that they may repent,
and prevent a further and heavier stroke.

But such teaching, and such an advice as Abigail gave to David, is to be
received and obeyed; for she counseled him not to shed Blood, neither to
avenge himself with his own Hand. And David when he came to the coolness of his
mind, knew that she was sent of God, and said to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy Advice;
and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from coming to shed Blood, and
from avenging my self with my own Hand. O that all men and women would take
notice of this blessed Advice and Counsel, given by a Woman! Here the Lord sent
the Woman to advise and counsel the Man, and David hearkened to her Voice, and
obeyed her Counsel, and took her Advice, and he never had reason to repent it;
the Seed of the Woman at this time trod upon the Head of the murdering Serpent.
O that our Nation were filled with many such Women like Abigail, to give good
counsel unto Men, and that our men would receive their counsel, and not avenge
themselves with their own Hand, but leave all Vengeance to him with whom it is
to take Vengeance on his Adversaries, and Recompense the wrong done unto his
Servants. And you may see how quickly the Lord pleaded David's Cause and his
Reproach with churlish Nabal.

But such teaching as Job's Wife taught him, and such an advice as she gave
him, is to be resisted and denied, as righteous Job did, for she taught and
advised him to curse God and dye; But Job told her, that she spoke like one of
the foolish Women; Should we, said he, receive good at the Hands of God, and
not receive evil also?

And Solomon when he was old, his Wives turned away his Heart from the Lord, to
follow after the Abominations of the Nations, so that his Heart was not perfect
with the Lord: Such Women's teachings, snares and inticements are to be denied
and resisted.

And also such teaching and instruction as Herodias, Philip's Wife, gave unto
her dancing Daughter, is not of God, the Serpent is Head in such, the bloody
Dragon rules in such; read Matthew. 14. And such are to be testified against, for
it is the Serpent's Voice, the Antichristian Voice that sounds through such,
and not the Voice of Christ.

Abraham was commanded of God to hearken unto the Voice of Sarah, and cast out
the Bond-women Hagar, with her mocking Son Ishmael; and although the thing was
very grievous in his sight, yet he resisted not, but obeyed the Voice of his
Wife: Here was no Usurpation (as is vainly supposed) the thing was right before
the Lord; Sarah was to be hearkened unto in this thing, the Bondwoman was not
to rule in the house with her, she was the Free Woman, neither was her Son
Ishmael the mocker, to be Heir with the Child of Promise, Isaac the righteous
Seed: And yet Sarah was in subjection to her own Husband, and called him, Lord;
and so is every Woman that is truly leavened with the Spirit of God. And Christ
is greater than Abraham, who is the Head and Husband of all the Daughters of
Zion; and these Women who have Christ to their heavenly Husband and Head, they
will never be found out of their Duty and lawful Subjection to their natural
Husbands, if they have any. And it is only those Women (be they outwardly
joined to a Husband, or free) who are married to Christ, and he Lord in them,
and Head in them, that are permitted and allowed to speak in the Church, and by
him they are strengthened and assisted to be teachers of good things. The
King's Daughter is all glorious within, and it is from this Glory within,
Christ Jesus in them, that they do prophecy and speak in the Church, or else
their Doctrine is not received, but rejected by the Children of Light, be they
Male or Female. The Lord has given a good measure of discerning to many in
this day, and has opened that Ear in many, that can try and taste Words, as
the Mouth does Meat, and know from what Fountain every Word comes.

Such teaching as the Woman of Samaria taught the Men of Samaria, John 4. 29.
is not to be slighted and neglected, she said unto them, Come, see a man that
told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ? And many of the
Samaritans of the City believed on him for the saying of the Woman, and came
unto Christ, and were confirmed in their Faith: Here was an effectual Preacher,
and here was an open hearted People; she was made Instrumental to them, in that
she prevailed with the People; and they were a noble minded People, because
they received her Testimony, and came unto Christ, and so was confirmed in the
truth of her Testimony. O! how may the Professors of this Age be ashamed and
confounded in themselves when they read this; the Samaritans believed, but they
will not believe. The Lord has sent out his Servants and faithful Messengers,
both Male and Female, to invite you all to come unto Christ, and to turn unto
Christ's Light in you. And our Testimony is, and has been all along since God
raised us up to be a People, that this is he, and not another, that tells us
all things whatsoever we have done: It is he, and not another, that searches
the Heart of every man and woman, and tries their Reigns, and shows unto
them their Thoughts; but oh, alas! who among you believes our Report? or who
among you believes the Testimony of the holy Scriptures, concerning this first
and only Principle of the Doctrine of Christ Jesus? see Jer. 17. 10. see also
Psalm. 7. 9. and 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. and Rev. 2. 23. and Amos 4. 13. See and read
these Scriptures; for if you will not believe Moses and the Prophets, neither
will you believe though one were raised from the Dead and sent to you: And my
Testimony is one and the same with the holy men of God, That he that forms
the Mountains and creates the Wind, and declares unto Man what is his
Thought, and makes the Morning darkness, and treads upon the high places of
the Earth, the Lord, the God of Hosts is his Name. And Paul, the faithful
Servant of Jesus Christ, says, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be
in the Faith, prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates. Oh! who among you receives this,
that Christ Jesus the Son of God is in you? Have you yet turned your Minds,
with your whole Affections and Desires to him in you? You say you believe the
Scriptures, and that Paul was a true and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ; if
you do, than take his Counsel, and obey the Scriptures, and turn to him in you,
and you will find that a day in his Courts, is better than a thousand
elsewhere. O turn you, turn you, speedily and in haste to Christ Jesus, the
true Light in you, which searches your Hearts and tries your Reins; I say,
turn while your Day lasts, and while the precious Light is in you, and while
his Spirit striveth with you, lest his Spirit cease striving with you any more,
and your Day pass over, and the Door be shut, and you without, left in a Night
of utter Darkness: O dreadful Darkness! etc. But now to our purpose in hand.

Exodus 15. 20. And Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of Aaron, took a Timbrel
in her Hand, and all the Women went out after her with Timbrels and with
Dances, and Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed
gloriously, the Horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea. Here were
Women assembled to Praise the Lord, in the day when God delivered his People
out of Egypt; and here was Songs of Deliverance sung unto the Lord by holy
Women, in the day when God had thrown the Horse and his Rider into the Sea.
Here was Women met, and here was Women Prophetesses, a part from the Men, and
yet we read not that Moses reproved them, nor that Aaron reproved them.

And now in this Day, wherein God is delivering his spiritual Israel out of
Egypt, from under the Bondage of spiritual Pharaoh, and bringing them through
the Red Sea, and by his mighty Power and outstretched Arm casting the Horse and
his Rider, to wit, the Beast and the Whore, into the bottom of the Sea. I say,
in this day, our Women in their travel being made Witnesses of the Work of God,
and of the wonderful Deliverances wrought by his outstretched Arm of Power,
cannot but meet together, and praise God together without outward Symbals, and
speak often one to another, and stir up one another in the Grace of God that
brings their Salvation, and has called them, and brought them out of Darkness,
to be partakers with his Saints in Light. And they who are against them in this
Practice of meeting together, and of prophesying one by one when met together,
and Praying and Praising together; I say, they who are against them in this
holy and comely Order, are not of Moses's Spirit, nor of Aaron's Spirit, but in
a contrary Spirit, Numb. 11. 29. Would God that all the Lords People were
Prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them And the Lords People
are Women as well as Men, Daughters as well as Sons, Hand-maidens as well as
Menservants, as before is said.

Zach. 12. 12. And the Land shall mourn every Family apart; the Family of the
House of David apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the House of Nathan
apart, and their Wives apart; the Family of the House of Levi apart, and their
Wives apart; the Family of Shimei apart, and their Wives apart; All the
Families that remain, [Mark, that remain] every Family apart, and their Wives
apart.

Here the Prophet of the Lord Zachariah tells us, that there shall be Men and
Women's Meetings, both apart the one from the other.

Object. But some may say, This is in the days of Mourning, etc.

Answ. Yea, it is in the day of Mourning; for the day of Mourning goes before
the day of Joy and Rejoicing: Blessed are they (said Christ, Matthew. 5. 4.) that
Mourn, for they shall be Comforted. And the reason of their Mourning is given
in the 10th Verse of Zach. 12. They shall look upon me whom they have Pierced,
and they shall Mourn for him, etc. And so you may see that the gathering is to
him, whom they have pierced. [And if they were to Mourn apart, then who shall
hinder their Rejoicing and Praising God apart, when the time is come?] Rev. 1.
7. Behold, he comes with Clouds, (mark) and every Eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him; and all Kindreds of the Earth shall Wail because of
him; even so, Amen. And the gathering is, and must be to him whom they have
pierced, when the Lord opens the Eyes both of the Male and Female, to see him
whom they have pierced: they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only
Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
firstborn. They that sow in Tears shall reap in Joy (Psalm. 126. 5.) Those
Women who were gathered together, to mourn for him who was crucified and
pierced, it was not long that they had waited at the Sepulcher Mourning, till
they were made Witnesses of his Resurrection, and then joy and gladness filled
their Hearts; yea, these holy Women were made Witnesses before the Men, the
Lord seeing it meet in his Wisdom to reveal himself to, and in the weaker
Vessels, that he may stain the Pride of all Flesh, and bring into contempt all
the honorable of the Earth.

Matthew. 27. 55, 56. And many Women were there (beholding afar off) which
followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him. Here was Women Ministers,
ministering unto Christ, among which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the Mother of
James and Joses, and the Mother of Zebedee's Children. Here was a Meeting of
Women following Jesus from Galilee. And who can forbid a gathering of Women,
following the Light of Christ, out of the World, from all its Affections and
Lusts, even through the Cross to the Death, that they may witness through him
the Resurrection unto Life eternal, and so rejoice and praise him together?

Mark 16. 9. Now when Jesus was risen early, the first day of the Week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven Devils, and she
went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. Here was
Mourners and Weepers in the men's Meeting, as well as among the Women.

And who can forbid the Women to come to the Men, and declare it to the men,
when they are made Witnesses of the Resurrection of the Life of Jesus Christ in
their own Hearts, as Mary Magdalen did to the Apostles.

Acts 16. 13. And on the Sabbath we went out of the City by a Riverside, where
Prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down, and spoke unto the Women which
resorted thither. Here was a Woman's meeting by a Riverside: And here Paul and
those that were with him, came and sat down with them, and Paul spoke to them,
and the Lord opened Lydia's Heart. So as men feel a freedom from the Lord, and
a true desire raised up in them, they may go to the women's meetings, and visit
the women's meetings, and sit down with them, and wait upon the Lord together,
and Pray and Prophecy together, and Praise the Lord together.

Deborah was a Prophetess, and judged Israel, and was a Mother in Israel; and
what a Prophecy she prophesied in the Name of the Lord, and what gracious Words
proceeded from the Spirit of God through her, you may read at large in the
fourth and fifth Chapter of Judges.

Hannah was a good Woman, and she prayed in her Heart, and spoke in her Heart
unto the Lord, and the Lord heard her, and gave her her Request; he gave her
Samuel, and Samuel was one of the Lords Prophets; and after she had brought
forth her firstborn, she rendered Thanks unto the Lord: and what gracious Words
came from Gods own Spirit in this Woman, you may read, 1 Samuel 2.

And there was a wise Woman in Abel of Beth-maacah, who gave good Counsel unto
Joab, and to the men of the City, and delivered the City from Destruction; she
was one that was peaceable and faithful, and a Mother in Israel, as you may
read, 2 Samuel 20. Such women as these may be permitted to speak in the Church,
and will not be hindered nor stopped by the Righteous: But the covetous proud
Priesthood of this Generation is of another mind, warring against the
appearance of God, both in the Male and Female, forbidding all either to Preach
or Prophecy, except those who are approved and licensed by themselves, and has
received-their Mark; but their Building is shaken, and their Foundation
discovered, and their Power is broken and scattered, and the Consumption
determined, is come and coming upon them; read Zach. 14. 12, 13.

And you may read 2 King. 22. How Hilkiah the Priest found the Book of the Law
in the House of the Lord, and gave it to Shaphan the Scribe, and he read it,
and also he read it to the King; and we see how tender the Heart of good Josiah
the King was, and how he rent his Clothes and humbled himself, and how he sent
Hilkiah the Priest, and others of his Counselors, to enquire of the Lord for
him and the People, and for all Judah, concerning the words of the Book of the
Law, that had been lost, and was found in the House of God; for the King
perceived that the Wrath of the Lord was great against them, because they and
their Fathers had not hearkened unto the words of the Book of the Law, to do
accordingly to what there was written; and they went unto Huldah the
Prophetess, and enquired at her.

What! was there not a Prophet in all Jerusalem nor in Judea to enquire at,
that they went to the Prophetess? Was there not a man that knew the Word of the
Lord, that they went to a Woman? Yea, there was; howbeit they went to a woman,
and the Lord spoke to them by a woman; They read the Words in the Book of the
Law without them, Jer. 1. 2. But this woman read in the Book of Life.

Come, hear all you who despise Women's Teaching and Prophesying in the Church,
answer me plainly, What do you think of this Woman? If she were in your days,
would you not forbid her, and tell her, that women are not permitted to teach
or prophecy, and that Paul permits not a Woman to speak in the Church? Oh!
that the Lord God may open your Eyes to see and know what Women those are that
Paul speaks of there, and then I know, that the best of you who are against
holy Women's speaking in the Church, would be quiet your selves, and forbear
speaking in the Church till ye come to dwell in that holy Spirit wherein this
holy Woman Huldah dwelt; for I here declare, that all men, as well as women,
that is, in their first fallen estate, in their first birth, in old Adam's
nature, let them be never so gloriously adorned with knowledge, learning and
wisdom, arts, parts and sciences, I say, they are nothing then but Women not
permitted to speak in Christ's Church. But in the new and second Birth, the man
and the woman is all one in the Lord; and the man and the woman that comes
through the Cross of Christ to have the first man crucified and slain in them,
and the second birth brought forth in them, and they being born again, not of
corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and
abides sorever; I say, be it either man or woman that comes to this state, may
preach and prophecy in the Church, and speak, and pray, and praise God in the
Church; for it is not they that speak, but it is Christ Jesus that speaks in
them, they being nothing but the empty Pitcher, until the heavenly Light and
Life appear, and Christ does utter his Voice through their earthly Tabernacles;
for we preach not our selves, (said Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6, 7.) but Christ Jesus
the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake; for God who commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the
Light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, (see
also Mat. 17. 2.) But we have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the
excellency of the Power may be of GOD, and not of US.

There is a great Mystery lies hidden in all the Scriptures of Truth, which
the first man sees not, and knows not; but it is opened in the Light of the
Lord, in the glorious face of Jesus Christ, to the truly sincere and seeking
Soul, who loves the Light and hates Darkness; I say, in this 14 verse. of the 22
chap. of 2 King. there lies open a clear Manifestation of the place and
dwelling of a true Prophet or Prophetess; the enlightn'd Mind does see it in
the openings of the Springs of Life, in the face of Jesus Christ they see it)
whose face does shine as the Sun in his strength, and his Raiment is white as
the Light: O that the vail were taken off all hearts, and that the eyes of all
might be opened and anointed with Christ's Eye Salve, that they may see and
believe in him, and turn to him who rends the vail and breaks down the middle
wall of partition; it is the true Light and Life (in man and in woman) of
Christ Jesus in them, that opens all the Mysteries of his Father's Kingdom.

The King and his Nobles, and Hilkiah the Priest had a knowledge of God and his
Law by holy History, and by Report and Hearsay, and they were zealously
affected and real so far as they did know; but Huldah, that godly Woman was
come to the holy Spirit of Prophecy, where she knew and heard the Voice of God
immediately, and saw him by the seeing of the Eye of her Soul, as Job did.

The King, and the Priest, and the Scribe, and the rest of the King's
Counselors had the outward Book of the Law, which was found in the outward
Temple, opened unto them: But Huldah, this godly Women and Prophetess of the
Lord had the inward Book of the Law, which she had found in ^he inward Temple,
opened unto her by ^im, who opens the Seals in all Ages, even Christ Jesus
the Lamb of God, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, the Root and Offspring of
David, the bright and morning Star, the Light and Life of men; I say, ^e had
opened the Book of Life unto Huldah, and does open it to all who believe in and
follow him, both Men and Women.

They read in the Law and believed it, and were humbled before the Lord, and
their hearts were tendered, and they wept; and this was and is acceptable with
God in its time and place; Oh! that this were the case with Kings, Nobles and
People this day, wherein there is as great a Cloud of Wrath hanging over our
heads, and ready to be poured forth because of our Transgressions, Iniquities
and Rebellions, as ever hung over the heads of Israel in the days of old, we
are guilty of the like Transgressions, and may expect the same Punishments, if
speedy and unfeigned Repentance prevent it not; and it would have been poured
out long ever now, but that the Lord waits to be gracious, and is calling and
hastening People out of Sodom, that they be not consumed in the Flames of
eternal Vengeance. Oh! this Land is guilty, guilty, let great and small, and
Persons of all ranks and degrees lay it to heart. But to return to our purpose
in hand.

The King, and the Priest, and the Scribe, and the rest, read and heard read
the Book of the Law written by Moses and others of the Lords Prophets, and
believed what was written, and was humbled before the Lord, when they heard of
the Wrath denounced because of their Iniquities and Rebellions; and this (as I
said before) was acceptable with God in its time and place: But men and women
are not to stay here, nor set up their standard here, but they are to travel
on, till they come to witness deliverance from the Evil, against which the
Wrath is denounced; and till they come to travel beyond the Historical
knowledge and hearsay, and be made partakers of the Life it self, even the
Life of the Son of God, manifested in their earthen Vessels, and they being
born again, without which they can neither see, nor enter the Kingdom of God,
nor hear the Voice of God in his own Kingdom. Huldah was come here, and had her
dwelling here, to wit, into the new Birth, and here she read in the Book of
Life, and heard the Word of the Lord; And the King, and the Priest, and ^he
rest knew this, and therefore was not ^atisfied with what they could learn from
^he Letter of the Law, till they went and ^nquired at her, who knew the Word of
^he Lord; and what effect the Word of ^he Lord, through this good Woman, had
upon good King Josiah, and the rest, you may read, 2 King. 23.

There is one thing more, which comes before me, which I may not let pass, and
that is, the grievous mistake of the Letter-learned, who prosess themselves to
be the only men; and I verily think, believe themselves to be the only men that
are endued with Wisdom, and Gifts to govern the People, and to teach the People
the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, which Kingdom of Heaven signifies in
Scripture Language, Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost; (Romans 14.
17, 18.) For he, (says Paul) that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God, and approved of Men. But what Righteousness we have had, and
how much Peace we have enjoyed under these Letter-learned men's government and
teaching, let the present Broils and Contentions that are found amongst their
Followers and Scholars bear witness: You may see in this 14th Verse of 2 Kings
Chap. 22. The Translators of the Scriptures call it the College where Huldah
that holy Prophetess dwelt; they (to wit, the Letter-learned men) imagining
that none can be a Prophet but those who have dwelt in their Colleges, and are
trained up there; this College they account their second part; their English
and Grammar Schools they account their first part. First, they put their Sons
to the English and Grammer-Schools, being their first part; and when learned
there, then they put them to the College, which is their second part, and when
learned there, then commonly comes forth three sorts, to wit, Lawyers,
Physicians, and those they call Divines, Ministers, etc. But to let pass the
first two, I intend to speak something concerning the third, to wit, these men
called Ministers thus prepared in their Grammar-Schools and Colleges. Now
being passed through these two parts, and learned there, and have served their
Apprenticeships there, and approved by their Teachers there, and made Master
John and Master James, etc. there; (contrary to Christ's command, Mat. 23. 8.)
then they come forth as Journeymen, and take what employment they can have
amongst their Kindred, Acquaintance and Relations, and amongst the men of their
own Trade; some of them go home to their Friends and Relations, and are
maintained by them till they be prefered to some place or other; and others go
among the men of their own Trade, and Preach here and there where they are
employed, crouching to them (as it is said concerning those, 1 Samuel 2. 36.) for
a piece of Silver and a morsel of Bread, saying, Put me (I pray thee) into one
of the Priests Offices, that I may eat a piece of Bread. Others of them go and
seek out a place where they may sojourn, and are hired many of them for so much
a Year, by the great Men and great Women of the Nation, to be their Chaplains;
and there they stay till they be prefered to some Parish or other, where they
get a larger allowance of Wages and Hire; just as the Young Man the Levite did,
(Judge. 17.) where he hired himself with Micah for ten Shekels of Silver by the
Year, and a suit of Apparel, and there he stayed till he found a better place,
and greater preferment with the Danites, as you may read, Judge. 18.

And so they having read and studied Letter-Authors and Histories, come forth
Ministers of the Letter and History, not of the Spirit. But in this our Age
these Letter-learned men bring not the People to know the History of the holy
Scriptures truly as it is, but corrupts their Understandings, darkening their
Minds with their dark and doubtful Expositions and Meanings, deceiving the
Hearts of the simple with their fair Words and eloquent Speeches.

Let none mistake me here, for I have nothing of enmity or hatred in my heart
against any Bishop, Priest or Minister (so called) in all the World, but love
and good will to them, as they are Men, and the Creatures of God; only that
which I feel that the Spirit of God in me is pressing after, is that Deceit may
be discovered, and Truth manifested unto all, and that all may come to see and
embrace that Truth that sets free from Sin, Deceit and Falsehood.

And there was a little Maid that waited on Naaman's Wife (as you may read, 2
King. 5.) and she gave good Counsel unto her Mistress, and wished that her Lord
were with the Prophet in Samaria, for he would recover him of his Leprosy.
Here was good Counsel given by a little Maid; a good Advice indeed, for it had
a good effect, Naaman obeyed her Counsel, and went to the man of God Elisha,
and he directed him what to do, and after he had obeyed the Prophet, he was
made ^ witness of the cleansing virtue of Jordan.

And now in this our day, Wisdom has sent forth her faithful and chaste
Am^assadors, [which the wise Man is ^ot ashamed to entitule by the Name of ^er
Maidens] entreating all, and inviting ^ll, and wishing that all, both great men
and great women, Poor and Rich would come unto the Prophet, whom God has
appointed and ordained for Salvation to the ends of the Earth, that he might
direct them how to be cleansed and washed from the Leprosy of Sin. The little
Maid directed Naaman to the Prophet in Samaria: And these in this day, whom the
Lord sends forth (both Male and Female) direct them to the true Light in
themselves, the Witness of God, Christ Jesus in them, that he may direct every
one of them what to do to have the Leprosy of Sin done away, and Iniquity
purged out. And as the Prophet in Samaria directed Naaman to wash seven times
in outward Jordan, to have his outward Leprosy washed away; so this inward
Prophet, Christ Jesus in us, has directed all who are truly come unto him, to
walk in the Light, with which he has lighted them, till they witness his
precious Blood to cleanse them from all Sin; and all who have obeyed him, and
continued walking and abiding in his Light, have witnessed that Jordan in
themselves to have a precious virtue to cleanse from the Leprosy of Sin; and
this we feel, that the oftener we wash in this heavenly Jordan, the cleaner we
are, and the more tender we are, that even some have their inward Flesh, or
heart of Flesh, made as tender as the flesh of a new born Babe. But who has
believed our Report, and turned at the Reproofs of Wisdom? to them is the Arm
and Power of the Lord revealed: But to them who are disobedient, the Stone
which the Builders refused in all Ages, and the Babylonish Builders refuse in
this Age, is become a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of Offense; but to us who
believe he is precious, and we have felt his cleansing and healing Virtue,
glory to his Name forever. In this History concerning Naaman I take notice of
several clear things, opened to me by the Light of the Lord.

First, we see that after Naaman had given car to the Advice and Counsel of the
little Maid; he went to the King of Syria, his Master, who was so far from
hindering him, that he writ a Letter with him, and directed it to the King of
Israel; but herein he was mistaken, for he should have directed Naaman to the
Prophet, according to the little Maids Advice. And we see likewise how the King
of Israel thought that the King of Syria was seeking a Quarrel against him, as
you may read at large in 2 Kings 5. Now the little Maid had not directed him to
the King, but to go to the Prophet, for the King could not do it: And so there
Jealousies arose from a Mistake, as too to many do this day: Many are the
Quarrellings, Contendings, Warrings and Fightings, that arise from Mistakes;
one Party crying, Lo here, and another Party crying, Lo there is Christ: And to
tell the truth, neither of them knowing where is Christ. And when Wisdom's
little Maidens direct them both, and all of them to the true Light in
themselves, to Christ, the true Prophet in themselves, they reject their Advice
and Counsel, and say, it is not he; calling his Light in them but natural and
insufficient for them, and many of them give it very bad Names, and so reject
it, and turn from it, and fall a quarrelling and fighting among themselves
again, contending for the true Christ, when neither of them has him revealed,
as appears by their Fruits.

Now when Elisha, the man of God, heard that the King had rent his Clothes,
that he sent to the King, saying, Wherefore have thou rent thy Clothes? let him
come now to me, and he shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel. O that all
Kings and Rulers were turned to the true Prophet Christ Jesus, to the true
Light in themselves, and would direct all their People to him, then their Rents
and Divisions would quickly come to an end; for he is the Healer of the
Breaches, and he is the Prince of Peace, all his subjects are peaceable, their
Song is, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace and good Will toward
men.

Now when Naaman was come to the Prophet, he directed him to wash in Jordan
seven times, and be clean; but Naaman was wroth, because the manner of his Cure
came not according to what he had imagined to himself, as you may read in the
11 and 12 verses of that chapter; but his Servants gave him good counsel. So
you may see that it is good for great Men to have good Servants, that may give
good counsel in the time of need, and pacify wrath in time of Anger; and it is
good for Masters to take Advice from honest faithful Servants; for if Naaman
h^d gone away in his wrath, and not taken his Servants counsel to obey the
Prophet, his L^prosie had remained with him, and he had not been cured.

There one thing more that I cannot let pass, before I proceed to another
place, and that is concerning the Covetousness of Gehazi: We see that the
Prophet of the Lord Elisha would receive none of Naaman's gifts, and although
he urged him, yet he refused: Here is a true mark of a Prophet of the Lord, and
of a Disciple of Jesus Christ; freely they receive from the Lord, and freely
they give to the People; they covet no man's Gold, Silver nor Apparel. Honest
Paul, who was a faithful Minister and Apostle of Jesus Christ, was such an one,
as is witnessed, Matthew. 10. 7, 8. As ye go, Preach, saying, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; heal the Sick, cleanse the Lepers, raise the Dead, cast out
Devils; freely ye have received, freely give. Also read Acts 20. 34, 35. 1 Cor.
4. 11, 12. 2 These. 3. 8.

But Gehazi received them, and run after Naaman with a Lie in his Mouth, to get
the Silver, and to get the Garments; as too to many this day run after the
great Men and great Women of the Nations, with a Lie in their Mouth, coveting
the Gold, and the Silver, and the Apparel. But what should I say more? the
Leprosy of Naaman did cleave unto Gehazi, and the Leprosy of Gehazi does
cleave to his Seed forever, according to the Prophets words. And now the
Gehazians have lost the knowledge of the true Prophet, and they have lost the
knowledge of spiritual Jordan, and therefore their Leprosy remains, their Sin
remains, their Defilements remain, and they have now lost hope of ever being
cleansed on this side of the Grave, and preach this for Doctrine to the People:
And they are very angry with any that speak of a possibility of being made
clean; For a Body of Death and Sin (say they) will remain, and Imperfection
will remain while we are on this side of the Grave.

But what have I to do with them? or what should I say more of them? for the
Day breaks, and the Light arises, wherein they shall be made manifest to
all, that will but open their Eyes to see them; and they that will not, must
continue in blindness; and at present I will leave them with that saying of
Christ, Matthew. 15. 14. Let them alone, they be blind Leaders of the Blind, etc.
And now to our purpose in hand.

Phlip, the Evangelist had four Daughters, Virgins, which did Prophecy, as you
may read, Acts 21. 8, 9. And Paul and others of the Disciples tarried many
days in Philip's House; and yet we do not read that Paul reproved them for
prophesying. So here you may see that in those days there was Daughters that
had the Spirit of Prophecy, and did Prophecy.

And also we read Acts 18. 26. That not only Aquila, but also Priscilla his
Wife, were Expounders of the Way of God; and Aquila was a Tradesman and
Tentmaker, and Paul was of the same Craft.

And we read in Phil 4. 3. That there were Women which labored with Paul in
the Gospel. And so you may see that there were Women-labourers in the Gospel,
as well as Men; and yet we read not that Paul rejected their labor, because
they were Women. And so you see there were Women-Prophetesses,
Women-Expounders, and Women-Labourers; and yet not rejected nor reproved by any
of the Apostles, that I read of.

And Paul desires Titus, to speak the things which become sound Doctrine; that
the aged Men be sober, etc. and that the aged Women likewise be in Behavior as
becomes Holiness (or holy Women) not false Accusers, not given to much Wine,
teachers of good things, that they may teach the younger Women to be sober,
etc. read Tit. 2. throughout, and there you will see that Paul allows Women
to be teachers of good things as well as Men; and that Spirit is judged that
would hinder what God aloweth, or stop that mouth which God opens.

And if Women did not meet together, how could the Elder teach the Younger? [Or
it may be queried, If their teaching the younger Women be not most proper,
comely and effectual in a Meeting, apart from the Men?] But it clearly may be
seen, that God allows Women to labor in the Gospel, and to teach good
things; and he has promised to pour out his Spirit upon the Women as well as
the Men; and they are to meet often together, and to speak often one to
another, and to wait upon God together, and think upon his Name together, and
praise his Power together, and call upon his Name together, as well as the Men;
and the elder in the Truth to teach the younger in the Truth.

Obj. But some may say, Seeing it is so clear from the Scriptures of Truth,
that there has been Women laborers in the Work of the Gospel, and
Women-Prophetesses, and Women-Expounders of the Way of God; and that it is
commanded, the Elder Women to teach the Younger, etc. How shall I know what
Women those are that Paul forbids to speak in the Church?

Answ. All Women that are apt to usurp Authority over their Husbands; all Women
that are under the Law, and that have not learned true subjection; and every
Woman that hearkens to the Voice of the Serpent, and is deceived by him, as Eve
was; while they continue in that state, cannot, nor may not be permitted to
speak in the Church of God: And all the Jezebelians, who paint their Faces, and
tire their Heads, and persecute the Prophets of the Lord, and maintain the
false Prophets at their Table, or otherwise; and all them who run greedily
after the Error of Balaam for Reward; and all them who speak evil of the things
they know not; and all the Gehazians who covet Silver, Gold, and Apparel, and
continue to be covered with the Leprosy of Sin to the day of their Death:
These who were Lepers were shut out under the Law, and now they are shut out by
the Spirit of God, none of these can be permitted to speak in Christ's Church:
and all them who deny the new Law of Christ and Covenant of God to be written
in the Hearts of Men and Women; and all them who deny the Unction of the holy
One, and the leadings and guidings of the Spirit of Truth, that leads into all
Truth, to be alone all-sufficient; and all such Ministers as break Christ's
Command, and justify themselves in so do doing, as in calling one another
Master James, and Master John, etc. None of these, while in that state, may or
can be permitted to speak in the Church of God, but if they do, they are to be
testified against; and all them that look for Gain, and seeks for Gain from
their Quarters, and teach for Hire, and divine for Money; and all them who
exercise Lordship over God's Heritage; and all them who beat their
Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the Drunkards; and all them who steal
the Words one from another, and say, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord never
spoke to them; and all them who use unsound Words, and slattering Titles to
please Men, and keep not the form of sound words; and all them that have a form
of Godliness, denying the Power; I say none of these may or can be permitted to
speak in the Church of God; and all those who deny Scripture-Testimony
concerning Christ, and undervalue his divine Precepts and Commands; None of
these may, or can be permitted to speak in Christ's Church. But I had almost
forgot to tell you, and did forget, till the Spirit of Truth brought it to my
remembrance, that it is impossible that either Male or Fe^ale can speak in
Christ's Church, till ^hey be redeemed out of all these; for the ^^ue Church is
in God, and God is in his ^wn Kingdom, where the rebellious, and and
disobedient, and unclean cannot en^er, nor any Man nor Woman can enter Gods
Kingdom till they be born again, and made new in Christ Jesus.

To be short, all who deny the Prophets Doctrine, or Christ's Doctrine, his
di^ine Precepts recorded in holy Scripture, ^r deny the Apostles Doctrine; I
say, ^^ch are not to be permitted to speak in ^he solemn Assemblies of the
Saints; and ^lthough they confess all to be true, yet if ^hey walk contrary in
Life and Practice, ^hey are to be silent in the solemn Assem^lies of the
Righteous. And all the Women that live in Pride and in Covetousness, and in the
vain Adornings of their outward Bodies; and all that are drunken with the Cares
and carnal Pleasures of this present evil World; and all who uses Usurpation
over the Man, outward or inward, are to be silent, and not to speak in the
Congregations of the Righteous. Whoever they be, Man or Woman, that are found
in the first Adam's nature in the fall, they not witnessing a Death to that
first Birth in them, and a Resurrection through Jesus Christ unto Life, in some
measure^ I say, be they man or woman, the Spirit o^ God forbids them speaking
in the Church

And as the Man and the Woman are a^ one in the Lord (being filled by the sam^
Spirit of God) may speak in the Church as the Spirit of God gives them
utterance^ it being not they that speak, but Christ i^ them, the Spirit of
Truth in them.

So the Man and the Woman are all one in old Adam, in the fall, and such old
Creatures may not, nor can be permitted to speak in the Church.

Isa. 49. 22, 23. Thus says the Lord God* Behold I will lift up mine Hand to
the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the People and they shall bring thy
Sons in their Bosom and thy Daughters shall be carried upon their Shoulders;
and Kings shall be thy Nursing-Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing-Mothers,
etc.

Was it not here foretold, that Women also should be nourishers or Nurses in
Christ's Church? And if they be Nurses, they must have something to give to the
Children, and Milk in their Breasts to the Babes: And if a Woman have the Milk
of the Word of God in her Breast, to wit, in her Heart, let her not hide nor
keep it back, but she must give it forth to ^^e hungry Babes; for if she do not
her ^reasts will grow dry.

O! my Soul and Life has traveled with ^he Lord that I might see this day
fulfilled, that this barren Wilderness might become ^ fruitful Field, that
Kings and Queens, ^rinces and their Princesses, Dukes and their Dutchesses, and
all other great Men and great Women, of all Ranks and De^rees whatsoever,
(among whom I have ^welt in the outward from my birth) might ^ome to receive
the Word of Life in themselves, and partake of the Promise in Christ Jesus in
his Church, and that they may ^ome to witness that noble Birth brought forth in
them, that partakes of the Milk of ^he Word of God, and would cause it to issue
abundantly to nourish the hungry Babes and Children of Christ.

O Lord God! I wait for thy Salvation, to see thee perform that word that
sprung in my heart concerning them, even that the Wilderness should become a
fruitful Field, and that the fruitful Field shall become a Wilderness; It is
with thee, O Lord! to do that which no other can do, even to bring down the
high Mountains, and to level the high Hills, and to make thy Way through them,
and to exalt thy Glory in the whole Earth; for thou art God, and there is none
else; with thee all things are possible glory to thy great Name forever and
evermore says my Soul.

Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17, 18. And it shall come to pass that in the last days
(says God I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh; and your Sons and your
Daughters shall Prophecy and your Young Men shall see Visions, and your Old Men
shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants, and on my Hand-maidens, I will pour out
in those days of my Spirit, and they shall Prophecy. And now in this Age, and
in our Day, the Lord is fulfilling his Promise, and his Spirit is poured forth
upon many Sons and Daughters, Servants and Hand-maidens. The Earnest Penny is
already received, and many of them are running to and fro, and trading with
their heavenly Penny, their heavenly Gift, that the may bring the Increase and
Gain to their Lord and Master Christ Jesus. And W^ will be to them who hide
their Lords Money in the Earth, and put their Candl^ under a Bushel of Earth;
and Woe also will be to them who stop, forbid and disturb the Sons and
Daughters, Servants and Handmaidens of the Lord, in their going to and fro, and
improving their Lords money, (to wit, their heavenly Gift) that knowledge may
be increased; I say, woe and misery will be the portion of such who distrub and
stop them in their Travel, if they Repent not.

Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Be Wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with Trembling; kiss
the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way: When his wrath is kindled
but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him: If you rebel
against him till his Wrath be kindled against you, he will break you and dash
you to pieces, one against another, like a Potters Vessel.

And now you may see, that the Promise is to Daughters as well as to Sons, to
Handmaidens as well as to Menservants; and that the one shall prophecy as
truly as the other.

Hugh Wood.

THE END.

