The Examination of TILENVS before the Triers; In order to his intended
settlement in the office of a public Preacher in the Commonwealth of UTOPIA.

Whereunto are annexed The Tenants of the Remonstrants touching those five
Articles Voted, Stated and imposed, but not disputed, at the Synod of DORT.

Together with a short Essay (by way of Annotations) upon the Fundamental
Theses of Mr. Thomas Parker.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1658.

(...)

THE EXAMINATION OF TILENVS in VTOPIA.

The Praefatory Epistle. Viro pari, and familiari meo M. S. P.
MY dear and good friend, these Papers come now to your hands, to give you
assurance, that my many late discourses upon the subjects here treated of, were
in good earnest. What ever it was that occasioned the forming of my conceptions
into this shape, there is nothing in the world has had a greater hand (if so
it may be said of motives) to give them birth, than your Passionate opposition.
For I am weary of those debates by word of mouth, wherein men of much zeal and
prejudice grow so hot and so far transported, that instead of solid arguments
advancing orderly under the command of sober Reason, they can Levy no other
forces but froath and choler to assist them. That I may no more break the peace
(in this kind) with you, nor endanger making the least flaw in that dear
friendship, that has by so long a conversation grown up to so great a height
betwixt us; I have resolved to take this calmer course, to give an account of
some grounds of my present persuasions, wherein I differ from your judgment.
Perhaps they may sometime or other find your affections so quiet, your
understanding so well awakened, and your Will so Willing to stand neuter, till
these truths have a fair and full hearing, that they may make a better
impression than hitherto they have had opportunity to do, upon you. And because
I remember (in some heat of dispute) you have thrown some things upon me,
(which were not so much faults in me, as prejudices and scandals taken up by
your self) I shall briefly wipe them off, that such rubs being removed out of
your way, you may have the less objection to fright you from a further inquiry
into the Articles under question.

And now, I beseech you, in the first place, to upbraid me no more with the
errors of my education (for so I must now account them;) because the greater
the prejudices were which were instil'd into me against these doctrines, the
greater you ought to conclude the light to be, which has wrought this my
present conviction of their truth, and induced me to embrace them, (against all
the charms of interest, and secular advantages, wherewith the world tempts us,
to the contrary.)

Unconstancy (one of your other charges) I confess is sometimes Culpable: but
may we not say so too of Constancy many times; which is therefore resembled
(somwhere) to a fullen Porter, who keeps out better company oftentimes than he
lets in? Our happiness that will be unchangable commenceth in a change; and
it is our duty to turn from darkness to light, though we be called inconstant
for it. We were not born with our eyes open; neither shall we ever see far, if
we look no further than that prospect, which some few admired writers have set
before us; The new man, which we are to put on, is renewed in knowledge and.
[Col. 3. 10.] If we receive our illumination regularly from heaven, that is
given according to the capacity of the subject. We have a dawning first, but
the progress of our light holds a proportion with the sedulity of our studies.
We are never too old to learn in Christ's School. But the great scandal, you
say, is, to profess my self a disciple to such Masters. What Masters do you
mean? I call no man Master on Earth (in this sense) nor ever will give any so
great a dominion over my faith, as to swear allegiance to his doctrines. (I
would others were as free from this yoke of bondage.) But yet I know it is not
only a thing commendable, but a duty to march after the standard of truth what
hand soever carries it before us. And who do you think were the bearers of it?
If you enquire into their learning, (even their adversaries being Judges) they
were as lights shining in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, [Phil. 2.
15.] and if you examine their lives, for piety and justice, they were blameless
and harmless as becomes the sons of God, not more polite in their intellectuals
than unreproveable in their morals, but very eminent in both. And they have
declared their virtues as well in a way of Passive obedience as Active. What
professors were ever more constant and cheerful in their sufferings for the
word of God and for the testimony which they held (having been taught it
(according to their full persuasion) as the truth is in Jesus. [Ephes. 4. 21.]
They have been banished, imprisoned, etc. Insomuch that one of them bespeaks
his fellow soldiers (in this Conflict) after this manner, Vos societatis
Apolog. pro Confess. in Praefat. ad finem.
nostroe decora ac lumina, quorum vincula iam non in Belgio tantum, sed pene
ubique per totum orbem Christianum celebria facta sunt, qui patientia vestra
iam per tot annos invicta atque infracta, adversari is totique adeo mundo fidem
fecistis, Conscientiam Remonstrantibus Pluris esse, quam quicquid uspiam carum
est in mundo. It a Pergite etc. You the lights and glory of our society, whose
bonds are famous throughout the whole Christian world, whose invincible
patience has given proof to your very adversaries and all the world besides,
that the Remonstrants value their conscience, above all things whatsoever.
March on with me, says he, to the mark, By honor and dishonor, by evil
report and good report, as deceivers and yet true: as unknown and yet well
known: as dying and behold we live: as chastened and not killed: as sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet making many rich: as having nothing, and
yet possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6. 8, 9, 10. Thus far he.

But you will say, non poena sed causa, it is not the suffering but the cause
that makes a man a Martyr; and those men run after the error of Pelagius, who
was condemned by the Ancient Fathers as an enemy to the grace of God. To this
I shall return Arminius his own solemn protestation. Inspiciantur capita omnia
Pelagianoe doctrinoe, Examen Thesium Gomari pa. 156. and 157.
prout illa in Synodis Milevitana, Arausicana, and Hierosolymitana enarrantur
and condemnantur, etiam ut a Pontifice Romano Innocentio referuntur; and
adparebit posse quempiam Relagianam doctrinam improbare, and tamen
doctrinoeisti (Gomari sc.) de Praedestinatione, non accedere: and a little
after, Profiteor interea me Pelagiana dogmata, quae ipsis imponuntur a Synodis
supra nominatis, ex animo detestari, and si quis commonstrare possit, ex iis
quae dico, quidpiam sequi, quod illis affine est, sententiam mutaturum and
correcturum. If the protestation of this person be not sufficient to clear the
innocence of these tenants, then take Vossius his Historia Pelagiana, and
Grotius his Disquisitio on that very argument, for their Compurgators. Withal
let us remember the Caveat, which Arminius gives (loco citato) Neque id solum
studio habendum, ut a Pelagiano dogmate recedatur quam longissime: Cavendum
etiam ne in Manichaeismum, aut quod Manichaeismo est intolerabilius, ratione
saltem consequentiae suae incidatur. But you object further, that these tenants
are not agreeable to the doctrine of St. Augustine, the Maule of Heretics, as
he is styled. St. Augustine must give us leave to depart from him, where he
takes leave to depart from all that went before him, and from himself also;
(and which of you will follow him in all he held?) For it is observed, that he
changed his Batteries, as he changed his enemies, and employed other principles
against the Pelagians, than those he used in combating the Manichees, and from
the variety of his opinions in these points it proceeds, that his followers
express themselves in such different terms, that though taught in the same
Sclool, and of the same master, yet they seem (as he says) not to have learnt
the same lesson. And yet we must not deny what Arminius observed (ubi supra)
that St. Augustine might have confuted the Pelagians sufficiently, and yet have
omitted that way of Predestination which he taught. And yet the doctrine of
Predestination, as it is handled by Gomarus and the rest of his persuasion,
differs much from that of St. Augustine, and lays down many things which
Augustine would by no means grant, though the greatest Adversary the Pelagians
had. And therefore your objection that these Tenants are against the doctrine of
the Synod of Dort; is of value, for besides their dissent from all the Ancients
and from St. Augustine himself, the manner of their proceedings, in carrying on
that business against the Remonstrants, were enough alone to beget an
aversation to their doctrine. Take it in their words, who had most reason to be
sensible of the injury. Scrip. Hist Rem. (mihi p. 211.) Where they refer us to
their Historica Narratio, and Antidotum, in which they say, iniquitas (Dordrac.
Synodi) imprimis autem frauds, imposturae, and aequivocationes in Canonibus
Synodicis ad horrendam illam Absolutae Praedestinationis sententiam color
aliquo fucandam and incrustandam usurpatae, clarissime deteguntur. Tilenus, who
was present there, an eye and an ear witness of those transactions, could
discover something: but he spares you. And yet he cannot but tell you, that the
many pitiful shifts, and thin distinctions and horrid expressions, which he
observed to be frequently made use of, by persons of that persuasions have
contributed very much to the rectifying of his judgment. Would it not startle
a man, that were well in his wits, sadly to consider that opinion so stiffly
maintained by Piscator, Maccovius, and diverse others, viz. Pisc. ad amic.
dupl. Vorsti. p. 175. in summase tueti fatetur Deum absolute decrevisse ab
aeterno and efficaciter. ne quispiam hominum plus boni faciat, quam reipsa
facit, aut plus mali omittat, quam reipsa omittit. See the doctrine, of these
Divines recited, Act. Synodal. par. 2. pa. 36, 37.
That God has so predetermined the will of every man to every action, that he
cannot possibly do any more good than he does, nor omit more evil than he
omitteth? What sad inferences may be drawn, and properly enough from this
doctrine? will it not (in the consequence of it) take off the wheels of duty,
and furnish the careless with an excuse, and lay all sin at the door of the
most Holy God? Some of you indeed, to decline the odium of this assertion, do
tell us the quite contrary, and affirm roundly that men may do more good, and
commit less evil if they will? but (see the fallacy) they hold withal, that
for them to will either, the decree of God has made impossible. You may as
well say, that a dog can fly, and a horse become an excellent Philosopher, if
they will. You cannot but take notice when you are treating of these points,
how your doctrines and uses do interfere, and when it has cost you much noise
and sweat to confute, what you account an error, in the doctrine how you are
sain to court the very same opinion to come in, to help you, at a dead lift, in
your exhortation. You deliver it for sound DIVINITY, that Christ died only for
a few, and yet you vehemently urge all men to believe in him, which they cannot
rationally do unless they be persuaded of the contrary. Have you heard the
Preacher inveigh against Apostasy, and yet almost in the same breath, tell his
Audience the Elect can never fall away, and the rest never stood? What is this
but to take away the very subject of that sin? What construction have I known
some men put upon those particles, in those Texts, [Let him that thinks he
stands 1 Cor. 10. 12.] and [What he seems to have Luke 8. 18.] as if they
signified nothing but a bare appearance or misconceit, when it is most evident,
they are either a redundance in the phrase, or imply reality? Hebr. 4. 1. One
while you cry O (...)! and declaim against prying into God's secrets; anon you
are as definitive, as if you had been of God's Counsel, and seem to be angry
that others should pretend to have as good a key to open that Cabinet, as your
selves. You ascribe much to God's Omniscience, and yet you will not allow him
to see future events but by the perspectives and optics of such decrees as
yourselves fancy him to have made to that purpose. Vide infra ad lit. E. ideo
praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordinaverat.
You set up his Sovereignty to confront his other attributes, viz. his Justice
and Mercy, and think you do much honor him in assigning him a power Fateor and
^pse, quod ad communem sentiendi consuetudinem crudum nimis hoc videri; Deum
posse blasphemiam, perjurium, mendacium etc. imperare:- quodotamen verissimum
est in se etc. vid. Szydlovium apud Steph. Curcellaeum, de jure Dei in
Creaturas. p. 25, 26. This is bound up with Armin. Examen Thesium Gomari in
octavo, of small price, and great profit.
to Command Perjury, Lying, Blasphemy, and a prerogative to cast poor innocent
babes into Hell torments; a piece of doctrine which the great Patriarch
certainly never dreamt of, when he expostulated with his Maker, and said, Shall
not the Judge of all the world do right? [Gen. 18. 25.] What think you of that
passage, which an honest ear-witness told me from the mouth of one of your
brethren, that God deals by Reprobates, as the Rat-Catcher does by those
Vermin, who stops up all their avenues and Passages, and then hunts them with
his dogs that he may provoke them to fly in his face? Do such expressions
become the pulpit, or that reverence which should govern our thoughts, when we
speak of the Divine Majesty? But this is one of your excellent artifices to
salve the justice of Gods decree of Reprobation, and because you dishonor him
in the first act of it, [the Praeterition of those forlorn wretches, without
any respect to sin,] you think to make him amends in the later, by saying in
effect, Ant. Thesius ad Sum. Baronis ex Piscatore, Reprobatio facta est nulla
habita peccati ratione: Idem ib. ex Wittak. Cygn. Cant. p. 57. Ibi demum
infinitum (...) and abyssus est divinae discretionis, quando sine peccati
ratione quidam reprobantur.
that he does necessitate them to sin, that he may seem not, to condemn them
without justice. Zanc. de not. Dei. l. 5. c. 2. de praed. part. 4. Resp. ad
postrem. arg. pa. 743, 744. Quia reprobatio immutabilis est etc. damus reprobos
necessitate peccandi eoque and pereundi ex hac Dei ordinatione constringi;
atque it a constringi, ut neque aut non peccare and perire. Et Mox, Non
dubitamus ergo confiteri etc. vide.
For thus, some of your party say, his wisdom has contrived it, and his will
decreed it, and his power brings it to pass insuperably. I know you will shift
this off, by saying that the Reprobates sin voluntarily. But will this plea
more alleviate, or aggravate the cruelty? That holy man could say, It is better
to be in Hell without sin, than in Heaven with it. If a man be cast into the
Goal without fault, he carries the comforts of a good Conscience to help to
bear the burden of his durance; But when his Judge contrives to draw him in to
be a partner in some crime, that the guilt and remordency of his own Conscience
may make an accession to his misery, this leaves him nothing to reflect upon to
mitigate his torments. I pray, by whose decree comes it to pass that the soul
of the Reprobate is polluted at the first. Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 7.
Unde factum est, ut tot gentes, una cum liberis eorum infantibus aeternae morti
involveres lapsus Adae absque remedio, nisi quia Deo ita visum est? -- Decretum
quidem horribile, fateor: inficiare tamen nemo poterit quin praesciverit Deus
quem exitum habiturus esset homo, antequam ipsum conderet, and ideo
praesciverit, quia decreto suo sic ordinarat. Et in responsione ad Calumn.
Nebul. ad artic. 1. Interea hanc meamesse doctrinam agnosco, Non solo Dei pern
issu, sed arcano etiam Consilio lapsum fuisse Adam, omnesque Posteros suo lapsu
in aeternum interitum traxisse. Et paulo post: Quod si Deum naturae legibus
subjicere tibi propositum est, injustitiae eum damnabis, quod ob unius hominis
culpam omnes aeternae mortis reatu tenemur impliciti. Peccavit unus, omnes ad
poenam trahuntur; neque id modo, sed ex unius vitio omnes Contagionem
Contrahunt, ut Corrupti and mortifera labe infecti nascantur. Quid tu ad hoc
bone Censor? An Deum crudelitatis damnabis, quia suos omnes faetus
praecipitaverit in exitium, unius hominis lapsu? Et si enim se and su^s
perdidit Adam, corruptionem tamen, and reatum arcano Dei judicio adscribere
necesse est; quia nihil ad nos unius hominis Culpa, nisi nos coelestis judex
aeterno exitio addiceret. He has also these words: Liberi arbitrii fuisse
dicunt [Adam] ut fortunam ipse sibi fingeret: Deum vero nihil destinasse nisi
ut pro merito eum tractaret. Tam frigidum Commentum (So he calls it) Si
recipitur, ubi eri^ illa Dei omnipotentia, qua secundum arcanum consilium, quod
aliunde non pendet, omnia Moderatur? Vide Iocum. Instit, ubi supra.
Their 1. sin comes to them only by imputation (as diverse of your party do
contend) and that draws all the rest after it by an unavoidable and invincible
necessity, as they acknowledge likewise. Upon which account, God should have
been less severe, if he had cast them into hell innocent, and without any sin
at all, as, you say, he Cast them off, or past them by, at first, without any
respect at all to it. But you have one reserve behind, by the strength whereof
you are confident, after all these disputes and foils, to win the field at
last. Upon the matter you say, Gods decrees could be no other than they are;
For Decreta and liberae Dei actiones sunt ipse Deus: The Decrees of God are God
himself, and therefore to make a conditional decree, were to make a conditional
God, and if Election or Reprobation should have respect to any qualifications
in their objects, this would amount to a denial of Gods Independency. And
having resolved justification to be an immanent act of God, and consequently
God himself: it follows, you say, from the same Topic or principle, that it
must be from all eternity, and that men's sins are remitted before they be
committed, and that it is as impossible for all the most horrid sins in the
world, to cause any interruption of a man's justification, as for Almighty God
to become immutable in his nature and being; that faith serves not as a
condition to qualify us for our actual justification before God, but only for
a mean to procure the sense and feeling thereof in our selves. These opinions
with many others of like import, you say, do unavoidably follow from that one
position, which you think as certain, as if you found it (totidem verbis) in
the Gospel. But that the very foundation, upon which you build so many gros
errors, is it self unsound, you may learn from your own Gomarus, who was once
of that opinion with you, but being afterward awakned to a more clear sight
and mature judgment in this point, he has left arguments enough upon record in
his own writings to confute you; to which purpose I shall subjoyn his own words
presently. Gomar Tom. 3. Disput. 9. These. 28. and seqq.

XXVIII. Ex qua, efficientis decreti. explicatione, gravis illa and ad very Dei
notitiam ac cultum pertinens, controversia; An decretum Dei, sit Deus, nec ne?
comomodissime dirimi potest. Siquidem spectata, cum rei, tum Dei, natura,
negationis veritas, perspicue demonstratur.

XXIX. Nam a natura rei haec demonstratio est; Nulla actio, a consilio and
voluntate Dei libere agente dependens, est Deus: Deus enim, a se, natura est:
non vero, a consilio ac voluntate libere agente, dependet: Atqui decretum Dei,
est actio, a consilio and voluntate Dei, libere agente dependens: Ergo decretum
Dei, non est Deus.

XXX. A natura vero Dei (ut causae efficientis decreti) altera etiam invicta
demonstratio promanat; Deus est ens, absolute necessarium: Decretum Dei non est
ens absolute necessarium. Ergo decretum Dei, non est Deus.

XXXI. Ex quibus etiam (ut alia omittamus) clarissimum, aeternitatis Dei and
decreti discrimen, elucet. Nam ut Dei existentia sit aeternitas ejusdem,
absolute necessaria est. Contra vero, et decreti existentia, a causa, liberrime
agente, dependet, sic ejusdem aeternitas mere arbitraria est: ut quae sic est,
ut non esse potuerit: quemadmodum ex superioribus constat. Ideoque decretum,
non (...), seu eadem prorsus ratione, qua Deus; sed (...), aeternum appellatur.
Ac propterea ex eo, decreti deitas, non firmatur; sed evertitur.

XXXII. Neque tamen, essentiae divinae simplicitatem (qualem Sacrae literae ei
attribuunt) ideo violari, si non omne quod in Deo est, sit Deus, ex actionibus
personalibus (generatione Filii a solo Patre, and spiratione Spiritus sancti,
ab utroque) evincitur.

XXXIII. Eas enim, sic in Deo esse, ut tamen, illaesa illius simplicitate, non
sint Deus, sole clarius apparet. Essentia enim Dei, absolute ac simpliciter,
communis est tribus personis: contra vero actio personalis, ut generatio silii,
non est absolute and simpliciter communis tribus personis; sed propria certae:
Engo actio personalis, non est essentia Dei. Deinde, Deus (...) praedicatur, de
singulis personis divinis: actio personalis Dei, non praedicatur (...) de
singulis personis divinis: Ergo ea non est Deus.

XXXIV. Ideoque mirandum non est, si liberrima voluntatis Dei, in rebus
futuris, pro arbitrio, determinandis, actio, in Deo sit, nec tamen sit Deus.
Idque sane non ignorasse, Clar. Ursinum, apparet ex Catechesis explicatione, ad
quaest. 58. de vita aeterna quaest. 1. etsi minus accurate exponere videatur.




In the mean time, if there be in any one word of this address, more asperity,
than I ought to use, or your self can well digest, I desire you to pardon it,
for Gods honors sake, which I am zealous to vindicate from that foul
impeachment, which something more than a mere jelousie prompts me to believe
your opinions guilty of. Nevertheless, to conclude with the words of the great
Apostle, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us
mind the same thing. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace. [Phil. 3. 16. Ephesians. 4. 3.] I have two things, which I must yet beg of
you upon the score of our old friendship, viz. the continuance of your
affection and your prayers; which I Will assure you, how freely soever you lay
them out, they shall not be cast away upon.

Sir, Your true and faithful friend. N N.

The Printer to the Reader.
THE absence of the Author, and his inconvenient distance from London, has
occasioned some escapes in this first Discourse and the two Tracts annexed. The
Printer therefore thinks it the best instance of pardon, if his Escapes be not
laid upon the Author; And he hopes they are no greater then an ordinary
understanding may amend, and a little charity may forgive.

The Examination of Tilenus before the Triers in UTOPIA.
DR. Absolute. The great prudence an^ piety of the Governors of this
Commonwealth (considering how apt the people are to be influenced by the
principles and examples of their constant Teachers) have been pleased (out of
an ardent zeal to God's glory, and a tender care of men's precious souls) to
think upon a course how their Dominions may be made happy in the settlement of
an able and godly Ministry amongst them; for which purpose they have appointed
Commissioners to examine the gifts of all such as shall be employed in the
office of public preaching. And seeing you have addressed your self to us for
our approbation in order to your Establishment in that office, we hope you
understand the nature and weight thereof. You are to be a Pastor not of beasts,
but of reasonable Creatures, framed after God's own image, and purchased with
his blood. Having undertaken this cbarge, it is incumbent upon you to watch for
those souls under your inspection, as one that must give an account; and what
shall perish through your default will be required at your hands. And that we
may not be sound betrayers of the great trust reposed in us, we must receive
some satisfaction, how you stand qualified for the carrying on so great a work
as you pretend to be now cal^ed unto.

And because it is to be suspected that he who has been so regardless of his
own soul, that he is not sensible of the work of grace in himself, will not be
very zealous in his endeavors to procure it to be wrought in others; therefore
let us be informed in the first place, what assurance you have that you are in
the state of grace?


Tilenus. Sir, I trust, you shall find, that I am no Reprobate.


Dr. Confidence. Methinks you speak very doubtfully?


Tilenus. Sir, I humbly conceive it becomes not me to be too Confident, when
the modesty of the great Apostle, was content (upon occasion) with the very
same expression which I used. 2 Cor. 13. 6.


Mr. Efficax. But can you remember the time and place: when and where that work
of grace was wrought in you? By what means, and upon what occasion?


Tilenus. I suppose they are violent and sudden changes only, (from one
extreme to another,) that fall under such a punctual Observation. Had I with
Mary Magdalen been so notoriously lewd, as to make the City ring of my crimes:
or had I traveled with a design of blood, as Paul did, and procured a
Commission to execute it upon the Church of Christ, my Conversion, if sincere,
in that case, must needs have been very remarkable. Or had I committed
Adultery, and then tempted the injured party with so much artifice to cloak it,
and because I could not, with all the wicked charms of intemperance, prevail to
induce him to it, deliberately contrived and commanded his murder: or had I
(though upon a surprise) so passionately denied and forsworn my Lord and
Master, (as you very well remember who did,) the solemnity requisite to attend
repentance, for such offenses would have made as deep an impression in my
memory, as the frequent inundation of tears did in those transgressors cheeks,
and there would have been no need of red letters in my Calendar to render such
a time Observable with me. But blessed be God! by whose providence it was,
that, being dedicated to the service of Christ in mine Infancy, the Piety of my
Parents took an early care that I should not be alienated from him through the
allurements of the world, for want of a religious education; and from a child
having been acquainted (as Timothy was) with the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make us wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus;
herein I have exercised my self, through the assistance of his grace, to have
always a conscience void of offense toward God and toward men.


Mr. Narrowgrace. You speak as if regeneration came by nature and education.


Tilenus. No, Sir; to say regeneration comes by nature were a Contradiction.


Mr. Takeo'-trust. Do you not remember what the Apostle says, Romans 3. 23. We
have all sinned, and come short of the glory of God. And Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. We are
dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature children of wrath? Can there be
so great a change wrought in a man, as is a change from death to life, and he
have no apprehension or feeling when such a change is wrought in him?


Tilenus. When I reflect upon the exuberance of the Divine grace under the
Gospel, I persuade my self, there is some difference betwixt Christians, born
of faithful and godly parents, and from their childe-hood educated and
instructed in the ways of faith and piety; I say we must make a difference
betwixt these, and those Jews and Gentiles of whom the Apostle speaks, before
they were made Christians. I know you will not allow Heathens to stand in
Competition with the servants of Jesus, devoted to him from their very infancy:
neither is the law and discipline of Moses an equal standard to measure the
dispensations of the grace of Jesus Christ by; and yet, if you consider
Zachary and Elizabeth (who were trained up under the Pedagogie of Moses) and
date their practice of Piety from their youth See 1 King. 18. 12
(as you ought to do, for why should we make an exception where God makes
none?) You will find, that being righteous before God and walking in all the
Commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless, S. Luke 1. 6. they were not
capable of answering your question, When and where and how the work of grace
was wrought in them. Now if the ministration of Moses (which was, in
comparison, a ministration of death) was thus glorious: how shall not the
ministration of Christ, which is the ministration of the spirit, be rather
glorious, 2 Cor. 3. Under the Gospel that Covenant is fully accomplished,
wherein God bound himself to Abraham by the sacred tie of an oath, to grant us
a power to serve him in holiness, and righteousness, all the days of our life.
S. Luke 1. 74. And the conveyances of this powerful grace being all put so
freely into our hands (this word and Sacraments) it is required of us as a
duty, to have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear. Heb. 12. 28. and doubtless it is only our own inexcusable fault if
we have not, for indeed (be it spoken with holy reverence) the administration
of our sacred baptism, were not better than a piece of solemn Pageantry, if
grace were not conferred upon us in receiving that Sacrament, for therein are
begged, on our behalf, the blessings of Christ, grace and pardon, with the
renewing and assistance of the holy spirit. These the Church by prayer seeks
for, on our behalf, by virtue of that Covenant, wherein God has promised and
engaged himself to bestow them; which promise, be for his part, will most
assuredly keep and perform. Then upon this, we engage our vow, to forsake the
Devil, and all his works, and to keep Gods holy will and Commandments. Can we
think, either that God, in goodness, or justice would require such an
engagement at our hands (under peril of a greater condemnation) or that the
Church of God in prudence could oblige us to undertake it, without good
assurance of sufficient assistance and power from his gracious spirit to enable
us to perform it according to the tenor of the Gospel?


Mr. Fribabe. It seems you are for universal grace, and you hold, that all the
children of the faithful (dying in their infancy, and before they have the use
of reason) are saved by virtue of that Covenant (made Isa. 49. 8. Heb. 13. 20.
with us in the blood of Christ) into which they are consigned at their
baptism; as if all such were invested with some privilege to exempt them from
the absolute decree of reprobation.


Tilenus. This, Sir, is the faith into which I have been baptized and
catechized; for I am taught to profess, that in my baptism, I was made a
member of Christ, a child of God, and an inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.


Mr. Knowlittle. But you know, that without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
Heb. 12. 14.


Tilenus. That I very well remember: but withal I consider, that besides that
federal holiness, which removes all obstacles in the children of the faithful,
and renders them recipients duly qualified for the Sacrament, I am instructed,
in my Creed to believe in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, (that is, if
I do not resist his work and quench his motions) and am further directed to beg
by diligent prayer his special grace to enable me to discharge my duty to God
and my neighbor; which grace (if I be not wanting to my du^y) I have reason to
assure my self of, upon the strength of our Saviors promise. S. Luke 11. 13.

The short is, Baptism being styled, the laver of regeneration. Tit. 3. 5, 6.
And the children of the faithful, being in no capacity of putting a bar
against the efficacy of it, the learned Davenant (one of the Divines of the
Synod of Dort) concludes, that, therein they are truly justified, regenerated
and adopted, and, by this means, a state of salvation is conferred upon them
suitable to the condition of their infancy; and arriving to the use of reason,
if they walk in the strength of the Divine grace, under the command and conduct
of the Holy Spirit, and fight under Christ's banner, as generous soldiers
(engaged by solemn covenant, and armed with assistance from above to that
purpose) should do, we are assured that sin shall not got the dominion over
them. Romans 6. 14. for he is greater that is [ingaged] in them [for their
assistance] then he that is in the world [against them] 1 John 4. 4. Whereupon
the same Apostle is confident to conclude [c. 5. v. 18.] We know that whosoever
is born of God, sins not: but he that is begotten of God, keeps himself,
and that wicked one touches him not.


Mr. Knowlittle. You speak as if a man might live without sin, and so be saved
without Christ.


Tilenus. Sir, I believe it is the duty of the children of God, (and therefore
possible) to be blameless and harmless, without rebuke, shining as lights, in
the midst of a crooked and perverse nation. Phil. 2, 15. that at Christ's
coming, they may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless; 2 Pet.
3. 14. but this is done (not without Christ, but) through the power of his
grace, rescuing them from the pollutions, that are in the world through lust,
and from all the carnal invitations, that do so earnestly solicit them. Yet
this is not to live without sin; for there are sins of ignorance and
inadvertencie, which, many times, through the levitie of the matter, insensibly
steal from us: sins of infirmity, wherein we are surprised on a sudden, and
sins wherein we are overtaken through the daily incursion and tiresome
importunity of temptations: but these, upon a general humiliation and petition
being put upon the accounts of Christ's Cross, and pardoned (as it were) of
course to the regenerate, do not interrupt his estate, nor impeach his interest
in God's favor, and hereupon such men are reckoned by our Savior in the
accounts of just persons which need no repentance. Luke 15. 7. nor no more
washing, save of their feet. [Iohn 13. 10.] which is ordinarily performed in
the daily use of their prayers and other holy offices.


Mr. Takeo'trust. But we see, by daily experience, that the dearest of God's
children, do frequently complain of their corruptions, and bitterly bewail
them, and groan under the apprehension and burden of them: Oh wretched man that
I am! etc.


Tilenus. No doubt, it is fit a Christian should entertain such a holy jealousy
over himself, as may make him humble, and keep him upon his guard, vigilant and
industrious. Blessed is the man that fears always. Prove. 28. 14.


Mr. Narrowgrace. Yea but we find also that the most eminent of the saints of
God have fallen foully.


Tilenus. We must walk by precept, not example; especially we should take heed
we do not transcribe a foul copy, though written by the hand of the greatest
saint in Heaven, who, we know, had never been admitted thither, had not that
hand been washed in the streams of repentance and the blood of Christ. But the
truth is, such is the frailty of our humane nature, and the lubricity, the
flexible and wax-like temper of youth, so apt to receive the impressions of
vice, and such the precipitancie of our passions, that if we be not bridled by
the benefit of a more severe and holy institution, and taught to improve our
talents of grace and nature for our own preservation, the deceitful paintrie of
pleasures, and the snare of occasions, and the witchcraft of ill company and
examples, with the sundry stratagems of that politic enemy, (who manageth all
the rest to his best advantage) will surprise and foil, and most miserably
wound us. But as to deny the possibility of preventing this mischief, were a
huge disparagement to the power of the Divine grace; so having that grace so
abundantly administered (as it is under the dispensation of the Gospel) to
prevent, and assist and follow us, not to cooperate therewith, but to let loose
the reins unto our lusts, and give way for sin to abound, that grace may much
more abound to the working of a remarkable repentance, that having such a
signal experience of sin and misery, we may be able to give a punctual account
of the time and manner of our conversion; what were this but to grow desperate
and tempt God; a ridiculous folly joined with a most execrable impiety, (like
a man that sets his house on fire, that he may make light for others to read
his evidence, by which he holds it) he turns Gods grace into lasciviousness,
and ventures upon a certain evil, for an uncertain good, whose damnation is
just.


Dr. Confidence. If a man should do so wilfully and of set purpose I grant it:
but if you cannot satisfy our question concerning your certainty of being in
the state of grace, how will you be able to obey that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.
15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you, a reason of the hope that is in you, with
meakness and fear?


Tilenus. That you may not think I have a desire to wave your question, by
telling you, that I perceive, you do, many times, allege Scriptures very
impertinently; I shall shape my answer directly, to what I conceive to be your
meaning: we must consider therefore what our Savior Christ says (very
applicable to our purpose) S. Luke 17. 20. The Kingdom of God (in the work we
speak of) comes not (always) with observation: but (many times) it is as if a
man should cast seed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise night and day,
and the seed should spring, and grow up, he knows not how. Mar. 4. 26, 27.
And therefore I observe, our Savior and Apostle do direct us to make our
judgment a Fosteriori, from the effects. By their fruits ye shall know them.
And let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself alone and not in another, Gal. 6. 4. The children of God are called
Saints of light. Col. 1. and the wiseman says, The path of the just is like
the shining light that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Prove. 4. 18.
It Is only the conscience laden with guilt, and fear, and horror, having fire
put to it, that like a gun charged with powder and shot, makes a bounce when
it is discharged. Experience teaches, that the natural day breaks without a
crack to report it to us, and so does the day of grace too in many souls.
Though the sun rises under a cloud, and so undiscernibly, and the clock of
conscience do not strike to give us notice of the hour, yet we may be assured
he is up by the effects, viz. if his influences have dried up the dirt and made
the plants and herbs to spring out and flourish. Grace is more discoverable in
the progress then in the dawning of it.


Mr. Impertinent. But the Apostle says, He that has not the Spirit of Christ
is none of his.


Tilenus. And I say as the same Apostle to another purpose. 1 Cor. 7. 40. I
think also, that I have the spirit of God.


Mr. Confidence. You said well even now from our Savior, that the tree is
known by the fruits; can you give us a good account of the fruits, that the
spirit of Christ has brought forth in you, so as we may be able to distinguish
them from counterfeit, and discern that they proceed from the Holy spirit, not
a lying one?


Tilenus. That I may not deceive my self nor you herein, I think the surest way
is, not to go by the common Inventory of the world; whereby I find men
pretending to godliness, to be generally very partial in their reckoning: if
they abhor Idols, they think it tolerable enough to commit sacrilege and
sedition: and if they be not drunk with wine, or strong drink, they think it is
no matter though the spirit of pride and disobedience stagger them into any
schism or heresy. I choose therefore to follow the Apostles Catalogue, (and
if I can find that in my self, I hope I am safe) the fruit of the spirit (says
he) is love, joy, peace, long-Suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: against such there is no law. Gal. 5. 22, 23. That is (as I
conceive) the love of Christ in sincerity, as it is Ephesians. 6. 24. which
sincerity discovers and approves itself, in a constant and uniform observation
of all his Commandments. John 14. 15.


Mr. Efficax. How did the spirit of God bring forth these fruits in you (if you
find them?) Did you ever feel it offer a holy violence to your will and
affections, so that you were not able to resist the power of it? You have read
how Paul was surprised in the height of his rebellion, his spirit subdued and
forced to yield, and he cast down to the earth in great astonishment.


Tilenus. Though I have intimated mine opinion in this particular already, yet
I shall add, that the conversion of St. Paul, was not according to the common
way and rule, but extraordinary, in regard whereof he may very well style
himself an abortive. 1 Cor. 15. 8. for the ordinary course is not for the
Kingdom of Heaven to offer violence to us, and take us by force; but for us to
do so by it. St. Mat. 11. 12.


Mr. Efficax. You speak as if the grace of conversion were resistible; and so
you would make man stronger than God: but the Apostle tells you, that God
exerts and puts forth a power for the conversion of a sinner equal to that,
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. Ephesians. 1. 20. And
indeed there is a necessity of such a power for the accomplishment of this
work; because the sinner is as a dead person; dead in trespasses and sins.
Ephesians. 2. 1.


Tilenus. It Is a rule we have learned in the schools, that Theologia Symbolica
non est argumentativa. Metaphors never make solid and cogent arguments. Sinners
are like dead men: but no like is the same. If they were absolutely dead, then
it were impossible for them to make any opposition or resistance at all, to any
the least dispensation of grace. Resistance implies reaction, but the dead have
no power at all to act; and yet it is acknowledged; that the sinner has a power
to resist, and does actually resist: but that which is maintained generally by
that side is, that the power of grace is so prevalent and invincible, that at
last it will subdue and take away the resistibilitie of man's will. And
therefore man is not dead in every sense. We find him sometimes resembled to
one half dead. Luke 10. 30. Sometimes to one asleep. Ephesians. 5. 14. so that you
cannot certainly infer the conclusion desired, from such figurative
expressions. Besides, Ephesians. 1. 20. speaks of Gods power toward those that
were already believers, not of his power that works belief in them.


Mr. Impertinent. It Is said of those that disputed with Stephen, Acts 6. 10.
That they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.


Tilenus. He speaks of that conviction, which the force of his arguments
(dictated to him by the Holy spirit) made upon their understandings, so that
they were not able to answer him in disputation: but he speaks not of any
irresistible impression that the internal Divine grace made upon their wills;
for there was no such effect wrought in them, as appears in the following
verses: but rather the contrary, as you may conclude from St. Stephens word,
Acts 7. 51. Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost.


Mr. Efficax. By resisting the Holy Ghost there, Stephens meaning is, that they
opposed the outward Ministry which was authorized and sent out by the holy
Ghost.


Tilenus. The words are plain in themselves, and so they are literally clear
against you: but that this Evasion may not serve your turn, we find the word
and spirit both together, Zach. 7. 12. Yet it is said, they hardened their
hearts like an Adamant, and resisted both. Esa. 63. 10. But (2) men may, and do
resist that power of Divine grace, which does effectually and eventually
convert others; yea, a greater power, than that which does it. Luke 11: 32. The
men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this generation, and shall
condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah: and be hold a greater
than Jonah is here. And as much is implied in those other words of Christ. Mat.
11. 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works
which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes. Those Heathen cities would have been
wrought upon by these gracious dispensations, but you to whom, they are so
freely and earnestly administered, do resist them. And why should our Savior
work so many miracles to their senses, to induce them to believe and be
converted? Ad quid perditio haec? Why so much pains lost? For (if that had been
the way) that one Superlative miracle, the irresistible operation of internal
grace, had superseded the necessity of all others, and made them utterly
superfluous.


Mr. Impertinent, what say you to that text in Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come
in: does not that imply an irresistible power upon them?


Tilenus. This place in St. Luke speaks of a charge given to a Minister, whose
office it is, to call, invite, and importune, (to say nothing, that it is part
of a parable) and I remember even now, when you were urged with that in Acts 7.
51. [ye always resist the Holy Ghost] then you could allege, that, that was
spoken concerning the outward ministry of the word, which you confessed, might
be resisted: but now you produce a text your selves, which though it does most
evidently belong to the outward ministry, yet because it has the word
[compel] in it, and will serve your interest, it must needs signify
irresistible. So that in the Acts, the Holy Ghost must (according to your
interpretation) signify the outward Ministry, and that must be the only thing
resisted: but in St. Luke, the outward Ministry shall signify the inward
working of the Holy Ghost, and that shall be irresistible.


Mr. Efficax. The Apostle says, It is God which works in you, both to will
and to do of his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13.


Tilenus. The Apostle does not say, that God does this immediately and
irresistibly; for if he did, that would evacuate the force of his exhortation,
(which is both a mean and swasion) to the duty of working out our salvation,
etc. for the enforcing whereof, that is rendered as the reason (which is the
cord of a man.) He speaks not of the means, see 1 Pet. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 10.
or manner of Gods working: and that he works the ability I grant: but not the
very act it self of our duty, (which if he did, it would be his act, not ours,
and so not obedience, for he has no superior) much less does he work it
immediately and irresistibly.


Mr. Efficax. The Prophet acknowledges, that the Lord works all our works in
us. Isa. 26. 12.


Tilenus. If the text were to be read [in us] there were some small color for
your pretension; but in the original, it is [for us;] and therefore (rejecting
the sense, which you would put upon the words) some understand all the
benefits, which God had bestowed upon them, answerable to the former part of
the verse [Lord thou will ordain peace for us: for thou have wrought, etc.]
others understand it of their afflictions and distresses, in opposition to that
former branch of the verse, and agreeable to the verse following, [other Lords
have had dominion over us.] But if you would have the meaning of that (or any
other place of Scripture) to be this, that God does immediately and
irresistibly produce all our spiritual works, (which are works, as well of
duty, as of grace in us) and that he has tied himself by Covenant and promise
so to do (as is affirmed by some) then it will undeniably follow, that God
himself, (being so engaged) ought to believe, and repent, and pray, and do all
other necessary good in us; as Servetus said, the fire burns not, the sun
shines not, bread nourishes not: but that God alone does immediately all these
things in his Creatures, without having given them such properties; and then,
sure, it were fitter for the preacher to direct his admonitions to God alone,
that he would perform his undertaken work in men's hearts, by his omnipotency,
unto which they may never find ability, to make resistance. But the truth is,
it stands not with Gods wisdom, neither does he ever use to work upon the
will of man after this manner, and that for three reasons.


Mr. Dubious. I pray let us hear them clearly from you.


Tilenus. First then, though (speaking of his absolute power) God can compel
and necessitate the will of man (and so we do not make him stronger then God,
as is very weakly concluded by some) yet he will not; because he will not
violate that order which he has set in our Creation. He made man after his own
image, invested him with a reasonable soul, having the use of understanding,
and the freedom of will: he indow^d him with a power to consider and
deliberate, to consult and choose, and so by conquence he gave him dominion
over himself and his own actions; that having made him Lord of the whole world,
he might not be a slave to himself, but imprimis animi sui possessione
regnaret, might first exercise his soveraigntie in the free possession of his
own mind says Tertullian. To force his will, were to destroy the nature of
his Creature (which grace is not designed to do, but only to heal and assist
it) and therefore God deals with manas a free Agent; by instructions and
commands, by promises and threatenings, by allurements and reproves, by rewards
and punishments. So true is the saying of that fathet, Nemo invitus fit bonus.
With this accords the Son of Syrach. Ecclus. 15. 14. to 17. God made man from
the beginning, and lefe him in the hand of his Counsel. If thou will keep the
Commandments, and perform acceptable faithfulness, He has set fire and water
before thee: stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou will. Before man is life
and death, and whether him likes shall be given him.


Mr. Knowlittle. That text is Apocryphal, and therefore will not serve your
turn, if you produce it to confirm a point of faith.


Tilenus. My second reason shall confirm it out of the authentic Canon, and it
shall be this, viz. because God will have our faith and our repentance, and his
whole service (wherein we engage our selves) to be a work of our own choice, as
it is said of Mary, she had chosen the good part: and hereupon our Savior
propounds the quaere. John 5. 6. Will thou be made whole? And so the Prophet
Jeremiah before him, Jer. 13. and the last. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made
clean, when shall it once be? God does not necessitate nor irresistibly
determine his people's will: but only directs, and conjures and assists them to
make the best choice. Deuteronomy. 11. 26. Behold I set before you this day a blessing
and a curse, and more fully, Chap. 30. verse 15. See, I have set before thee
this day, life and good, death and evil, and verse. 19. I call heaven and earth
to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing: therefore choose life. And this is rendered as the reason
of man's rejection. Prove. 1. 29. Because ye did not choose the fear of the Lord.


Mr. Narrowgrace. By this reason you make man to have freewil.


Tilenus. Under favor Sir, it is not I, but it was God that made him to have
it, and he that denies all freedom of will to man, deserves no other argument
then a whip or a cudgel to consute him. Sure the smart would quickly make him
find liberty enough to run from it. Our wosul experience tells us we have too
much freewil to do evil; and Scripture teaches us plainly, that we have
liberty in moral things, Numb. 30. 13. 1 Cor. 7. 36, 37. and for the service
of God and things spiritual, our Savior Christ says, John 8. 36. If the son
shall make you free (and he does so, by the ministry of his Gospel, Verse. 32.)
ye shall be free indeed: and sin shall have no more dominion over you: (unless
ye yield your selves up to the power of it.) Romans 6. 14. with the 16. Ioshuah
was so well assured hereof, that he puts it to the peoples choice, Ios. 24. 15.
(which implies their liberty) to serve the Lord or other Gods. [Yet were not
they under so great means as we are] your self acknowledged even now (out of
the Philippians) that God works in us to will and to do, (which signifies a
liberty, else it could not signify an ability) whereupon St. Paul says,
Phil. 4. 13. (...): I am able to do, or suffer all things.


Mr. Narrowgrace. The Apostle adds in that place [through Christ
strengthening me; for without Christ we can do nothing. John 15.


Tilenus. Nothing spiritual; that puts us into possession of Heaven, or
accompanies salvation: but observe, it is not through Christ's forcing, but
through Christ strengthening me. The grace and the ability is from Christ,
but it is our part and duty to actuate that ability, and cooperate with that
grace; and therefore it will be worth your notice to observe, that what God
promises to do himself in one place, He commands the very same things to be
done by us in another; to intimate, that although the power of acting be
derived from his assistance, yet the Act it self, as it is a duty, depends upon
our cooperation. Thus, Circumcision of the heart, is promised (as from God)
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. but commanded (as to be done by us) Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Ier. 4. 4. A new
heart and spirit, promised. Ezekiel. 36 26. but commanded, Ezez, 18. 31. see Ephesians.
4. 23
I will be your God, promised, Ierem. 32. 38. but commanded, Exodus 20. 3. and
if ye forsake him, he will cast you off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. One heart and
one way; promised, Ier. 32. 39. yet commanded, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 1. 10. So
Ier. 32. 40. it is promised, I will put my fear in their hearts. Yet, Prove. 1.
29. because they did not choose the fear of the Lord, and 1 Pet. 2. 17. So it is
promised, I will write my laws in their inward parts, and they shall be all
taught of God. Jer. 31. 33. Isa. 54. 13. Yet in other places it is commanded,
Be swift to hear; take heed how you hear; as new born babes desire the sincere
milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. See Prove. 7. 1, 3. and Romans 10 8. with the
17. verse. So it is promised, Isa. 1. 25. I will purge; yet 2 Timothy 2. 21. He that
purges himself. So it is promised, Ier. 33. 8. I will cleanse them from all
their iniquity: yet Iam. 4. 8. Isa. 1. 16, 18. it is commanded, wash ye, make ye
clean. And it is evident that God many times fulfilleth his promise, and
performs his part, when m^n altogether neglects his part and duty. Ezekiel.
24. 13. I have purged thee and thou wast not purged. See Mat. 11. 21. Luke 7.
30.


Dr. Dubious. Enough of this; you promised us a third reason, why God does not
(as you pretend) work man's Conversion and his faith, by a power of grace
irresistible. I pray let us hear that also.


Tilenus. Sir, you shall have it in a few words, and it is this; because he
will not save as (I speak of the Adult, who have the use of their faculties)
but in a way of duty. Genesis 4. 7. If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted?
Romans 2. 6, 7. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory
and honor and immortality, to them, and to them only, will he render eternal
life; and therefore He is said to be the Author of Eternal salvation, only, to
them, that obey him. Heb. 5. 9. Now observe; that which is not wrought, but by
the omnipotent impulse and irresistible motion and operation of God, that
cannot be the duty of a poor frail Creature: or thus, what is a work of
Almightiness in God, cannot be a work of obedience in us (if it were, it would
conclude us to be omnipotent; besides, the act could not be an act of duty,
Christ could do nothing, that was duty for us, till he had submitted himself to
the condition of our nature. Phil. 2. 7. because God, supposed to be the doer
of it, is not under obedience) but repentance and amendment of life, etc. are
required, as a duty, of us, and as part of our obedience, Ier. 7. 3, 5. Amend
your ways, and make you a new heart and a new spirit. Ezekiel. 18. 31.


Mr. Knowlittle. By this doctrine, you seem to make a man his own Savior.


Tilenus. If I should, not only seem to do so, but do so in good earnest, so it
be in a way of subordination to Christ, I see no harm in it. St. Paul says,
work out your salvation. Yea, St. Peter, exhorting to repentance, says
expressly, save your selves. Acts 2. 40. To our safety, our own sedulity is
required, according to that trite saying. He that made thee without thy self,
will never save thee, without thy self.


Dr. Absolute. Me thinks, this does hardly sound like that doctrine, which the
Apostle labors so earnestly to establish, to shut the creature, for ever, out
of all ground, and occasion of boasting. Romans 3. 27.


Tilenus. For a man to boast himself in his riches is vanity; in his
wickedness is impiety; in his works, performed in obedience to Moses law, or
out of the strength of nature, as if they could justify and save him, is
arrogancy: But to glory in the Lord, and rejoice in his salvation, is not only
allowed, Romans 2. 7.
but also enjoined, 1 Cor. 1. 31. Phil. 4. 4.
and practiced, 2 Cor. 1. 12. our rejoicing (or glorying) is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not by
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had our Conversation in the
world. See Romans 15. 17. and Gal. 6. 4. Let every man prove his own works,
performed in the faith of Christ, and through the power of his grace,) and then
shall he have rejoicing, (glorying, boasting,) in himself. It Is the same word
in these two places, with that in the Text objected. Romans 3. 27.


Dr. Damman. Are these your tenants Consonant to the Articles of the Synod of
Dort? What opinion have you of that, and the doctrine held forth by the Divines
in that Assembly?


Tilenus. I have had as great a reverence for that Synod, as any man living,
the principles therein delivered being instilled into me from my youth: but I
thank God, studying the best method for the cure of souls, and the opportunity
of reading better books, has altered my judgment quite.


Dr. Damman. Do you think you have changed so much for the better, that you
have reason to give God thanks for it?


Tilenus: Yes truly, and I persuade my self, you would be of that mind too, if
you would patiently attend to my objections against their doctrine, and weigh
them without prejudice or partiality. But before I propound those objections,
it will be requisite, that we take a brief view of that doctrine, which I shall
therefore concisely, yet truly and clearly sum up in these five Articles
following.

They hold. 1. That God by an absolute decree has elected to salvation a very
little number of men, without any regard to their faith or obedience
whatsoever, and secluded from saving grace all the rest of mankind, and
appointed them by the same decree to eternal damnation, without any regard to
their infidelity or impenitencie.

2. That Christ Jesus has not suffered death for any other, but for those
elect only; having neither had any intent, nor commandment of his father to
make satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.

3. That by Adams fall his posterity lost their freewil, being put to an
unavoidable necessity to do, or not to do, whatever they do or do not, whether
it be good or evil; being thereunto predestinate by the Eternal and effectual
secret decree of God.

4. That God to save his Elect from the corru^t Mass does beget faith in them
by a power equal to that whereby he created the world, and raised up the dead;
insomuch that such unto whom he gives that grace cannot re^ect it; and the
rest, being reprobate, cannot accept of it, though it be offered unto both, by
the same preaching and ministry.

5. That such as have once received that grace by faith can never fall from it
finally nor totally, notwithstanding the most enormous sins they can commit.


Dr. Damman. I confess you have done the Divines of that Synod no wrong in
setting down their tenants: but what objections have you against the doctrine?


Tilenus. I shall insist only upon this (and it is so comprehensive I need
mention no more) it does not only evacuate the force and virtue, but quite
frustrateth the use of the ministry of the word, and all other holy
ordinances instituted by our Savior Christ, and commanded to be continued for
the edification, and benefit of his Church to the worlds end.


Dr. Dubious. How can you make that appear?


Tilenus. For the ministry of the word it is employed, either about the wicked
or the godly; the wicked are of two sorts, either Infidels despising, or Carnal
persons professing the holy Gospel: the Godly, they are of two sorts, or two
tempers likewise; or we may consider them under a twofold estate, either as
remiss and tepid, or else as disconsolate and tempted: so that the ministry of
the word is designed to a fourfold end, (in respect of man.)

1. The Conviction and Conversion of an Infidel.

2. The Correction and amendment of the Carnal.

3. The quickening and provocation of the tepid and slothful.

4. The comfort and consolation of the afflicted and tempted.

But the former doctrine of the Synod of Dort, is so far from being serviceable
to any of these four ends, that it is directly repugnant to them all, and
therefore not consonant to that holy Scripture, given by inspiration of God,
which is profitable (for all those ends as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16.) for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God, (who is a helper of the peoples joy, 2 Cor.
1. 24.) may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. That this
may the more evidently appear, I desire, you (with whom that doctrine is in so
high esteem) to make a practical attempt of it, herein I desire you to be true
to your own principles, (and not to shuffle, as usually in your popular
sermons, wherein the Synodical and Calvinian principle in your Doctrine is
always confuted by an Arminian exhortation in your Application,) in the mean
while I am content to personate successively those four sorts of men; and for
method sake, I pray address your discourse; first, for the Conversion of
Tilenus Infidelis.


Dr. Absolute. Most gladly will we undertake this task, that we may convince
you of the errors, in which we see you are immersed; provided you do not
study to be obstinate, nor allege any other reasons to justify your
recusancie and averseness to the Christian faith, then what you clearly deduce
from the doctrine of the Synod, and the Divines thereof. To begin the work then,
we will take it for granted that you acknowledge a Deity, and demand of you,
what Attributes this Deity i^, according to your apprehension, invested and
clothed with.


Tilenus Infidelis. The School of nature has determined that question by so
many irrefragable arguments, that I am convinced long since, that there is a
sovereign Power called God, and when I consider such beams and characters of
wisdom and knowledge in the soul of man, such impressions of truth and justice
upon his conscience, with so great a variety of goodness in all Creatures, I
must conclude, that God, the maker of all these, is an Eternal being, infinitely
wise, good, and just. I believe further, that this most wise God in
communicating so much goodness unto man, intended hereby to oblige him to pay
(according to his ability) such homage and service as is due to his sovereign
excellency and bounty, and in performance hereof we may be confident to find
protection and reward.


Mr. Simulans. The God whom we profess and worship, and he alone is such a God,
as you have described; but more merciful and gracious, infinitely, then you have
been acquainted with, to whose service, therefore ^e do most earnestly invite
you.


Tilenus Infidelis. I thank you for your pretended kindness; but if you can
produce no fairer glass to represent the nature of your God; then the doctrine
of that Synod, I must tell you, I shall have no temptation or inducement at all
to believe in him; for that doctrine is so far from exalting the attributes of
wisdom, goodness and justice in him, that it does in a high measure impeach
them all.


Mr. Fatqlitie. You will never be able to make that good.


Tilenus Infidelis. I beseech you hear me patiently. For his wisdom first; I
conceive that is extremely eclipsed, in that he has made choice of no better
means to advance his own honor, but has stoopt to such mean and unworthy
designs (to compass that end) as all but tyrants and bankrupts would be ashamed
of.


Dr. Dubious. How so?


Tilenus Infidelis. Your doctrine (if it does not belie the majesty you profess
to worship) supposes him to have made a peremptory decree, whereby his
subjects are necessitated to trade with Hell and Satan for sin and damnation,
to the end he may take advantage out of that commerce to raise an
inconsiderable impost to augment the revenues of his own glory.


Mr. Preterition. We have his own word for it, M^t. 20. 15. Is it not lawful
for me to do what I will with mine own?


Tilenus Infidelis. (1.) Your Scripture must not conclude me, while I personate
the Infidel: but (2.) We are not now arguing what God may do by his absolute
power and right of dominion, but what is agreeable to his infinite wisdom. And
(3.) your text speaks of a free disbursement of his favors: but our discourse
proceeds upon the account of appointing men to sin and punishment. Now I hope
you will not call sin Gods own (though your doctrine concludes him fairly to be
the Author of it) and for punishment, he is pleased to call that, opus alienum,
not his own, but a strange work. But if your God, for his mere pleasure only,
and to make demonstration of his absolute power, has appointed to eternal
torments, the greatest part of his noblest Creatures without any respect to
sin, as some of your Synod do maintain (not regarding his own image) in them,
what is this but to play the tyrant, and where then is that infinite goodness,
which you profess to be in your, and I expect to be in that God whom I fear and
honor. A righteous man regards the life of his beast, Prove. 12. 10. yet his
mercy is to be but a copy transcribed from that original in God, Luke 6. 36 but
if your God be of that temper, the righteous man may very well be a precedent
of mercy unto him.


Mr. Preterition. Indeed some of the Synod do maintain that rigid way: but the
Synod it self determined otherwise, viz. that Almighty God looking upon
mankind as fallen in the loins of Adam, passed over the greatest part of them,
leaving them in that lapsed estate, not affording them sufficient grace for
their recovery, ordaining finally to condemn them.


Tilenus Infidelis. If for the sin of another man (and that pardoned to him,
that did wilfully commit it, but) imputed to his posterity, (who never were in
a capacity to taste the pleasure of it, or consent unto it, or protest against
it,) your pretended God deals thus cruelly with them, depriving them for ever
of his grace, which should enable them to repent, and sealing them up by an
irrevocable decree, under an irresistible necessity, continually to sin, and
then to perish everlastingly for so sinning; where is that infinite justice,
accompanied with that superabundant mercy and graciousness, you affirmed to be
in him? I have heard that the God whom Christians do adore, is so infinitely
merciful, that he will have all men to be saved, and none to perish; and not
able to swear by a greater, swears by himself, that he will not the death of
the sinner, but that he may repent and live. That he protests the
sufficiency of his own applications, and be waileth their wilful obstinacy,
and expostulateth most earnestly: What could have been done more that I have
not done? O that there were such a heart in you! Why will ye die? Indeed there
is so much grace and sweetness in these expressions, they would bring a poor
wretch presently upon his knees to such a God.


Dr. Dubins. These are all the very expressions of that God whom we serve, into
whose gracious arms and bosom we so earnestly desire to bring you.


Tilenus Infidelis. If you could teach me how to reconcile these expressions to
the doctrine of your Synod, I should say something: but I conclude that
impossible.


Mr. Simulans. I shall willingly undertake that work, as hard as you make it,
and a great deal more too, to gain your soul out of the state of infidelity.
There is a threefold distinction used amongst our Divines, that will untie the
knot presently. 1. Mr. Calvin (in Ezck. 18. 23.) has very learnedly observed,
that God has two wills, one outward and revealed, whereby he does most sweetly
invite sinners to his grace, and most graciously calls them to repentance,
seeming as though he were earnestly desirous of their salvation; the other will
is inward and secret, which is irresistible and takes effect infallibly, and by
this he brings, through ways unavoidable, to an estate and course of sin here,
and then to eternal damnation and punishment hereafter. Now to apply this; you
must understand those places of scripture forementioned, of Gods outward and
revealed will, which is uneffectual, not of his inward and secret will, which
is unresistible.


Tilenus Infidelis. A very useful distinction, and tending much to the honor
of your God, as you have applied it. I see you have not your name for naught
Mr. Simulans: but for my part, I think Homer was much more honest then you and
your God, when he says, that (...), etc. Who speaks contrary to what he means
ought to be held as a common enemy, and hated as the very gates of Hell. But
perhaps your second distinction may be more satisfactory. I pray let us have
that.


Mr. Simulans. We must make use of distinctions to clear our doctrins from
contradiction; and if that does not like you, we have another which cannot be
denied. When it is said, that God would have all men to be saved; the word [All]
is to be understood, non de singulis generum, but de generibus singulorum: not
for all of every kind, but for some few, only of every sort and nation.


Tilenus Infidelis. Methinks Sir (if this be the meaning of the words) the
Scripture might have said with far more reason, that God will have all men to
be damned, since of every Nation and condition the number of the damned do far
exceed the number of the saved (according to your doctrine,) and reason requires
that the denomination should be made according to the major part. But perhaps
your third distinction will help this out?


Mr. Simulans. The will of God, is either approbans tantum, or else approbans
et efficiens simul. God (we say) will have all men to be converted and saved
Approbative, non effective: he approves of it and likes it well in himself,
that all men be converted and saved, but he wills it not effectively, that is,
he has decreed the contrary, not to give them means necessary to the
attainment of it.


Tilenus Infidelis. This distinction I conceive no less unreasonable and absurd
than the former. That your God should appoint by a secret, absolute and
irrevocable decree, that those things, which he does naturally hate and abhor,
should be most practiced, and those which he naturally loves and likes, should
be omitted; this is so inconsistent with that infinite wisdom and goodness,
which you proclaim to be in him, that I cannot find my self, in any measure
inclined to acknowledge him the Governor of the world. I suspect rather that
you have a design to make me become a proselyte to the Manichoeans, who profess
two principles, a wicked one as well as a good one; and having acknowledged my
persuasion of a good God, who loves righteousness and hates iniquity, you
tempt me to believe a wicked God also, which is the Author of all evil, and in
perpetual hostility against the former. It were so great an impeachment of his
sincerity, that no civil person would endure to have his words so interpreted
as you interpret those of your Gospel; the unavoidable consequence whereof is,
that your God is the true Author of all the sins and wickedness of this world,
both past, present and to come.


Mr. Fatalitie. We say, Deus est causacur peccatum existat, sed non cur sit.
God is the cause of the existence, but not of the essence (if I may so speak)
of sin; as he that drives a lame horse is the cause of his halting, but not of
his lameness.


Tilenus Infidelis. This distinction will hardly help the lame dog over the
style. For he that drives a horse unavoidable into that motion, which
necessarily causes his first halting, is certainly the cause of his lamenes:
and so did your God drive Adam (according to your own doctrine) into the first
sin; which made him and his posterity halt ever since.


Mr. Fatalitie. You must distinguish the materialitie of sin from the
formalitie of it; or the Act from the deformity: God, we say, is cause of the
act, or the materialitie: but not of the formalitie, the defect or obliquitie
of it.


Tilenus Infidelis. I reply. 1. That there are sins of omissien, which happen
(according to your doctrine) by reason the offender is deprived of necessary and
sufficient grace to perform the duty, and these sins are not capable of that
distinction; and if the desicient cause in things necessary be the efficient,
you know to whom such sins are to be imputed 2. There are sins of commission
not capable of that distinction neither; as in blasphemy, murder, adultery,
wherein the act is not to be distinguished from the exorbitancie; were such a
distinction allowable before God, (and if it be not, sure it is not to be
alleged on his behalf,) every transgressor might show a fair acquittance, and
justly plead [not guilty.] The Adulterer might say, he went in to his
Adulteress as a woman, not as she was married to another man; and that he
humbled her for procreation, or for a remedy of his Concupiscence, not for
injury to her husband; the blasphemer might say, what he spoke was, to make
use of the faculty of speech, which God had given him, and to keep his tongue
in ure, not to dishonor the Almighty: and so (might every offender have leave
by virtue of this distinction to separate his sinful act from the enormitie of
it) every sin would become a miracle, that is, it would be an accident without
a subject. If your God stands in need of this logic himself, there is all the
reason in the world, that (when he sits in judgment) he should allow the
benefit thereof to others. But 3. the greatest Doctors of your Syned have
written, that God does predestinate men as well to the means as to the end: but
the natural Act (granting your distinction) is not the cause of man's damnation,
as it is an Act, but only as it is sin; and therefore those unfortunate forlorn
wretches, whom the absolute pleasure of your God has invincibly chained to the
fatal decree of Reprobation, can no more abstain from following sin [the
means,] than avoid damnation, [the woeful end] to which they are so peremptorily
designed.


Mr. Fatalitie. We do not desire, that you should lanch out any further into
that unfordable abyss of horror and astonishment [the decree of eternal
Reprobation.] It is more for your comfort, to make your calling and election
sure; to get an interest in Jesus Christ through faith; by whose means the
eternal decree of mercy may be accomplished to you.


Tilenus Infidelis. If the decree of God be really such as you propound it, my
endeavors would be to as little purpose, as your instruction is like to be;
for if every man be enrolled from all eternity (after such a sort as your
Synod has determined) in one of those two fatal books, of life or death, it is
as impossible to be blotted out of either, as for God to deny himself; to what
end then serves all your importunity?


Mr. Impertinent. It were too great an arrogance in us to pric into Gods
secrets. 'Till he gives us a Key (of his own making) to unlock that Cabinet, we
must not undertake to read the mysteries, he has locked up in it. There are
visible marks by which we may discern the Elect from the Reprobate, and those
we must reflect upon to the making out of our assurance; and because our
vocation is the next saving benefit, that result's from our Election, and it is
altogether uncertain when God will vouchsafe it to us, whether at the third, or
at the sixth, or at the ninth, or at the last hour of our lives, therefore
every one ought to keep himself in readiness, to answer when God knocks, and to
obey when he calls. What you utter in your ignorance and unbelief, is capable
of so much alleviation; that it proceeded from you in such a state, otherwise I
should tell you it savours much of a spirit of Reprobation, to say, that men
work in vain, since such as God has elected, are elected to the means, as well
as to the end, to believe, and do the exercises of piety, as well as to be
saved; and to perform these in order to their salvation.


Tilenus Infidelis. If it be so great an arrogance to pry into these secrets;
why do you so positively define in them, and so peremptorily obtrude your
definitions upon others? But 2. If all men be infallibly inlisted under one of
those two Regiments, of Election or Reprobation, and we be not able to
distinguish to which we do belong till God be pleased to call us over and give
us our special marks and cognizance; and that vocation be not in our own power
to procure (all our works and endeavors, that are brought forth before it,
being born in sin and children of wrath, (as your doctrine teaches) and so not
conducible to that purpose) sure it were a piece of improvidence at least, if
not a huge presumption, to attempt thus to prevent the will of God, and
anticipate the decrees of heaven; notwithstanding, it is a part of our faith (as
you define it,) that we must needs stay till that saving call of God does ring
so loud in our ears, that it is impossible we should be deaf or disobedient to
it.


Dr. Confidence. None but a Reprobate would argue after this manner.


Tilenus Infidelis. If you be of that opinion, I Will hear no more of your
instructions; for I understand, it is one of your tenants, that the Gospel is
preached to the greatest part of the world, to no other end, but to aggravate
their condemnation; as it is recorded by a chief professor of that doctrine,
called Mr. Calvin, that God does direct his word unto such, that they may
become the more deaf, and that he does set his light before them, of purpose,
to make them the more blind; [Inst. 3. c. 24.. 13.] And if this be the
infinite wisdom, goodness, and justice of your God, those, at whose ears there
never arrived any intelligence of him, are the more happy, or at least the
less unfortunate and miserable, than those who are brought into some
acquaintance with him, and yet cannot believe, because the notice they have of
him, through his own unprovoked restraint, is not attended with grace necessary
to work belief in them.


Mr. Impertinent. We advise you to betake your self to your prayers, that these
thoughts of your heart may be forgiven you, and that God would put you into a
better mind.


Tilenus Infidelis. I am weary of these absurd contradictions: for if the best
works of the unregenerate be not only unfruitful, but noxious and hurtful, (as
they are accounted by the test and scale of your doctrine) and it be impossible
to please God without faith in Christ, and that faith not to be ushered into
the soul, but by the dead-awakening call of the Almighty; my papers in this
state of Infidelity, will rather provoke and exasperate that God, you advise
me to pray unto, then propitiate and appease him. That Philosopher therefore,
gave those wicked passengers, whom the violence of a tempest had stormed into a
fit of devotion, a great deal better counsel, when he said, Silete, ne dii vos
nebulones hic naving are sentiant, he bid them hold their peace lest their
cries should give the Gods warning to take their advantage to shipwreck and
destroy them.

By this gentlemen, you see with what success you are able to manage your plea
(according to your Synod's principles) in behalf of your God, against an
Infidel; perhaps you may come off better in your attempt to correct a wicked
Christian; I desire therefore, in the next place, that you would make proof of
your discipline upon Tilenus Carnalis.


Mr. Fatalitie. Herein methinks, I should make no great difficulty to prevail,
if the power of reason can but fasten upon your understanding, or the tie of
religion upon your conscience, or the sense of gratitude upon your heart and
affections. Do but reflect upon those obligations, which Almighty God has laid
upon you, in your Creation and Redemption. He has a fair title to your best
obedience by right of dominion, in regard of that excellent nature and being,
he freely conserr'd upon you; but a stronger title (if stronger may be) by the
right of a deer purchase, made by no lower price than his own blood. These
obligations, as common equity has drawn them up, so (with respect to the
benefit that would accrue to you hereby) your own ingenuitie has drawn you on
to subscribe and seal them. You have been solemnly devoted unto God and listed
a sworn soldier under the Banner of your Redeemer. Are you under his pay, and
fight against his interest? Do you wear his livery, and eat his provisions, and
expect his reward, and yet spend your time and strength and talents in the
service of his mortal enemy? How execrable is the sacrilege of this
ingratitude and rebellion? Remember, it will not be long ere the justice of God
send's the trumpet of the Law (which will be so much the shriller, if it be
sounded by the hollow lungs of death) to give your now-secure Conscience a hot
alarm; and when you are once awakened with the terror of those dreadful
threatenings, you will be amazed at the horror of that apprehension, when you
shall behold all those shoals and swarms of sin (you are guilty of) mustered
up in their several ranks and files, to charge and fight against you; for the
momentarie and trifling pleasures whereof, you have so improvidently forfeited
all the comforts of a good Conscience, and refreshments of the Holy Ghost, with
your portion in Heaven and your interest in Gods favor; in exchange whereof,
like a foolish Merchant, you have procured nothing but the coals of eternal
vengeance, and the flames of Hell, which the crowds of your condensed sins have
thrust wide open, ready to swallow up and devour you, unless you presently
prevent it, by an unfeigned repentance, and universal reformation.


Tilenus Carnalis. Sir, I beseech you suffer not your zeal of a holy life to
transport you beyond the rule of sacred truth, lest while you pretend to honor
God on earth, you cast reproach upon his Eternal designs in Heaven. I am
jealous, Tilenus Infidelis has so disturbed your passions, that you know not
where you are; for you have quite forgotten your Synod and your principles, and
(I think) your own name too, and seem to have lost your Creed in your
Commandments. Recollect your senses, and recall your wandering fantasy, and
awaken your judgment to consult the Oracle of your belief (your Synod) and
speak accordingly (for whatsoever is not of faith will be sin in you:) And is
it not one of the Articles of that Creed (which you profess) that all the good
or evil whatsoever, that happens in the world, does come to pass by the only
immutable and ineluctable decree of God, and his most effectual ordinance? That
the first cause does so powerfully guide and impel all second causes, and the
will of man amongst the rest, that they cannot possibly either act or suffer
sooner then they do, nor in any other manner? I am sorry I am no more master of
my self and mine own actions, that I am so divested of my liberty, and carry a
nature about me so debauched, that I cannot choose but suffer my self to be
carried captive under the power of those sins, that reign in-me: but (my
comfort is) I am assured by the judgment of such sound Divines as your self,
that the secret will of God (which procured Judas's treason no less then Paul's
Conversion) has so decreed it. And you know it is not in my power to procure a
writ of Electment, to cast out that sin, which came in and keeps possession by
the uncontrollable order of the divine predestination. I cannot get grace when
God will not give it me, nor keep it, when he is pleased to take it away from
me. I have no Lure to throw out, that the Dove of Heaven will vouchsafe to
stoop unto. the Spirit blows where he pleases, inspires whom he pleases, and
retires when he pleases; returns where he pleases; And so if it comes with an
intent to amend me, it will be as impossible then to put him back, as it is now
to draw him on. It were an intolerable presumption in me, to make my self so
much a taskmaster over the Holy Spirit, as to prescribe him the time and hour,
when he shall effect that work for me, whereunto I am able to contribute no
more than to mine own birth or resurrection. Atque hec est illa tantopere in
Scripturis predicata regeneratio, nov a Creatio, suscitatio and mortuis, and
vivificatio, quam Deus SINENOBIS in nobis operatur. Can. 12. art. 3. and 40.
Synodi Dordracene.
I can affirm with confidence, I never was so much an Atheist as to entertain
the least distrustful thought of the divine power. When he has been four days
dead, and lies stinking in his grave Lazarus may be raised; and the more
putri'd I am in my corruptions, the triumphs of the divine grace will be so
much the more glorious in my restitution; but it may be the last hour of the
Day with me, before the Dayspring does thus visit me. In the mean while, to
show my detestation of that arrogant doctrine of the Arminians, I will not
strive to do the least endeavor toward piety, lest by attributing some
liberty to my self, I should eclipse the glory of Gods grace, which I
acknowledge, as well most free in her approaches, as unresistible in her
working. I confess for the present, my sins have brought such a damp upon my
grieved spirit, that he does not afford m: so much grace as to cry Abba
Father. Nevertheless I can call to mind, I have sometimes heretofore, had such
heavenly motions, and gracious inspirations in my heart, as could be breathed
from no other than the spirit of the Almighty, and hereby there has been
begotten in me a faith in Christ's merits not only true (which can never be
lost) but so firm also, that I am even now persuaded, nothing shall be able to
separate me from the love of God toward me in Christ Jesus. This faith is
rooted in a rock, which all the powers of darkness are not able to root up,
though to your present apprehension (for want of the fruits and blossoms of
piety and devotion) it be as trees and herbs in winter, which seem dry, dead
and withered, but are not so. Besides, being one of God's Elect (as every one
is bound to believe, according to the doctrine of the Synod of Dort, or declared
foresworn by that of Alez.) it follows by the same doctrine, that my sin though
never so abominable does Cooperate to my salvation; yea, and that my pardon is
sealed already; and this Mr. Fatalitie, you intimate your self, in your
exhorting me to repentance; for repentance (you know) is of no worth without
says, and faith it self is defective, except it believes the forgiveness of
all sins, past, and to come. However, if I be a Reprobate (which no temptation
shall induce me to believe, contrary to my duty, as I am instructed by the
doct^in of the Synod) yet, unless you have a commission to disanul the decrees
of Heaven, your threatenings and exhortations cannot avail me: but may do me
this disadvantage, that they may anticipate my hell terrors, and beget a worm
in my bosom, to torment me before the time.


Mr. Takeo'trust. I like it well, you are so fully persuaded of the
All-sufficiencie of the Divine grace, and that you profess so much aversness to
the proud conceits of the Arminians, (not daring to ascribe any thing to your
own endeavors,) and that you are so careful to avoid the comfortless suspicion
of your being under the state of Reprobation: but I much bewail your dangerous
errrour in one thing, and must endeavor your correction in that, as the most
likely foundation of all your practical miscarriages.


Tilenus Carnalis. I beseech you what may that be? I should be glad to have it
discovered to me.


Mr. Takeo'trust. Because (as you argued very well according to the mind of
the Synod) the Holy spirit does immediately produce repentance in the sinners
heart, therefore you seem to set light by the Ordinance of the word, and this
is a very dangerous error in you; for the word (preached especially) with
threatenings and exhortations are the means and instruments by which the Holy
Ghost works, to the conversion and correction of a sinner.


Tilenus Carnalis. When we take our principles, without any examination, upon
the credit of our admired Authors, we are apt to embrace their contradictions
as points of faith, and their absurdities, as parts of our belief. And so it
has happened to your self in this particular; for you must observe, that, that
manner of working only is called immediate, wherein no means do concur: now if
the repentance and conversion of a sinner be attributed to the immediate
working of the Holy Ghost, it implies a manifest contradiction to say, that
exhortations and threatenings are the instruments and means thereof. Besides,
the very essence and being of an instrument is placed in the aptitude and
fitness, which it has, for the use and office to which it is designed: so a
knife is a knife in that respect only, that the quality and form of it is
matter gives it an aptitude to cut: an eye is therefore an eye, because it is
apt to see. So every instrument has a suitable fitness to that office, for the
performance whereof it is designed to be an instrument, and therein lies its
subserviencie to the principal efficient.


Mr. Takeo'trust. By this very reason I conclude, the Ministry of the word to
be the means and instrument of the sinners conversion and repentance; for it is
most apt, to inform his understanding of his duty, and to quicken his will and
affections to pursue and follow the same.


Tilenus Carnalis. Sir, you are much mistaken; indeed if a moral efficiencie
would serve the turn, there are most excellent arguments of persuasion to work
upon a reasonable Creature: but this is the very thing, that the Arminians do
plead for. Our Synod and the Divines thereof teach us otherwise, namely, that
the conversion of a sinner cannot be wrought but by a physical or, or
hyperphysical action, an impression of grace that is irresistible, to which
effect the ministry of the word (as exhortations and commands, promises and
threatenings) can no more avail (having no more aptitude thereunto) then to the
raising of the dead, or the creation of the world.


Mr. Impertinent. We do read, at the raising up of Lazarus, and the Creation of
the world, that God spoke the word and it was done. Genesis 1. 3, 6. John 11. 43.


Tilenus Carnalis. The word that produced those effects, was not the word of
exhortation, such as we speak of; no, nor yet that outward word consisting of
sound and syllables, (which did but signify what God was about to work by his
irresistible omnipotency:) but it was the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. which
is said to be his son, verse 2. compared with Col. 1. 16, 17. And as there
could be no resistance made against that power, exerted and put forth for that
creation and resurrection; so your Synod teach us to believe, that that power,
which is employed to effect the conversion of a sinner from the error of his
ways, is equally irresistible; but that the ministry of the word has no
such power or energie appears too manifestly in the frequent, and almost
general contempt and frustration of it. This therefore having no aptitude to
such an use or office, (which nothing but an irresistible force can accomplish)
it can with no propriety of speech, be said to be the means and instrument
thereof.


Mr. Knowlittle. Then you will allow the ministry of the word to be of no use
at all in the Church of God?


Tilenus Carnalis. One function it has and no more, according to the
consequence of the Synods doctrine; it serves for a sign or object to represent
outwardly, what the spirit works inwardly, as well in the will, as in the
understanding: but because it is like the raising of the dead, and the creation
of the world, it requires an omnipotent and irresistible operation; therefore
the Scripture, though it represents and urges so many sundry ways (as by way
of command, exhortation, promise and threatening) yet (to speak congruously to
our principles) it can implie and signify it, but as a work of God's, not as a
duty of ours; and then why should we trouble our selves about it, any more than
Adam troubled himself about the creation of Evah, or Lazarus about his own
Resurrection; especially seeing, we must believe it is nothing in our power to
help it forward, and that God in pursuance of his own Deorees, will infallibly
perform it, though we be cast into as deep a sleep (of security) as Adam was,
or lie stinking in the grave of our corruptions (though insensible of it) as
did Lazarus.


Dr. Dubious. Do you then think the use of the Ministry a thing indifferent,
and purpose to decline it?


Tilen. Carnalis. Seeing the most the word can do is, to make us Moral men, if
yet it can do that, (which are of no great esteem in Gods Kingdom, as our
Divines generally have resolved) and the spirit is no more bound to wait upon
the preaching thereof, than to be at our command; and seeing when he does come,
he needs none of those auxiliary forces to atchieve his irresistible conquest
over our rebellions, and yet God has been pleased (out of his unsearchable
wisdom, and to show his own dominion and liberty) so to order the matter, that
although the word cannot really promote our spiritual good (which is a work
far above the sphere of it is power and activity) yet, receiving it in vain
(though it be not in our power (confessedly) to receive it otherwise) it will
aggravate our condemnation; for this cause I think it prudent, to avoid the
certain danger, with the no-probable-good that (according to those principles
of the Synod) will accrue by it.


Mr. Narrowgrace. If you be of that mind, we must leave you to the mercy of
God, and the use of your own prayers, which are the only reserve, we can
commend to your assistance and benefit.


Tilenus Carnalis. Alas Sir, you are as much out of the story now as ever, for
the grace of prayer (without which the duty will be a vain oblation, if not
abominable) must be derived from the same supernal fountain; and we cannot pump
it up our selves, it comes freely; and when it comes, it is so impetuous, and
overflows the soul with such inundations of the spirit, that it is impossible to
resist it. And since you see me altogether silent to this office, you may
conclude that this silence begins in heaven, and that God will not have me
pray, in that he denies me his grace to that effect. But Sir, you do well to
take your leave of me; for it is evident, that God has not employed you, as
intending my amendment by your ministry; since I find the confusion of your
doctrine, more apt to furnish a cushion for the secure and areless, or a halter
for the doubtful and depairing, then any sacred Amulet against the charms and
poison of impicty. And yet because, when the wheel is once in motion, a little
strength will be sufficient to continue it, and the fire is easily blown up
after it is once kindled; therefore you may please to make your third experiment
upon Tilenus Tepidus. And I am afraid you can produce no argument to quicken
his remisness, into a more through pace of devotion, which the dexterous use of
that buckler (of the Synods doctrine) will not be able to put by. Let us hear
therefore how you will urge him to a further progress in Piety.


Mr. Efficax. Do but reflect upon Peter's redoubled exhortation. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
He supposes that they had escaped the (foul) corruption that is in the world
through lust. And besides this (says he) giving all diligence, add to your
faith virtue, etc. and verse. 10. give diligence to make your calling and
election sure.


Tilenus Tepidus. If S. Peter had understood our calling and election in the
same sense the Synod understands them in, his exhortation had been to little
purpose; For (in that sense) it is as sure already, as the wisdom, truth, and
power of God, or the blood of Christ, or the seals of the divine decrees can
make it. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord
knows them that are his. 2 Timothy 2. 19. It were arrogance to go about to lay
any other foundation; and a folly to imagine we are able to fortify it by our
endeavors.


Mr. Simulans. But Sir, we should make a Conscience of the duty, though there
were no other necessity of it, but necessitas praecepti] because it is the will
of Almighty God.


Tilenus Tepidus. I perceive Sir, you have forgotten your own distinction,
though it is so little while since you used it. You told us God has a twofold
will; an outward revealed will, and an inward secret will. His outward will is
signified by his commands, but says Piscator, they are not properly God's
will, for sometimes he nills the fulfilling of them: As for example, Genesis 22.
2. with 12. He commanded Abraham to offer up Isaac, yet he nill'd the execution
of it: but his secret will is the will of his good pleasure, which he has
therefore decreed shall ever come to pass. Whereupon, one of your Divines,
concludes there is a kind of holy Simulation in God. [Vnde percipitur esse
simulationem quandam sanctam, etc.] Now whereas you urge me to give all
diligence, that I may grow in grace, if this were the will of Gods Beneplaci
ure, he would move and impell me indeclinably to effect it: but if it be only
his outward will, and improperly so called, He having by an irrevocable Decree
predetermin'd my not doing of it, though it be outwardly commanded; then my not
doing his outward will is the performance of his secret will; and this being
his proper will, wherein consists his good pleasure, my compliance therewith
must needs be the more acceptable; especially since to this he affords me his
providential concurrence, which he denies me toward the accomplishment of the
other.


Mr. Knowlittle. We are taught, that there are degrees of glory; One glory of
the Sun, another of the Moon, and another of the stars; and so there shall be
in heaven. 1 Cor. 15. Now grant that you are secure (as you presume) as to the
estate of glory; yet you should be earnest in your endeavors to capacitate
your self for the highest degrees of it.


Tilenus Tepidus. There are some have made a question of those different
degrees of glory. In the parable, every one (at the end of the day) received
his penny (as much they that wrought but one hour, as they that had born the
heat and burden of the day.) And the righteous shall all shine as the Sun in
the kingdom of the Father; and every one shall enter into the joy of the Lord,
which is fullness of joy; But besides this, if a sparrow falls not to the
ground without God's Providence, and if the hairs of our heads be all numbered
(as our Savior says they are;) shall we not think as well, that every degree
of happiness, and every beam of glory, and spark of joy are likewise
apportioned and predetermined for all the Elect.


Dr. Absolute. It Is true, the state of eternal bliss, as to all the degrees of
joy and glory in it, is firmly and irreversibly decreed to all the Elect; but
yet through your remisness, and especially if that betrays you to any wasting
sin, you may damp your hopes, and lose the sense and comfortable apprehension
of the influences and effects thereof, which you know was David's case. Psalm*
6. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure. Have mercy upon me, O LORD, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my
bones are vexed: My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long? Return
O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake, and restore to me the
joy of thy salvation. Psalm. 51.] For in death there is no remembrance of thee.
From hence you see there is ground enough for the Apostles exhortation. Hebr.
6. 11. We desire that every one of you do show the same diligence, to the full
assurance of hope firm unto the end.


Tilenus Tepidus. I know Mr. Diodati, in his Annotations upon the 5. verse of
that 6. Psalm, says: Hereby is shown the fear of Gods children, anguished and
pressed by the feeling of his wrath, lest they should die out of his grace,
unreconciled; and by that means be excluded and debarred from their desired
aim, to be everlastingly instruments of his glory. But it is probable David had
no intelligence of that comfortable Doctrine (defined by the Synod in this last
age) as appears by his fearful complaint and expostulation (if that Psalm
were his) Psalm. 77. I remembered God and was troubled: I complained, and my
spirit was over whelmed: My soul refused to be comforted: will the Lord cast
off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for
ever? does his promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious?
Has be in anger sbut up his tender mercies? There could not have been this
conslict of diffidence and anxietie in him, if he had been established in the
principles of the Synod; for, annexing the Lords Public declarations (by the
mouth of Samuel touching him. I Sam. 13, 14. etc c. 16. 6. 7.) to the
conscience of his own integrity, he might have collected a certainty of his
present regeneration (when he was anointed King) and from thence have concluded
undeniably his election from all eternity, and consequently the impossibility
of his rejection from God's favor. But there is some likelihood, He thought
that, in the designation of his everlasting mercy toward them, God considered
men, as faithful (according to the way of the Arminians) and as persevering in
their faithfulness. For he says, Psalm. 4. 3. Know that the Lord has set
apart him that is godly for himself. If that text will not serve the turn, yet
there is one unavoidable. Psalm, 103. 17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting; Upon them that fear him: To such as keep his
Covenant: and to those that remember his commandments to do them. And to him
that orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. Psalm.
50. the last. And governing his persuasions by these principles, there is no
wonder he was so exceedingly transported with a fear of God's displeasure. And
that such were his principles, may be collected also from hence, in that when
the Paroxisme of the temptation was somewhat over, he does not make his
recourse to the immutable decree of God's Election, to cure the remanent
palpitation of his spirits; but only to former experience of God's merciful
despensations toward his people. Psalm. 77. 11. 15. I will remember the works
of the Lord: thou have redeemed thy people, etc. But since the clearing up of
this soul-setling doctrine, by the great judgment and piety of the Synod, He
that has once tasted, the graciousness of the Lord in his effectual vocation,
and firmly believes, that the things concerning his everlasting happiness, are
so established and carried on by the irresistible power of an irrespective
Decree (as is there taught) he may cast away all anxiety and care, and repose
himself with confidence under the wings of that security.


Dr. Absolute. But the Synod declares fidelibus perpetuo esse vigilandum and
orandum, ne in tentationes inducantur. That the faithful must watch and pray
lest they fall into temptations; and that when they grow remiss and torpid,
quit their guard and neglect their duty (as you do) they are many times
surprised of the flesh and the world, and carried captive into heinous and
enormous sins; whereby they offend God, and grieve the Holy Spirit, and
incur the guilt of death and the like.


Tilenus Tepidus. 'Twas well you stopped there Mr. Doctor. But I had thought your
worship had been better versed in this point. For my part, such Mormo'es and
bugg-beares never trouble me. I am taught by the Synod to believe, that all the
sins in the world, shall never be able to separate an Elect person from the
love of God: but rather make for his greater advantage.


Mr. Indefectible. But suppose by your sins, you should provoke God to anger so
far forth, that he should cut you off, as our Savior threatens the Jews; Ye
shall die in your sins. And Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous turns away from
his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations, that the wicked man does, shall he live? All his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.


Tilenus Tepidus. I did not expect such a supposition, or objection from you of
all men living; for to speak properly, God is never angry but with the
Reprobates, and I know it is your avowed opinion, that the Elect can neither
fall finally, nor totally, and all the Synodists are of the same judgment.
They distinguish therefore of righteousness, into that which is inherent, or
the righteousness of works, and that which is imputed, or the righteousness of
faith. And they confess the Elect may forsake his inherent righteousness, and
fall into most foul and horrid sins, but yet he does not fall from his imputed
righteousness, the righteousness of Christ, which he has by faith. They do
also distinguish between death temporal, and death Eternal; affirming that the
sins of the Elect, though never so many or heinous, do not incur the guilt of
eternal death, but only temporal, which is never inflicted upon them neither,
as a curse, nor before their restitution; for if you ask them what doom David
had layn under, if death had surprised him in his murder and adultery, they
will tell you roundly, it was impossible he should die without repentance.


Dr. Dubious. I suppose David's case was extraordinary; and a special reason is
given by them of the Synod, why he could not die before repentance, viz.
because after his sin he was to beget a son of whom the Messiah should descend.


Tilenus Tepidus. I conceive, that ground is too loose to bear the
superstructure, the men of that opinion, would raise upon it; for they are not
all saints in our Savior's Genealogy, neither did David's sin bereave him of
the faculty of generation. The son of Jesse might have propagated a stem for
the Messiah to branch out of, and yet have died in his sin afterward; the
impossibility therefore of his dying without repentance is grounded upon a
more solid and impregnable foundation, viz. the eternal decree and love of God,
which equally concerns all the Elect. That immutable love wherein God elected
them, does exert it self and prompt him infallibly to confer the grace of
repentance upon them first or last, how great and how many sins soever they run
into. And if men had the will to improve this most excellent comfortable
doctrine, the advantage of it would be unspeakable. Men do beat their brains and
exhaust their treasure in experiments to find out and extract Paracelsus his
Elixer to preserve them in life and health to perpetuity. But here is the only
insallible medicine, ten thousand times more sovereign than the Poets fabulous
ambrosia, or Medea's charms, that are said to have restored Jason's father to
his youth. Here is a moral Antidote against death, easy to be made and
pleasant to be taken; a receipt to make us shotfree, sword and pistol-proofe;
the ingredients are not many, nor chargeable, nor hard to be attained. Let a
man get a firm persuasion, that he is elected (which the Synodists say, every
one is bound to believe) then let him be sure to espouse some beloved lust, and
keep it very warm in his bosom, being careful (as he has free will to evil)
Mat. 17. 12. John. 19. 11. Dan. 5. 19. not to cast it off by repentance; and he
may venture himself securely in the midst of the greatest perils. Let such
Elect persons take up Arms against their lawful Governors, in the pretended
defense of their Religion, rights and liberties, and they shall hew down
thousands of their enemies before them, and none of them shall fall in the
attempt, (for they cannot die in sin) unless some few, whose pusillanimitie and
cowardice, does melt their hearts into an unseasonable relenting and repentance
of their Rebellion, while they are in pursuit of their design.


Mr. Impertinent. But Mr. Tepidus, to grant you that the Elect can never fall
from grace (which is our avowed tenent,) yet certainly, we are bound to be rich
in good works, out of gratitude, that God may have the more glory.


Tilenus Tepidus. I need not tell you, it will be all our business to glorify
God, in Heaven; and so we may adjourn that work till we come thither; for our
Divines hold, that sin is as much a means for the setting forth of God's glory
as virtue is, and that God decreed to bring it into the world to that purpose;
and if it be the riches of his grace that we should glorify, how can we
glorify that better, than by an absolute resignation of our selves up to it,
(in despite of raging sin) and a confident dependence upon the free pardon
thereof. And doubtless, if God would really have me show my gratitude in any
other way of service, he would irresistibly press me to it; for whatsoever the
Lord pleases that he thus effects, Psalm. 135. 6. (for to that purpose this
text is alleged by our Divines.) And therefore it is the resolution of
Maccovius, (he instanceth in David committing murder and adultery) that if we
consider the power of the regenerate, in respect of the Divine decree, and in
respect of the actual Divine providence, and in respect of the permission of
sin, then (and in these respects which are not in our power) a man can never do
more good then he does, nor commit less evil than he commits. His reason is,
that otherwise the will of man might be said to act independently to the will
of God. Now if it be thus impossible to add one cubit to the stature of the
new man, it will (by our Saviors argument, Mat. 6. 27.) be impertinent and
ridiculous to take thought about it. See Luke 12. 26.


Mr. Knowlittle. Mr. Tepidus, Mr. Tepidus. What ever you say, the doctrine of
the Synod does not overthrow the practice of Piety, and the power of
godliness, as you go about to infer from it; for we know, the Doctors of that
Assembly were very worthy Godly men, and so are many (as you cannot deny) that
embrace their tenants.


Tilenus Tepidus. Though the persecution and banishment of their brethren (only
for dissenting from them in these opinions) be no great sign of godliness, yet
I speak not concerning the quality of the persons that hold such opinions, but
of the nature and tendencie of the doctrine, the conclusions which immediately
and necessarily flow from it; They may be good men; but then they are ill
Logicians at least; order not their works by their faith or principles, and
their godliness is not the result of these principles, but flows from some
other, with which these are inconsistent, if they were rationally improved and
practiced, as is now evident to you from this threefold experiment already made.


Mr. Impertinent. The power of grace will subdue such Carnal reasonings.


Tilenus Tepiaus. That is, in those men, who suffer their reason to be
debauched, and then arrested by such principles: But you have yet another part
for me to act, I shall not be satisfied till that is over. Another main end of
the office ministerial, is to comfort the afflicted, and doubtful; and I am
persuaded, this is rendered ineffectual by the doctrine of the Synod, and its
Adherents, as well as the other forementioned; for proof whereof, I desire I
may now have leave to exhibit my complaints and grievances under the person and
title of Tilenus Tentatus.


Dr. Confidence. Let us hear what they are.


Tilenus Tentatus. Time was when I did walk comfortably before God in my
Christian profession, feeling such inundations of spiritual Consolation flowing
into my soul from his gracious presence, as put me in mind of the hidden
Manna, mentioned Rev. 2. 17. whose ravishing sweetness nothing but experience
can make credible; and has made me cry out in a holy ecstasy of admiration; It
is good for me to be here! But now I feel the tide is turned, my wine is mixed
with water, or rather my joys turned into extreme bitterness; for I being
continually alarmed by the cries of an accusing Conscience, I apprehend the
terrors of the Divine vengeance set in battle array against me, and the
curses of the Law thundering out my sentence of condemnation, and the mouth of
Hell gaping wide open to swallow me up and devour me. These frightful
apprehensions are my constant attendants, they lie down and rise up with me,
and pursue me so uncessantly that I am become a burden to my self.


Dr. Confidence. This is some sudden storm raised in your bosom through the
power and subtlety of Satan: but there is refuge at hand, an immovable rock to
anchor on, that will not suffer you to be overwhelmed. Remember that Jesus
Christ is the propitiation for our sins, and has purchased Eternal Redemption
for us. By the sacrifice of himself he has purged our sins, and delivered us
from the curse of the Law, and from the wrath to come, and satisfied the divine
justice, and obtained reconciliation with the Father for us. Every one that is
sensible of his misery by reason of sin, and understands what need he has of a
Redeemer, and runs into the arms of Jesus Christ, and embraces him for his
Savior, and depends upon his merits and mediation, and pays a dutiful
subjection to his scepter and authority, by a true and a lively faith, he has
an interest in all those benefits (as actually applied to him,) He receiv's the
privilege of justification and adoption, and being justified by faith, he has
peace with God. Romans 5. 1.


Tilenus Tentatus. Sir, I know these are excellent Cordialls to the soul that
is persuaded she has a real interest in them: but they are designed only for
a very small number, as the doctrine of the Synod has determined. For those
Divines tell us, that Almighty God did by an absolute decree elect certain
particular persons to salvation, (neither considering the death of his Son, nor
the faith of those elect, in that decree, but) then decreed to give his Son to
die for them, and irresistibly to work in them a saving faith to lay hold upon
that his Son, and actually to apply all the said benefits to themselves; (for
whose salvation only they were all prepared and designed.) Now all the promises
of salvation in Christ, how universally soever propounded, being (by your
Doctrine) restrained only to these Elect, (amongst whom that I should reckon
my self, neither any particular mention of me in Scripture, nor any revelation
by Angel or Prophet out of it, does assure me) and the number of them
(according to your computation) being so small in proportion to the Reprobates,
there is so much odds against me, that I have reason to be afraid, that I am
inlisted under the greater multitude. When Christ said to his Apostles, One of
you shall betray me, though the odds were eleven to one on the Innocent parties
side, yet it raised so much scruple and suspicion in all their bosoms, as made
them very anxious and inquisitive. Matthew. 26. 22. Master is it I? Were the
number of the Reprobates, for whom you say Christ died not, far more
disproportionable to the elect; yet the sad apprehension of those eternal
torments fatally linked to the end of that horrible decree, would prompt me to
entertain fears and jealousies more than enough, lest I should be filed upon
that chain, having no assurance to the Contrary, How much more should
fearfullness and trembing surprise me, when I consider how few the Elect are
even amongst the vast multitudes of such as are called!


Mr. Simulans. Seeing it has pleased the wisdom of Almighty God to keep his
immutable Decrees, as well that of Reprobation, as that of Election, locked up
in the secret Cabinet of his own unsearchable Counsel; we are to govern our
judgment by the rule of Charity, which believes all things, and hops all
things. 1 Cor. 13,


Tilenus Tentatus. I confess the judgment of Charity is a tried and equal
beam in many Cases, but if you extend it generally, and apply it unto all
particulars, it must needs be very false; and I am confident, you dare not
avouch the truth of it in such a latitude, or if you dare, you are no more
able to maintain it, than I can believe these two contrary propositions at
once, that Jesus Christ died for all, and yet, that he died for a very small
number. 2. It is not the judgment of my Charity, but the certainty of my
faith that must give me assurance and comfort in this particular. 3. Charitable
judgment is a fair standard to measure the doubtful actions of our neighbor
by, and commands us to cover his infirmities, and stifle the too light
conception of suspicions, and sinister opinions touching him, but binds us not
to preach falsehood to him, to induce him (against his own reason) to foster too
good an opinion of himself. When I see a man present himself to the Holy
Sacrament, the judgment of Charity persuades me, (knowing nothing to the
contrary) that he addresses himself to it, with that preparation of heart, that
becomes a good Christian. But that such as are rightly prepared and qualified,
do partake thereof to their salvation; this I believe by the judgment of
faith, which adm^tteth nothing that is or can be false. So when I see a sick
man render his soul up with much devotion and resignation, into the hands of
Christ, I believe charitably, that he dies as becomes a faithful Christian:
But that God communicates his salvation to such as die in the profession and
obedience of the right faith; this I believe by the certainty of faith; wherein
it is impossible I should be deceived, though the judgment of Charity deceives
us very often. In a word, the judgment of charity is a good standing measure
betwixt man and man: but it is not current betwixt man and his own Conscience,
much less betwixt him and God. I know, I am not to be relieved, but by such
succors as are levied upon the divine promises, and those promises having
their foundation, and infallibility in the undeceivable truth of God, they
require such a certainty of faith, as will admit no mixture of any thing false
or doubtful. Besides, when I do inquire which act of faith has the prioritie,
viz. to believe in Christ, or to believe Christ to be my Savior, (in
particular) I am taught by some of your Divines (Maccovius by name,) that I
must in the first place, believe that Christ is my Savior, and that is the
cause of the other act, or the reason why I place my faith in him. Now if
Christ died only for a few particular persons, and all the promises made in
him, belong to those few only, unless I could find some mention of my name
amongst them, or receive some revelation from heaven to that effect, how can I
with any certainty or assurance build my faith upon it, that I am one of them?
Mr. Tako'trust. We are bound to think every one is of the number of the Elect,
till it appears to the contary.


Tilen. Tentatus. This is but singing the old note ever again. This is still
your judgment of Charity; which though it suppresseth all suspicion in you
toward me, yet can it not cure those fears and jealousies, which I have (but
with too great reason) conceived of my self. As for your appearances to the
contrary, I cannot understand them, much less set any value upon them; for by
such outward things, the Synod is ready to tell us, we can never perceive any
thing of what belongs to the state of Election or Reprobation. I am beholding
to you, that waving the severity of your reason, you will make use of a
charitable supposition to flatter me into an opinion, that I am one of that
little Flock for which Christ dyed: But there is nothing can secure and comfort
me, but a full and certain persuasion that I am one of them; which you will
never be able to work in me (denying that Christ died for all) unless you can
find some particular and undeniable evidence of my interest in him.


Mr. Indefectible. You should reflect upon your former experience of God's
gracious work in you. That spirit of adoption sent out into the hearts of Gods
Elect, to bear witness to their spirits; though he may become silent, and not
speak peace to them in such an audible language of comfort, as is always
apprehended by them, yet he abides with them for ever. Spiritual enjoyments are
different from these outward and carnal ones; we may lose their taste and
relish, as to sensible refreshment: but not their real presence, as influencing
to Salvation.


Tilenus Tentatus. Some comfortable apprehensions might be awakened and kindled
in those bosoms, that have been warmed with such sweet and heavenly
experiences, if they were not all overcast and darkened again, by other black
and dismal clouds, which the observation of some of your greatest Divines have
spread over them. For Mr. Calvin himself (Instit. 1. 3. c. 2.. 10, 11.) says,
The heart of man has so many starting holes, and secret corners, of vanity
and lying, and is clothed with so many colors of guileful bypocrisie, that it
oftentimes deceives it self: and besides experience shows, that the
Reprobates are sometimes moved with the same feelings, that the Elect are, so
that in their own judgment they nothing differ from the Elect. See Heb. 6. 4,
5. But the truth is, though I have lived a good moral life hitherto, and in a
way of duty have had a comfortable dependence upon the mercy of God in Christ
Jesus, yet I am now afraid, I have had none of those extraordinary snavities
and refreshments of Gods spirit, and consequently have no assurance of the
presence of that comforter, who is promised shall abide with us for ever.


Mr. Knowlittle. You are to consider that all the Elect are not called at the
same hour.


Tilenus Tentatus. I should not stand upon the hour; I could be content that
God may take his own time to call me, if you could, in order to my present
comfort, insure me, that I shall be called, though it be but at the hour of
death: but this is that, I am afraid you have no grounds for.


Mr. Take o'trust. You may be confident, that Christ is dead for you, and that
you have an interest in him, so you can believe it.


Tilenus Tentatus. I would desire to ask but these two questions. 1. Whether
this comfort be applicable to all and every sick and afflicted persons, and 2.
whether it be grounded upon the truth? For if it be not to be applied unto all,
I may be amongst the excepted persons, and so am not concerned in it; or, if it
be not grounded upon the truth, you offer me a delusion instead of comfort.


Mr. Take o'trust. It is applicable unto all; and every one, and grounded upon
the unquestionable truth of the Holy Gospel.


Tilenus Tentatus. If it be applicable to all and every one, as you affirm, and
grounded upon the truth; that is, as I conceive a rruth an^ecedent, to their
believing; then it follows undeniably that Christ died for all in general, and
for every one in special, (else how can the comfort of this doctrine be so
applied to them, as you would have it.) But if your meaning be, that, it will
become true to me, or any other person [that Christ died for us,] by that Act
of faith, which you would have me, or any such other person give unto your
speeches; then you run into a manifest absurdity, maintaining, that the object
of faith, or the thing proposed to be believed, does receive its truth, from
the act of the believer, and depend upon his consent; whose faith and
approbation can no more make true, that which in it self is false, then make
false by his unbelief, that which in it self is true. Well may the Infidel
deprive himself of the fruit of Christ's death, but he cannot bring to pass, by
his unbelief, that he has not suffered it, as a proof of his love to
mankind. On the other side, the believer may receive benefit from the death of
Christ, but his act of faith does not effect, but necessarily suppose that
death as suffered for him, before it can be exercised about it or lay hold upon
it. Nay, my believing is so far from procuring Christ's death for me, that on
the contrary, our great Divines do maintain, quod nemo unquam fidem habeat,
nisi morte and meritis Christi procuratam, that I cannot have faith unless it
be procured for me by the merits and death of Christ. And because I cannot
find this faith in me, I may conclude he has not procured it for me, and
consequently that he has not died for me neither; and this you know is the
ground of all my trouble.


Dr. Dubious. Sir, I wish you to take heed of that evil heart of unbelief, as
the Apostle calls it, Heb. 3. and to that end remember the words of our
Savior, John 3. ult. He that believes on the son has everlasting life: and
he that believes not the Son shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides
on him.


Tilenus Tentatus. Sir, instead of lending me a clew to guide me out of that
Maze of difficulties, into which the prodigious Divinity of the Synod has led
me, you entangle me much more in it. For whereas the Apostle says, that God
sends strong delusions to such as will not receive the love of the truth, that
they may be saved. (2 These. 2.) You (governing your discourse by those
principles) would first persuade men to believe a false proposition (when you
exhort every man to believe that Christ died for him, which is false according
to that Doctrine) and then having believed this falsehood, they are punished by
the spirit of error to believe a lie. I beseech you, which way would you have
me turn my self, to get out of these perplexities? Having instructed me to
believe a doctrine, that turns my obedience into punishment, and makes my
following the truth (according to that Calculation) the sure way to aggravate
my damnation. For if the Synod says true, and Christ be not dead, for them
that believe not in him, how do they deserve to be punished, for not believing
that which is false? And those that do obey the Commandment and believe in his
death (though but for a time,) why suffer they the punishment due only to the
refractory and incredulous, which is to believe a lie?


Mr. Knowlittle. Sir, you must not think to beguile us with your vain
Philosophy: we are too well established in these saving truths, to be
perverted by such Sophistry.


Tilenus. If you have no better Cordials for afflicted Consciences; nor firmer
props to support the necessity of your ministry, than what the doctrins of
the Synod will afford you, I am afraid, the most vulgar capacities will find
Logic enough to conclude, from the premises, that your office is altogether
useless and impertinent. Laying aside therefore the person of the Infidel,
Carnal, Tepid, and Afflicted, whose parts I have hitherto acted, to make a
practical trial of the efficacy of your ministry upon them, according to the
tenor and consequences of those doctrins, I beseech you sadly to reflect upon
what has already passed betwixt; and consider further what a vertiginous
spirit presided in that Synod, that led those Divines (Maugre all the reason to
the contrary) to deny some things which the Scripture expressly does affirm;
and to affirm other things, which the Scripture does as expressly deny. They
deny the universalitie of the merits of Christ's death, (which the Scripture
abundantly proclaims) and yet they do exhort and enjoin all men upon peril of
damnation to believe in him; as if the Author of all truth did not only allow,
but also command some men to believe falsehood. They exhort and command every
one to believe that he is elected to salvation, (though indeed he be a very
Reprobate,) and that he cannot lose faith and grace once received, which the
Scripture in express terms denies. And as the denial of Christ's universal
redemption, takes away all the solid ground of comfort: so the asserting the
Saint's indefectibilitie overthrows the necessity of exhortation, with the
usefulness of promises and threatenings to enforce it; for who will value such
admonitions, [Harden not your hearts, take heed lest ye fall, receive not the
grace of God in vain.] When he is instructed to believe, that he can never be
so far wanting to the grace of God, nor harden his heart, nor fall from his
standing so far as to endanger his salvation, and who will deny himself (upon
the assault of a gallant temptation especially) the present satisfaction of his
lusts and passions, for the reversion of a Kingdom, who is persuaded, there
are several decrees past in Heaven as well to necessitate, as secure him in the
Succedaneous enjoyment of them both? And who will be frighted from the
pleasures of sin with the threatened danger of damnation, (unless a fit of
Melancholy transports him into that folly) which believes it is no more
possible to happen to him, then for God to lie, or his immutable decrees to be
rescinded? In brief, when we consider the consequences of that doctrine, that
the absolute decrees of Heaven, do not only overruled, but also predetermine
every individual action of mankind (so that it is impossible for the endeavors
and wit of man, to make any one of them happen at any other time, or after any
other manner then they do) may we not (as far as that doctrine can warrant us)
conclude, that it is God's only fault, that so many men prove Infidels, and
Profane, Lukewarm, and desperate; because it is he that does withhold that
grace, which is absolutely necessary to work an effectual alteration and change
in them? And resolve, that it were therefore fit, that all preachers
(forbearing to importune the weak creature to attempt any of those mere
impossibilities to which he has, at most, but a passive power) should direct
their admonitions to God alone, that he would (perform what is his own work
only, in the hearts of men, that is, to) Convert, Correct, provoke and comfort
them, by such an invincible arm of efficiency as cannot be resisted?

The benefit of the word preached being thus totally evacuated by these
doctrines, we shall find no more use or comfort in the Sacraments, but so far
forth as we can observe, the very same Ministers, in the very administration of
them, to overthrow their own unhappy doctrine; for to every one they baptize,
they apply the promises of the Covenant of grace, contrary to their own Tenet,
which, that they belong nothing at all to the Reprobates. Likewise the Lord's
Supper is given to all, with the assurance Christ died for all them that
receive it, though their own Tenet is, that he no way died for them who receive
it unworthily, and to their condemnation; whose number is not small among our
Reformed Congregations, even by their own Confession. What more? The very
exercises of prayer, wherein the Pastor and the flock are joint petitioners,
shall be found of no use or comfort unto either, since they all either Elect or
Reprobate; for the Elect obtain no new thing by this means, if God has
written them (as the ^ynod says) from all Eternity in the Book of life,
without any relation to, or consideration of, their faith and prayers; and that
it is impossible they should be blotted out of it. And the Reprobates can never
cause themselves to be inrol^ed therein by any exercises of faith or prayers,
no more than they are able to disanull the immutable Decree of God.


Gentlemen, I beg your pardon, and shall trouble you no further, but only to
desire you to ponder those many prejudices that lie against such a Religion, as
is rather repugnant than operative to the Conversion of an Infidel, and the
correction of the carnal, and the quickening of the careless, and the
consolation of the afflicted; And if the doctrine maintained and delivered by
the Divines of that Synod, and their Adherents, does frustrate and nullify the
preaching of the word, and the use of the Sacraments, and the exercise of
prayer; it overthrowes the sacred function of the Ministry (which consist's in
the faithful administration of wholesome Doctrine and good Discipline,) and
gives such a total defeat, to the whole design, of the Divine Ordinances; I
hope you will, out of your great Piety and Prudence, not think it reasonable,
to make the profession of such faith or Doctrine, your (...), or Shiboleth
[Judg. 12. 6.] to discern your Examinats, and pass them in the account of the
Godly Ministers.


Dr. Absolute. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw.


Mr. Fatality. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw.


Mr. Frie-babe. Withdraw, withdraw, withdraw.


Dr. Absolute. Brethren, what think you of this man, now you have heard him
discover himself so fully?


Mr. Fatality. The man has a competent measure of your ordinary unsanctified
learning: But you may say he has studied the Ancient Fathers, more than our
Modern Divines, such as Mr. Calvin, and Mr. Perkins; and alas! they threw away
their enjoyments, and their lives too, some of them, for, they knew not what;
they understood little or nothing of the Divine Decrees, or the power of Grace
and Godliness. This great light was reserved for the honor of after-ages, to
be held forth and displayed in.


Mr. Efficax. He may be an honest Moral man; but I cannot perceive that he
has been much acquainted with sin, nor very sensible of the nature of
Repentance. I confess for my own part, I was never much taken with these
Obadiah's, that cry, I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth. [1 King. 18.
12.] give me your experimental Divines. The burnt child will dread the fire;
and as Jude advises, will have compassion upon their brethren (having been
tempted themselves) and will save them with fear, using a holy violence to
pluck them out of the burning. I remember Mr. Calvin confesfeth in an Epistle
to Bucer, that he had a great conflict with that wild beast of impatience that
raged in him, and that it was not yet tamed. He would frequently, reproach his
brethren (especially if they dissented from him in the matter of
predestination, etc.) by the name of Knave and Dog, and Satan. And he so vexed
the Spirit of Bucer, that he provoked the good mild man to write thus to him:
Judicas prout amas, vel odisti: amas autem vel odisti, prout libet. That his
judgment was governed by his passions of love and hatred, and these by his
lust. And for his bitter Speeches, Bucer gave him. the title of a Fratricide.
Reverend Mr. Beza confesses also of himself, that per quindecim annorum
Spacium, quo alios docuit justitiae viam, nec sobrium se factum, nec liberalem,
nec veracem, sed haerere in luto. That for the space of fifteen years together,
wherein he taught others the way of righteousness, himself trod neither in the
way of truth, nor bounty, nor sobriety: but stuck fast in the mire [of sin.]
Men that have had trial of the powerful workings of sin and grace, and been
brought upon their knees (like the great Apostle) with a bitter complaint, O me
miserum! O wretched man that I am. These are your Nonesuch Divines, which,
methinks, our Savior gave an intimation of, in that passage to Peter, Luke 22.
32. and tu aliquando conversus confirma fratres tuos.


Mr. Narrowgrace He attributes so much to the Ministry of the Gospel, that he
seems to be superstitiously addicted to it, and turns it into an Idol.
Whereas, we know of it self it is but a dead letter; and therefore Maccovius
handling that question; Whether the word God may be savingly heard before
regeneration; concludes negatively, and to avoid his Adversaries argument, he
affirms, that that hearing of the word, which produces faith, does
presuppoose regeneration. To this agrees the opinion of some Divines, who think
that Regeneration is effected after another manner then faith is. To which
purpose Johannes Rysius in his Confession, says thus, Fides Dei gratia per
verbum concipitur. Regeneratio [vero] a Deo per Christum sine ullius rei
Creatae interventu proficiscitur. Faith is conceived by the grace of God
through the word, but Regeneration pro-ceeds from God through Christ, without
the intervention of any created thing whatsoever.


Mr. Take of trust. I conceive Sir, when we see the ministry so much ecclipsed
and undervalued as it is, if there were nothing else in it, Christian Policy
should teach us, not to vent such doctrines, as are apt to bring more contempt
upon it. But the Holy Ghost has set it at a higher rate, by clothing it with
titles of a greater reputation. He calls it the word of grace, the word of
faith, the word of life, the Joh. 6. 63. Heb. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25.
word of reconciliation, the ministration of the Spirit, the word that is able
to save the soul, the power of God unto Salvation, the word of God that
effectually works in them that believe.


Mr. Know-little. I conceive, the Ministry of the word has these excellent
titles bestowed upon it, in regard it is the instrument, by and through which
God does infuse into the understanding and heart, his special grace, or rather
that regenerating virtue, which alone does powerfully effect the work of
regeneration; so that the outward word, as an instrument, conferreth nothing at
all, to that effect, but is only as the tunnell, whereby water is poured into
a vessel; and yet that water receives no tincture at all from the nature or
quality of the said tunnell.


Mr. Takeo'trust. I have seen this alleged: But they say, we should consider,
that the nature and property of the word, is, to be intelligible (in
expression) and to carry such a sense as is apt to move the party, to whom it
is addressed, by working upon his understanding, and inciting his heart to love
or hatred, hope or fear; and this is the true efficacy the word is endowed
with. But if the word contributes no more to our conversion or regeneration,
than the tunnell (that only conveighs the liquor) to the filling of the vessel:
then it matters not whether the word be intelligible yea or no; for that
regenerating virtue being a distinct power infused besides it, the word does
not work as a verbal, id est, a rational instrument, but only concurr's as an
instrument destitute of sense and reason. And therefore as it matters not what
metal the tunnell be made of, whether wood, or brass, or tinn; So (had the
word no other kind of instrumentalitie than that has) it were all one,
whether the language were barbarous nonsense, (as is usual amongst some
Sectaries) or significant. And to what end then did God confer the gift of
tongues upon his Apostles, and they take such care to condescend and apply
themselves to the capacity and apprehension of their hearers? Besides, if the
word has no more to do in this work, than is pretended, why should it consist
of precepts, and those established with promises and threatenings? For a
precept, (so established especially) does prescribe the thing (under command)
as a duty, and concurr's unto that duty, as the reason moving and obliging a
man to perform it; But if that special grace, or regenerating virtue, so
infused, does alone effect a man's regeneration (taking nothing at all from the
word) how can that effect be said to be the performance of his duty, and an act
of obedience to the command of the word?


Mr. Knowlittle. It Is a question, whether there be any precepts properly so
called, under the new Covenant, yea nor no? Some absolutely deny it. But we
confess it; and they may be said to concur to our conversion and believing, per
modum signi, as a sign, or object representing, what God by his free grace, is
said to effect and work in us. Indeed they declare what man ought to do: but
they serve rather to discover and convince his weakness, than promote his duty.


Mr. Takeo'trust. This doctrine does cancel the very formal reason and force of
all the Commands of Christ, and makes the word of God, intended for an
instrument of man's conversion, to serve only for an object and mere doctrine for
his faith and repentance to converse with; (for they are not to be wrought (it
seems) by this means, but immediately effected and wrought of Almighty God, in
the heart, by a special action and operation) and consequently, all the
exhortations and precepts, as such, all the promises and threatenings,
complaints and obtestations, wherewith the word of God abounds, to be nothing
else, but empty signs, and busy trifles (if not a ludicrous stage play)
conducing nothing to that effect, which they pretend to be designed for. But,
that faith and regeneration (which flows from it,) are both wrought (in a
rational way) by the outward ministry of the word, moving and inciting the
understanding and heart of man, will evidently appear to be the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles. 1. For faith, take that expression in our Saviors
prayer, John 17. 17, 20. Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.
Neither pray I for these (Apostles) alone: but for them also, which shall
believe on me through their word. See Joh. 20. 31. 1 John 5. 13. And Romans 10.
17. Therefore faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. 1. That
he understands faith working by love, which the Gospel determines to be the
only means, by which we may, and ought to be saved, appears in the 9. and 10.
verses; If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe with
thy heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved. For with
the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the tongue confession is
made unto salvation. 2. That by the word which works this faith, he understands
the outward word, appears by the whole contexture of the Chapter; for he says,
(1.) This is that word of faith, which we Preach, verse 8. (2.) That word,
which cannot be heard, unless it be preached, not internally by God, but
externally by men, sent out to that purpose, verse 14, 15. (3.) That word,
which is heard with the ears of the body, and (4.) may be disobeyed, verse 16,
18.

As the working of faith is attributed to the ministry of the word, so is the
working of Regeneration too; Jam. 1. 18, 19. Of his own will begat he us with
the word of truth; wherefore, let every man be swift to hear. To this add 1
Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. Being born again not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, which lives and abides for ever, and this
is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you. Hereupon St. Paul tell's
the Corinthians, not only that he was a Min^ster of God, by whom they did
believe: but tells them also, that He was their Father; for in Christ Jesus He
had begotten them, through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 14, 15.


Mr. Knowlittle. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. 6. I have planted and Apollo
watered: but God gave the increase.


Mr. Take o'trust. So the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15. 38. God gives to every
seed his own body, as it has pleased him: but still it is in the ordinary way
of husbandry; and therefore the Sower goes out to sow his seed, and so the King
himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5. 9. But the sluggard, who will not
plow by reason of the cold, He shall beg in harvest and have nothing, Prove. 20.
4. In these natural things, we see, God does not bring forth fruit, by any
peculiar divine action distinct from that of planting and watering; but by
preserving that force and vigor, once put into the earth and water, (wherein
and whereby such plantation and watering is made) he concurs to make the labor
of the husband man succesful, and so gives the increase, Psalm. 65. 9, 10, 11,
12. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly inrichest it with
the river of God, which is full of water: thou preparest them corn when thou
have so provided for it: Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly: thou
setlest the furrows thereof: thou make it soft with showers, thou blessest
the springing thereof. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy paths
drop fatness. So it is here in a spiritual sense: ye are Gods husbandry, of Gods
tillage, 1 Cor. 3. 9. and he has instituted a ministry to bring you unto
fruitfulness. I have planted, laying the foundation, or first principles of
Christian faith among you: (of Heathens making you believers;) Apollo watered,
he baptized you, and promoted that faith to some further growth in you. But yet
there is no great matter imputable to him or me, that you should make a
schism, upon this account, as if either of us were the author of your faith;
but it is God alone, who gave us our ability. [See 2 Cor. 4. 6. 1 Cor. 4. 7. 2
Cor. 3. 4, 5, 6.] and put all the force and efficacy, into those sacred
Ordinances which we administer, and so gave the increase. Thus, I say, God
gives the increase, not by any peculiar, special action distinct from that
Plantation and watering of Paul and Apollo: but by continuing to prosper that
vigor and efficacy, which he was pleased to put into that Ministry. Hence
the Apostle says. Verse 9. We are laborers together with God, and Verse 5.
Ministers by whom ye believed. To this purpose, the Apostle is a Chosen Vessel
to bear the Gospel to the Gentiles. Act. 9. 15. and his Commission is, To open
their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. Act. 26. 18. and he does so well manage and execute this
Commission, that he is confident to say, I have whereof I may glory, through
Jesus Christ, in those things, which pertain to God. Romans 15. 17.


Mr. Know-little. There is a promise. Isai. 30. 21. Thine ears shall hear a
word behind thee, saying, This is the way, etc.


Mr. Takeo'trust. 1. That promise is made to such as are already converted, *
and signifies no more, than what is more clearly expressed, It Is observed, that
the holy spirit (not in his miraculous gifts only) is most frequently said to
be given to men after their conversion. Luke 11. 13. Acts 5. 32. c. 19. 2. etc.
Isa. 59. 21. (2.) If the word, there promised, be a thing distinct from the
word of the ministry, then I ask, whether it be an intelligible word or not?
If not, then it is no fit mean to work upon a reasonable soul, and bring it to
perform to God, a reasonable service, as ours ought to be, Romans 12. 2. If it be
an intelligible word, then either it has the same sense, with the word written
and preached, or a different sense from it. If it be of the same sense with the
word written and preached, then it is to no purpose [frustra fit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora, and entia non sunt multiplicanda sine necessitate]
it is frivolous to multiply means without cause. If this word be of a different
sense from the word written or preached, then this, to the dishonor of the
word, will argue the insufficiency of it, to make us wise unto salvation, and
the man of God perfect thoroughly furnished unto every good work; and this will
lay an imputation, not only upon the veracity and truth of God, but also upon
his wisdom and goodness, for commending and injoyning the use of his written
word to us, for an end and purpose to which it is unsufficient. But that we may
understand the Prophets meaning; consider that we are commanded to walk before
God, Genesis 17. 1. according to which expression, we are to think God always, at
our heels (as we say,) observing our steps, and consonantly to that
metaphorical expression, if we step aside, what means soever his providence
uses to set us right, and direct our goings in his paths, it is as if we heard
a voice behind us. Not that God would exempt us from following the direction
of the ministry: no, for the promise is thus expressed in the former verse.
Thine eyes shall see thy Teachers; [see Deuteronomy. 17. 9, 11.] and that we may not
think it lawful to run on in error, till the Enthusiastical charm recals us;
remember, it is our duty to seek the law, at the priests mouth, Mal. 2. 7. Hence,
we have these Caveats, not only, take heed how you hear, and what you hear, but
also, whom you hear; for many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1
John 4. 1. and therefore try the spirits whether they are of God, ibid. What
need all these caveats, and so much ado, if the ministry of the word has no
influence or energie into our faith, and regeneration, and the work of grace in
us?


Mr. Knowlittle. But we see, the Scripture, every where ascribes the work of
faith, conversion and regeneration in us, to the power and gift of God, to
Christ, and to the Holy Ghost.


Mr. Takeo'trust. The Scriptures do attribute to Almighty God, that which he
does mediately by any of his creatures or Ministers: Joh. 4. 1. Jesus is said
to have baptized more disciples than John, yet in the next verse, it is said that
Jesus baptized not but his Disciples. See John 6. 45, 46. with Luke 10. 16. [2
Cor. 5. 19.] 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. Heb. 12. 25. Act. 5. 39. chapter 7. 51. Though the
ministry of the word be instrumental in the work of grace in us, yet must we
acknowledge the blessed Trinity the chief cause and author thereof, and are
bound always to render them the honor of that efficacy, that is wrought by
this instrument; because all the light force and efficacy, which appears
therein, flows from God alone, and had not been in it at all, if He had not
(as it were) implanted it therein. We have this treasure in earthen vessels (as
the Apostle in a like case 2 Cor. 4. 6, 7.) [2 Cor. 3. 3, 4, 5.] Certainly
there we have it, and God associates what other divine internal aids he
pleases with it; [Mar. 16. 15, 20. Romans 15. 16, 19.] To Him therefore we must
ascribe the glory, who has annexed such an excellency of power, to such
(otherwise) weak and feeble instruments. 2 Cor. 10. 4.


Dr. Absolute. Leave your wrangling (Gentlemen) that we may dispatch Mr.
Tilenus one may or other; Have any of you any more objections against him?


Mr. Indefectible. He holds the possibility of the Saints Apostasy
notwithstanding the decrees and promises of God to the contrary, and concludes
David's Adultery and Murder, to be wilful wasting, deadly sins, and
inconsistent with the state of Regeneration: so that should a godly man through
the frailty of the flesh suffer the like infirmity, he would be ready to
discourage and grieve his spirit, telling him he had forfeited his interest in
Gods favor, and lay under a damnable guilt, liable to the wrath of God and the
torments of hell; and so in danger to bring him to desperation, if he does not
forsak his sin, and mortify his lust, and bring forth fruits meet for
repentance upon his admonition.


Mr. Narrowgrace. Which was worse then that to my mind; he flouted the Divines
of the Synod, saying, if their doctrine were well improved, it would prove an
Antidote against the power of Death, and teach a man how to become immortal,
even in this life.


Mr. Impertinent. That slipped my Observation. I pray' what was it, he said?


Mr. Narrowgrace. It was to this purpose; If the Elect cannot be cut off in
the state of imp^nitency, notwithstanding they fall into most grievous sins;
then (says he) let them abandon themselves to some horrid lust, or course of
impiety and they shall be sure to be immortal.


Mr. Indefectible. But we know the Elect cannot do so. They have a principle
within them, and a guard without them to defend and secure them from such
courses. They are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. 1 Pet.
1. 5. There is their guard, and their inward principle, that inclines and moves
them, you have 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin: for
his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin because he is born of God.


Dr. Dubious. Under Correction, Sir, I conceive man is never immutably good till
he arrives in heaven. As long as he converseth here below he is like other
sublunary things, subject to change Quod Angelis Casus hominibus mors.
The reason is (besides temptations from without to allure and draw him) He
has a twofold principle, a new or an old man within him: the flesh and the
spirit in Con estation Gal. 5. 7. The flesh lusts against the sp it, and the
spirit against the flesh; This Conflict is in the regenerate; And that he has
liberty to side with either of these parties, and so to change, I think cannot
be denied. He has a liberty through Gods grace to side with the spirit against
the flesh; and hereupon he is exhorted to abstain from fleshly lusts, to
mortify his earthly members, and to walk in the spirit; his liberty to side
with the flesh is but too evident. And therefore the words [CANNOT SIN] must be
taken, not Physice but Ethice, Not for a natural impotency but a moral one, he
cannot do it Legally, or at averseness of mind, which notwithstanding is
capable of being altered. It Is said of Christ sometimes, that Id possumus, quod
jure possumus.
He could do no mighty work. Mark 6. 5. and so it is said that the brethren of
Joseph could not answer him Genesis 45. 3. And the Angel could do nothing against
Sodom till Lot were escaped into Zoar. Genesis 19. 22. [See Ios. 24. 19, 21.] And
it is usual in our common speech to say, we cannot do a thing; when the thing is
not impossible to be done, but only it is unlawful or inconvenient for us to do
it. If we set aside the inconvenience and step over the hedge of the law (as
many times we do) we can find power enough to do it. And so it is here.
Therefore to that of our Savior Mat. 7. 18. A good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit. S. Hierome adds, Quamdiu in bonitatis studio perseverat, as long
as it perseveres in the study and love of goodness. Thus he that is born of
God, whiles he acts according to the nature of the principles of his new
birth, and studies to follow and resemble his heavenly Father, He cannot
deliberately yield to any kind of sin. Haec non admittet omnino qui natus e
Deo fuerit, non futurus Dei filius si admiserit, says Tertullian. He that is
born of God will not at all admit such sins as these; he shall not be a child
of God if he does admit them. As for that guard you mention out of St. Peter
[They are kept by the power of God.] We must consider that we are to add a
guard of our own to it, as is required Jud. ep. ver. 20, 21. But ye beloved,
building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost,
Keep your selves in the love of God. And S. Peter adds [through faith] 1 Pet.
1. 5. The Psalmist says, Except the Lord keeps the City, the watchman waketh
but in vain: but he does not say, the Lord will Keep the City, whether the
Watchman waketh, yea or no: He that sets the watch, and is Captain of the
guard over us he says, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation; and
we can promise our selves safety no longer then we are upon our duty. 1 John 5.
18. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself and that wicked one touches
him not. That is the effect or event of his duty, if he be careful to observe
it. But (though Christ has freed us from the dominion of the enemy, yet if we
do voluntarily render our selves up again to his power, his servants we are, to
whom we obey. Romans 6. 14, 16. ^r if we quit our guard, and suffer our selves to
be surprised through our wilful carelessness, we are involved in a like
thraldom; for of whom a man is overcom, of the same is he brought in bondage.
2 Pet. 2. 19.


Mr. Indefectible. Sir, The Apostle has taught us to distinguish betwixt, a
sin unto death, and a sin not unto death. 1 Ioh. 5. We confess the
Regenerate may fall into sin, but not into sin unto death. Though he fall, he
shall not utterly be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand. Psalm.
37. 24.


Dr. Dubious. For that place of the Psalmist, the context does clear the meaning
to be of falling, not into sin, but into affliction and misery. Yet I do not
deny, but God out of his abundant mercy, is ready (in a way agreeable to his
wisdom and justice) to assist such as fall into sin, in order to their rising
again. But I am in some doubt whether the regenerate may not sin a sin unto
death; and that as well if you consider the event, as the demerit of his sin;
For the Moderate (and those not inferior Vid. Synops. pur. theo. disp. 31.
these. 38. Synod. Dordra. c. 5. Art. 4. and 5.
in learning to the more rigid) of the Synod of Dort do acknowledge, that the
regenerate may not only fall from certain degrees of grace, and intermit the
Acts of grace: but likewise that they may fall into such sins as leave them
under a damnable guilt, so that they have need of an actual renuall of
repentance, and a new absolution: that they lose their present aptness to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, into which no unclean thing shall enter. And
that David and Solomon fell thus far, will be evident, if you consider the
nature of their sins, and apply these following Scriptures to them. 1 Cor. 6.
9, 10. Gal. 5. 21. Apoc. 21. 7, 8. 1 Ioh. 3. 15. Now let us consider whether it
be not possible for a man that is fallen into this estate and condition, to be
cut off in his sins, before his repentance be renewed, and his new absolution
received, to remove his guilt, and restore him to an aptitude, and a present
actual capacity to enter into the kingdom of heaven. If it be possible for him
to be cut off in this condition, then it will follow, that either he shall not
enter into the Kingdom of heaven at all; or else there must be some purgatory
after this life (for him to pass through) to cleanse and fit him for heaven;
which Protestants will not admit of. But if we say, it is not possible for such
a man to be cut off in his sin; then it must follow, (1.) That he has a lease
of his life granted, till his restoration; which will be a hard matter to make
appear; and (2) that God is bound by some Covenant or promise to afford him, as
well grace as time to repent, and this will be as hard to evidence, as the
former; for, I presume, it is not to be denied, that there is required, a
greater measure of grace to raise up such a sinner being fallen, then to keep
him while he stood, from falling; Now if God's Covenant and promise, did not
bind him to give that less measure of grace to keep him actually from falling,
how can we persuade our selves that he is bound by it, to conferr that greater
measure of grace, whereby he shall actually arise: Mr. Indefectible. The
Apostle tell's the Philippians, he is confident of this very thing, that he
which has begun a good work in them, will perform (or finish) it until the
day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1. 6.


Dr. Dubious. I need not say, the Apostle's persuasion is not always an
infallible argument of Gods purpose. [Act. 16. 6, 7.] for he had a persuasion
of charity, as well as of faith, [Heb. 6 9.] and that his persuasion touching
the Philippians was of this nature, appears by the verse following, that which
is alleged. But I say, God does as well carry on, as begin the work of grace
in man's heart, in such a way as does not evacuate but establish the necessity
of man's duty; and therefore, he backs that his confidence, with a vehement
exhortation. Chap. 2. 12, 13. As ye have always obeyed, work out your own
salvation with fear and with trembling, for it is God, that works in you to
will and to do, of his good pleasure. And we may observe in the Epistle to the
Angel of the Church of Philadelphia. Where God makes a promise, to preserve him
in a time of trial then at hand (though that promise was something of the
nature of a reward, being made to him upon a consideration of his former
fidelity, yet) he subjoynes an obligation of duty. Apoc. 3. 8. Thou have a
little strength, and have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name: Verse 10.
Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the
hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world to try them that dwell
upon the earth. But to show that his own care and constancy was requisite in
order to the accomplishment of that promise; he add's, Verse. 11. Behold, I come
quickly, hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy Crown.
Notwithstanding God's Promise, if we grow careless, we may forseit our reward,
and incurr damnation, as is clearly threatened. [Ezek. 18. 24.] But when the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and
does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does; shall he live?
all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned: in his
trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them
shall he die.


Mr. Indefectible. How can this consist with God's Covenant and promise. Ier.
32. 40. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn
away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that
they shall not depart from me.


Dr. Dubious. That God does not engage himself in that place, to confer upon
his people an irresistible power of grace, infallibly to effect the gift of
perseverance in them, will be manifest, if we consider that the Covenant there
mentioned, concerned the people of the Jews, and contained the favor that God
would vouch safe to do them presently upon their return from the Babylonish
Captivity, as appears clearly in the foregoing and following verses, and yet
through their fault, and want of compliance, this did not take effect, their
renewed defection crossed God's promise, and the event happened far otherwise;
for if you consider that people soon after their return from that Captivity,
they grew worse and worse, as appears Nehemiah the last; and if you will refer
the fulfilling of the promise till after the exhibition of the Messiah (though
that is against the scope of the words, yet) then they grew worst of all. They
resisted the Holy Ghost. Act. 7. 5. and rejected the Counsel of God against
themselves. Luke 7. 30. and judged themselves unworthy of eternal life,
blaspheming and persecuting the Author, means and ministry of it, Act. 13. 45,
46, 50, and so were cut off for their wilful unbelief. Romans 9. 32. In the
Covenant therefore we are to consider two things. 1. A Promise on Gods part;
and 2. A stipulation of duty on their part, who are concerned in the promise.
The Promise on Gods part is. [I will be their God, and I will not (that is of
my self, or without provocation) turn away from them to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts: But to what end is all this? why, that they
may be my people, and fear me, as my people, and not depart from me, (as is
expressed in the 39. and 40. verses of that Chapter.) This then being a voluntary
duty which God requires, we must not imagine it to be intimated, as the
infallible effect or event of his promise, but as the end why he makes that
promise to them, and the Engagement which it puts upon them. But if they will
not choose to have the fear of God before their eyes, and to excite that grace,
which he puts into their hearts, but out of an evil heart of unbelief, depart
from the living God; they, by this their prevarication and apostasy (becoming
Non populus) ceasing to be his people, he cease likewise to be their God.
Thus the Spirit of God by Azariah, has resolved it to Asa and all Judah and
Benjamin, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him: and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. Yea, and cast you off for ever; as David adds to his Son Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.] So that there is a kind of reciprocal engagement betwixt God and
man, and something is to be performed by either party in order to salvation.
Now it so happens many times, that all, which is promised to be done on God's
part, is effectually done in regard of the sufficiency of it, and yet nothing
done, that is required to be done on man's part, in respect of the event. [See 2 Timothy 2. 13.] Hence it is that sometimes God is said to have done all (viz. all
his part) Ezekiel 24, 13. I have purged thee, but thou wast not purged; and for my
part, what could have been done more? Isai. 5. 4. Sometimes again, he is said
to have done nothing. Isa 53. 1. To whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? that
is, in respect of the effect, or the event, for God was not wanting in sending
his Prophets to make the Revelation. So Deuteronomy. 29 4. The Lord has not given you
an heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Not
that God was wanting in affording necessary means and assistance hereunto (for
then Moses should rather have upbraided God's illiberalitie, than the Prophets
Obstinacy,) which he had no reason to do, God having wrought so many signs
and miracles of mercy for them, and of justice upon their enemies, as many
times gained credit and acknowledgement amongst the Egyptians, and other
nations as they past along, and captivated the understanding, and subdued the
will and affections of Ioshuah and Caleb.) but God is said, not to have given
them hearts, etc. in regard of the event; because though he had administered
abundant means to that purpose, yet through their wilful obduration, he could
not prevail so far with them, they had frustrated the effect (as it is said of
our Saviors Countrymen in respect of his ministry, Mat. 13. 58.) and
therefore Moses, must not be thought, to excuse them by laying their blindness
and stubbornness at Gods door, but to upbraid them, that they had made their
hearts so impenetrable (hitherto) to all those gracious and powerful
dispensations, that by them, though sufficient, God had not effected such an
advertencie, as might have begotten a willingness thoroughly to confide in him
and obey in him, [verse 6. this was the end, which God seriously intended, and
aimed at.


Mr. Indefectible. This is inconsistent with that of the Apostle, Romans 11. 29.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance.


Dr. Dubious. Sir, It will be a very hard matter to draw an argument from that
Scripture to infer your conclusion. The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Ergo, what? The regenerate cannot fall from grace, and their
interest in Gods favor? Which is a plain non sequitur. It does not follow. For
of whom speaks the Apostle that? Does he not speak it of the Israelites? And
yet he tells you but ten verses before, that they were broken off for their
unbelief. All that can be concluded from those words will amount but to this,
that God is so faithful and tenacious of his promise, (wherewith he had
gratified their fathers) that (as it is verse 23.) If they abide not still in
unbelief, he is no less willing and ready, than able to graft them into the
Covenant again. And upon this occasion, (my brethren,) give me leave to
acquaint you with a few more of my doubts and scruples, in order to my better
satisfaction and settlement in these points; for I hope you will not mistake
me, as if I were peremptory in my assertions; for I speak only tentative, to
try, whether I can draw out of you, any better arguments or answers to
objections, then I have hitherto met with, in those that have handled these
controversies. I tell you then, that the Text last quoted with some other
passages in the 9, 10, 11. Chapters of that Epistle to the Romans, have
begotten a great doubt in me; whether, the Apostle in his discourse (Chapt. 9.)
treats at all, of that absolute and peremptory decree of Reprobation, whereby
men are irrevocably excluded from salvation, and all the necessary means that
lead to it. Let me give you the reasons of my doubting.


Mr. Preterition. I am afraid we shall not have time now to examine them, yet
seeing you are so desirous, let us have them briefly, that we may be the better
prepared to deliver our opinion about them at our next meeting.


Dr. Dubious. Then take them thus. I suppose it will be granted, that the
Apostle, in those Chapters applies his discourse more especially to the case of
the Jews, yet happily so, as to conclude all others in their example. If so,
then, that he speaks not of their absolute and peremptory reprobation, is very
probable, not only from his way of arguing, but also from his passionate
sorrow, hearty prayer, and earnest exhortations to them.

1. Let us reflect upon the Apostle's sorrow, and his option upon it, Chap. 9.
verse 2, 3. I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I
could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my brethren, my kinsmen
according to the flesh. What is the ground of this heaviness and his vote upon
it? If it were that God, by an absolute decree of reprobation, and out of his
sole beneplaciture had excluded them from the grace and power of believing unto
righteousness and salvation; (as some interpret it,) then, where was the piety
of the great Apostle expressed in this sorrow? Where was his prudence in this
option? For if such were the decree God, and the Apostle knew it, and was about
to demonstrate it to be such, he must grant it to be most wise, and most just,
and much conducing to the illustration of Gods glory; and then 'twere impiety
in any man (much more in him, who was therefore called a vessel of Election,
because he was designed and called so eminently to be instrumental to the glory
of the divine dispensations) to repine and grieve at it. And if he knew such a
divine decree, to be immutably fixed to all eternity; it was against prudence
to interpose such a wish for the avoidance of it. If the common opinion be
true, that in respect of the manifestation of the divine glory, it is better
and more Eligible to be miserable than not to be at all, (and it be out of an
erroneous and inordinate judgment, that the very damned in hell torments judge
otherwise, as some great Schoolmen maintain (then certainly we must set an ill
Character upon the Apostles sorrow and option, if we make that the cause and
ground of it alleged in this supposition. And it will not excuse, to say this
vote past the Apostle in the hurry of his passions, or that it was but a sudden
sally of his affections, in their eager pursuit after the salvation of his
nation; for all the circumstances of the discourse, and that solemn preface
wherewith it is ushered in, do manifestly argue, that 'twas uttered
considerately, and with great deliberation. I say the truth in Christ, I lie
not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, Chap. 9. 1. and
it is a sufficient indication of his calm and composed mind, that he did commit
this option to writing and transmit it in an Epistle to the Churches.

2. To this let us add his prayer, Chap. 10. 1. Brethren my hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. What Israel he means is
expressed in the 3. verse, they [who] being ignorant of God's righteousness;
went about to establish their own righteousness, and did not submit themselves
to the righteousness of God. How can this prayer or option of the Apostle
consist with his knowledge or belief of their absolute and peremptory
reprobation? For his prayer (according to that opinion) must be after this
manner: Lord I know by Divine revelation, (and am now declaring it, in an
Epistle to the Romans, and so to all the world) that it is thine absolute will
and good pleasure, utterly and irrevocably to abandon this people under an
immutable decree of repentance; yet I do most heartily desire, and beseech
thee, to grant that they may be saved. Such a prayer had been directly against
his faith, and therefore sin, (Romans 14. 23.) and against the very Rule of
prayer, and obedience in that kind, [Thy will be done] and so sin too. Sure
the Apostle (after his conversion) was not wont, thus to break his faith and
cross the counsel of his maker.

3. To this we may add all other his endeavors and stratagems to gain them to
the faith of Christ, and consequently to salvation: of which we read, Romans 11.
14. and else where. All which had been as ridiculous as the incounters of the
Knight Errant. in Don Quixot, if the Apostle had believed these men to be
absolutely excluded, from all possibility of salvation, by such a decree as
some fancy to be treated of in that ninth Chapter.

4. I conceive my doubt more reasonable, when I consider the Apostles way of
arguing, [Rom. 11. 1.] For (to intimate (at least according to my apprehension)
that the ground of his sorrow was, (not their absolute irrespective and
irrevocable reprobation, but) the danger of their rejection from the Covenant
and divine grace, wherein they had hitherto stood, as God's peculiar adopted
people) 1. He makes their own wilful unbelief, the cause and ground of this
their rejection and misery, Romans 11. 20. Because of unbelief, they were broken
off; which cannot be said of the decree of Reprobation; for the maintainers of
that decree, do not make unbelief the cause of reprobation, but rather
reprobation the cause of unbelief. 2. He says there is a possibility, and
hope of their restitution. This is intimated, Romans 11. 11, and 29. and expressed
verse 23. If they abide not still in unbelief, they shall be grafted in; for
God is able to graft them in again. And this cannot be said with respect to the
decree of Reprobation; for the decree of God is God himself (as Maccovius, and
others do affirm, and so did Gomarus, Vide Gomar. Tom. 3. Disp. 9. These. 28.
etc.
till being impugned by Arminius he changed his opinion in this particular) and
God cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. Besides, the men of that opinion, lay
the foundation of all mercy and judgment to come, in those their absolute
decrees of Election and reprobation; and make Christ but a part of the
superstruction, or the Executor of those decrees; whereas this Apostle says,
other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 3. 11. And we may observe, that consonantly hereunto, he shuts up that
his discourse, Romans 9. 30. What shall we say then? Or, what is the sum of all
that has been spoken? Namely this; That the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is
of faith: But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness, has not
attained to the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? (not, because they were
excluded by an absolute and irresistible decree, as the Apostle should have
said (if he had argued regularly) according to that opinion, but) because they
sought it not by faith, (as they were taught, and enabled and obliged to do)
but as it were by the works of the law: for they (quitting the only foundation)
stumbled at the stumbling stone; as it is written, Behold I set up in Sion (the
deliverer of Jacob, whom they shall take occasion to make) a stumbling stone,
and (through their wilful infidelity and perverseness he shall become to them)
a rock of offense: but whosoever builds upon him by a lively faith and a holy
obedience, shall not be confounded, verses 31, 32, 33. For as he has tasted
death for every man; [Heb. 2. 9. 1 Gor. 8. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1.] according to the
Scriptures, even for them that perish; and bought with the price of his heart
blood, them that deny him, as St. Peter says: so the father would not that
any should perish, but [2 Pet. 3. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 4.] That all should come to
repentance and be saved; and to that end He now commands all men every where
to repent, [Acts 17. 30.] and to kiss the Son, [Psal. 2.] and submit to his
scepter; who is the propitiation for their sins, and the sins of the whole
world, [1 John 2. 2.] having made our ot^nement and our peace, [Col. 1. 20.]
and purchased grace and eternal redemption for us: [Rom. 5. 11. John 1. 16.
Heb. 9. 12. 2 Pet. 1. 3, 4. Heb. 12. 28.] sufficient abilities and glorious
privileges, whereby we might be enabled and encouraged to serve him acceptably
with reverence and godly fear, and is the author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. These are all express parts of the divine
Revelation, and therefore part of the object of our faith, and therefore
infallible assertions of sacred truth. What slender distinctions are invented,
and what Texts of Scripture wrested to elude some of them, I shall take my
opportunity to represent, when you will vouchsafe to give me a friendly
meeting, to debate these and other emergent doubts, touching these great points
of controversy. In the mean time, I could wish, you would not exclude from the
exercise of their ministry, men legally ordained thereunto, if they be
otherwise well qualified, though they differ somewhat from you in these
matters. But I am single, and must submit my vote to the suffrages of my
brethren.


Chairman. Brother Doctor, we may think upon your advise and doubts hereafter;
but for the present we must agree as one man to carry on the great work of
reformation, we have in hand; and therefore, Gentlemen, what say you to Mr.
Tilenus? Do you approve of him as a man well gifted and fitly qualified for the
Ministry.


Mr. Fa^ality Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles.


Mr. Pre^erition Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles.


Mr. Indefectible and the rest Noe, by no means we do not like his Principles.

Call him in.
Chairman. Sr, The Commissioners are not satisfied in your Certificate. You may
be a godly man, we do not deny, but we have not such assurance of it, as we can
build upon, and therefore we cannot approve of you for the Ministry; and that
you may be at no more expense of purse or time in your attendance, we wish you
to return home, and think upon some other employment.


Tilenus. Sr, I could wish I might be acquainted with the reason of this my
reprobation, unless the Decree that governs your Votes, or proceeds from them,
be irrespective. I think I am not so ill beloved amongst the most learned of
the Godly Clergy (though differing a little in judgment from me) but I can
procure a full Certificate from the chiefest and most moderate of them.


Chairman. That is not all the matter we have against you; what have we to do
with moderate men? we see your temper and want of modesty in that expression,
and therefore you may be gone.


Tilenus. Then Gentlemen, I shall take my leave, and commend you to more sober
Counsels and resolutions.


Isaiah 9. 16. The leaders of this people [Heb. they that call them blessed]
Cause them to err.

Jer. 23. 30. Therefore behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that
steal my word every one from his neighbor.

Luke 11. 52. Ye take away the key of knowledge.

Ier. 23. 32. Behold I am against them that Prophecy false dreams, says the
Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and their
lightness.

Mat. 15. 6. and Mark 7. 13. Thus have ye made the word of God of none effect
by your tradition.

Ezekiel. 34. 4, 5. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed
that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither
have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that
which was lost, but with force and with cruelty have ye ruled them. And they
were scattered, because there is no shepherd.

1 Timothy 6. 3-5. If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, -- From such withdraw thy thy self; For if the blind lead the
blind, they shall both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15. 14. But they shall
proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men.

2 Timothy 3. 9. THE FIVE ARTICLES Controverted betwixt the REMONSTRANTS, and
CONTRA-REMONSTRANTS, Commonly called ARMINIANS and CALVINISTS.

To the Reader.
WHEN those points of doctrine maintained by Melancthon and other Moderate
Lutherans, to be managed by the acute wit, Solid judgment, and great Learning
of James Hermine, Public Reader in the University of Leiden, they appeared to
the unprejudiced Examiners, so much more consonant, as well to the sacred
Scriptures and right Reason, as to primitive Antiquity, and so much more
agreeable to the Mercy and Justice and Wisdom of Almighty God, and so much
more conducing unto Piety, then the tenants of the rigid Calvinists, that they
quickly found a cheerful reception and great multitudes of followers in the
Belgic Churches. Hereupon their Adversaries (having so passionately espoused
the contrary opinions, and being so vehemently carried on with a prejudice
against these) that they might the more effectually decry and suppress the
Propugnators of them, caused some of their Confidents to repesent them and
their doctrine under such odious Characters as were indeed proper to their own
opinions. It was given out, that among their Heresies, they held; First, that
God was the Author sin and Secondly, that he created the far greatest part of
mankind only of purpose to glorify himself in their damnation, with several
others of like nature; which indeed are, not only the Consequence and Results
of Calvin's Doctrine, but positively maintained and propagated by some of his
followers.

That thy credulity, [Good Reader,] may not be abused and betrayed by such
practices, the following papers are hereunto annexed, to give thee, in a short
view, a true account of the difference that is betwixt the disagreeing Parties,
with the grounds thereof.

Farewell.
The first Article touching Predestination.
What the Remonstrants hold.
THAT God to the glory and praise of his abundant goodness, having decreed to
make man after his own image, and to give him an easy and most equal law, and
add thereunto a threatening of death to the transgressors thereof, and
foreseeing that Adam would wilfully transgress the same, and thereby make
himself and his posterity liable to condemnation; though God was
notwithstanding mercifully affected toward man, yet out of respect to his
justice and truth, would not give way to his mercy to save man, till his
justice should be satisfied, and his serious hatred of sin and love of
righteousness be made known.

Proofs out of Scripture.
After his own Image. Genesis 1. 26, 27. So God created man after his own image.
See Col. 3. 10. Ephesians. 4. 24.

An easy law etc. Gen 2. 16, 17. Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall not eat. See Romans 2. 14, 15. Levit. 18. 5. Ezekiel. 20. 11. Romans 10. 5.
Gal. 3. 12.

Added thereto a threatening of death. Genesis 2. 17, In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die.

Foreseeing that Adam, etc. Isa. 44. 7. And who, as I shall call and shall
declare it, -- and the things that are coming and shall come. See Isa. 41. 22,
23. Act. 15. 18. Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the
world. And all man's works too, Psalm. 139. 2. Thou understandest my thoughts
afar off. See Genesis 3. 6. 2 Cor. 11. 3. 1 Timothy 2, 13, 14. Eccles. 7. 29. See
Isa. 45. 21.

Liable to condemnation, etc. Romans 3. 23. All have sinned and come short of the
glory of God. Romans 5. 12-18, 19. By one man sin entered into the world and death
by sin. Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death. See Act. 17. 26. Heb. 7. 10. Job
14. 1. etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 11. 3. with Rev. 2. 7. Genesis 3. 24. Deuteronomy. 27.
26. with Gal. 3. 10. Jam. 2. 10.

Mercifully affected etc. Exodus 34. 6. The Lord God merciful and gracious. 1 John 4. 19. He loved us first. See ver. 11. Jona. 4. 2. Thou art a God gracious
and merciful, slow to anger. So 2 Chronicles. 30. 9. Psalm. 86. 5, 15. For thou Lord
art good and ready to forgive -- a God full of compassion and gracious. Psalm.
103. 8. 13. The Lord is slow to anger. As a father pittieth his children. Psalm.
111. 4. and 145. 8, 9. His tender mercies are over all his works. Romans 2. 4.
the riches of his goodness, and forbearance and longsuffering. Luk 6. 36. Be
ye merciful, as your father is merciful. See Isa. 55. 7. Jer. 31. 20. Joel 2.
13. Number. 14. 18, 19. Neh. 9. 17. Deuteronomy. 5. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 18.

Respect to his justice. Ex. 34. 7. He will by no means clear the guilty. Psalm.
5. 4. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither shall
evil dwell with the. Isa. 59. 2. your iniquities have separated, etc. And to
his truth. Genesis 2. 17. thou shall die the death, and he is a God that cannot
lie, nor repent, nor deny himself. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. Number. 23. 19. 2 Timothy
2. 13.

Till justice be satisfied. Isa. 53. 5, 6, 10. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all; and made his soul an offering for sin. He was wounded for
our transgressions. Luke 24. 26, 46. Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. 1 Pet.
3. 18. the just for the unjust. Mat. 20, 28. To give his life a ransom for
many, and 1 Timothy 2. 6. Psalm. 69. 4. I restored that which I took not away. See
Phil. 2, 7, 8. Matthew. 3. 15. c. 5. 17. Genesis 3. 15. Mar. 10 45. 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
Luke 2. 14.

His hatred of sin, etc. Psalm. 5. 4, 5, 6. Thou art not a God that has
pleasure in wickedness, thou hate, and abhorrest, etc. Psalm. 45. 7. thou
hate iniquity. Prove. 11. 20. The froward are abomination to the Lord. Isa.
59. 2. your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins
have hid his face from you. See Psalm. 7. 11, 12. Isa. 65. 12.

And love of righteousness. Psalm. 45. 7. Thou love righteousness, Romans 3.
24, 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, to declare his
righteousness: that he might be just, etc. He is the avenger of
unrighteousness.

And therefore I.
For the satisfying of his justice, he did ordain the Mediator Jesus Christ,
who should be made a sacrifice for sinful men, suffer Death for them, and by
his blood, shed for their reconciliation, obtain right of saving them upon
terms befittting mercy and justice.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
Ordained the Mediator, Isa. 9. 6. To us a son is given. Ioh. 3. 16. So God
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son. 1 Ioh. 4. 9, 10. In this
was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Romans 5. 8. etc. But God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 1 Timothy 2. 5,
6. For there is one God and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. See Hebr. 12. 2. with 24, 25 verses.

Made a sacrifice, and suffered death. Phil. 2. 8. He became obedient unto
death. Ioh. 10, 11, 15. 17, 18. I lay down my life for my sheep. Se Ioh. 15.
13. Heb. 2. 9. He tasted death for every man. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Christ died for our
sins, Romans 4. 25. c. 6. 10. He died unto sin once. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his
own self hare our sins in his own body, on the tree. 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our
Passover is sacrificed for us. Isai. 53. 10. When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin. Ephesians. 2. 2. Who loved us, and gave himself for us, an
offering and sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor. 1 Ioh. 2. 1, 2. He is the
propitiation for our sins. Romans 3. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood. See Hebr. 5. 1. etc. c. 8. 3. etc. c,
9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 32, 26, 77, 28. c. 10. 5. 10. 12, 14. He is the lamb of God,
that takes away the sin of the world. Ioh. 1. 29. He gave his life a ransom.
Mark 10. 45. and purged our sins. Hebr. 1. 3. He was made sin for us. 2 Cor.
5. 21. Made a curse. Gal. 3. 13. To redeem us that were under the Law, and
delivered us from the curse of the Law. Gal. 3. 13. and the power of darkness.
Col. 1. 13. and the fear of death. Heb. 2. 14. Hos. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 55. and
from the wrath to come. 1 These. 1. 10. Romans 5. 9. and obtained eternal
redemption for us. Hebr. 9. 12. Luke 1. 60. 8. 2 Timothy 1. 10.

By his blood shed for their reconciliation. Matt. 26. 28. This is my blood of
the new Testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins. Rev. 1. 5.
and washed us from our sins in his own blood. See Revel. 5. 6. 12. 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 18, etc. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. Romans 5. 10. When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God
by the death of his Son. Having made peace through the blood of his Cross. See
Col. 1. 20, 21, 22. and chapter 2. 12, 13, 14. and Ephesians. 2. 13. and 18. through
him we have access unto the father.

Obtain right of saving, etc. Isa. 53. 10, 11. He shall see his seed, and
justify many. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are bought with a price. Act. 20. 28. Which he
(God) has purchased with his own blood. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 11. 27.
[Mat. 28. 18.] All are delivered unto me of my father. Ioh. 3. 35. and Ioh. 5.
22. [See Ioh. 17. 2.] The Father has committed all judgment unto the Son.
Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. The Son of man is come to seek and save that which
was lost. See Heb. 2. 14. 15, 16, 17. In whom we have redemption. Col. 1. 14.
Ephesians. 1. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3. Rev. 3. 14.

Upon terms befitting, etc. 1 John 3. 8. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, Mat. 1. 21. [see Romans
6. 1, 2. Ephesians. 1. 4, 6.] For he shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 9.
13. I am come to call sinners to repentance, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 14. That he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and from our vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. And
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Rev. 5. 9. He has
redeemed us unto God, that we might become servants to God, [1 Pet. 4. 1, 2.]
And have our fruit unto holiness, Romans 6. 22. And live unto righteousness, 1
Pet. 2. 24. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.
3. c. 10. 4. That the Lord God might dwell amongst us, Psalm. 68. 18. And We
live to him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Romans 14. 9. [Heb. 5. 9.] and set forth his
praise and glory, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 30. Therefore if any man be in Christ
he is a new Creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17.

II.
Upon the Consideration of his blood, as shed, he decreed that all those, who
should believe in that Redeemer, and persevere in that faith; should through
mercy and grace, by him be made partakers of salvation: but such, as would not
believe in him, but die in infidelity, should therefore be punished with
eternal death; Reprobation being decreed upon precedent infidelity and dying
therein.

Proofs out of Scripture.
His blood, as shed, etc. Rev. 13. 8. The lamb, slain from the foundation of
the world, Isa. 42. 1. [see 1 Pet. 1. 20.] Behold my servant whom I uphold,
mine Elect, in whom my soul delights, Isa 49. 3. Thou art my servant, O
Israel, in whom I will be glorified, See a Tim. 1. 9. Before the world began.
Who should believe, etc. John 3. 14, 15, 16, 36. That whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life: He that believes on the Son
has everlasting life, John 6. 40. And this is the will of him, that sent me,
that every one which sees the son and believes on him, may have everlasting
life, see verse 47, 54, 58. Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the son of God,
1 Pet. 2. 6, 7. Whosoever believes on him shall not be confounded, see Romans 9.
30, 33. Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, 1 Pet.
1. 2, 5. who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, Heb.
10. 38. Now the just shall live by faith, Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by faith,
Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, etc. 1 Timothy 4.
10. The Savior of them that believe, John 5. 24. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, He that hears my word and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation: but is passed from
death to life, 1 John 4. 13. These things have I written unto you that believe,
that ye may know that ye have eternal life, Acts 15. 11. We believe that
through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved.

And persevere, etc. Romans 2. 7. To them, who by patient continuance in well
doing, Mat. 24. 13, 46. [1 Timothy 2. 15.] But he that shall endure unto the end,
the same shall be saved. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing, 2 John v. 9. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ,
has the father and the Son, 1 John 2. 24. If that, which ye have heard from
the beginning shall remain in you, Romans 11. 22. if ye continue in his goodness,
Col. 1. 23. Chap. 2. 5,6,7,8. If ye continue in the faith, rooted and built up,
Heb. 3. 6, 12, 14. If ye hold fast-stedfastly unto the end, Romans 8. 13. If ye
mortisie the deeds of the body, Heb. 10. 35. ad finem. Cast not away your
confidence, Rev. 2. 25. c. 3. 11. Hold fast till I come, that no man take thy
crown, 2 Cor. 6. 1. Receive not the grace of God in vain, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.
Beware lest being led away with the error of the wicked, ye fall from your own
stedfastness. But grow in grace, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling, 2 Timothy 2. 5, 12. If a man strive for masteries, yet is he
not crowned except he strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he
strive lawfully: if we deny him, he also will deny us, Rev. 2. 11, 17, 26.
Chap. 3. 12, 21. To him that overcomes will I give of the hidden Manna; and
grant to sit with me on my throne, and make him a pillar, and he shall not be
hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 10. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give the a crown of life, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, see Job 27. 3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 8. 15.

Such as would not believe, but die in infidelity, etc. Mar. 16. 16. He that
believes not shall be damned, John 3. 18, 36. He that believes not is
condemned already, the wrath of God abides on him, 2 John v. 9. Whosoever
transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God, [see Isa.
27. 11.] Romans 11. 20. because of unbelief they were broken off, Rom 6. 23. For
the wages of sin is death, Psalm. 9. 17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell:
Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, etc. See Rev. 21. 8. But
the fearful and unbelieving, and abominable, etc. shall have their portion in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone: Rev 22. 15. See the place Ephesians.
5. 5, 6. Because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Be not deceived, the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God: See Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. John 3. 19. This is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light. 2
These. 1. 7, 8. The Lord shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire taking
vengeance of them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. See Mat. 13. 41, 42, 49, 50. Chap. 25. 41, 43. Wherefore if thine
eye offend thee, etc. Mark 9. 43. to 49. See Heb. 11. 6. Chapter 12. 14. Rev. 21.
the last. Ezekiel. 18. 26. Mat. 3. 10, 12. Chap. 5. 20.

III.
And because sinful man could not possibly of himself by his natural ability,
believe in this Redeemer, and persevere in such faith, he decreed to afford man
means sufficient and necessary (as he saw befitting his own wisdom and
justice) for the working of faith and repentance, whereby man might be enabled
to believe, or more and more prepared and in certain steps or degrees brought
on at length to true faith.

Proofs out of Scripture.
Not of himself etc. Mat 6. 27. Which of you by taking thought can add one
Cubit unto his stature? Job 9. 19, 20. If I speak of strength, lo he is
strong. Hos. 13. 9. Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Isa.
43. 1. c. 45. 21. I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior.
Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thy heart: and lean not to thine own
understanding. Isa. 5. 21. chapter 31. 1. Woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes: but look not unto the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. Not
believe by his natural ability etc. Romans 5. 6. chapter 8. 3. Without strength. [See
a Cor. 4. 6.] 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves. See Romans
11. 32. Gal. 3. 22. Ioh. 3. 3, 5. Mat. 12. 33, 35. Make the tree good, and
(then) the fruit good: 1 Cor. 3. 4. God gives the increase. Phil. 1. 29. Unto
you it is given. Act. 16. 14. Whose heart the Lord opened Phil. 2. 13. It is
God which works in you both to will and to do. See Ezekiel. 36. 22. Mat. 16.
17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee: Lam. 1. 17. Every good
gift is from above etc. Joh. 6. 44, 65. Except the father draw him. Mat. 11.
27. Neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the
Son will reveal him. John 15. 5. Without me ye can do nothing. 1 Cor. 12. 3.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 2. 8. For by
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift
of God. See Romans 4. 16. chapter 5. 15. etc. chapter 6. 23. 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace
of God I am what I am. Gal. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 3. Who have obtained like
precious faith with us, according as his divine power has given us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness. Ephesians. 3. 14. etc. chapter 6. 23. Rev. 1. 4.
Grace and peace from God the Father etc. 1 Cor. 1. 3. He that glories let him
glory in the Lord. See Romans 1. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 3. Nor persevere in such etc. Ioh.
15. 5. He that abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit:
for without me ye can do nothing. Heb. 12. 2. Jesus, the author and finisher of
our faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 16, 17. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God even
our Father, which has loved us and given us everlasting Consolation, and good
hope through grace, comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word
and work. 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all grace make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you. See Ephesians 3. 14. etc. Phil. 1. 6. Hebr. 13. 20.

Means sufficient and necessary. etc. Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own
Son- [See Romans 10. 14. etc. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Isa. 59. last.] How shall he not
with him also freely give us all things. Ephesians. 1. 3. He has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in Christ. Isa. 49, 6, 8, 9. chapter 42. 7. That thou may be
my salvation unto the end of the earth. To open the blind eyes, to bring out
the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison
house. I will give thee for a Covenant to the people. To perform the promise --
that he would grant unto us [a Power] that we might serve him in holiness and
righteousness -- all the days of our life. S. Luke 1, 72, to 76. 2 Pet. 1. 3.
His Divine power has given unto us all things, that pertain to life and
godliness. Mat. 25. 14, 15, 27, 29. He gave unto them his talents. Mat. 13.
11, 12. To you it is given to know. Act. 2. 4, 5, 39, 41. The promise is to you
and your children -- Luke 10. 9. The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you.
Isa. 65. 1. Romans 10. 20. I was made manifest to them that enquired not after
me. Tit. 2. 11, 12. chapter 3. 5, 6. For the grace of God that brings salvation
unto all men has appeared: -- the renewing of the holy Ghost, which is shed on
us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior. [See Hebr. 4. 12. 1 Cor. 14.
24, 25. Iam. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 15.] Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over
you, for ye are not under the law but under grace. Mar. 4. 23, 24, 25. Luke 8.
18. To him that has shall be given. John 7. 17. If any man will do his will he
shall know of the doctrine. Luke 11. 13. Act. 5. 32. He will give the holy
Spirit to them that ask and obey him. Isa. 5. 4. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? Heb. 12. 28. wherefore let us
have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear.

IIII.
Whence arises the last decree, concerning the salvation of this or that man
in particular, who by these means should be brought unto faith, and persevere
therein; this being the condition required in every one, that is to be elected
unto eternal life: and the consideration of this or that man in particular, who
should die in unbelief.

Proofs out of Scripture.
The condition required in every one that is to be elected etc. Iam. 2. 5. Has
not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. God
has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the
spirit and belief of the truth, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 2. [Mark. 13. 20] Elect
according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the
spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Romans 8. 29.
Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate. Romans 9. 23. with 2 Timothy 2. 21.
If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel of mercy,
unto honor, etc. See Psalm 4. 3 and 103. 17, 18. Romans 10. 10, 11. and all those
texts cited above under these heads [Who should believe -- and persevere.] See
Romans 11. 4, 5. not bowed.

And the consideration of this or that man, who should die in unbelief, etc.
Exodus 32. 33. Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
Numb. 14. 21, to 35.

As truly as I live, says the Lord, The very form of actual Reprobation.
because all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles, and have
tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice, surely they
shall not see the land, which I swear unto their fathers, neither shall any of
them that provoked me, see it. And ye shall know my breach of promise. Heb. 3.
18, 19. And to whom swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to
them, that believed not: So we see that they could not enter in because of
unbelief. Now these things happened unto them for [types, (see the application,
Heb. 4. 11.) or] ensamples unto us. 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Romans 11. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith. Be not
high minded but fear; for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed
lest he alse spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of
God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness; if thou
continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off. 1 Chronicles. 28.
9. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him, he will
cast thee off for ever. 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we deny him, he will deny us. Ioh. 12.
46, 47, 48. He that rejects me -- has one that judges him. Jude, v. 6, 7.
[2 Pet. 2. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.] The Angels which kept not their first estate and
Sodom -- giving themselves over to fornication: are set forth for an ensample.
Ungodly men turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, Were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, to whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever. verse 4, 13. See 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. and 2 Pet. 2. 7. etc. See
also the texts cited above, under this head [Such as would not believe, etc.]

V.
Christ is not only the executor of election, but the foundation of the decree
it self.

Proofs out of Scripture.
The executor, etc. John 3. 16. So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten son. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any other. John 17. 3.
This is life eternal to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. John
14. 6. I am the way, the truth, and the life. John 15. 4. Abide in me, and I in
you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine:
no more can ye, except ye abide in me, Col. 1. 27. Christ in you the hope of
glory. See 1 Cor. 2. 2.

But the foundation, etc. Ephesians. 3. 11, 12. According to the eternal purpose,
which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord: 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. According to his
own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world
began. John 1. 16, 17. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, and of his
fullness. See Col. 1. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself. Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this
grace wherein we stand. See Ephesians. 3. 11. 12. and Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11.
Blessed with all spiritual blessings in Christ chosen in him, predestined us
by him, made us accepted in him, In whom we have redemption, forgiveness, and
an inheritance. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. Jesus Christ being the Corner stone. 1
Cor. 3. 11. Other foundation can no man lay. See the Text cited above under
this head [made a sacrifice and suffered death.]

What the Remonstrants do utterly deny Concerning Predestination.
I.
They do utterly deny, that God decreed to elect some to eternal life, and to
reprobate others from the same, before he decreed to create them.

The Reason of this.
Not to elect some, etc. For he has chosen us in Christ. Ephesians. 1. 4. But in
Christ we cannot be, unless we be considered, 1. As sinners, 2. As believers;
and therefore Creatures, 1. As sinners. For 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, [See Mat. 1. 21. John 1. 29. Mat. 18. 11. Luke
19. 10. John 6. 51. Heb. 2. 14. etc. 2 Cor. 5. 19. etc. See all the places
cited for salvation by faith.]

2. As believers. For, John 1. 12. They that receive him are they that believe
in his name. See Ephesians. 3. 17.

Not to reprobate others, etc. For reprobation is an act of Gods hatred, who
hates nothing but sin and for sin, which the creature could not be guilty of
before it had a being. Exodus 32. 33. [See Ezekiel. 18. 23. Chap. 33. 11.]
Whosoever has sinned him will I blot out. Ezekiel. 18. 4, 20. The soul that
sins, it shall die. See all those places where damnation is said to be for
sin, especially for infidelity. See also those places cited to show Gods
hatred of sin, and his inclination to mercy, as Exodus 33. 18, 19. Chap. 34. 6,
7. Lam. 3. 33. Psalm. 145. 8, 9. Ezekiel. 33. 11. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Ezekiel. 18. 23, 32.
Mat. 25. 41. Hell made for Devils.

II.
They do not hold, that any such decree in order before the decree of Creation,
was made for the demonstration of the glory of Gods mercy and justice, or power
and absolute dominion.

The Reason of this.
1. Ier. 18. 4. The vessel that he made of clay, was marred in the hand of the
potter; so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the potter to
make it. See to the 10, 1^. verse. [See Isa. 27. 11. last part. Hos. 9. 15.]

(2.) Isa. 49. 8, and 6. verses. I will give thee for a Covenant of the people
to restore Israel, and inlighten the Gentiles. And verse (...) Thou art my
servant, O Israel, [Christ] in whom I will be glorified: [See John 15. v. 8 and
Proverbs 14. 28.] Consider what is noted before, and what follows, for
further evidence of this.

III.
They do utterly deny, that God did, with this intent, create all men in Adam,
ordain the fall and permission thereof, withdraw from Adam grace necessary and
sufficient, or procures the Gospel to be preached, and men to be externally
called, and bestows certain gifts of the Holy Ghost upon them, (and all this
with this intent) that these should be means whereby he would bring some unto
life, and disappoint others of the benefit thereof according to such decree.

The reason hereof (in the several branches) is to be collected from the proof
of the foregoing and following articles; yet that it may further appear.
1. That God did not create, etc. Consider that He made man after his own
image: Genesis 1. 27.

2. Gave him the tree of life. Genesis 2. 9.

3. That he hates sin: Psalm 5. 4, 5. Hab. 1. 13.

4. And cannot be tempted with evil James 1. 13, 14, 15, 17.

5. And desires not the death of a sinner: Ezekiel. 18. 31. c. 33. 11.

6. That sin was from the suggestion of the Devil: Genesis 3. 1.

7. And man's voluntary compliance with him: Eccles. 7. 29.

2. That he procures not the Gospel, etc. Consider,

1. He is merciful to all: Psalm 145. 8, 9. Acts 14. 16, 17. Chapter 17. 26,
27. Would not that any should perish: Ezekiel. 18. 23, 31. and Cha. 33. 11. [See
John 3. 17. 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. But that all should come to faith and repentance:
1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9. And,

2. Christ having died for all: 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Heb. 2. 9. He invites all:
Mat. 11. 28. And upbraids such as wilfully refuse to embrace his offered grace
and salvation: John 5. 34, 40.

IV.
They do utterly deny, that Christ the Mediator is only the executor of the
decree of Election, and not the foundation thereof.

The places cited (above) in proof of the affirmative is sufficient reason
hereof. And note here once for all, that whenever the Affirmative is
sufficiently proved, the Negative is thereby utterly overthrown; because both
parts of a contradiction can never be true.

V.
They do utterly deny, that the cause why some are effectually called,
justified, persevere in faith, and are glorified is, because they are
absolutely elected to eternal life.

The Reason.
Acts 10. 34, 35. [See Genesis 4. 6, 7.] God is no respecter of persons: but in
every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is accepted with
him. Romans 10. 11, 12. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him,
shall not be ashamed: for the same Lord over all, is rich unto all, that call
upon him. See Jam. 2. 5. 2 These. 2. 13. and all the rest of those places cited
above for the affirmative conditional Election.

VI.
They do utterly deny, that the cause why others are left in the lapse, and
Christ not given to them, and that they are not at all, or uneffectually
called, and so hardened and damned, is, because they are reprobated from
eternal life by an antecedent decree.

The Reason.
Prove. 5. 22. [See Mic. 7. 18.] His own iniquities shall take the wicked
himself, and he shall be holden with the cords of his sin. Isa. 59. 2. But your
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you. See the places cited above for the affirmative, viz. for
respective reprobation. Also the Texts cited for Christ's satisfaction, and the
administration of necessary and sufficient means unto salvation.

VII.
They do utterly deny, that God did decree, without respect unto actual sins
coming between, to leave in the fall of Adam, the far greater part of mankind
shut out of all hope of salvation.

The Reason.
Genesis 3. 15. chapter 9. 8, 9. Isa. 49. 8. Christ is promised and given for a
Covenant and means of restoration. Genesis 22. 16, 18. [See Romans 1. 18. chap. 2.
8. Deuteronomy. 24. 16. 2 King. 14. 6. Ephesians. 5. 7, 11.] See the Texts cited for his
satisfaction. Ezekiel. 18. 2, 3, 4. What mean ye that ye use this proverb, The
Fathers have eaten sour grapes and the childrens teeth are set on edge? As I
live says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this
Proverb. Behold all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul
of the son is mine: the soul that sins, it shall die. Ier. 31. 29, 30. They
shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape and the childrens teeth
are set on edge. But every one shall die for his own iniquity, every man that
eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge. [See Isa. 27. 11. It is
a people without understanding, therefore he that made them will have no pity
on them. Genesis 4. 6, 7.] Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. The wrath of God comes upon the children
of disobedience. Prove. 1. 24. etc. Because I have called and ye refused etc. 1
Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body and bring it into subjection: lest that by any
means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. See
Prove. 5. 22. Isa. 59. 2.

VIII.
They do utterly deny, that God did destin by an absolute decree, to give
Christ a Mediator only to the Elect, and to give faith to them alone by an
effectual calling, to justify and continue them in the faith, and glorify
them alone.

The reason of this appears in the Texts cited above for Christ's satisfaction,
and those which follow for the universality of his merit, in the Second Article
or Question. To which nothing is needful to be added.

IX.
They do utterly deny, that many, even all the reprobates, are rejected from
eternal life, and means lufficient thereunto by an absolute and antecedent
decree, so as neither the merit of Christ, nor vocation, nor any gift of the
spirit, can, or do avail unto their Salvation.

The Reason.
Because God created man after his own image and approved him to be very good.
Genesis 1. 27, 31. and to the judge of all the earth, the righteous are not (dealt
with) as the wicked. Genesis 18. 25. For he is good to all and his tender mercy is
over all his works. Psalm. 145. 8, 9. He will not the death of a sinner. Ezekiel.
18. and chapter 33. almost throughout. [See Job 34. 23.] 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Man's destruction is of himself. Hos. 13. 9. Rom 6. 23. chapter 1. 32. for he
despises mercy. Romans 2. 4, 5. Luke 7. 30. Acts 13. 46. See Mat. 22. 2. to the
15. Luke 14. 24. Hebr, 10. 26. etc. John 3. 19. [See 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. and 36.
15, 16.] This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world and men
love darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil. Ezekiel. 24. 13.
In filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee and thou wast not purged,
thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my
fury to rest upon thee. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. [See Prove. 1. 29, 30, 31. Romans
2. 8. c. 1. 18.] Because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. For this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. See likewise all the places cited for the
affirmative, viz. respective reprobation.

X.
They do utterly deny, that God has destined Reprobates (as they are called)
to infidelity, impiety, and sins, as means and causes of their damnation.

The Reason.
1. God himself has stigmatized Jeroboam with this Character, (as a brand of
infamy) 2 King. 23. 15. Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. And
Hab. 2. 15. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, that put thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also; that thou may look on their
nakedness.

2. If a Prince should make a decree to take away the life of his subject, and
then necessitate him by force, or wind him in by subtlety, to be instrumental
(and subservient to his own ends) in the perpetration of an act, which, the
said Prince himself, has made to be criminal, that the execution of his said
subject might appear to be just; this argues clearly, that his first decree
against him, even by the verdict of his own conscience, was unjust, and so is
his execution also.

3. It is accounted an act of horrid tyranny in Tiberius, who because it was
unlawful to strangle Virgins, He caused the hangman first to defloure a virgin,
and afterward to strangle her. See also the Reason of the next.

XI. They do utterly deny, that God is the Author of sin.
The Reason.
1. Because He is Holy and a pattern of holiness. Lev. 11. 44. chapter 19. 2. 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16.

2. His ways are right and equal and he can do no iniquity. Ezekiel. 18. 25, 29.
Hos. 14. 19. Psalm. 45. 7. and 92. 16. Zeph. 3. 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 4.

3. He hates sin. Psalm 5. 4, 5. and 45. 7. Prove. 11. 20. Isa. 59. 2. Deuteronomy. 12.
31. Isa. 61. 8. Zee. 8. 17. Am. 6. 8. Ier. 44. 4. Hab. 1. 13.

4. It Is a burden to him. Isa 7. 13. chapter 43. 24.

5. He forbids sin. Exodus 20. 1. etc. Job 36. 21. Ezekiel. 45. 9. Romans 6. 12. 1
Cor. 15. 34.

6. He cannot be tempted with evil. Jam. 1. 13, 14, 15.

7. He is provoked to anger by it. Isa. 3. 8. Hos. 12. 14. Exodus 23. 21. Mark
3. 5.

8. It Is enmity to him. Romans 8. 7.

9. It Is the work of the Devil. Ioh. 8. 44. Genesis 3. 1.

10. He sent his Son to destroy it. 1 John 3. 8. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18.

11. He does revenge it and punish the sinner for it. Jer. 5. 25, 29. Deuteronomy. 18.
12, 13. Romans 1. 18. Ephesians. 5. 6. Psalm. 11. 5, 6.

12. Man's destruction is from himself. Hos. 13. 9. Prove. 5. 22.

XII.
They do utterly deny, that election of particular persons is made without
consideration of faith and perseverance therein, as the condition prerequired
in him that is to be chosen [unto glory.]

The Reason.
Ps. 103. 17, 18. But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him [considered as such] Ps. 3. 3. The Lord has set apart
the man that is godly for himself. Ps. 50. ult. To him that orders his
conversation aright will I show the salvation of God, Rev. 3. 4. Thou have a
few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and they
shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. Isa. 48. 10. I have chosen
thee in the furnace of affliction. Jam. 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures
temptation: for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of life, which the
Lord has promised to them that love him. Heb. 6. 12. Who through faith and
patience inher it the promise. See Heb. 10. 36. Rev. 7. 14, 15. See also the
proofs of the 2 and 4 affirmatives.

XIII.
They do utterly deny, that particular men are reprobated from eternal life
without consideration had of sin and infidelity, and perseverance therein, as
going before.

The Reason.
Exodus 32. 33. Whosoever sins -- Him will I blot out. [See the 2 and 4
Affirmative] Rev. 22. 15. Without are dogs. 1 Cor. 6. 9. The unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God See 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12. Luke 14. 17, 21, with 24.
verse.

A general reason of both the former Negatives.
The execution of Gods decree shows what the decree it self was; for God
works (in time) all things according to the counsel of his own will [from
eternity,] Ephesians. 1. 11. So that man must be considered in the decree, as he is
considered in the execution of it; otherwise the act decreeing, and the act
executing should have respect to different Objects, and Consequently, this act
could not properly be called the execution of that Decree. Ex. Gr. If a decree
be past against T B as a Malefactor, and R S does arrest T B being clear and
innocent; this action cannot be said to be the execution of the former decree,
which was made against T B the Malefactor, though R S pretends to do it in
persuance of the same. So in other Cases, But in the execution of the divine
decree [of Election and Reprobation] We see men are looked upon according to
their several qualifications Mat. 25. 31. and 41. Then shall the King say --
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: For I was
an hungered, and ye gave me meat. Go ye Cursed: For I was etc. Romans 2. 6, 7, 8,
9. He shall render to every man according to his works. To them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor and immortality, eternal
life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness; indignation and wrath: Romans 8. 13. For if ye live after the
flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the
body ye shall live: See Psalm. 11. 5. To the end; an Emphatical place.

Concerning Children, They hold.
That all the children of the faithful are sanctified in Christ; so as none of
them departing this life, before they come to the use of reason, can perish.

Proofs out of Scripture.
Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman, shall bruise the Serpents head. This seed
(which is Christ) was promised, before ever any seed of mankind was conceived:
Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. [See Mat. 18. 11, 12.] Christ came to seek and to
save that which was lost: 1 John 3. 8. He came to destroy the works of the
Devil: Romans 5. 12, 18. As by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to
condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life: Hebrews 2. 14, 15, 17. For as much as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that
is the Devil and deliver -- and make reconciliation, etc. [Consider 1 John 2.
12. with Mat. 19. 14.] Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not; for of such is the Kingdom of God. See Psalm. 127. 3.

Concerning Children, What they do utterly deny.
I.
They do utterly deny, that some Infants, (children) of the faithful are to be
accounted in the number of Reprobates.

The Reason.
Romans 11. 16. For if the first fruits be holy, the lump is also holy: and if
the root be holy so are the branches: Genesis 17. 7. And I will establish my
covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for
an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee:
Acts 2. 39. The promise is unto you and to your children: Acts 11. 14. Words
whereby thou and all thy house shall be saved: Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved and thy house: 1 Cor. 7. 14. The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is
sanctified by the husband; else were your children unclean, but now are they
holy.

II.
They utterly deny, that some Infants of the faithful departing this life in
their Infancy, before they have committed any actual sin, in their own persons,
are reprobated.

The Reason.
Genesis 18. 25. That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that
be far from thee: shall not the judge of all the earth do right? Jonah 4. 11.
Thou have had pity on the gourd, for the which thou have not labored, neither
made it to grow, which came up in a night and perished in a night: and should
not I spare Nineveh, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, that
cannot discern between their right hand and their left: Ezekiel. 18. 2. 3, 4. What
mean ye that ye use this proverb, saying the fathers have eaten sower grapes,
and the c^^ldrens teeth are set on edge? [See Deuteronomy. 24. 16. 2 Kings 14. 6.] As
I live says the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this
proverb. Behold all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul
of the son is mine: the soul that sins it shall die; Ier. 31. 29, 30. In
those days, they shall say no more, the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge. But every one shall die for his own
iniquity, every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on
edge.

III.
They do utterly deny, that the sacred laver of baptism, and the prayers of
the Church, can no ways avail such Infants unto salvation.

The Reason.
Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and disciple all Nations, baptizing them, etc. 1
Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now save us:
Tit. 3. 5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration: Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it: that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the word: Acts 2. 38, 39. with Acts 22. 16.
Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins; for the promise is to you and to
your children: Gal. 3. 27. with Romans 8. 1. As many as have been baptized into
Christ have put on Christ, and there is now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus.

And the prayers of the Church, etc.] 1 John 5. 14; 15, 16. This is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will;
he hears us. And if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that
we have the petitions, that we desired of him. If any man see his brother sin a
sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for them
that sin not unto death. And shall not God hear the prayers of the Church in
behalf of Infants?

IV.
They do utterly deny, that some of the faithfuls children, baptized in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, while they live in
the state of their Infancy, are reprobate, by an absolute decree.

The Reason of this appears sufficiently in the Reasons of those Negatives
forementioned.

The state of the Controversy touching Predestination, or Election to Eternal
life, or Reprobation therefrom.
I.
Whether of divine and peremptory Election to (Glory or) eternal life, the
first and adequate object be [All and only those, which persevere in true faith
unto their lives end, as such: or certain particular persons not at all
considered as believing and persevering in faith, as such.]

See all the Texts alleged for conditioned and against absolute irrespective
Election.

II.
Whether of Peremptory Reprobation unto everlasting torments, the first and
adequated object be [All and only unbelievers dying in their unbelief, as such:
or certain particular persons (the greatest part of mankind) not at all
considered, as impenitent, unbelievers and disobedient, as such.]

See the Texts forecited for respective and against irrespective and absolute
reprobation; to which you may add: Isa. 27. 11. Because this people have no
understanding, therefore, etc. Ezekiel. 18. 1^, 23.

The second Article Controverted, concerning the Universalitie of Christ's death.
What the Remonstrants hold.
I.
THey hold, that the price of Redemption which Christ tendered unto his Father,
was not only in it self sufficient for the Redemption of all mankind, but was
also according to the decree, the will and grace of God the Father, paid for
all and every man.

Proofs out of Scripture.
For all and every man: 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all:
Chap. 4. 10. We trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, John 3.
16. John 1. 29. Behold the lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world: 1
John 2. 2. [John 6. 33, 51.] We have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. He tasted death for every man:
Hebrews 2. 9. For the unjust: 1 Peter 3. 18. etc. For the ungodly, for sinners,
for his enemies: Romans 5. 6, 8, 10. See the places cited before for Christ's
satisfaction.

According to the decree, the will and grace of God, etc. John 3. 16. So God
loved the world: etc. 1 John 4. 14. We have seen and do testify, that the
father sent the son, to be the Savior of the world: Romans 8. 32. He spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: 1 John 4. 9, 10. In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten
Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us; and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins, for God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but
that the world through him might be saved: John 3. 17. That he by the grace of
God should taste death for every man: Heb. 2. 9.

Col. 1. 19, 20, 21. It pleased the father -- by him to reconcile all things to
himself: Tit. 3. 4. After that the kindness and pity of God our Savior toward
man appeared. John 12. 47. For I came not to judge the world: but to save the
world. John 15. 13. Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friend. Rev. 1. 5. He loved us and washed us from our sins in his
own blood. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. The love of Christ Constrains us etc.

II.
They hold, that Christ by the merit of his death, has so far forth reconciled
God the Father to all mankind, that the Father, by reason of his Sons merit,
both could, and would, and did enter and establish a new and gracious Covenant
with sinful man liable to Condemnation.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; not
imputing their trespasses unto them. Col. 1. 21, 22. And you that were
sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Isa. 49. 8. I will give
thee for a Covenant of the people. [i. e. A mediator and foundation of the
Covenant of grace. Deodat: Annot:] Isa. 53. per tot. verse 10, 11, 12. When
thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, He shall see his seed -- and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hands: -- by his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many. Act. 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets
witness, that through his name, whosoever believes in him, shall receive
remission of sins. See Ier. 31. 31, 33, 34. and chapter 33. 8. Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20.
with Hebr. 8. 6. etc. He is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was
established upon better promises, viz. I will put my laws into their mind and
I will be merciful to their unrighteousness etc. Hebr. 9. 14, 15. etc. How
much more shall the blood of Christ -- and for this cause he is the Mediator of
the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the
transgressions, that were under the first Testament, they which are called,
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. See chap. 10. per totum chap.
7. 22. chap. 12. 24, 25.

III.
They hold, that though Christ has merited reconciliation with God and pardon
of sins, for all and every man, yet according to the tenor of the new and
gracious Covenant, none is indeed made partaker of the benefits purchased by
the death of Christ, otherwise then by faith; nor are a man's sins pardoned,
before he actually believes in Christ.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
None made partakers otherwise then by faith. Romans 3. 24, 25. Being justified
freely by his grace, through the redemption, that is in Jesus Christ: whom God
has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood. Heb. 11. 6. But
without faith it is impossible to please God. Romans 9. 33. Whosoever believes
on him shall not be confounded: 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the Savior, specially
of those that believe: Col. 1. 19. to the 23. For it pleased the Father by him
to reconcile all things unto himself -- And you has he now reconciled -- to
present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, If ye
continue in the faith etc. Heb. 3. 6, 14. We are made partakers of Christ, if
we hold fast etc. Heb. 9. 15. He is the Mediator that by means of death, they
which are called [Cum Eventu] might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.
John 1. 12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. See Gal. 3. 22.

Nor are a man's sins pardoned before he believes: Acts 10. 43. To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins: See Acts 26. 18. Chapter 13. 39. [See John 3. 36.]
Romans 3. 21, 22. The righteousness of God, without the law is manifested -- even
the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon
all them, that believe: Romans 4 3, 24. Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, and it shall be imputed to us also, if we
believe. See the whole Chapter.

Gal. 2 26. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the
faith of Christ: Gal. 3. 11. [See Gal. 3. 22.] The just shall live by faith:
Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God: See Acts 2. 38.
Isa. 53. 11.

IV.
They hold, that only they for whom Christ died, are bound to believe, that
Christ died for them; and if there were any for whom Christ died not, they
should not be bound to believe he died for them, or condemned for not
believing; yea, if there were any such Reprobates, they should rather be bound
to believe, that he died not for them.

Proofs out of Scripture.
Only they bound to believe, etc. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. with 21. ye were redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ, who was manifest for you, who by him do
believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory, that your
faith and hope might be in God. John 14. 1, 2, 3. Believe also in me. Why? I
go to prepare a place for you, and I will receive you to my self. See 1 Cor.
15. 2, 3. with the 14 verse. Whence it follows, that they for whose sins
Christ died not, and for whose justification he rose not again; to them,
preaching is vain, and their faith is vain, for they do but believe an untruth,
and lean upon the staff of a broken reed. Accordingly (as was alleged above)
Maccovius says, A man must first believe Christ to be his Savior (which he
cannot be, unless he has died for him) and that must be the reason why he
places his faith in him.

Rather believe that he died not for them. For Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Those things which
are revealed, belong to us. And Luke 24. 25. O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken. If it be a revealed truth, that
Christ died not for the Reprobates; then are they bound to believe, he died not
for them. But if it be not a truth revealed, why is it then preached, and
urged, as an Article of faith?

What they do not hold, touching Christ's death.
I.
They do utterly deny, that the price of Redemption, which Christ tendered unto
God his Father, was not, according to the decree, will, and grace of God the
Father, paid for all and every man, that so the greatest part of mankind,
should by an absolute and antecedent decree of God, be precisely shut out from
the participation of the benefits of Christ's death.

The Reason.
1. Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. Christ came to seek and to save that which was
lost. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. Isa.
53. 6. He laid upon him the iniquity of us all. And Christ died for all, for
every man, for the world, for the whole world, for the unjust and disobedient
(finally such,) 1 Pet. 3. 18 with the 20. for the ungodly, for sinners, for his
enemies, (as was said above.)

2. Also for as many as died in Adam. Romans 5. 12, 18. 1 Cor. 15. 22. As by the
offense of one man, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14.

3. For as many as are bound to believe in him, (as was declared above.)

4. For as many as are bound to adore and serve him. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Ye are
bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. with
Romans 14. 9. We thus judge; that if one died for all, then were all dead: and
that he died for all, that he might be Lord of all, that they which live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves; but unto him which died for them.
See Ephesians. 1. 12.

5. For as many as we are bound to pray for in Christ's name: 1 Timothy 2. 1, 5, 6.
I exhort, that supplications be made for all men -- For there is one Mediator,
who gave himself a ransom for all.

6. For such as crucify him a fresh to themselves, Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. c. 10.
29. For such as deny him, and finally do perish. 2 Pet. 2. 1. See Romans 14. 15.
1 Cor. 8. 11.

II.
They do utterly deny, that the immediate fruit of the death of Christ is the
actual pardon of sins; or (which is the same in effect) that sins are pardoned
unto sinners, before they do actually believe in Christ.

The Reason.
Romans 10. 10. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness. [See Gal. 3.
22.] Heb. 11. 6. But without faith it is impossible to please God. Mark 16.
16. He that believes not shall be damned. John 3. 18, 36. He is condemn^d
already: the wrath of God abides on him. See proofs for the affirm.

III.
They do utterly deny, that Reprobates (as some call them) for whom Christ died
not (if there were any such) are bound notwithstanding, to believe in him, and
to believe that they are elected unto glory, and that therefore those that
believe not shall be condemned justly, yea, shall therefore be punished with
more grievous torments by Almighty God.

The Reason.
1. Job 13. 7. Will ye speak wickedly for God? And talk deceitfully for him?
Ier. 10. 1^. He is the God of truth. Tit. 1. 2. Heb. 6. 18. that cannot lie.
All his Commandments are truth, righteousness and faithfulness. Psalm. 119.
86, 151, 172. And Romans 15. 8. Christ was a Minister for the truth of God, and
no lie is of the truth. 1 John 2. 21.

2. If we meet with false Prophets and dissemblers, (for all their fair
speeches) he bid us Believe them not. Ier. 12. 6. Mat. 24. 23. Prove. 26. 25.

3. He denounces grievous judgments against such Prophets as go about to
induce the people to trust in a lie. Ier. 28. 25. chap. 29. 31.

4. It is a sore judgment, inflicted only upon the obstinate and refractory,
(and therefore certainly no duty of them that are not such) to be given up to
such Errors. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of the
truth, that they might be saved; for this cause, God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned, who
believed not the truth; but had pleasure in unrighteousness. So that the God of
truth and righteousness does not bind men (as a part of their duty) to believe
falsehood, much less punish them with more grievous torments for not believing
it.

5. Job 8. 3. Does God pervert judgment? or does the Almighty pervert
justice? Io^ 34. 10, 12. Yea surely, God will not do wickedly, neither will
the Almighty pervert judgment; and ver. 23. He will not lay upon man more then
is right, that he should enter into judgment with God.

The state of the Controversy, touching the Universality of Christ's death.
Whether Christ Jesus, out of a serious and gracious purpose and decree of God
the Father, suffered that most bitter and shameful death, that he might bring
into favor with God only some few, and those formerly and in particular
chosen to eternal life by an absolute decree: or that he might merit and obtain
reconciliation with God, for all, and every sinner, without difference, by
doing and suffering those things, which divine justice, by sin offended, did
require to be done and suffered, before he would enter a new gracious Covenant
with sinners, and open the door of salvation to them?

The decision is contained in the former Assertions and Negations.

The Third and Fourth Articles Controverted, which are touching the grace of
God in the Conversion of Man.
What the Remonstrants hold.
I.
THey hold that a man has not saving faith of himself, nor from the power of
his own free will, seeing while he is in the state of sin, he cannot of
himself, nor by himself, think or will, or do any saving good (in which kind
faith in Christ is eminent) but must needs, by God in Christ, through the power
of the Holy Ghost, be regenerated and renewed, in his mind, affections, will,
and all his powers, that he may aright understand, will and meditate, and do
that which is savingly good.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
Not faith or any saving good of himself, etc. Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes
darkness: Romans 7. 5. When we were in the flesh, the motions of sins, which were
by the law, did work in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. Romans 11.
32. God has concluded all in unbelief. Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved,
through faith, and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God. Phil. 1. 8,
9. To you it is given -- to believe. 1 Cor. 12. 3. None can say, that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; (who is therefore called) the spirit of faith.
2 Cor. 4. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think
any thing, as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Romans 5. 6. For
when we were yet without strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly. John
15. 5. Without me, ye can do nothing. John 6. 44, 45, 65. No man can come to
me, except the Father draw him. Every man therefore, that has heard, and has
learned of the Father comes unto me.

Must needs be regenerated, etc. John 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh: and this I say brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God: 1 Cor. 15. John 3. 3, 5. Except a man be born of water and of
the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God: Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. Not by works of
righteousness which we had done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior: 1 Pet. 1. 3, 23. The father of
our Lord Jesus Christ has begotten us again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible, by the word of God, etc. See Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Renewed in
understanding, will, affections, etc. Ephesians. 4. 23. Renewed in the spirit of
your minds: Col. 3. 10. In knowledge: See 1 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Tit. 2. 11. Acts 26.
18. To whom I send thee, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God: Acts 15 9. God, through the Holy
Ghost, purifying their hearts by faith: Heb. 9. 14. The blood of Christ purge
your conscience from dead works to serve the living God: 1 Pet. 1. 22. Seeing
ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth, through the spirit, and the
very God of peace sanctify you wholly: 1 These. 5. 23.

To do that which is savingly good, etc. Mat. 7. 17, 18. and chap. 12. 33, 34,
35. Make the tree good, and his fruit good: Romans 6. 22. But now being made free
from sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the
end everlasting life: See verse 18.

II.
They hold, that the grace of God is the beginning, proceeding, and fulfilling
of all good, so as even the regenerate man himself, without grace preventing,
exciting, following, and co-working, cannot think, will, or do good, or resist
any temptation to ill: so that the good deeds and actions which any man can
conceive, are to be ascribed, to the grace of God in Christ.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
That the grace of God is the beginning, etc. James 1. 17, 18. Every good gift,
and every perfect gift is from above: John 8. 36. [2 Cor. 4. 6.] If the Son
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed: 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the spirit of
the Lord is, there is liberty: Phil. 1. 6. and chap, 2. 13. It is God, which
has begun a good work in you, which works in you, to will, and to do, of his
good pleasure: Heb. 12. 2. The author and finisher of our faith: 2 These. 2. 14.
Whereunto he called you by our Gospel: See verse 15, 16, 17. and 1 Pet 5. 10.
etc. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 3, -- His divine power has given us all things that pertain
to life and godliness.

Or resist any temptation to ill, etc. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor
of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day: Ephesians. 6. 13. Watch and
pray, etc. Mat. 26. 41. Lead us not into temptation: Mat. 6. 13.

The good, we do, to be ascribed to the grace of God, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 10. By
the grace of God, I am what I am: Gal. 2. 20. The life, that I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God: 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy,
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 10, 11. But the God
of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory, by Christ Jesus; to
him be glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen: See Romans 1. 8. 1 Cor. 1. 4,
5. Ephesians. 1. 3. etc. Romans 16. 25, 26, 27. Rev. 1. 5, 6.

III.
They hold, that to hear Gods word, to be sorry for sin committed, to desire
saving grace, and the spirit of renovation (nothing of which, notwithstanding,
can a man do without grace) is profitable and needful for the obtaining of
faith, and the spirit of renovation.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
St. Luke 19. 13 Negotiamini dum venio: Trade, till I come; for whosoever has,
to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance, Luke 19. 26. See Mat.
13. from v. 10, to 17. John 6. 45. [See Luke 16. 11, 12. chap. 19. 17.] Every
man that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me: Romans 10.
17. Faith comes by hearing: Acts 17. 11, 12. They (of Berea) received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures, Therefore many of
them believed: John 7. 17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God: See Psalm. 25. 12, 14. Psalm. 111. 10. Prove. 1. 7.
2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works repentance unto salvation: See Acts 2. 37,
38. chap. 16. 29, 30 Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If thou will incline thine ^ar
unto wisdom, and apply thine heart to understanding -- If thou seek her as
silver -- Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord: Prove. 8. 17. I love
them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me: Luke 11. 13.
Your heavenly Father will give the spirit to them that ask him: See the example
of Sergius Paulus: Acts 13. 7, 12. Especially that of Cornelius: Acts 10. 1, 2,
4, 5, 34, 35. See also Gal. 3. 24. Prove. 3. 32. Job 28. 28. 2 Timothy 2. 21. James
1. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. See the reason of the Negative, following.

IV.
They hold, that effectual grace whereby a man is converted is resistible: and
though God does so work upon the will by his word, and the inward operation of
his holy spirit, as that he gives both power to believe, and supernatural
abilities, and makes a man actually to believe; yet can man of himself, despise
that grace, not believe, and so through his own default perish.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
Ezekiel. 11. 20. compared with the 21. verse. I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. That they may walk in my
statutes, and keep mine Ordinances and do them -- But whose heart walks after
the heart of their detestable things, and their abominations, I will recompense
their way upon their own heads: Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22, 23. Then began he to
upbraid the cities, wherein most of his mighty works were done, because they
repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the
mighty works, which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they
would have repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes. And thou Capernaum, which
art exalted unto Heaven shall be brought down to Hell: for if the mighty works
which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have remained
until this day: Ezekiel. 24. 13. I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged:
Acts 2. 41. They that gladly received his word were baptized: 1 These. 2. 13,
and 19. [See v. 19. and Acts 11. 21.] Ye received it, not as the word of man,
but, (as it is in truth) the word of God, which effectually works also in you
that believe: See Romans 1. 16. Acts 13. 46. and 48. Luke 14. 16. etc. Mat. 22.
4, 5. He sent out his servants, saying -- All things are ready: coms unto the
marriage. But they made light of it: Luke 10. 16. 1 These. 4. 8. He that
despises you, despises me: he despises not man but God, who has given us of
his spirit: Mat. 23. 37. Luke 13. 34. How often would I have gathered thy
children -- and ye would not: John 5. 34, 40. These things have I spoken that
ye might be saved. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life. Prove.
1. 24. etc. Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand
and ye regarded not, etc. Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his
geodness and forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? Isa. 63. 10. They rebelled and vexed his holy
spirit: See Zach. 7. 11, 12, 13. Acts 5. 7, 51. Ye have always resisted the
Holy Ghost, and done despite to the spirit of grace. Heb. 10. 29. And rejected
the Counsel of God against themselves. Luke 7. 30. and turn the grace of our
God into lasciviousness. Jude ep. v. 4. We then as workers together with him*
beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in vain: 2 Cor. 6. 1.
and Heb. 12. 15. Looking diligently, ne quis desit gratiae Dei, lest any man be
wanting to the grace of God: See Psalm. 78. 40. etc. 2 Cor. 3. 15. chap. 4. 4.
Also see the Reason of the second Negative following: See Exodus 21. 5, 6.
compared with Isa. 61. 1, 2. and Romans 6. 14, 16.

V.
They hold, that though grace be dispensed in differing measure, according to
Gods most free will, yet on all those, to whom, the word of faith is preached,
the Holy spirit bestows, or is ready to bestow, so much grace, as is
sufficient, in fitting degrees, to bring on their conversion.

Proofs out of Scripture.
In differing measure, etc. Heb. 1. 1, 2. God, who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners -- has in these last days spoken to us by his son: Mat. 12.
4. A greater than Jonas is here. John 10. 10. I came that they might have life,
and that they might have it more abundantly: Heb. 2. 2, 3. How shall we escape
if we neglect so great salvation: Mat. 25. 15. To one he gave five talents, to
another two, to another one. 1 Cor. 12. 4. There are diversities of gifts. 1
Pet. 4. 10. The grace of God is manifold. Ephesians. 4. 16. According to the
effectual working in the measure of every part. Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in
the faith receive you. 1 Cor. 8. 7. There is not in every man that knowledge.

So much grace as is sufficient, etc. Acts 3. 26. God having raised up his son
Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your
iniquities. Acts 5. 31. Him has God exalted, to be a Prince and a Savior, for
to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is
made unto us wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. Tit.
2. 11, 12 [See 2 Chronicles. 24. 19.] The grace of God which brings salvation has
appeared unto all men, etc. Acts 26. 18. To whom I send thee, to open their
eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance, etc. 2 Cor.
3. 5, 6. Our sufficiency is of God; who also has made us able Ministers, --
not of the letter, but of the spirit. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go ye and teach -- and
lo I am with you. [Mat. 18. 20.] 2 Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled unto God. 2 Cor. 6. 1. receive not the grace of God in vain.

In fitting degrees, etc. St. Mark 4 33. With many such parables spoke he the
word unto them, as they were able to hear it. Mat. 25. 15. And delivered to his
servants his talents, to every one according to his several ability,
[Agreeable to his capacity, and competent to his office and employment, and
the exigence of business entrusted to him of his Lord] see Heb. 5. 13, 14.
Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day. Mat. 13. 12. For whosoever has, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance. Luke 16. 10, 11, 12. He that is
faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much: If therefore ye have
not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the
true riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another, who
shall give you that which is your own? [If you be not faithful in the use of
things temporal, how shall God entrust you with things heavenly and spiritual?
Wherefore let us have grace [hold it fast by employing it] whereby we may serve
God acceptably. Heb. 12. 2. 8. and grow in it. 2 Pet. 3. 18.

VI.
They hold, that a man by the grace of the holy spirit, may do more good then
indeed he does, and omit more evil, than indeed he omitteth.

Proofs out of Scripture.
John 15. 22, 24. If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin:
but now they have no cloak [excuse] for their sin. If I had not done among them
the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now have they
both seen, and hated, both me, and my father. Acts 17. 30. [1 King 21. 25.
Zach. 1. 15.] The times of this ignorance God winked at. Deuteronomy. 30. 14. with
Romans 10. 6, 8. But the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise;
the word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do
it. [Iohn 8. 32. with 36.] 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty. Romans 6. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants
of righteousness. Rev. 3. 8. Thou have a little strength, and have kept my
word, and have not denied my name. Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things,
through Christ, which strengthens me. Matthew 11. 21, 23. If the mighty works,
which have been done in you, had been done in Tire, Sidon, or Sodom, they would
have repented. See the 4. negative propositions.

VII.
They hold, that whomsoever God calls unto salvation, he calls him seriously,
that is, with a sincere, and unfeigned intention and will to save him.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
1. His command. Acts 17. 30. But now, he commands All men every where to
repent.

2. His invitations. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14, 15, 16. [See 2 Chronicles. 24. 19.] And the
Lord sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimes and sending: Mat. 22. 2,
4. etc. Luke 14. 21. And he sent out his servants -- and he sent other
servants, saying, go out quickly -- and compel them to come in. Rev. 22. 17.
The spirit and the Bride say, come. And let him that hears, say, come. And
let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of
life freely. Isa. 55. 1. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters.
Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock. Prove. 1. 20. etc. Wisdom
cries without: she utters her voice in the streets. How long ye simple ones
-- Turn you at my reproof: Behold I will pour out my spirit unto you. etc.

3. His reception. John 6. 37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out. Mat. 11. 28. Come and I will refresh you. Rev. 3. 20. He shall sup with me.

4. His options. 1. For the time past. Psalm. 81. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But my
people would not hear. O that my people had hearkened unto me. Isa. 48. 17, 18,
19. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer -- I am the Lord thy God, which teaches
thee to profit, which leads thee by the way that thou should go. O that
thou had hearkened to my Commandments: then had thy peace been as a river,
and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. 2. For the future. Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it might be well with them. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that
they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their later
end.

5. His precations and beseechings. Isa. 65. 2. Romans 10. 21. I have spread out
my hands [a posture of prayer Exodus 9. 29. Psalm. 63. 5.] all the day unto a
rebellious people. 2 Cor. 5. 20. God does beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, Be ye reconciled unto God.

6. His obtestations. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing:
therefore choose life that both thou and thy seed may live. Isa. 1. 2. Hear O
heavens, and give ear O earth etc.

7. His complaints Micha. 6. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee, and
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. Ier. 2. 5. What iniquity have
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, and have walked after
vanity and are become vain. Ier. 2. 31. Have I been a wilderness etc.

8. His Lamentations. Ier. 4. 14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee; Mat. 23. 37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings and ye would not? Luke 19. 41, 42. He beheld the city and wept over it,
saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
that belong unto thy peace!

9. His expostulations. Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. Cast away from you all your
transgressions, and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will ye die,
O house of Israel? Ier. 13. last.

10. His increpations and exprobrations. John 5. 40, with 34. These things I
say, that ye may be saved. And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.
Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness -- not knowing, that the
goodness of the Lord leads thee unto repentance? Ier. 13. last. Woe unto
thee, O Jerusalem: will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be?

11. His Comminations and threatenings. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Therefore will I judge
you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, says the Lord God;
repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions: so iniquity shall not
be your ruin. Ier. 18. 10, 11. Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah
-- saying, thus says the Lord, behold I frame evil against you, and devise a
device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your
ways and your doings good.

12. His oath and Protestation. Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O
house of Israel? Are not these arguments of seriousness? Judge. 13. 23. If the
Lord were pleased to kill us, -- he would not have showed us all these things,
nor have told us such things as these. See the Reason of the fifth Negative.

What the Remonstrants do not hold, touching the said Articles, viz. Gods grace
and Man's Conversion.
I.
THey do not hold, that all Zeal, Care, and Study for the obtaining of
Salvation, which a man shall use before he has faith, and the spirit of
renovation, is vain and to no purpose; much less, that it is rather hurtful,
than profitable and fruitful to him.

The Reason.
1. The neglect hereof is complained of. Isa. 64. 7. There is none that
stirs up himself to take hold of thee. [Isa. 44. 19.] Job 35. 10, 11. But
none says, where is God my maker? -- Who teaches us more then the beasts of
the earth, and makes us wiser then the fouls of heaven? See Ier. 5. 24. and
chapter 8. 6. No man repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done?

2. This neglect is threatened Luke 16. 10, 12. He that is unjust in the least,
is unjust also in much. If therefore you have not been faithful in that which
is another etc. Romans 1. 21. Because when they knew God, they glorified him not
as God.

3. This is a duty expected even of the Heathens. Act. 17. 27. That they should
seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him.

4. And it is commanded. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear. Isa. 46. 8.
Remember this, and show your selves men. Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask of God. Strive to enter in at the straight gate [Ier. 4. 3.] Luke
3. 4, 6. Prepare the way of the Lord. Hos. 10. 12.

5. This is commended as a disposition and preparative to faith in Christ, and
the spirit of renovation. Mat. 13. 10, 11, 12. To him that has shall be given;
To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 11. 5,
25, 26. Thou have revealed them to babes. Even so Father, for so it seemed good
in thy sight. [Iohn 10. 27.] John 3. 21. But he that does truth, comes to the
light. Luke 8. 15. That on the good ground, are they, which in an honest, and
good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience. Mark 19. 14. Of such is the kingdom of God.

6. This care and study is encouraged. Mat. 12. 20. He will not quench the
smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed. Isa. 55. 1. Mat. 11. 28. Ho every
one that thirsts, that labors: Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh unto God, and he will
dnaw nigh to you. Neh. 1. 11. They that desire to fear thy Name. Psalm. 38. 9.

7. He adjourns the judgment, upon Ahabs humiliation. 1 King. 21. 27, 29. [See
2 Chr. 12. 12. Exodus 1. 17, 20, 21.]

8. He sends direction to such as are pricked to the heart, and inquire after
him, Acts 2. 37, 38. To the Publicans and Soldiers, Luke 3. 8, 10. To the
Jailor. Act. 16. 29, 30. To Cornelius after a most eminent and extraordinary
manner. Act. 10. 1. to 35.

9. He gives persons of such study and inclinations, satisfaction and a
blessing. Mat. 5. 6. Blessed are they, that hunger and thirst after
righteousness; for they shall be filled. See Luke 1. 53. Mat. 11. 28. God is a
rewarder of all them that diligently seek him. Heb. 11. 6. Arise therefore, and
be doing, and the Lord be with thee. 1 Chr. 22. 16.

II.
They do utterly deny, that effectual grace, whereby a man is converted, is an
unresistible power.

The Reason.
1. Conversion is enjoined us as our duty and we are exhorted to it with
promises and threatenings. Prove. 1. 22. Ezekiel. 18. 30, 32. Ier. 7. 3. Turn ye,
turn ye.

2. It Is a matter of Choice. Deuteronomy. 30. 19. Jos. 24. 15. Choose whom ye will
serve, choose life. [2 Cor. 5. 20. Isa. 1. 19, 20.]

3. The duty and the grace enabling to it may be neglected. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Hebr.
2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation. Jer. 36. 6, 7.
Therefore we are admonished. Hebr. 3. 7, 8. Psalm. 95. 7, 8. Harden not your
hearts. [Some temper of mind better qualified: See the 1. Negat.

4. God requires our endeavors (1,) by way of preparation: laying aside the
vail. 2 Cor. 3. 15. prejudice [John 7. 3. 4, 5, 52.] ambition. [Iohn 5. 44. ch,
12. 42, 43.] all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and all
superfluity of naughtiness. [See Act. 13. 45. Luke 16. 14.] that we may with
meekness, [Psal. 25. 9, 12, 14. See Acts 2. 41.] as new born babes receive the
ministeries of grace. Jam. 1. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2. And as many as [being in
pursuit of the world to come] were [thus] ordained, [addicted, disposed] to
eternal life, believed. Acts 13. 48.

5. When being wrought into this temper and frame of spirit, by Gods preventing
grace, we are fit for the kingdom of Christ. [Luke 9. 62.] God requires our
endeavors, by way of cooperation, to make his saving grace effectual (which
argues it is not an unresistible power) Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door
and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door. [Which door turns upon
two hinges, faith and obedience, Romans 1. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Ephesians 3. 17.
Romans 6. 17.] I will come in to him etc.

6. That this grace is not unresistible, appears further: By Gods option: O
that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me etc. (as above.)

7. He complains also of men's perverseness and contumacy, obstructing the work
of grace in themselves. [See Mark 6. 6.] Isa 5. 4. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard that I have not done in it? [Mat. 3. 15.] Ezekiel. 12. 2. They
have eyes to see, and see not: they have ears to hear, and hear not, for they
are a rebellious house. Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. But they rebelled and vexed his
holy spirit; and Zech. 7. 10, 11, 12. But they refused to hearken, and pulled
away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they should not hear. Yea, they
made their hearts as an Adamant-stone, lest they should hear the law, and the
words which the Lord of hosts has sent in his spirit, by the former Prophets.

8. Some are captivated to the obedience of this grace, whiles others stand out
in rebellion against the power of it Act. 2. 41. chapter 13. 48 with 45. Some
gladly receive it, others do thrust it from them, contradicting and
blaspheming. See 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. with 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6, 7.
Thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech -- surely had I sent thee to
them, they would have hearkened unto thee: but the house of Israel will not
hearken unto thee, Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22. Tire and Sidon, and Sodom would have
repented: but you will not. Matthew. 12. 41. The men of Nineveh repented at the
preaching of Jonas; but [you resist a greater light and force of grace] behold,
a greater then Jonas is here. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. To the one we are the
savor of life unto life; and to the other the savor of death unto death.

9. The Lord punishes the refractary, for resisting the work of his grace and
spirit. Heb. 6. 7, 8. For the earth which drinks in the rain -- and brings
forth fruit -- receives blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and
briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Prove.
1. 24. etc. Because I have called and ye refused etc. Zech. 7. 11, 12, 13.
Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord. John 3. 19. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness, rather
than light. Ezekiel. 24. 13. [See Mat. 13. 15. etc. Acts 28. 24. etc. 2 Chronicles. 24.
19, 20.] In thy filthiness is lendness: because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee: James 4. 6. God resists the proud, but
gives grace to the humble. See the 4. and 7. Affirmatives.

III.
They do utterly deny, that God does bestow grace sufficient for faith and
couversion, only upon those, whom according to the decree of his Election, he
wills to convert unresistibly, and that he neither does, nor wills to
bestow on the Reprobates grace necessary to faith and salvation.

The Reason.
1. Psalm. 145. 8, 9. The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over
all his works. 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. He will have all men to be saved. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
He will not that any perish. Mark 16. 15. with 20. Go preach the Gospel to
every Creature -- and they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord
working with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Isa. 5. 4.
What could have been done more. [See Mark 6. 6. and Jer. 36. 6, 7.] Ezekiel. 18.
31. Why will ye die. Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, etc. See the proofs for conditionate
Election, Administration of necessary and sufficient means, and the seriousness
of Gods call: being the 7. affirm. propos. above.

2. He threatens to withdraw his grace from men, only for their stubbornness
and rebellion against him and it. Mat. 21. 41, 43. Therefore -- the Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you. Rev. 2. 5. Or else I will remove thy Candlestick
out of his place. Luke 14. 24. None of those men which were bidden shall taste
of my supper. Luke 13. 34. with chap. 19 42. How often would I, and ye would
not? -- But now are they hidden from thine eyes. Matthew. 13. 12, 13, 14, 15. But
whosoever has not (made good use of preventing grace) from him shall be taken
away, even that he has. Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they
seeing, see not: And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaias, by hearing
ye shall hear, and shall not understand -- for their eyes have they closed,
lest at any times they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and should understand with their heart, and should be converted and I should
heal them. See Acts 28: 26. etc. Romans 1. 18. 21, 24, 25, 28. Who hold the truth
in unrighteousness -- and turn it into a lie, for this cause God gave them up
to vile affections. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved, for this cause God gave them up. Prove.
1. 24. etc. Because I have called, and ye refused -- Ye also shall call and I
will not answer you; I will laugh at your calamities. James 4. 6. God resists
the proud but gives grace to the humble. See the Texts cited against Absolute
Reprobation. 1 Chronicles: 28. 9. 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Zach. 9: 15. with
17. I will love them no more; because they did not hearken.

IV.
They do utterly deny, that God is simply unwilling that a man should do (1.)
more good than he does, or (2.) omit more evil than he omitteth; or that he
has precisely decreed from Eternity, that both [Good and Evil] should be so
done, as they are.

The Reason.
1. His command.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy mind
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength. 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from
all appearance (kind) of evil. Ephesians. 5. 11. Have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness. Mich. 6. 3. [See Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.]
Wherein have I wearied thee? Mat. 11. 29. Myyoak is easy. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Receive
not the grace of God in vain. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace. Luke 19. 12, 13.
etc. Negotiamini dum venio. Trade till I come. Verse 20. etc. Wherefore (have
thou kept my talent in a napkin, and) gave it not into the bank, that at my
coming I might have required mine own with usury? etc. Cast that unprofitable
servant, etc. Gal 5. 7. Ye did run well, who drive you back?

2. Jude Epist. verse 10. But what they know naturally, as bruit beasts, in
those things they corrupt themselves. Eccles. 8. 11. Their heart is fully set
in them to do evil. Mich. 2. 1. They devise iniquity upon their beds. Job 24.
13. They rebel against the light. Consider verse 15, 16, 17. [See Romans 1. 32.
and Isa. 30. 8, 9, 10, 11.] See the proofs of the Affirmative in the sixth
Assertion.

V.
They do utterly deny, that God does outwardly call some, whom he is unwilling
inwardly to call, and truly to convert, and that before they have rejected the
grace of conversion.

The Reason.
1. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Luke 19. 10. This is a faithful saying, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. Mat. 9. 13. To call sinners to repentance:
Romans 16. 25, 26. To call them to the obedience of faith. 1 These. 4. 7. Unto
holiness. 1 Pet. 2. 9. [Ephes. 1. 12.] Out of darkness, into his marvelous
light, that we might set forth his praise. Why should he not be serious in all
this, seeing it is according to his purpose and grace? 2 Timothy 1. 9.

2. And the motive of it is, his Compassion. 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. The Lord sent to
them by his messengers: because he had compassion on his people. But they
mocked the messengers, etc. [See 2 Chronicles. 24. 19. Mark 12. 6, 7. Romans 1. 7.
Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. Beloved, and called:] I will mention the loving kindness
of the Lord -- He was their Savior in all their afflictions, he was afflicted
-- in his love and in his pity he redeemed them. But they rebelled and vexed
his holy spirit. With this affection the Lord calls such as are finally
disobedient. See 1 Pet. 3. 19. with chapter 4. 6. Till they provoke him to
wrath, that there be no remedy left: 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. This affection is
testified, by options, and entreaties, by expostulations and increpations, by
his lamentations and oath. See the proofs of the seventh Affirmative.

3. His charge: Acts 20. 28. Ezekiel. 33. 7. Son of man, I have set thee, a
watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore thou shall hear the word at my
mouth, and warn them from me. When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou
shall surely die; if thou do not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that
wicked man shall die in his iniquity: but his blood will I require at thine
hand.

4. His expectation: [1 Pet. 3. 20.] Isa. 5. 2. He looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

5. His appeal to our own judgment in the cases: Isa. 5. 3, 4. Judge I pray
you betwixt me, and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my vineyard,
(dare any man allege the want of a serious inward call?) That I have not done
in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it
forth wild grapes? [Luke 14. 21. He was angry at their refusal.] Ezekiel. 18. 29.
etc. O house of Israel, are not my way equal? Are not your ways unequal?

6. He charges their non-conversion (as was proved above) upon their own
refractariness: and punishes them for it: Jer. 25. 4. and cha. 35. 15. 1 Samuel
2. 30. (1.) with desertion: [Rom. 1. 28.] 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. and 2 These. 2. 10,
11, 12, and (2.) with destruction: 2 These. 1. 8. See the proofs of the seventh
Affirmative.

VI.
They do utterly deny, that there is a secret will in God, so contrary to his
will revealed in his word, that according to his secret will he nilleth the
conversion and salvation of the greatest part of those, whom by the word of his
Gospel and revealed will, he seriously calls and inviteth to faith and
salvation; so as there should be acknowledged in God, a holy simulation and a
double person.

The Reason.
1. He calls us out of compassion and according to his purpose and grace: [See
2 Chronicles. 24. 19. Mark 12. 6.] 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. and 2 Timothy 1. 9.

2. He is a God of truth, and adds his oath for confirmation of our faith in
this particular. He cannot lic, nor deny himself: Numb. 23. 19. Titus 1. 2.
Heb. 6. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 13.

3. He condemns a double heart and punishes dissemblers and Hypocrites, no
less then unbelievers: Mat. 24. 51. Luke 12. 46.

4. And besides, our conversion, sanctification, and salvation, is according to
his secret, acceptable and perfect will: Ephesians. 1. 9. 1 These. 4. 3. Romans 12. 2.
See the proofs of the seventh affirmative: see 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4.

VII.
They do utterly deny, that God calls Reprobates for these ends, viz. that
he may harden them the more, make them unexcusable, punish them the more
grievously, manifest their weakness; and not, for this end, that they may be
converted, believe and be saved.

The Reason.
See it in the Reasons of the 5. and 6. Negatives, immediately foregoing; to
which add Ephesians. 4. 1. I therefore the prisoner See. 2. Chron. 24. 19. His
design is to reduce them. Mark 12. 6. Romans 1. 7. Beloved, and called.
of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation, wherewith ye
are called. And what answer does such a call deserve, as is given to no other
end then those now mentioned? But God calls us with an holy calling. 2 Timothy
1. 9. And he says unto me, write. Blessed are they, which are called unto the
marriage supper of the lamb. And he says unto me, these are the true sayings
of God: Rev. 19. 9. [Luke 10. 24. Mat. 16. 17.]

2. He upbraids such as make no better use of his calls, then to aggravate
their own damnation. Deuteronomy. 29. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Ezekiel. 2. 5. John 15. 22, 24. and
John 5. 34, 40. These things I say that ye might be saved. And ye will not come
to me, that ye might have life. Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness -- not knowing that the goodness of God, leads thee to repentance?
But after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath
against the day of wrath? Se proofs of the 7. Affirm.

VIII.
They do utterly deny, that by the force and efficacy of the secret will and
decree of God, not only good things, but evil do necessarily come to pass.

The Reason.
1. It Is man's duty to eschew evil and do good [Psal. 34. 13. 1 Pet. 3. 11.]
(See 2 Samuel 24. 12, 13. 1 Samuel 23. 11, 12.) good being commanded upon promise
of life, and evil forbidden under peril of damnation. Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life keep the Commandments. Romans 1. 18. The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth of
God in unrighteousness. See verse 32.

2. The good and evil, which men do, are matters of choice, [See John 19. 11.
Ios. 24. 15, 22.] Isa. 1. 19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient etc. But if ye
refuse and rebel etc. Ezekiel. 2. 5. Whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear, etc. See Ier. 36. 6, 7. Mic. 2. 1. Woe to them that devise iniquity,
and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hand. [Mat. 17. 12.] 1 Cor. 7. 36. Let him
do what he will. See Deuteronomy 30. 19.

3. Gods exprobration. Ier. 5. 22, 23. under different laws.

4. Good and evil are attended with praise and dispraise which such actions
deserve not as come to pass Necessarily. The wise shall inherit glory: but
shame shall be the promotion of fools. Prove. [Phil. 4. 8. Romans 2. last.] Romans
13. 3. Do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same. [1 Cor.
4. 5.] 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. This is thank-worthy with God. Well done good and
faithful servant. Luke 19. See Gal. 6. 4. Who seek for glory and honor and
immortality. Romans 2. 7.

5. God propounds examples to our imitation.

6. That is omitted which God loves, and that comes to pass which He hates.
[See Ier. 44. 4, 5.] Isa. 65. 12. and 66. 4. They did evil before mine eyes,
and did choose that, wherein I delighted not. Zech. 8. 17. All these are things
that I hate. See Ier. 44. 4, 5. [1 King. 20. 42.]

7. Lastly, God is sometimes said to expect that which does not come to pass.
[See Mark 12. 6. Ezekiel. 22. 30.] 1 Pet. 3. 20. When once the long suffering of
God waited, in the days of Noah. Isa. 5. 2, 4. He looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. See the places cited for Gods
hatred of sin, and against Absolute, antecedent decrees.

The state of the Controversy, touching the work of grace, in the Conversion
of man.

Whether a man, when God seriously wills that he believe, and be converted, can
nill to believe and convert.

The Fifth Article Controverted is touching Perseverance.
What the Remonstrants hold.
I.
THey hold, that God does furnish the true believer with supernatural power of
grace, as, according to his infinite wisdom, he judges sufficient for their
perseverance, and conquest over the temptations of the Devil, the flesh and
the world, and that he is never the cause why they persevere not.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
Sufficient for their perseverance. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God, does
not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin: because he is
born of God. See Ioh. 4. 14. and chapter 6. 53. shall never thirst. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
My grace is sufficient for thee. Phil. 4. 13. I am able to do all things
through Christ, which strengthens me. Matthew. 11. 30. 1 John 5. 3. My yoke is
easy, and my burden light.

And conquest over temptations. Ioh. 10. 28, 29. They shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me,
is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.
Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us? 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able. (Luke
22. 32.) John 17. 11. Holy Father, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou
have given me. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. For this thing I besought the Lord thrice, that
it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is sufficient for thee;
Romans 8. 35. etc. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? 1 John 5. 4, 5.
For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the world. 1 John 2. 13. 14. I have
written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides
in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. 1 John 4. 4. Because greater is he
that is in you, than he that is in the world.

He is never the cause why they persevere not etc. 1 Cor. 1. 8. Phil. 1. 6.
Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it, until the day of Jesus Christ. [See 1 These. 5. 23, 24.]
2 These. 3. 3. The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and keep you from
evil. Jude ver. 24. Now to him that is able to keep you from falling. 1 Cor.
15. 57. Thanks be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

II.
They hold, that true believers may fall from true faith, and into those sins,
which cannot stand with true and justifying faith; neither is this only
possible, but often comes to pass.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
True Believers may fall from true faith. Mat. 13. 20, 21, 22. and Luke 8. 13.
14. They on the rock, are they, which when they hear, receive the word with
joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of
temptation fall away. And that which fell among thorns, are they, which when
they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches, and
pleasures of this life, and bring forth no fruit unto perfection. Romans 11. 20,
21, 22. Because of unbelief they were broken off. Gal. 5. 4, 7. Ye did run
well: Ye are fallen from grace. 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. Holding faith and a good
conscience, which some having put away, concerning faith have made shipwreck.
chapter 4. 1. Some shall depart from the faith, chapter 5. 12, 15. Some are already
turned aside after Satan. Having damnation, because they have cast off their
first love. See chapter 6. 10. and 2 Timothy 1. 15. chapter 2. 17, 18. Genesis 3. 6, 24.

Into sins which cannot stand with justifying faith etc. 2 Pet. 2. 18. [See
ver. 1. etc.] They allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much
wantonness, those that were clean escaped from them, who live in error, -- It
has happened unto them according to the true proverb; The dog is turned to his
own vomit again, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.
Mat. 26. 70, 72, 74. Then began Peter to curse and to swear, saying, I know not
the man. David, a man of great faith and integrity: 1 King. 15. 5. yet 2 Samuel
11. 4, 15. and chapter 12. 9. He committed adultery and murder. And Solomon beloved
of the Lord. 2 Samuel 12. 25. 1 Kings 3. 10. yet 1 Kings 11. from 1 to 10 verses,
through the love of strange women his heart was turned from the Lord God of
Israel, -- which had appeared unto him twice, and went after other gods. And
that these sins (of Adultery, Murder, and Idolatry, are inconsistent with true
justifying faith, See Gal. 5. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Rev. 21. 8. chapter 22. 15.
Demas one of Saint Paul's fellow laborers: Philemon 24. Col. 4. 14. Whose names
were written in the book of life. Philip. 4. 3. yet 2 Timothy 4. 10. He embraced
this present world. How great a sin that is, [in a person so engaged. 2 Timothy 2.
3, 4.] See James 4. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 20. 1 John 2. 15. Ier. 2. 13. My people have
committed two evils: they have forsaken me the fountain of living water etc.
Rev. 2. 20, 22. Jezebel -- seduced my servants to commit fornication, and eat
things sacrificed to Idols -- and they commit adultery with her. Luke 11. 24.
etc. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry
places, seeking rest: and finding none, he says, I will return unto mine house
whence I came out. And when he comes he finds it swept, and garnished. Then
goes he, and takes to him seven other spirits, more wicked then himself, and
they enter in and dwell there.

III.
They hold, that true believers, may through their own default fall into crimes
and heinous offenses, continue and die in them, and so finally fall away and
perish.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
1 Chronicles. 28. 9 If thou forsake him, He will cast thee off for ever. John 15.
2, 6. Every branch in me that bears not fruit, He takes away -- and it is
withered, and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
burned. Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations, that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done, shall
not be mentioned: in his trespass, that he has trespassed, and in his sin,
that he has sinned, in them shall he die. See ver. 26. and chapter 33. 12, 13, 18.
Matthew. 18. 26. ad finem. Then his Lord, said unto him, O thou wicked servant, I
forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me: should not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? And his
Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors. See the Reasons of the 2,
3, 4, etc. Negatives, and the proofs of the 2 Affirmative.

III.
They hold, that true Believers, though they fall sometimes into grievous sins,
and such as wast the Conscience, yet fall not from all hope of repentance, but
that God, according to the multitude of his mercies, can and often does bring
them again, by his grace, unto repentance: although they cannot certainly be
assured, that this shall certainly and undoubtedly be done.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
Fall not from all hope, etc. Ezekiel. 18. 30. Repent and turn your selves from
all your transgressions: so iniquity shall not be your ruin. See Rev. 2. 4. c.
3. 3. Psalm. 51. 17. Ier. 3. 1, 12, 14. Thou have played the harlot with many
lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord. Turn O backsliding children: I
will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful: I will not keep
anger for ever: For I am married unto you: Hos. 14. 4. I will heal their
backsliding, I will love them freely: Ier. 31. 19, 20. Is Ephraim my dear son?
Is he a pleasant child? For since Ispake against him, I do earnestly remember
him still: therefore my bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy
upon him, says the Lord: Mich. 7. 7, 8, 9. Therefore I will look unto the
Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will hear me. Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise: Mat. 18. 21, 22. How often
shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Jesus says, until
seventie times seven. Luke 6. 36. As your father, which is in heaven is
merciful. Exodus 32. 2. etc. to the 10. Aaron makes a calf and provokes the
Lord, yet, chap. 40. 13. He is consecrated to the Priests office. Hezekiah
humbled himself, the wrath of God was removed from him, 2 Chronicles. 36. 26. Peter
weeps bitterly. Mat. 26. 75. David's sin is put away. 2 Samuel 12. 13. The
incestuous Corinthian finds indulgence: 2 Cor. 2. 7, and 10. A broken and a
contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51. 17.

They cannot certainly be assured, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 25. In meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth; and that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil. Joel 2. 14. Who knows, if he will return and repent, and
leave a blessing behind him? [Ionah 3. 9.] Isa. 27. 11. For it is a people of
no understanding: therefore he that made them, will not have mercy on them, and
he that formed them, will show them no favor. Prove. 1. 28. Then shall they
call upon me, but I will not answer: they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me. Numb. 14. 40. etc. They rose up early in the morning, saying, we
will go up unto the place, which the Lord has promised: for we have sinned
[viz. in refusing to go up at his command:] see 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Heb. 3. 18.
with chap. 4. 11.] And Moses said, it shall not prosper. But they presumed to
go up, and were discomfited. Heb. 12. 17. Afterward when he would have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place of repentance
[in his Father, who had past away the blessing from him though he sought it
carefully with tears. If these places do not make a saving repentance
(especially after grievous sins [see Acts 8. verse. 22.] and an obstinate
continuance in them) somewhat doubtful, yet doubtless they implie a difficulty,
(and the more difficult, the more doubtful.) So do the places following. Mat.
12. 43, 44, 45. He takes seven other spirits, more wicked then himself, and
they enter in and dwell there. And the last state of that man is worse than the
first. 2 Pet. 2. 20. [Compare this with verse 1. etc.] For if after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the
latter end is worse with them, than the beginning. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. For it is
impossible: [i. e. very difficult, as Luke 17. 1. or Luke 18. 27.) If they fall
away, to renew them again unto repentance. See the last Negative precedent.
Ecclus. 5. 5. Concerning propitiation, be not without fear to add sin unto
sin. Romans 2. 4, 5. Despisest thou the riches, etc? Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter
in at the straight gate, for many, I say unto you, will strive to enter in, and
shall not be able.

V.
They hold, that the true believer may for the present be assured of the
integrity of his faith and conscience, and for that time, may and ought to be
assured of his salvation, and the saving love of God toward him.

Proofs out of holy Scripture.
1 John 1. 7. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses
us from all our sin. 1 John 2. 3. And hereby we do know, that we know him, if
we keep his Commandments. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death
to life, because we love the brethren. 1 John 5. 2, 3. By this we know that we
love the children of God, when we love God, and keep his Commandments -- and
his commandments are not grievous. Gal. 6. 4. But let every man prove his own
works and then shall he have rejoicing in himself. 1 John 3. 21. If our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
re^oycing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God we have had
our conversation in the world. Romans 5. 1, 2, 5. Therefore being justified by
faith we have peace with God, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God -- and
hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,
by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. 1 Ioh. 4. 13. Hereby know we, that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because He has given us of his spirit, Romans 8. 16.
The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of
God: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the
spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are
led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. ver. 13, 14. Isa. 32. 17.
And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever.

VI.
They hold, that the true believer may and ought to be assured for the time to
come, that in the use of watching and prayer, and other holy exercises, he may
persevere in faith, and that Gods grace shall never be wanting thereto. But how
he may be assured for the time to come, that he himself shall not be wanting
to do his duty, but that he shall, in the actions of faith, piety, and charity,
as beseems the faithful, persevere in this school of Christian wa^^^re, they
see not, nor think it necessary, that a believer should be assured thereof.

Proofs out of Holy Scripture.
In the use of watching and prayer etc. Ephesians. 6. 11, 13, to 19. Put on the whole
armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil and
having done all to stand. 2 Thessalonians. 5. 17. pray without ceasing. Watch and pray;
Matthew. 26. 41. and chapter 24. 13. with the 42. Luke 12. 35, 36, 37. Let your loins
be girded about and your lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that
wait for their Lord. Luke 21. 34, 36. Take heed lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness and the cares of this life. Watch
ye therefore and pray always. 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant: because
your adversary the devil, as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith. James 4. 7. Resist the devil and he
will flee from you. 1 John 5. 18. He that is begotten of God, keeps himself,
and that wicked one touches him not. Heb. 6. 11. And we desire that every one
of you, do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope unto the end.

That Gods grace shall never be wanting. Psalm. 23. 6. Surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me all the days of my life: Romans 8. 38. For I am persuaded, that
neither death, nor life etc. shall separate us from the love of God. Phil. 1.
6. He which has begun a good work in you. John 15. 2, 7, 10. Every branch that
bears fruit he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. If ye abide in
me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
unto you. [See Luke 11. 13. Acts 5. 32.] ver. 10. If ye keep my Commandments,
ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept my fathers Commandments, and
abide in his love. Rom 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
are not under the law, but under grace. 2 Cor. 12. 9. My grace is sufficient
for thee. 1 John 4. 4. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them;
[the false teachers] because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in
the world.

But how assured for the time to come, that he himself shall not be wanting
etc. For

1. Man is many times deceived in his present condition. Rev. 3. 17. Thou
say, I am rich and increased in goods, and have need of nothing: and know
not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor and blind and naked. Gal.
6. 3.

2. Man's heart is deceitful above all things. Ier. 17. 9. [See John 16. 2.

3. It Is Gods prerogative to know future contingencies. Isa. 41. 22, 23. and
Eccles. 9. 1. The righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
God: no man knows either love, or hatred by all that is before him.

4. A man may resolve well for the present, and be confident he shall stick to
such principles and resolutions as he has once made and espoused; and yet fall
quite off from them. 2 King. 18. 13. Hazael practiced afterward, what he then
abhorred. [Mar. 14. 31.] Matthew. 26. 33, 35. Peter said unto him, though I
should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the
disciples. But he denied before them all, saying, I do not know the man. ver.
70. and 72. and again he denied with an oath. and ver. 74. Then began he to
curse and to swear. Mar. 14. 50. And they all forsook him and fled. So
Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31. 20, 21. He wrought that which was good, and right, and
truth, before the Lord his God. And in every work that he began in the service
of the house of God, and in the law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God,
he did it with all his heart, and prospered. But Chap. 32. 25. Hezekiah rendered
not again, according to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was lifted up,
therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. See David's
fall, 2 Samuel 11.

5. Hence Romans 12. 16. Isa. 5. 21. Woe to him that is wise in his own eyes.

6. Our life is a warfare. Job 7. 1. and only death discharges us from that
service. Rev. 14. 13. Happy is the man that fears always. Prove. 28. 14. For
thou know not what a day may bring forth. Prove. 27. 1.

7. Therefore let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor.
10. 12. [See Romans 11. 20] Watch and pray. Matthew. 26. 41. Take heed lest at any
time. Luke 21. 34, 36. and work out your salvation with fear and trembling:
Phil. 2. 13.

What the Remonstrants hold not touching Perseverance.
I.
They hold not, that a Believers Perseverance in faith is an effect of that
absolute decree, wherein God is said to have chosen some particular persons,
without all respect to any condition of obedience.

The Reason.
Psalm. 125. 1. They that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Zion, which
cannot be removed, but abides for ever. Romans 11. 20. Thou stand by faith. 1
Pet. 1. 5. Kept through faith unto salvation. Ioh. 15. 4. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: no more can ye except ye
abide in me. ver. 7. If ye abide in me etc. John 14. 15, 16. If ye love me keep
my Commandments, and I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter -- that may abide with you for ever; 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4. This is the
will of God, even your sanctification -- 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under my body,
and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means, when I have preached to
others I my self should be a Cast away. Romans 8. 13, 16. If ye mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. 2 Pet. 3. 18. But grow in grace. 1 Pet. 2.
19. This is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God (not of
necessity) endure grief, Psalm. 15. 5. 2 Pet. 1. 10. If ye do these things, ye
shall never fall. Ephesians. 6. 10. to 19. Take unto you, and put on the whole armor
of God etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.
1 Timothy 6. 12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life. Phil. 3.
12. I pursue hard after, ^f that I may apprehend, etc.

II.
They do utterly deny, that true Believers cannot sin of deliberation, but
only of ignorance or infirmity.

The Reason.
1. From exhortations. 2 Cor. 6. 1. Receive not the grace of God in vain. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Quench not the spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30. grieve not the holy spirit.
Hebr. 10. 35. 37, 38. Cast not away your Confidence; if any man draw back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

2. From expostulations, and admiration etc. John 6. 67. will ye also go away?
Isa. 1. 21. How is the faithful city become an harlot? Ier. 2. 12, 21. Be
astonished, O ye heavens, at this: -- For my people have committed two evils:
-- Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou
turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? Mat. 12. 43, 44,
45. Luke 11. 24.

3. He takes to him seven other spirits more wicked then himself.

4. David's example. 2 Samuel 11. 4. He sent Messengers for Bathsheba, and lay
with her. ver. 6. He sends for Uriah to cover the fact, and tempts him to that
purpose, ver. 8. He made him drunk, ver. 13. Plotted and Contrived his death,
ver. 14, 15.

III.
They do utterly deny, that true believers can by no sins fall from the favor
of God.

The Reason.
Romans 11. 22. If thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou shall be cut
off. 2 Samuel 11. 27. The thing that David had done displeased the Lord. See
Chap. 12. 10, 11, 12. 1 King 11. 9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned from the Lord. [See 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Cant. 5. 2. to
6.] Isa. 64. 5, 7, 9. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember
iniquity for ever: behold, see we beseech thee, we are all thy people. Hos. 9.
15, 17. All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the
wickedness of their doings, I will drive them out of mine house, I will love
them no more. Isa. 63. 7, 8, 9, 10. He said, surely they are my people,
children that will not lie: So he was their Savior. But they rebelled and
vexed his holy spirit: therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he
fought against them. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. There was wrath upon Hezekiah. Deuteronomy. 32.
19. When the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provoking of his
sons and of his daughters. Rev. 3. 16. I will spue thee out of my mouth. Jer.
2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee -- know therefore, and see, that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord. Heb. 10. 39.
[See verse 38.] Of them, who draw back unto perdition.

IV.
They do utterly deny, that every man is bound to believe, that he is elected,
and consequently, that he cannot fall from that Election: or that a 1000. sins,
yea, the sins of the whole world, cannot make his Election void.

The Reason.
See the places cited for conditional Election: and the 2. and 3. Affirmatives
of this Article, and the reason of the foregoing Negative. To which add Romans
8. 13. If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: Romans 6. 16. His servants ye
are to whom ye obey. 2 Pet. 2. 19. For of whom a man is overcome, of the same
is he brought in bondage. John 15. 6. If a man abide not in me, he is cast
forth, as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them, and cast them into
the fire, and they are burned. Rev. 2. 5. Remember therefore from whence thou
art fallen, and repent and do thy first works. Rev. 3. 2. Be watchful and
strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die, etc. verse 15, 16. I
would thou were cold or hot, etc. Judas, being one of those, whom the Father
had given to Christ, was lost. John 17. 12. He had power over all Devils. Luke
9. 1. Yet through covetousness he made way for Satan to enter ^n to his heart.
Luke 22. 3, 4. [See Mat. 26. 14, 15] It seems that he had some title also to
one of those twelve thrones. Mat. 19. 28. But he forfeited his interest and
never came to sit on it.

V.
They do utterly deny, that no sins of the faithful, how great and grievous
soever they be, are imputed unto them; or that all their sins present and
future are forgiven them.

The Reason.
Ezekiel. 18. 24. When the righteous turns away from his righteousness -- all
his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in his trespass and
sin shall he die. Psalm. 89. 31, 32. 2 Samuel 7. 14. I will visit their iniquity
with rods. 2 Samuel 12. 10. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy
house. See Psalm. 6. and 38. and 51. 8, 9, 10. O Lord rebuke me not in thy
wrath, thy hand is heavy upon me. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head:
as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. Make me to hear joy and
gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Hide thy face from
my sins, and blot out altmine iniquities, cast me not away from thy presence,
and take not thy holy spirit from me. Rev. 2. 4, 14. I have somewhat against
thee. 1 Cor. 11. 30, For this cause many are weak, and sickly amongst you, and
many sleep. Amos. 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth:
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. See the reason of the
third Negative.

VI.
They do utterly deny, that true believers falling into deadly heresies, and
most heinous sins, as adulteries and murders (for which the Church, according
to Christ's institution is forced to testify, that she cannot tolerate them in
external Communion, and that unless they repent, they shall have no part in the
Kingdom of Heaven) cannot, notwithstanding fall totally and finally from faith.

The Reason.
1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If you forsake him, he will cast you off for ever. Rev. 3. 11.
Hold that fast which thou have, that no man take thy crown. 2 ep. John verse. 8.
Look to your selves, that we lose not those things, which we have wrought. Gal.
3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain? Mat. 16. 19. And I will give
unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind
on earth, shall be bound in heaven. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and chap. 10. 26. etc. For
it is impossible [the Laws of the Church permits it not] for those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come; if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance:
seeing they crucify to themselves the son of God afresh, and put him to an
open shame. So cha. 10. 26. etc. Wherefore giving all diligence, add to your
faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to
temperance patience; and to patience godliness; and to godliness brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness charity: for if you do these things ye
shall never fall. For so an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. See the 2. and
3. affirmative, and the 1. and 3. Negatives.

Note. These five last Negatives, the Remonstrants do reject with their whole
heart and soul, as enemies to piety and goodlife.
Jacobus Arminius in Articulis perpendendis, says as follows.
I.
THat opinion, which denies, that true believers can or ever do fall from faith
totally and finally, was never accounted for Catholic from the times of the
Apostles to these our times, nor the contrary esteemed heretical; yea, the
affirmative part had ever more for it.

II.
That a believer can be assured, without special revelation, that he shall not
fall from faith, And that a believer is bound to believe that he shall not fall
from faith, are two points, which were never accounted for Catholic in the
Church of Christ: nor was the denial of them ever judged heresy, by the
Catholic Church.

III.
That persuasion, whereby a believer does certainly persuade himself, that he
cannot, or shall not fall from faith, serves, not so much for comfort against
despair, as for to breed security, directly contrary to that most wholesome
fear, wherewith we are commanded to work out our salvation, and which is very
needful in this place of temptation.

See Heb. 12. 15. Romans 11. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 12. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. Heb. 6. 11. Gal.
6. 1. Phil. 2. 13. 1 Pet 1. 17. Rev. 3. 11. Job 9. 28. 1 Cor. 9. 27. 1 Cor. 4.
4.

IV.
He that thinks he may fall from faith, and thereupon fears lest he should fall
therefrom, is neither destitute of needful comfort, nor tormented with anxiety
of mind. [He that gives comfort and security upon any other terms, does sow
pillows as in Ezekiel. 13. 18. etc. See Ierem. 6. 14. Ezekiel. 13. 10.] It being
sufficient for comfort, and freedom from anxiety, to know that he shall not by
any power of Satan, sin, and the world, or any affection and infirmity of his
own flesh fall from faith, unless himself shall willingly, of his own accord,
yield to temptation, and neglect conscionably to work out his salvation.

See Ioh. 10. 28. Romans 8. 35. to the end. 1 Ioh. 5. 18. Jam. 4. 7. Romans 6. 16.
2 Pet. 2. 19.

This doctrine (according to the undeniable consequence thereof) will uphold,
the necessity of an industrious duty, and the usefulness of a settled Ministry,
and the peace of a good Conscience.

And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. Gal. 6. 16.

The Postscript to the First part.
TILENUS Thinks fit to give this further account of his design in the foregoing
papers. He resolved at first only to give the true state of the questions, and
nakedly to lay down the tenants, as well negative as affirmative, in as few,
significant and clear expressions as was possible. Afterward he met with some
temptation to affix quotations out of Scripture, in the Margin, to prove the
several branches of these tenants. Then considering that most men pass over
such proofs, as are only referred unto, though they have their bibles lying by
them (which are not always at hand neither) rather then give themselves the
trouble to turn to them; He thereupon concluded, it would be for the Readers
greater ease and advantage, if he cited the very words of Scripture, out of
which such proofs are to be made; and he had not gone far in this method, but
it came into his mind to be a little more distinct in setting down the grounds
of his Proofs and Reasons for his affirmative and negative tenants
respectively; which is done accordingly in the later Articles. And yet in the
former as well as these, are contained such Topics and heads of arguments, as
a little skill (to reduce them to the rules of Art) will be sufficient to
improve, to thy impregnable establishment in the present truth.

And now Reader before Tilenus can dismiss thee, he thinks himself obliged to
make thee satisfaction for having imposed upon thee in two or three
particulars, when he personated the Infidel and the carnal man. One was in
effect, that God is not serious when he forbids the wicked (Reprobates as they
call them) to sin, and invites them to repentance and amendment of life. He
does this, they say, by his revealed will (which indeed they account not his
will) but by his secret will (which is his will properly so called) he wills
the contrary. Celari interdum a Deo (says Beza) aliquid ei, quod in verbo
Patefacit, repugnans. Resp. ad acta colloq. Mompel. Part. 2. page 173. and
Piscator in disp. contra Schasm. says, Deum interdum verbo significare se
velle, quod revera non vult: aut nolle quod revera vult. Now because Gods
intercourse with Abraham about his offering up of Isaac Genesis 22. is the great
instance usually produced to prop up that opinion (so dangerous to piety, and
so dishonorable to the sacred veracity and sincerity of Almighty God, if not
taken Cum grano salis, and qualified by some Commodious interpretation)
according to that saying of Luther (in Genesis 22.) Deus dixit and Abrahamum:
Occide filium etc. Quomodo? Ludendo, simulando, ridendo. And a little after,
Atqui apud Deum est lusus, and si liceret ita dicere, mendacium est? Therefore
Tilenus thought it an acceptable service to God and good men, if he could offer
any thing to clear the reputation of that passage from the suspicion of being
accessory to that doctrine in whose behalf it is so often pleaded. To this end
let us examine the plea. Genesis 22. 2. God said unto Abraham, Take now thy son,
thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah:
and offer him there for a burnt offering, upon one of the Mountains which I
will tell thee of. (Where by the way the Reader may take notice that Abraham
was to expect further orders from Almighty God before the utmost execution of
this affair: But to the plea) here, say they, we have Gods revealed will
signified by a command, that Isaac should be slain: But by his secret will,
that he would not have it so, appears as well by the event as by the Angels
voice ver. 12. Lay not thine hand upon the Lad, etc. Therefore God commands
what he nilleth etc. But Tilenus sees no such matter, no contradiction, no
opposition betwixt Gods secret and revealed will in this passage, being
confident to affirm that God willed with his secret will, all that was
commanded by his revealed; which was, not the occision or slaughtering of Isaac
(to which single act they usually restrain Gods revelation and Command) but
Abraham's voluntary and free obedience, in devoting, Consecrating and rendering
up his son for a sacrifice at Gods command; some particulars whereof are set
down, Take thy son, go into the land of Moriah, carry wood and fire, make an
Altar, and bind Isaac and expose him upon it. That God willed this, is clear
by the event according to the adversaries own rule, Ex eventu judicandum est de
Dei Voluntate. And that Gods command, or revealed will intended the same and no
more, appears by all those Scriptures, which (speaking of this matter) do
positively affirm, that Abraham, did fully perform what God had commanded. So
Hebr. 11. 17. By faith Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac: And he
that had received the promises offered up his only son. So Jam. 2. 21. Was not
Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac his son upon
the Altar? And so God himself interprets it, Genesis 22. 16. Because thou have
done this thing etc. To which purpose also it is observable, that God does not
use the same phrase of speech in the Prohibition ver. 12. that he used in the
injunction ver. 2. Here Gods will revealed is, offer eum in holocaustum, but
there the will of God forbidding is (not ne offeras; for that was done already
according to Gods interpretation and requiry, but) neinjicias manum tuam super
puerum.

Objection. The phrase and word of command in ordinary construction seemed to
imply the slaying of Isaac; because it was the custom to slay such sacrifices
before they were burnt upon the altar.

Resp. For answer to this, it needs not be replied, that words and phrases in
Holy Scripture (as well as in other authors) are used in diverse senses: but
the answer is, that there was a necessity (upon the matter) that Almighty God
should use a phrase that carried such an obvious sense with it, because this
was a special command given unto Abraham for a signal trial of his faith and
obedience, [And it came to pass that God did tempt Abraham Genesis 22. 1.] which
there could have been no proof of, if God had expounded to him the sense of his
command after this manner, Go, take thy son, etc. but thou need not startle
at the imposition, for my intent and purpose is, only that thou should bring
him into the land of Moriah, and blind him and expose him there upon the
altar, which thou shall make for that purpose, and then I will accept thy
obedience, and rescue thy son from the knife by a voice from Heaven. If God had
thus far revealed his will, Abraham's faith had found no difficulty to contest
against, and consequently had not been capable of an approbation. The upshot
therefore of all is this, that in this intercourse with Abraham, God revealed
his will, and nothing but his will, but not his whole will, which he was not
bound to do, neither could the doing of it consist with his design of trying
the sincerity of Abraham's graces. But this is not to be drawn into example,
when we speak of Gods ordinary external intercourse with sinners inviting and
calling them to repent, believe and obey the Gospel, upon promise of life and
peril of damnation.

For 1. This would make the divine call, not only a continual temptation (which
is absurd enough) but also ridiculous; for this would not be such a temptation,
as that which occurs in Abraham's example; wherein the duty commanded was not
only possible to be performed, but was also actually performed, so far forth,
that God declared his own satisfaction in it by a voice from Heaven. But
(according to the doctrine of those men we oppose) God is supposed to be always
tempting and trying, whether that will come to pass, which is altogether
impossible to come to pass, that is, he tempts and tries again and again,
whether the reprobate will believe and convert, that is, whether he will do
that, which Gods own decree has rendered impossible for him to do. Which is, as
if one should be very sollicitous to make an experiment, whether the blind
would see, or the dead walk. 2. This would make Gods calling of Reprobates,
which is done by his signant will alone; (as they say) not only an act of
hypocrisy, in seeming to wish them well, by desiring their repentance and
salvation, when his beneplacent will has decreed otherwise: but also an act of
cruelty; because by this calling, God is not only the occasion, or cause of
their infidelity and disobedience (it being impossible for reprobates to
answer that call) but of their greater punishment likewise, into which they do
necessarily fall for that their necessary and unavoidable infidelity. From
which it follows. 3. That that will whereby God wills not to give to reprobates
sufficient grace to enable them to repent and believe (much less irresistible
grace, that actually they must do so) should not be Voluntas beneplaciti, but
rather Maleplaciti, a will of displeasure rather then of good pleasure; because
it is an affection of the greatest hatred and aversation; where as
notwithstanding Gods calling unto faith and to salvation (which is done by the
word) is declared to be an act of his good pleasure and grace, [Ephes. 1. 9. 2
These. 1. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9.] and an evidence of his compassion and love, as may
easily be collected out of Holy Scripture. [2 Chronicles. 36. 15. Romans 1. 7. Hos. 9.
15.] Lastly, according to the doctrine of that distinction, and those men that
make use of it, the whole revelation and ministry of the Gospel, goes for no
more, but voluntas signi, the will of God to give out such a thing for a sign
only, when indeed, it is the will of Gods beneplaciture and is expressly so
called, as shall appear in the second particular, wherein Tilenus offers the
Reader satisfaction, which is, about the sense of another text perversely cited
by him above upon another occasion.

Maccovius [Colleg. de Predest. disp. 2.] to prove that God would not have all
men to be saved; no, not [voluntate signi] contrary to the most express
grammatical sense of Scripture [1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.] he says, voluntas
signi, non est proprie dicta voluntas, sed est verbum Dei, that which is
revealed and signified (in holy Scripture) to be the mind of God, is not his
will properly so called, but it is the word of God, (as if it were consistent
with his sacred veracitie to utter something disagreeable to his own will) and
he affirms further [disp. 5.] that God does not will, that is, not delight in
or approve of any thing, but what he does effect, and this he endeavors to
prove out of Psalm. 115. 3. a parallel place to which, we have Psalm 135. 6.
against which doctrine these 2. assertions are clear.

1. That Gods word or his command revealed in holy Scripture, is his will
properly so called. John 6. 38, 39, 40. I came down from Heaven -- to do the
will of him that sent me -- and this is the will of him that sent me. Romans 2.
18. Thou art called a Jew -- and make thy boast of God, and know his will
-- being instructed out of the law. 1 These. 4. 3. This is the will of God even
your sanctification. Mat. 7. 21. But he that does the will of my father, etc.
See Mat. 12. 50. John 7. 17. chap. 9. 31. Heb. 13. 21. 1 John 2. 17. It Is that
which is right in the eyes of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 6. 17, 18. and Heb. 13. 21. It Is
that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God. Romans 12. 2. And if it be
not so, how can we be assured, that we do please him, and are acceptable in his
sight, when we walk according to this rule?

2. This will of God is not always done, but many times the contrary. Isa. 65.
12. and chap. 66. 4. When I called ye did not answer; when I spoke ye did not
hear, but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted
not. So Ier. 19. 5. and chap. 32. 35. They have built also the high places of
Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which I
commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind.

Now to come to those passages of the Plalmist; when he says, The Lord does
whatsoever pleases him, it cannot be understood of man's work, whether we mean
his sin or his duty.

1. Not of his sin; for that cannot be said to please God. For he is not a God
that has pleasure in wickedness. Psalm. 5. 4. And therefore most of our
adversaries are ashamed, directly to attribute the effecting thereof unto God.
Nor yet 2. Can it be understood of man's duty; for that pleases God, not as it
is opus operatum [Isa. 1, 12. etc.] but as it is a duty, and a duty it cannot
be, if it be Gods doing; for a duty is a work performed by an inferior, in
obedience to the command of his superior, who has authority over him; and
consequently man's duty cannot be a work of Gods only doing: besides, he that
commands a thing, he would have that thing, which he commands, to be done by
him, to whom he does command it: but he that does that thing (supposed to be
under command) himself, he wills not that it be done by another: otherwise he
should at the same time both will and nill it to be done by that other. The
Psalmist therefore is to be understood, not of the things, which the Lord would
have done (in a way of duty) by others; nor yet of such things as he promises
to perform himself upon condition of man's obedience, which through default
hereof many times are not accomplished, as Numb. 14. 30. 1 Samuel 2. 30.) but of
all things, which he intends absolutely to execute and bring to pass himself
(as Psalm. 33. 9.) and so we may observe, that his power in these works, is
opposed to the impotencie of Idols, who are able to do just nothing: see those
two Psalms throughout, viz. Ps. 115. 3. etc. Psalm. 135. 6. etc.

But here a question may be moved, whether the will of God can at any time be
defeated? To which the answer is, that it is most true in a good sense, that the
will of God is always fulfilled. For the understanding whereof we must
distinguish of Gods will and the objects of it. Some things God wills
Absolutely, and they must of necessity come to pass, otherwise, that will of
God could not be truly said to be fulfilled. Thus when it is said, God will give
Christ for a Covenant of the people; Whoremongers and Adulterers God will
judge, the faithful he will save; if Christ were not so given, or Whoremungers
and Adulterers could avoid judgment, or the faithful fail of salvation, Gods
will declared in those promises and threatenings, were utterly broken. Thus
also, it being Gods absolute will, that man being a reasonable creature, should
be a Free Agent, he must be so of necessity. Other things God wills
disjunctively, and they come to pass contingently, or not at all; otherwise if
they should come to pass of necessity, Gods will should be crossed in them. For
in these things his will is, that neither the one, nor the other particular
should be necessary, but either that they should not be at all, or be
Contingent. This distinction may be seen in his judgment threatened and
propounded to David 2 Samuel 24. 12, 13. Thus says the Lord, I offer thee three
things, choose which of them I shall do unto thee. Will thou that seven years of
famine come upon the land, or will thou flee three months before thine
enemies, or that there be three days of pestilence in thy land. Here God
absolutely willed to send a judgment, and consequently the coming of it was
necessary: but which of the three was referred to David's choice, and so that
was contingent. But this distinction is more evident in Gods commands,
established with promises and threatenings, relating to man's transgression and
obedience respectively. So in his commands for temporal safety. Jer. 21. 8, 9.
And unto this people thou shall say, Thus says the Lord, Behold I set before
you the way of life, and the way of death. He that abides in this city shall
die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goes
out, and falls to the Caldeans, that besiege you, he shall live, and his life
shall be unto him for a prey. Here Gods will is disjunctive, and whether they
continued in the city, and perish't there, or fled out to the Caldeans and were
preserved by them, it was a matter of their own free choice, and so Contingent;
but which soever of these two courses they took and succeeded accordingly, Gods
will was fulfilled. So it is likewise in the matter of life and death eternal.
Deuteronomy. 11. 26, 27, 28. Behold, I set before you this day, a blessing and a
curse: A blessing, if ye obey the Commandments of the Lord your God: And a
curse if ye will not obey, but turn aside out of the way, which I command you,
and Romans 8. 13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye through the
spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. So that whether they
live by one means, or die by the other, Gods will is necessarily fulfilled;
because his will is not that they shall either necessarily observe his
commands, or necessarily transgress them: But if they do transgress (though
that transgression be Contingent, Death is the necessary Doom awarded to it.
And if they do observe them though that observation be a matter of choice and
so contingent also, yet is life the necessary Reward, and absolutely designed
to crown that obedience.

It appears by this discourse, that God cannot fail of accomplishing such an
end, and after such a manner as his wisdom thinks fit to propound in his
intercourse with voluntary and free Agents; for if he cannot prevail with us
(by such means, and such a manner of working as is agreeable to the condition
of our intellectual nature) to suffer our selves to be saved by him, in
performing that service to which his goodness has ordained us (which his good
pleasure is set upon in the first place) then his good pleasure is fulfilled by
inflicting upon us that punishment, which he treatned; according to that saying
of S. Augustine, Facit Deus Voluntatem suam de eo, a quo voluntas ejus facta
non est.

ANNOTATA QUAEDAM in FUNDAMENTALES Mri THOMAE PARKERI Theses De traductione
hominis peccatoris ad vitam.

LECTORI.
OCyus te in pedes Conjice, Lector (...), ni mavis in harum Thesium Editoris
substratos Encomiorum flosculis Casses incidere; vel perplexis earundem
Authoris plagulis irretiri. Neque tamen ab isto metuendum esset, Scholarum
inaniis, verborumque Captum humanum fugientium involucris sensa mentis
intricante, nisi viam aed periculum ille, incautus, opinor, Praefator sic
stravisset, Vir sane, quicunque is est, Cordatus, quem nec hoc nomine tam
incusandum Censuerim, quod ab Ecclesiae etiamnum Anglicanae doctrina,
formulisque (ex praejudicijs imbibitis) abhorrere videatur, quam jure merito
laudibus efferendum, quod placidum se, and modesti ingenii virum, indiciis
minime obscuris, nec non bonarum literarum been compotem praestiterit.

Laudet sane, ut sibi gratum faciat, Cameronem Scoto-Gallum, Twissium
Anglo-Britannum, Arminium autem and Corvinum Batavos, Tilenum etiam Gallum, a
Twissio, sc. Confossos proculcet. Rursus Robertum Parkerum, Amesium,
Robinsonum, ad coelum laudibus vehat: nec tamen effecerit, ut Thomas hic
tantopere praedicatus Parkerus, Sanctissimum Vnici nostri Salvatoris Benedicti
Evangelium, decretorum Dei de salute and interitu humano fundum non subruerit,
aut ipsi Justitiae soli tenebras non offuderit. Quasi vero, O boni, absque
vobis esset defensoribus and hyperaspistis, ne ipse quidem Deus Socinum
Arminiumque (Par impar paulo invidiosius Praefatori Conjunctum, at toto coelo
disseparandum) non esset refellendo.

Nos ad Evangelium ipsius Dei Patris, Christique Domini ex ejus sinu
prodeuntis, and sancti utriusque spiritus inibi clarissime loquentis provocamus.

Loquere jam, mi Parkere, verum sicut Dei, Christique oracula. En Praesto
adsumus ut divinis Eloquiis fasces proni submittamus. Nostrum neutri credatur:
uni Deo fidei obedientiam praestare didicimus. Age ergo: arrectis enim auribus
documenta coelestia libenter expectamus.

LECTORI.
SIste te parumper, erudite Lector, ut noris cujam and qualem pagellam
comprimis, hoc scilicet solo nomine redarguendam, quod sit tota gemmea. In
historiis, compendia, dispendia; at in Theologia, polemica saltem, (...), atque
instar montium, qui, quo sublimiori consurgunt cacumine, magis sterilescunt.
Optandum ex Theologorum disceptationibus, and colloquiis, ut puta
Mompelgartensi, Hagiensi, aliisque succum and sanguinem exprimi, responsionum
lacinias abradi, in personas, nominaque (quas vere rabiem and rixas Theologorum
vocavit Melanchthon) lituras expungi: quibus sarmentis, siquis inter (...)
(quos vocat Spiritus Sanctus Eccles. 12. 12. (...), magistros collectionum five
pandectarum. Merc.
) nomen suum professus, operam daret averruncandis, plus certe quam ex alio
quovis scripto elenctico proficerent lectores. Vide consilium I. Hornbeek. in
sum, Controvers, de Papismop. 316.
. Dicam quod res est: misere ruspamur in controversa Theologia, and si quando
veritatis importuna fame confecti, margaritam offendimus.

Exclamare libet, populus quod clamat Osyri.

Invento. --

Nervosi siquidem sunt, and acuti Theologi Camero, ubi habet Tilenum
adversarium, Twissius, ubi Arminium, Corvinum, eundemque Tilenum confodit; at!
at! postquam pulmones in verborum cortice exagitaveris, vix tandem medullam
sensus potis eris eruere anhelus lector. Inde est adeo laudabile institutum
Reverendi Viri Thomae Parkeri, authoris Thesium de Traductione peccatoris ad
vitam, qui eadem premit vestigia, nec taedio lectorem enecat. Neminem
suppilavit, sugillavit neminem. Non habent scriptores, quem incusent
stellionatus, nec alii verbera violentae linguae patiuntur. Arminii, and Socini
nomina reliquit intacta; non ita causam, and argumenta. Sentiunt se mori tacito
vulnere, qui in argumentis aut Conversionis, aut Satisfactionis periculose, and
infoeliciter disputarunt.

Hic is est, si nescis, lector, cujus pater Robertus Parker, (...), tam erudite
and copiose scripsit de signo crucis, Descensu Christi ad inferos, and
Ecclesiastica politeia, in causa Religionis patriae exul, qui una cum Amesio,
notissimum virum I. Robinsonum, Vide eundem Hornbeckium in Brownismo p. 625.
ad sobriam in disciplina mentem revocavit. Dignus est adeo hic noster Author
tam istoc patre, quam hac prole. Id unice agit Vir Doctissimus, ut Gratiae
Divinae suus constet honos sartus-tectus; ut Gratia praeveniens, excitans,
pulsans, efficax and actuosa habeatur, non segnis, and voluntatis nostrae
pedissequa, qualem adversarii comminiscuntur, qui Gratiae verbo abusi sunt, (ut
Vidi quem admodum potuerit (Pelagius) etiam gratiam nominari sub ambigua
generalitate, quid sentiret, abscondens, gratiae tamen vocabulo, frangens
invidiam, offensionemque declinans. Aug. de pecc. Orig. contra Pelag. and
Caelest: cap. 37.
Augustinus jam diu notavit) ad frangendam invidiam.

Si cui minus arridet, quod a stili Evangelici simplicitate abhorrere videatur;
and (...) quaedam terminorum Philosophicorum interpolasse, sciat velim,
lectorem desiderari gravem, and in scholis exercitatum, cui si sit ingenium
Theologicum, nihil nocebit stilus metaphysicus; nec omnino desunt, quod dixit
in re leniori Antonius, [lib. 9. sect. 3.] etiam in phrasi (...). Prodiere
saepius hae eaedem Theses, cum aliis ejusdem commatis Amesii Tractatulis
compactae, a doctis indoctisque pro Amesianis habitae, and citatae; sed quod
dolendum maxim, mancaesemper, and imperfectae, (...) nonnunquam addita, loca
Scripturaefoedissime distorta, and transversa tuentia: quindecim integras
theses nescio cujus sacrilegae manus depeculabantur. Pauci haec observarunt,
miratique non superesse, qui plagiarium and stellionem insequeretur, and injus
vocaret. Tu igitur, ingenue Lector, aequi bonique consulas, quod ego, qui in
sacro sum satellitio ultimae sortis, in extremis Angliae oris ab omnibus paene
bonis literis exul,

((...) -- (...).)

hanc qualemcumque opellam dabam, tribus quatuorve exemplaribus MSS. and
impressis fideliter collatis, ut authorem tibi, authorique suum nomen and
Theses vindicarem.

H. S.

THESES DE Traductione Peccatoris ad vitam.
THESIS I.
DEus cum sit ens absolute primum Exodus 3. 14. propterea primum est ac summum
bonum: and quia primum ens, proinde omnia ab ipso sunt: quia vero summum bonum,
summus est finis ad quem tendunt. Si enim aliquid esset, quod non esset ab
ipso, plura prima essent, and proinde non esset absolute primum: and si summum
bonum, summus finis est, quia bonum finis est; and si summus finis, omnia ad
ipsum tendunt, alioqui non esset absolute summus. Hinc Deus Apoc. 22. 13.
(...), omnium entium ad seipsum Motor est. Irrationalium quidem, quia sensuum
conclusa limitibus, mediate duntaxat: rationalium vero selectae multitudinis ad
fruendum ipso. Cum enim proxime per intellectum and voluntatem ad Deum
accedant, proximum eorum bonum erit unio cum eo quod summum est, seu fruitio
Dei: quae divinae amicitiae and favoris est adeptio.

Annot. Ad THIS. I.
Ad Thesin primam paucula haec videntur adnotanda. 1. vocem [omnia] page 1.
lin. 5. ad entia Creata restringendam (uti Parkerum voluisse fit vero simile p.
2. l. 8.) ne aut peccatum ens esse negetur, aut de numero esse creaturarum, and
sub voce [omnia] Comprehendi debere affirmetur. Quod quorsum tendat judicare
obvium est. 2. Eadem page 2. lin. and sequentibus intelligendus videtur, quasi
entia irrationalia (mediate licet) ab ipso Deo ad ipso fruendum moverentur;
Dilute nimis. 3. Cave ne hic Dei ipsius (naturalem an supernaturalem) quoad se,
cum Dei de nobis fine voluntary intento de nostri ipsius fruitione confundas.
Versatiles n. sunt hae locutiones.

THESIS II.
Intentio finis hujus, pro modo independentis ac supremae voluntatis ex
consilio agentis suo, ABSOLVTA est. Romans 11. 34. Isa. 40. 13. Nec enim (...)
potest is esse, qui a condition determinatur extrinseca: cui praescribitur
ordinis ratio ab eo quod ordinatur ab ipso: qui discit ab homine agendi modum
ac finem, adeoque regitur ab ipso ut mensurante actum suum. Quin contra (...)
homo infinitus and inordinatus foret, quippe disponeret seipsum ad finem prius,
quam disponatur a Deo.

Annot. Ad THESE. II.
1. Intentionem finis hujus h. e. Suiipsius] duriuscule dicitur, nec tamen sano
sensu acceptum, [pro perfectionum divinarum manifestatione] admodum aversor,
sed male metuo ne fallacia sit insidiarum integumentum.

2. Ut maxim Consilio Dei (ex citatis lin. ult. page 2. Scripturae commatis)
sua ab-omnicreato independentia astruatur, non sequitur tamen voluntati divinae
ad extra, omnimodam independentiam, and finis hujus, h. e. suiipsius absolutam
quoad omnium, speciatim, perfectionum suarum, omni tempore, manifestationem,
ascribendam esse. Non quod negetur, sed quod ex istis locis sequi non constet.
Quid? quod ex ipsa Dei voluntate absoluta, and consilio sit, ut finis adeptio
non sit absoluta, nisi media includantur.

3. Absolutam esse istam finis hujus intentionem sano sensu admittimus, and
libenter, nec tamen absonum videri debet si voluntas divina dependere interdum
dicatur a condition aliqua (quam ipse and statuit, and principaliter efficit)
non quidem dependentia causalitatis utpote (...), sed dependentia quadam
relationis, uti Patrem a filio dependere, ut sit Pater, nemo sanus, opinor,
negaverit. Nec obstat quod sequitur. Ipse n. Deus determinavit se hoc sic
facturum, and homines ad finem (prout novit justitiam, misericordiam and
sapientiam suam decere) dispositurum.

THESIS III.
Hinc multo minus ex praevisa fide; haec enim medium est ad fruitionem Dei qui
finis est: idcirco non antecedit intentionem finis ut conditio.

Annot. Ad THIS. III.
1. Aliud est Praevisa fides, and ex ea: aliud Praescientia fidei, and secundum
eam. 1 Pet 1. 2. Fides n. est actus officii nostri: Praescientia actus
perfectionis divinae. [ex] Causam, [Secundum] ordinem notat. Ex praescita fide
tanquam causa dependere Dei intentionem finis seu praemii nostri negamus, fieri
secundum praescientiam cum S. Scriptura affirmamus.

2. Finis hic sc. ad Deum unio, fruitioque (cum perfectionum divinarum viz.
misericordiae glorificatricis pariter and gloriosae, reliquarumque
manifestatione plenissima conjunctus) intelligitur vel ut Finis ex consilio
voluntatis nude consideratus, quo de hic non quaeritur; vel quasi judicialiter,
and Politice, ut praemium and merces ex beneplacito Dei miserentis, mero,
libero, absoluto, and independente, omnesque causas secundas antegrediente
manans, and certis legibus promissa; at ex Dei veracitate and Constantia, legum
seu conditionum harum observatoribus praestanda. Hoc modo, recte, secundum S.
scripturam, Voluntatis and Consilii divini, declaratricem, affirmatur, fidem
etiam in Dei intention (Praescitam, nondum Praestitam) Praemii and Mercedis
adeptionem antecedere.

3. Notandum Anthorem sibi non satis constare in fine Dei intentionis
assignando, quem interdum seipsum respicere intendentem, interdum hominem
intentum indicat.

THESIS IV.
Via ad finem istum exhibita homini fuit in statu primaevo, quo viribus
instruebatur idoneis, quibus Deo, si voluisset, potuit frui. Verum quia
finitus, ideo mutabilis, and quia mutabilis, seducente Diabolo descivit a statu
illo: unde summi boni interrupta est adeptio. Iis tamen quos ad finem istum
destinarat, ex misericordia reconciliari voluit Deus; ita tamen ut simul
justitia maneret illaesa: quare tum pro offensa satisfacere oportuit prius,
quam in conditionem justitiae restaurari. Quia vero hoc a nobis, quippe
nullarum virium, Romans 5. 6. effici non potuit: aut per alium effici oportuit,
aut de reconciliatione nostra actum. Hoc autem quia perficere non debuit alius
nisi homo, nec sufficere potuit nisi Deus: hinc Christus (...) mediator
designatus; qui redemptionem a peccatis virtute satisfactionis, and
restaurationem virtute justitiae procurans, reconciliationem impetravit iis,
quibus voluit Deus.

Annot. Ad THESE. IV.
1. Cavendum est, ne prima Theseos hujus verba temere deglutiamus. Viam n. ad
finem istum, Dei fruitionem (omni modo consideratum, sc. ut fruitio etiam
Christi Mediatoris existentis, and Judicis, Remuneratorisque futuri, ex
misericordia, justitia temperata, includatur) non fuisse, homini in statu
primaevo exhibitam, nec in isto statu, viribus ad Deo, hoc modo considerato,
fruendum, hominem instructum fuisse fidenter asserimus. Quod est Authoris
nostri (...).

2. Ut facile largiar (quod tamen vix quivis capit) hominem primaevum ideo
mutabilem quia finitum (quamvis finitum et mutabilem fuisse procul sit omni
dubio) summique boni adeptionem ex ista sua voluntaria defectione, seducente
Diabolo, interruptam fuisse; non sic tamen, ut Christus Mediator, Judexque
noster sub ista summi Boni Consideratione veniat: ne (ut caetera infinita
incommodataceam) Christus noster in Adamo primaevo, integro censitus, in ipso
nobiscum laberetur, peccatique Originalis se alligaret, aut a Deo Patre,
ejusdem reus censeretur, unde satisfactio (quam eum divinae justitiae
Praestitisse, nemo praeterquam qui absolutas Dei intentiones esse omnes
crediderit, negare, nisi laesis principiis potest) salusque omnis nostra
corruat necesse est.

3. Si per eos quos ad finem istum destinarat Deus, intelligi vult absoluta et
praecisa salvandi, seu ad summum finem perducendi, intention destinatos, non
video ut seipsum sibi in eadem oratione reconciliet: Mox. n. subiungit, iis ex
misericordia reconciliari voluit Deus, etc. Sed cave, mi Parkere, ne ejusmodi
En sublapsarium. Vid. quae ad These. 10. de suprapositis fundamentis notavi.
absoluta ad finem istum destinatio reconciliationi dictae repugnet, et
universam Christi satisfactionis necessitatem, vel etiam utilitatem funditus
evertat et aboleat. Quos n. ad finem istum destinarat (intellige absolute)
Deus, iis certe jampridem erat reconciliatus, absque hoc, ut Christi interventu
fieret satisfactio, et inde manans reconciliatio. Non insto ne asperior paulo
videar.

Annot. Ad THESE. IIII.
Caetera de Satisfactione, Sana existimo, nisi quod quaedam in fine sint
obscura, et Phrasis ultima [reconciliationem impetravit (Christus) iis, quibus
voluit Deus] animadvertenda. Quid. n. Pro quibus voluit Deus ut impetraret? Pro
lapsis et Perditis omnibus? Non opinor dicturum te cum S. Scripturis. Pro
Reprobis? Nequaquam. Pro Electis ergo? Fieri non posse, aut esse superfluum
videri potest, si absolute and praecise ad finem summum a Deo prius
destinentur, quam in Christum ponantur Credituri, imo quam Christus
satisfecisse, aut in satisfactionis pretium destinari dicatur.

THESIS V.
Hinc quotquot reconciliandi fuerant, propter Christi merita reconciliari
oportuit: proinde ut applicetur reconciliatio, merita Christi applicandaprius.
Applicanda vero homini cum fint qua intellectu ac voluntate praedito, propterea
ut ab ipso (Scal. ex. 307. sect. 27. lin. 2.) recipienda, applicanda sunt. Hinc
foedus Dei cum electis emergit, se recipientibus Christum reconciliatum iri.
Conditio a part Dei, reconciliatio es^, in qua tamen debtor non nobis est
Deus, sed sibi, qui seipsum negare non potest. Ea etiam finis ipse hominis est,
non quidem quoad rem alius a fruitione Dei; relatione solum distinctus
interruptionis praeviae. Conditio vero a part nostra est Christi Receptio:
conditio autem non ut ab homine dispensatore actus hujus, sed ut in homine quid
ad reconciliationem praerequisitum.

Annot. Ad THESE. V.
1. Nota ut hic sermonem in re prorsus eadem licenter variet. In Thesi 4.
legimus Deum reconciliari voluisse quibusdam; hic homi^es reconciliandi et
reconciliari dicuntur, idque propter Christi merita. Quid ergo? An Christus non
meruit ut Deus hominibus reconciliaretur? Non dixeris, opinor. At tantundem hic
dicitur. Certe Christus Deo, non hominibus satisfecit. Verissimum quidem est,
nos recte dici Deo esse reconciliandos, ut applicetur reconciliatio merito
Christi impetrata: utinam a^ apertius and liquidius nos docuisset, quo pacto
merita Christi prius applicanda fuerint.

2. Exmeritorum Christi, ad hominem, qua intellectu and voluntate praeditum,
applicatione, Foedus Dei cum Electis emergens, hoc esse dicitur [se
recipientibus Christum reconconciliatum iri] quod oracularem ambiguitatem, ex
vocum sono, refer videtur. Sed praestat sic intelligere, ac si clare
affirmetur, Deum reconciliatum iri recipientibus Christum: Quid a. sit hoc
[Christum recipere] utinam explicasset. Sed quid si noluit, ne quid infirmum
subter latens exponeretur: aut non potuit, Thosibus, dicam, an hypothesibus
salvis?

3. Non moror sequentium amphibolias dictionum, nec minus exactas loquendi
formas vellico. Conditiones audio; placet. At reconciliationem ad Deum non esse
rem aliam ab ejusdem fruitione, sed idem hominis finis, nisi quod relatione
interruptionis praeviae distinguatur, fateor me non satis capere; non quod
minus intelligam, quam quod minus sanum esse judicem. Sed transeat.

4. Conditionem a part nostra, Sc. Christi receptionem ab homine non propriis
naturae viribus praestari, sed a Dei praesertim gratia, damus: modo hominis
esse actum, a nobis, mediante Dei Evangelio, per spiritus sancti gratiam
productum, non negetur.

5. Meminerit lector, Conditionem hanc, ab Authore Concedi, esse in homine quid
ad reconciliationem Praerequisitum.

THESIS VI.
Applicatio utriusque conditionis fit primo per deductionem earum ad actum ut
sint: deinde per conservationem in actu ut porro sint. Deductio autem ad actum
est Receptionis Christi prius, cum ex ea tanquam medio praerequisito
Reconciliatio ineatur. Haec vero vocatio dici solet, quae Motus est a Deo, quo
Christi receptionem electis ingenerat.

Annot. Ad THESE. VI.
1. Advertat etiam, quod ex ea, tanquam medio praerequisito, Reconciliatio
ineatur, eodem hic fatente. An vero haec vocatio dici soleat (in sacris
literis) ambigo.

2. Reconciliatio hic dicitur vocatio, quae motus est a Deo, quo Christi
receptionem electis ingenerat. Quid audio? Reconciliatio generat receptionem,
quae receptio est reconciliatione prior, seu quid ei praerequisitum? Annon haec
sunt valde operosum nihil? Capiat qui potest. Fallor? An haec sibi
contradicunt? Certe Robertus Parkerus Pater tuus fuit, non idem tuus filius.

THESIS VII.
Motio hominis est: ideo Movens requiritur, and Mobile quod movetur, and Motus
moventis actus, and Res Motu Facta. De quibus ordine.

Annot. Ad THESE. VII.
Motio hominis est, inquis. Cave dixeris. Quid? An hominem affirmas actus hujus
dispensatorem, quod modo These 5. negasti? Rursus haereo, nisi motio pure pute
passive intelligatur. Pergo.

THESIS VIII.
MOVENS est, qui intendit finem: principium and finis Deus. Movens autem est,
ut consilio agens; proinde decreto, quod pariter secundum proportionem decreti
circa finem, absolutum est. Nec enim finis absolute ab ipso intenti, ex
fallibili condition suspendi eventus potest.

Annot. Ad THESE. VIII.
De fine, qui ipse Deus dicitur and est, litem non moveo. Sed an eodem modo
Deus intendat se ut finem suum, and hominis finem, seu mercedem magnam,
Consilio, proinde decreto, merito ambigo. Intendit quippe, se, finem suum,
opinor, Natura; se autem hominis finem, Consilio. Nec satis assequor, nisi
statuendum sit Dei Decreta esse ipsum Deum, and posse seipsum non velle sicut
decreta Potuisset facere non voluisse, and Deum seipsum, Sicut decreta secundum
voluntatis suae Consilium facere, arbitremur.

Non tamen negaverim hominis finem Deum (si media ad eum assequendum connotet)
a Deo homini absolute intendi. Neque hinc metuendum est, si Dei intentio finis
humani sic explicetur, ne ex fallibili (Deus n. falli nequit) Condition (non
dico necessitata) eventus suspendatur, quam conditionem supra These. 5.
statuisti esse Christi receptionem. Hanc. n. secundum Evangelii vocem dicentis,
Qui Credit Salvabitur, in Decreto hoc circa hominem includi affirmo. Adeo ut
certo certius, and infallibiliter, finis hu^usmodi eventus ex fallibili
condition non suspendatur.

THESIS IX.
9. Et sicut in comparatione ad finem, sic qua id quod decernitur est effectus
entis primi; a quo sicut Romans 11. 36. omnium entium dependent essentiae,
virtutes, actiones, sic praecipue Jac. 1. 17. supernaturalis boni. Hinc
vocationem independente consilio producens, tum per sapientiam de forma
deliberat, tum per voluntatem intendit secundum illam formam ex suppositione
potentiae. Forma illa exemplar est and mensura veritatis in re, ut prout ipsa
fuerit, sic rem fore necesse sit dependenter ab ea. Hinc ex condition in re
non vult conversionem Deus, sed secundum deliberationem sapientiae suae,
voluntas intendit, and potentia exequitur immutabilis. Et quia secundum
sapientiam and bonitatem vult and potest, proinde futuram praevidet virtualiter
a voluntate pendentem.

Annot. Ad THESE. IX.
Sicut decretum circa finem, seu decretum secundum proportionem decreti circa
finem (stylo and phrasi horridis, hactenus inauditis, and mortalium captum pene
superantibus) statim dixerat, sic (quid hoc [sic] sibi vult?) id quod
decernitur (quid tibi est [id] istud? An neque motio, nec movens, nec mobile,
nec motus, nec res mo^u-facta? Quanta hic confusio, quantus tumultus?) sic id
quod discernitur, inquis, est effectus entis primi; a quo dependere omnium
essentias, virtutes, Romans 11. 36. Jac. 1. 17.
actiones praecipue boni supernaturalis, nullus dubito. Quid ergo? Hinc,
inquis, vocationem (reconciliationem supra These. 6.
dixeras) independente consilio producens (in fieri intelligis, dum producturus
est, an in facto esse, quando produxit? ambigua n. est oration) tum per
sapientiam, inquis, de forma deliberat, tum per voluntatem intendit secundum
illam formam ex suppositione potentiae. Quid audis lector? Evangelium an
scholam? Apostolos an Sorbonam? Transeat hoc omne. Sapientia divina de
reconciliationis forma deliberat, voluntas secundum formam illam intendit,
Potentia exequitur. Concedo. Perge.

Forma, inquis, illa exemplar est, and mensura veritatio in re, ut prout ipsa
fuerit, sic rem fore necesse sit dependenter ab ea. Audio, sed Cave ne mox,
(...), te fallas and incauto Lectori Scandalum objicias. Tam Metaphysica
veritas seu rei, quasi Thematis incomplexi auditur, postea (ut mihi etiam
liceat griphos loqui) Logicam Axiomatis affectionem, veritatem Thematis
Complexi, quasi formae dictae exemplaris exemplatum, veritas rei, esset
veritatis Axiomaticae exemplar, deducere satages. Frustra. Reconciliatio seu
vocatio (quando visum est sic confundere) sit sane res a forma N. B. hanc rem
motufactam, vocationem seu reconciliatianem non esse sed receptionem Christi
praerequisitam. These. 46.
ista dependens. Non quaeritur verum de modo, and ordine, quem satius est
erudite ignorate, quam in abscondita Dei (...) te ingerere. Hinc, inquis, unde,
inquam? ex condition in re non vult conversionem Deus (reconciliatio, vocatio,
conversio, Christireceptio, idem tibi sunt; verum quo Doctore praeeunte?) Ex?
Absit, Quid si secundum? Non affirmo. Sine condition non vult. Quid si
asseram? Certe bona tua cum venia fecero, utpote qui receptionem Christi esse
quid reconciliationi praerequisitum, modo bis (...), affirmaveras. Sed de his,
post opportuniorem dicendi locum inveniam. Quomodo igitur vult Deus
conversionem? Secundum deliberationem sapientiae suae, voluntas, inquis,
intendit, and potentia exequitur immutabilis. Recte, si dictio [immutabilis]
pro non mutanda postquam eventum sortita est, vel actu superaverit humanam
resistentiam, intelligatur. Quid balbutis? Eloquere: Potentiam intelligis
irresistibilem; and hanc Deum exerere, clare fatebo^, in rebus, actibusque ab
ipso solo, nullo mediante, productis. Sed an Conversio etc. sint hujusmodi suo
loco.

2. An satis has voces [secundum sapientiam and veritatem vult and potest] ad
exactam dicencendirationem and obrussam exegerit, Lector judicet.

Proind^ futuram, pergit, praevidet and virtualiter a voluntate pendentem.
Futuram sc. rem. Quam? Conversionem, Christi receptionem. Praevidet futuram.
Recte, sed vereor an sensu tuo. A Voluntate Pendentem (Dei, intelligis, opinor)
recte: praecipue: Sed quid sibi vult virtualiter? Nugae.

Hactenus fundamenta operose, in metaphysicae, nescio cujus arena, and
scholarum quisquiliis jacta, mole quantumvis exigua ruunt sua. Qui possunt ergo
quae superstruuntur omnia non labi, non cidere? Tantum abest ut his fundamentis
positis error concidat, nisi qui istis inaedificatur.

THESIS X.
Exsupra-positis hisce fundamentis concidit error in gradu-triplici. Primus,
decretum Velleitatis, quo determinationem ad conversionis actum, ad quam
necessitate hominem nonposse creditur, desiderare solum fingitur Deus.
Secundus, desideratae illius determinationis praevisio per scientiam mediam,
qua dependentis ab homine. Tertius, ex praevisa determinatione, conditionati
concursus intentio concomitanter in effectum. Et primo Vellcitas illa decretum
non est: hoc enim imperanti^ est exsuppositione potentiae; illa vero purus
voluntatis actus cum potentiae defectu. Si enim quod possum volo, effectum
impero: si quod non possum, desidero; assequi enim non possum quod volo.
Proinde etiam indignum Deo. Nam Omnipotenti potentiae defectum adfingit, and
assequendi voti incertam spem Felicissimo. Quid enim felicitas aliud, nisi boni
expetiti certa fruitio? Quid vero omnipotentia, nisi potentia omnium in
omnibus? Denique, objecti etiam ratione impossible. Primam enim potentiam
transfert in hominem, qui creatura est and (...).

Annot. Ad THIS. X.
1. Exsupra-positis, inquis, hisce fundamentis Concidit error gradu triplici.
Quid video? Fundamenta supra-posita? Certe humi sternatur aedificium necesse
est, mox Cor. 3. 11. Vide. Annot. ad These. 4.
fundamenta concidunt. Cave ne Jesus Christus inter supra-posita fundamenta
subvertatur.

Sed ad rem. Nequen. in vocabulis moramur. Ex supradictis (vis dicere)
fundamentis error triplex concidit; De velleitate, Praevisione per scientiam
mediam, ex praevisa determinatione conditionali concursus intentio
concomitanter in effectum. Laconice satis. Sed quid si nemo mortalium hos
errores, aut eorum aliquem erraverit Sic enunciatum? Velleitatem agnoscet
non-nemo (...) Deo recte ascribi posse, qui tamen eum ad Conversionis actum
necessitare potuisse (absque esset decreto suo in contrarium) inficias non
iverit, velle autem Deum, ordine decretorum stante, aegre concesserit.
Scientiam mediam ex permultis S. Scripturae periodis astruent nonnulli, qui
tamen determinationem (N B.) qua ab homine (solo, aut principaliter
dependentem) rotunde negaverint. Denique vix, aut ne vix quenquam reperias, qui
errore^ tertiu^, prout hic expressum, intelligat, nedum teneat. Conditionatum
quendam concursum quidem Concomitanter in effectum recte explicatum, viz. ut
post Dei gratiam pulsantem Praevenientem, operantem, cum cooperante fi quis
asserat, errare eum ostendendum erat, non praestruendum, ex fundamentis (quid
dico labilibus?) corrutis and coliapsis.

Quid si decretum velleit as non sit? Non est ergo (ut hominum more and ad
captum mortalium loquamur) velleit as? Est quidem vohuntatis actus, non a. (uti
affirmas) in Deo cum potentioe defectu. Voluntas divina a me supponitur
potentiam Omnipotentis quandam habere comitem, and executricem quoties, and
quatenus voluntati ejusdem libet came ex consilio suo exercere, non autem semper
per potentiam Omnipotentioe ubique voluntatem suam exequitur Deus: Praesertim
ubi decretum est (ut formulis tuis utar) imperantis (sc. obedientiam) aut
proerequisitum quid (agnosce phrases tuas) homini, sub praemii and poenae spe,
metuque. Pergis. Si, n. inquis, quod possum volo, effectum impero: Si quod non
possum, desidereo; assequi n. non possum quod volo. Quid mihi and tibi, bone
vir, quid velis aut possis? De Deo loquimur; qui quod vult facit, and quod
velle potest, facere, vel effectum dare potest. Quod vult facit, quatenus, and
quousque facere vult. Quid a. si non semper velit, quousque tu eum velle facere
opinaris? Noli Deum (...) et omnipotentem, tuo modulo metiri. Et tu tamen,
nunquamne experiris voluntatem tuam potentiae tuae non imperare ut ad extremum
virium ubique et semper agat?

Si te causa solitaria res in arbitrio tuo penitus sita agenda fuerit, effectum
dabis: secus, opinor, eveniet, si cum causis sociis, aut instrumentalibus (quae
ab officio cessare, vel te destituere possint, praesertim si hoc ex tuo ipsius
instituto sit ut possint) imperatum sit perducendum in actum. Sed quid tibi
vult effectum Impero? Ambigua locutio, et Anglicismum sapiens, si etiam
intelligatur ut significet (uti hic videtur) finem seu effectum intentum
assequor. Praeterea, si volo, inquis, quod non possum, desidero. Rursus ambigua
dictio. Desidero, si Careo significet; recte: si Cupio; male. Quippe doles,
desperas, irasceris, sie homines solent, quando, quod non possunt, volunt. At
indignum est Deo, et Proinde: Quare Proinde? An quia, quod tu vis et non potes,
desideras? At Deus quodcunque vult, quatenus vult, potest, and facit. At
indignum est Deo: Quare? inquam; quia omnipotenti potentiae, inquis. defectum
adfingit. Minime, inquam, nec Omnipotentis potentiae cujuscunque modi, nedum
omnipotenti potentiae cui resisti nequit. Si quem defectum ad fingeret, hic
esset voluntati ad fingendus non-imperanti, minime a. potentiae, voluntatis (ut
ita dicam) imperata semper facienti, sed secundum voluntatis intentionem, et
imperium, et eorundem mensuram. At ad fingit etiam, inquis, assequendi voti
incertam spem Foelicissimo: Noli timere, bone vir, salva res est. Falli aut
incertus esse, nequit Deus: hoc certo certius scio, etiamsi nec tu, qui
Metaphysica tota imbutus es, modum explicare potis fueris. Nescire velle quae
Magister Optimus Docere non vult, erudita est inscitia. Quod de foelicitate,
and Omnipotentia Philosopharis, praetereo, ne actum agam.

Denique, inquis, objecti ratione est impossible. Quid est hoc impossible?
Quid objecti ratione? Scilicet, opinor, vis, velleitatem (more humano loquor)
quandam esse in Deo, impossible esse. Quare, inquam? Primam, inquis, Potentiam
transfert in hominem, qui creatura est et (...). Quis transfert primam, etc?
Deus? Quid primam, etc. transfert? Hic de velleitate error, opinor. Minime a.
inquam, Ego, sed hominem non negabit, quoad sensum gratiae pulsantis et
Praevenientis esse omnino Passivum, quamvis in consensu (dicam et assensu
interdum?) Esse plerunque a gratia actum, activum. Sed primam potentiam omnes,
certe Christiani in Deum transferunt, eique acceptam ferunt. Facessant, qui
aliter sentiunt.

THESIS XI.
Proinde nec observatur determinatio illa scientioe medioe. Hinc enim idea rei
prius in creatura esset, quam in Deo: cognitionis etiam divinoe principium a re
finita procederet: ipsumque adeo summum bonum, omnipotens, infinitum, purus
actus, dependenter a voluntatis creatoe consilio and providentia moveret.
Quinetiam impossible idem. Quippe fribile est ante scientiam, sicut (...).
Proeest autem, dum proecedit ipsius (...). At nihil est nec exsistit, quod a
Dei voluntate non est nec exsistit. Si proescit igitur priusquam velit,
proescit nihil. At si aliquid esset in homine, quod sine proeeunte voluntate
proesciret; quale est in fieri proesciretur a causa dependens. Causa vero si
non proedeterminetur a Deo, mere contingens est. Hinc incerta vicissim esset
divina cognitio. Quare proescientia non esset, quoe effecti est non
contingentis sed necessarii judicium.

Annot. Ad THESE. XI.
Quamvis mihi nulla necessitas incumbat Scientiam Mediam astruendi, quaedam
tamen non obscura hujusmodi scientiae rerum, ex suppositione circumstantiae
hujus aut illius eventurarum vel secus, vestigia in S. literis apparent. Ut
exemplum mi^tam de Davide in Keilah notissimum, de Chorazin 1 Samuel 23. 12. Mat.
11. 21. Luke 10. v. 3.
etiam et Bethsaid a. Consule, inter alia ejusdem numeri, dicta salvatoris
nostri ad sacerdotes and scribas sciscitantes, Number tu es ille Christus? Dic
nobis: dicentis, si vobis dixero, nequaquam credetis. Et versu sequente, Quod
si etiam interrogavero, Luke 22. v. 67, 68.
nequequam respondebitis mihi, neque absolvetis. En tibi tres eventus non
eventuros ex suppositione etiam ipsius Christi Domini nostri. Caetera mitto.
Frustra ergo a te quaeritur, vel potius supponitur, quid prius sit aut
posterius, frustra etiam, (quod non capis) impossible affirmas. Nec rations a
te productae aliud quid probant, quam quod plurimis S. Scripturae
affirmationibus sole clarioribus oculos obnubis, ut refrageris. Nec minus ideo
Praescientia Dei, eaque certa de effectis natura sua contingentibus esset,
quamvis tibi scientiam divinam ex tua finita and fallaci omnium mortalium
metienti ita videatur. Quid nos scire ex suppositione Possimus, vix ipsi
cognoscimus: quid a. scire possit Deus, vix, ac ne vix; nisi quod omniscium eum
esse, infallibiliter scire possumus, ac debemus.

THESIS XII.
Denique corruit simul ex condition praevisa concursus intentio, quippe quae
tum independenti naturae Dei repugnat, tum vocationis decretum non est, ut
postea declarabimus.

Annot. Ad THESE. XII.
Quia te postea declaraturum, ais, paucula ista, quae de errore tertio dicenda
habuisti, hic istorum examine supersedebimus, Te illic praestolaturi.

At at talia cogitanti mihi jam subolet (dum sequentia perfunctorie lustro)
quamobrem hae Theses totae sc. gemmeae, et hoc solo nomine redarguendae (si
Praefatori Credimus) Latin etiamnum prostent, necdum vernaculam calleant:
nemo, opinor, apt, et ad mortalium captum, Anglico redderet, aut redditas
intelligeret. Lectorem haud facile invenissent, quae jam a nonnemine, nescio
quo, eruditionis laudem captante, immane quantum! allaudantur. Quid ais Cl.
Praesator, Istaene eaedem Theses cum Amesianis Tractatulis, idque saepius
Compingebantur? Quam nollem Credere virum istum tam gravem, tot, tantaque,
tamdiu (a Patria exulem an Profugum) perpessum, ob solam S. literarum (uti prae
se tulit) Confessionem and defensionem, has Metaphysicas, aerias, a S. Spiritus
stylo penitus abhorrentes Theses cum suis ipsius Operibus quicquam commercii
habere permissurum. Verum sic usu venit, ut hujusmodi Scripta se in celebris
alicujus Doctoris clientelam recipiant, cujus ut splendore cohonestentur, est
votorum summa.

Me quod attinet, potui hoc trihorium non sic perdere; nec libet cum
juvenilibus his an anilibus larvis luctari, non tam quod difficiles esse nugas
duxerim, quam quod inutiles et viris gravibus indignas. Praetereo, quod
supervacaneum prorsus fuerit in superstructis gemmis diutius immorari, quarum
fundamenta Supra-posita Corruisse jam vidimus. Hoc interim sancte spondeo, me
totum in veritatis, fideique obedientiam (Deo been juvante) libentissime
transiturum; eumque me esse profiteor, qui ex his Thesibus, aut alicunde,
veritatem secundum pietatem docenti, cumprimis herbam porrigam.

Restat, ut apud Deum Opt. Max. supplicibus votis contendam, ut ne porro
gliscat inter Christiani nominis professores, de vocabulorum minutiis, qualis
hodieque regnat contentio. Tacete o Parkere, Twissi, caeterique
Metaphysico-verbi-potentes Logodaedali, ut audiaretur Jesus noster in aeternum
benedictus, et a S. Spiritu acti Prophetae, Evangelistae et Apostoli. Ille ex
aeterni Patris sinu ab intima inibi secretorum intuitione Prodiit: Hi ab eo,
quicquid apud Patrem viderat et audiverat didicerunt, cumque Ecclesia, qua
Sermon, qua Scripto communicarunt, integrum Dei de nobis Consilium secundum
beneplacitum; [Act. 20. 27. Ephesians. 1. 9.] omne voluntatis suae circa salutem
humanam mysterium, etiam secundum propositum. Hoc de uno S. Paulo, quiutrobique
ad Ephesios verba facit, in sacris literis affirmatur. Quid attinet reliquos
spiritus sancti Amanuenses commemorare.

Denique rationum momenta artificialium, et Testimonia humana, si hic adsint,
non respuo, si absint, non defidero: decidi a. quae de hominum salute et
interitu lites incidunt, ex S. praesertim literis, nominatim Evangelio, et
posse et debere, hoc est quod contendo. Vale, mi Parkere, et vivere malimus
quam disputare, aut saltem S. Scripturis magis quam futilibus cerebri nostri
argutiis rixisque muliebribus, amice colloquamur.

Raptim.
Soli Deo Gloria.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D. and printed for R. Royston.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by H.
Hammond, D. D. in fol. The Second Edition now in the Press.

2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises in two volumes in
4.

3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and
Primava Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum, in
4.

4. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries, in 12.

5. Of Schism. A desence of the Church of England against the exceptions of
the Romanists, in 12.

6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, in 12.

7. Paraenesis or seasonable exhortatory to all true sons of the Church of
England, in 10.

8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published of late, most of
them in defense of the Church of England, Now put together in three Volumes.
Newly published, in 4.

9. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books of the
New Testament, with some Additions and alterations, in 8.

Books and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor, D. D. and printed for R. Royston,
viz.
(...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundays of the Year; together with a
discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, Sacredness and Separation of
the Office Ministerial, in fol.

2. The History of the Life and Death of the Everblessed Jesus Christ, third
Edition in fol.

3. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

5. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12.

6. The Doctrine and Practice of Repentance rescued from popular Errors, in a
large 8. Newly published.

7. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol.

7. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. New.

Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce, Rector of Brington. And Printed for R.
Royston.
1. A Correct Copy of some Notes concerning Gods Decrees, especially of
Reprobation. The 2. Edition with some Additionals. in 4.

2. The Divine Philanthropie defended, in answer to Mr. Barlee. in 4.

3. The Divine Purity desended in answer to Dr. Reynolds. in 4. new.

4. The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great
discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receives from Sin it self.

A Collection of Offices or Forms of Prayer in Cases ordinary and
extraordinary, taken out of the Scriptures, and the Ancient Liturgies of
several Churches, especially the Greek; in large 8. new.


