FIVE SERMONS, IN Five several Styles; OR Ways of Preaching.

The First in Bp ANDREWS his Way; before the late King upon the first day of
Lent.

The Second in Bp HALL'S Way; before the Clergy at the Author's own Ordination
in Christ-Church, Oxford.

The Third in Dr MAINE'S and Mr CARTWRIGHT'S Way; before the Universitie at St
Mary's, Oxford.

The Fourth in the PRESBYTERIAN Way; before the City at Saint Paul's, London.

The Fifth in the INDEPENDENT Way; never preached.

With an Epistle rendering an Account of the Author's Design in Printing these
his Sermons, as also of the Sermons themselves.

By AB. WRIGHT, sometimes Fellow of St John Baptist Coll. in Oxford.

1 Cor. 9. 22. I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some.

Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1656.

TO THE Christian Reader.
SIR,
IT is that Man I mean, whose life speaks the same Creed with his mouth, and
whose Actions are the Christian; and not your Chemical Professor of Religion,
that has been twice Dipped, yet never Baptized; whose deeds of darkness
Eclipse his New Lights; or rather whose very Lights are a cloud to conceal that
darkness, which is daily masked, and veiled, and foiled off to the world even
with Light it self. Being therefore such a Christian, as I suppose thee, you
are to know something as to the Design of printing these Sermons, and
something also as to the Sermons themselves.

And first for my Design, I hope thou will not put any such vainglorious
thoughts upon me, nor uncharitable upon thy self, as to say it was to appear in
Print; a most ridiculous piece of Fopperie, especially in this Age, and this
Way too, (the Way of Preaching): which I do acknowledge (as it is generally used
in this Nation) to be the lowest part of a Scholar, (if indeed it be any part
at all) and that it is much harder to teach to Spell, according to the right
rules of Spelling, then to make every day of the week a sermon, as sermons are
usually now made. Much less, Reader, would I have thee censure my Design here
to be guilty of that unpardonable ambition, as to make thee believe I were able
to pen either like that incomparable Pair of Bishops, or the other incomparable
Pair of Students, who were the Prime Masters of this Nation in their several
Ways of Preaching. The chief thing then that I drive at in printing these
sermons, is to show the difference betwixt Universitie and Citie-breeding up of
Preachers; and to let the people know, that any one that has been bred a
Scholar is able to preach any way to the capacity and content of any
Auditorie: And secondly that none can do this but they only that have had such
Education. For truly as to those so much talked of now-adaies extraordinary
Inspirations, this Age is so excessively sinful, and notoriously wicked,
beyond the days of our Forefathers, that I cannot see that man that is any
ways fit for such Revelations. And therefore upon this account there will
appear to be a very great conveniencie, if not necessity of Humane Learning;
especially forasmuch as it is too clear and evident since these Times, that all
men will not be brought by the same way of preaching to heaven: some are well
satisfied with the plain easy way of Doctrine and Use; others are not taken
with any sermon, but what is filled with depth of Matter, height of Fancy, and
good Language. And therefore I think it were not an ill wish for the Church of
England, if all her Preachers were Scholars likewise, able to deliver
themselves upon any occasion, any way, to take every ear, and prevail upon
every mind and fancy. So should I see an English Clergie-man to equal at the
least the Jesuit or Capuchine, who by his exact skill in the Arts and Oratorie
can command a confused Rabble (met to see an Interlude, or Mountebank) from
their sport to a sermon, and change the Theater into a Church; having a greater
power over the passions of their Auditorie, then the Actor has upon the Stage;
being able to turn even the Player himself into a Monk, and the Mimical Jester
into a religious Votarie. By this time (Christian friend) I hope thou see
that my design in making these few sheets public, was not in any
vainglorious way for thy applause, but instruction only, to teach thee the
necessity of that known distinction between a Scholar and a Preacher. Not that
I assume to my self the first, no more then I dare the Learning of any of those
whom I have here proposed to thy imitation; but to show thee what a Scholar may
do more then a mere Preacher, and that there is a vaste difference betwixt
Shop-board-breeding and the Universities; the preaching of the one being hardly
learned under a double Apprenticeship, whereas the other Knack may be compassed
far sooner then the easiest Trade, a truth which these Times have abundantly
cleared: and this I look upon as a just judment upon some Predicants in this
Nation, who held the people in hand they were the only deserving Churchmen
among us, because somewhat more forward then the rest of their Brethren in a
popular way of preaching; when now a company of Cloaks, scarce free of the
City, have yet made themselves free of the Pulpit, and have outdone those
other Predicants even in their own way both of Praying and Preaching. And truly
were it not for the ill example in the Church of God, and those bad
cousequences that might follow upon such an example, I would teach my very
Barber, and Shoemaker, and Tailor the Preaching-trade; that so the Common
people should see how slight, and easy, and contemptible a thing it is to be a
Preacher, as Preachers are now adays; and that their God-amighties of the
Pulpit, which for these late years they have so much adored, are of no higher
Gifts* nor of a more divine Mission, then what may proceed from a Thimble, a
Shuttle, or a Last. And therefore say I (were it not for the scandal) I would
teach my Mechanic Relations to preach: by which Act though ('it is confessed) I
should appear no good Churchman, yet herein I should perchance show my self no
bad Commonwealths man: forasmuch as there is no way left under heaven to
undeceive the people, and take them off from their superstitious idolizing this
kind of Preaching, but this. For when they shall clearly see, that any one of
any Trade, and he too sometimes very deboist and vicious, can serve the turn of
the Pulpit, they will then begin also to know, that it is not Gi^ts, but
impudence, not the Spirit of God, but a frontlesse ignorance that calls out
these men to Humor, and in humoring to divide and confound the people. And this
the Jesuit knows full well, and accordingly does make this use of it at this
day in this Nation. Which sad truth as often as I seriously think upon, I am
instantly brought upon my knees, and to my prayers, for God's mercy and
forgiveness of our Pulpit-sins; in that we have prayed and preached the
Doctrine and Discipline of three flourishing Nations into complicated Heresies
and Confusion, and this too mingled with the blood of near upon an hundred
thousand Protestant Christians (so much is the number of the Church of Romes
Adversaries lessened since the year 1640). I would to God that all such of my
own Coat, whom this concerns, would but cordially think upon it; and know for
certain, that though their bonus Genius the conscience of these Acts has fled
them now, iterum tamen Philippis, yet it will meet them again with horror upon
their death*beds. I speak not this in malice or revenge; as if any of those men
had robbed me of a Living, or Churchpreferment; but merely out of a deep
Christian sense of that common calamity which they have brought upon the three
Nations, and that fearful judgment which will fall upon themselves, being
already begun in a contempt of their Praying and Preaching-trade, by those that
have out-praied and out-preach'd them even from the Shop and Stall; and will
end upon their Persons and Families in such a way, as I tremble even to think
o^. And let this suffice (Christian Reader) for the reason of my Design in
publishing these Sermons.

As for the Sermons themselves be pleased to take notice, that not so much the
Doctrine, (though that also will not be disliked by peaceable sober-minded
Christians) as the Style and manner of them is offered to thy view. And here I
shall not make any comparison between the several Styles, nor determine which
Way is best, because I will not prejudice the sincere conscientious endeavors
of any, that with an upright, unbiased spirit labor in God's vineyard; but
shall in my daily prayers desire Gods daily blessing upon them. But then also
for the Doctrine of these Sermons in general (however particular Judgments may
like or dislike of some particular doctrines: For as I do not expect that those
of the Episcopal persuasion should allow of every expression in the last, so
neither do I look that those of the contrary judgment will approve of every
period in the first Sermon) You are to know further, that this Tract is so far
for these Times, as these Times are preaching times, and this Tract a preaching
Tract: and yet in this agreement there is a vaste difference. For this Pulpit
age has so much of the New light, as it has almost none of the Old day of the
Gospel; but the Tract before you discovers this day to you without that Light.
Again, the present Times have preached Congregations into Armies, and Churches
into Garrisons; making the Pulpit a Magazine or storehouse for the War, and
the Minister both the old Trumpet of the Law, and the new Drum of the Gospel;
whose Sermons are the great Artillery, made use of not so much to beat down
vice as Cities, and men; so that what heretofore was spoken of the true
Prophets, may now be applied to these False ones without a figure, The chariots
of Israel and the horsemen thereof. But, Sir, in these peaceable Sermons you
shall meet with no armor but that of Gods, no strong holds taken and sacked
unless those of hell. The lines here speak not Petars and Granado's; nor are
the Doctrines delivered in a whirlewinde or tempest, but in a soft still voice;
and answerable are the Applications, for meekness, and peace, and brotherly
love, and not under pretense of cursing Meroz to murder Christians. You have
here indeed many of the Primitive Doctors of the Church drawn up like so many
Commanders (as it were) into an Army, yet not one of that long robe did change
his Miter for an Helmet, nor his Crosier for a Sword. I do not find in
Ecclesiastical story, that old Anselme did ever command a troop of horse, or
Nazianzene a regiment of foot; neither do I meet with among the Records of the
Church for 1500 years together, that, though the Ministers of the Gospel were
back and breast proof, they were ever clad in Armor; never did they preach or
pray in Buffe (and yet even those naked prayers of theirs could subdue heaven
it self) never as I read of did those Primitive Saints gather their People into
Regiments, nor the Catholic Church into a Catholic Army; and yet that Church
was an Army too, and that Army had its weapons, and its war, but both
spiritual. The breathings of the Holy Ghost, though sometimes they might come
as a mighty rushing wind, that filled both houses and hearts likewise; yet
never did that wind blow down the one into ruin, nor the other into despair;
and if at any time that wind was cleft into Tongues of fire, those tongues
were only to warm and enlighten, not to burn down and consume Cities.

You are also taught from these leaves, that Secular Learning is not so
heathenish but it may be made Christian. Plato, and Socrates, and Seneca were
not of such a reprobate sense, as to stand wholly Excommunicate. The same man
may be both a Poet and a Prophet, a Philosopher and an Apostle. Virgil's fancy
was as high as the Magi's Star, and might lead Wisemen in the West as clearly
to their Savior, as that Light did those Eastern Sages. And so likewise
Seneca's Positions may become Saint Paul's text; Aristotle's Metaphysics
convince an Atheist of a God, and his Demonstrations prove Shiloes Advent to a
Jew. That great Apostle of the Gentil es had never converted those Nations
without the help of their own Learning. It was the Gentiles Oratorie, yet ^ot
without the Holy Ghost's Rhetoric, that did almost persuade Agrippa to be a
Christian; and it was the Gentiles Poetry, but not without a Dietie in the
Verse, that taught the Athenians to know an unknown God. By which you see it is
possible that Gamaliel's feet may be a step to an Apostleship; and that there
is no such necessary relation betwixt the Stall and the Pulpit, but that gifted
men may proceed from either of the Universities, as well as from the Shuttle,
or the Last. And I do believe that within these very few years, when the Vail
and Vizard of these Times shall be laid aside, all our New lights, and gifts,
and inspirations, will appear to the world to have a greater mystery in them
then that of a Trade; to be forged in no Shop but a Study, and by no
handicraft Company or Corporation, but a Society and a College. And remember
you were told this sad truth by him who foretold it twelve years since in his
private discourse; and now (as if the Transactions of these days had turned
that prophecy into story) dares publish it to this credulous abused Age as an
experimented truth, which notwithstanding is still contradicted by the Prayers,
though it cannot be by the Reason of,

SIR, Your Christian friend

THE First Sermon, Which is that in Bp ANDREWS His Style, or Way of Preaching;
Delivered before the late King upon ( Ashwednesday) the first day of LENT.

ISAIAH 58. 6. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that you break every yoke?

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, Anno
Dom. 1656.

MAT. 9. VER. 15. And then shall they fast.
THe words going before are these: Then came to him the disciples of John,
saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not? And
Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the bride-chamber mourn, as long as
the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom shall
be taken from them, and tunc jejunabunt, And then shall they fast.

AS it is now the unhappiness of these times, just so was it of the Primitive,
not to please all, either full or fasting, neither with their Festivals, nor
their Eves. For our Savior came eating and drinking, and the Pharisees had an
[ Ecce] for him; Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-biber. A glutton
perchance, for his great feast made to the 4000; and a winebiber no doubt, for
that marriage-miracle of Cana in Galile^, the turning of the six water-p^ts
into wine, a great quantity indeed, when each contained two or three ferkins a
piece. Again, the Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, says the the same
text, and yet according to the 10 ver. of 69 P.s. even that was turned to his
reproach: for they said he had a devil; a strange devil certainly, not unlikely
to be of the same kind our Savior mentioned, Matthew. 18. that could not be
cast out but by fasting. But John must be content: for if they call the master
of the house Beelzebub, well may it be endured by those of the family; and i^
Christ, who fasted forty days, be brought in for a glutton, I see not how
his Apostles, men that could not abstein nibling corn on the Sabbath, should
escape the disciples of John for not fasting. The disciples of John? What, did
the Voice contadict the Word? were the Baptist followers against the Saviors?
did John that came to prepare the way of Christ make it more crooked and
uneven? No certainly: for this was done instigan^thus Pharisaeis, says
Maldonete, the Pharisees putting them upon it; a sort of people that had their
very name from division, which in this place they make good, drawing the
disciples of John into their party, and so siding against Christ: A^^rick much
practiced by the Pharise^s of these d^ies, who the better to color their own
hypocrilie, and increase the faction, abuse the honest simplicity of
well-affected men; setting some conscientiou^, plain-meaning disciples a work
to ask questions, and move such doubts in Church and State, as they themselves
have long before resolved upon. This Quaere then came not from the disciples of
John, as their own proper doubt, but these being wrought over by the Pharisees,
came to Christ, and said, Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy
disciples fast not, etc.

These words are a precept, or command: in which, may it please you to observe,
first the Substance or main business of it in the word Fast, jejunabunt, they
shall fast; next the Circumstance, or time measuring this Fast, implied in the
Adverb [then] and tunc jejunabunt, and [then] shall they fast. Now from this
Precept arise two questions, one about jejunabunt, whether we will fast at
all; and we may very well make a question of it, for you know there are certain
in the world who have been enjoined by Authority to Fast, yea and to Feast
too, but they will do neither. The other question is about the [ tunc], the time
when these men will fast; and I fear this question will be answered by them in
Felix his words to S. Paul; Not now, but when we have a convenient season, we
will send for this tunc: and Felix his convenient season never came as I
reados; when theirs will be voted and resolved upon, they know themselves best,
I have not yet found it to sal upon the last Wednesday of any month. Well! but
get us a Fast first, and then a time after; and this to do will be no easy
task; most of them being like the Israelites in the wilderness, when once they
begin to fast, they begin to murmr; to murmr I say, not at the act alone,
but the very name and mention of Fasting, at the bare reading of a text that
does but look toward an Ember-week: but and if that text be a commanding one,
if Authority comes along with it, Authority said I? nay then so much the worse
for that; for if it have a jejunabunt, they shall fast in it; why then,
forsooth, they will fast; yes they will fast, but it shall be that fast in the
58 of Is^ a fast for strife and debate, a fast from all love feasts you may be
sure. How these men can answer my text I know not, sure I am Expositors give it
up for a main precept of fasting, and by such an one enjoined, who could
command a Fast to the Sea and Grave, two great devourers, and both should
abstein, the one from a Peter, the other from a Lazarus. A precept then
perchance they will grant it, but by whom to be obeyed: tunc jejunabunt then
they shall fast, they, Christ's disciples dead long since, and their. Fast with
them; this belongs not to us, they will cry; and they say true, if they are not
of Christ's disciples For if they be of the number of these they in my text,
they must be the Nominative case to this Verb, agree with this jejunabunt, they
shall fast with Christ disciples here, or not feast with them hereafter. And so
much for the Tense shall, next for the Verb Fast, and about this I told you
there was a question: Now that all questions may be fully understood, it is
necessary the terms should be fore known, an sint, and quid sint* whether there
be any such things or no, and what those things be; the same method must we
observe about our term of fast, adding withal the cur sit, the ground and
reasons of fasting: First then let us enquire alter the an sit, whether there
has been such a thing in the world as Fasting, and that there has, I could
bring down, if I so pleased, as others have done in lesser cases, from the very
beginning of the world. Nam a principio fuit sic, it was so even in Paradise,
and the first precept God gave our forefathers after their Creation was that
in Genesis, Ye shall not eat of the tree of good and evil, not eat, that is
fast. And surely had their meat and drink been to have done the will of him
that sent them, that other place of Scripture had not followed, Meat for the
belly, and the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both it and them, there
had been no destroying, nor cutting off from eating now. Thus was it before the
Law, and no otherwise under it: for you shall find Moses commanding the
children of Israel, and that twice in one book, to keep a strict fast every
year on the tenth day of the seventh month: and a strict Fast it was, even like
unto that in Paradise, In the day thereof that he eats, the party must die the
death, Levit. 16. Now more then this one day, though we read not that Moses
ordained, yet Prophet Zechary in his 8 Chap. has his Fast of the fourth, his
Fast of the fifth, and his Fast of the tenth month; and not only Prophet
Zechary, but Prophet Elias, and Prophet Daniel may be brought in for fasters,
this last for his three full weeks of abstinence, Eliah for his 40 days; for
which act alone he might very well be interpreted by Christ of John the
Baptist, they both being our Saviors forerunners, John in his Doctrine, Eliah
in his Fast. Now for the quid sit, what fasting is; all that I have met with,
define it to be, An abstinence from meat and drink, joined with an inward grief
and sorrow of heart: which last part is made good from the very text: Our
Savior was asked, Why fast not thy disciples? and he said, Can the children of
the Bride-chamber mourn. The question was of Fasting, and his answer of
Mourning; as if fasting and mourning had been all one: and that this outward
fast of the body is an abstinence from all natural food clearly appears out of
Esthers 3 days fast, a long Lent for a Queen. Now least any should say we are
the children of grace, as little bound to your old Testament Fasts as your old
Testament meats, let such but turn over their Bibles, and they shall meet one
bringing both Ashwednesday and Lent home to them in the Gospel, I mean the
Baptist coming with his leathern girdle, and garment of Camels hair, a habit
very well agreeing with the humiliation of this day, as also neither eating nor
drinking, says the text, an abstinence ^it for the following forty. Fasting
then, is a withholding of meat and drink even under the Gospel. But now non
omnes capium sormo^^m h^nc, all are not capable of this precept, and therefore
our indulgent mother the Church, that none might compl^ine of wrong do^e to
Christian liberty, or the weak stomach of any weak brother, remits all she can
of this rigor, and enjoins not for a fast either that of, Esthers or this of
John's, and yet qui porest capere cap^at, he that can fast so, let him fast a
Gods name; but if he must needs eat, then let him sit down with Daniel, and
fall to his pulse: our Church forbidbing only that pan^m desider abile^, the
pleasant bread there mentioned, your Lents of sweetmeats, and E^ber-weeks of
preservs, all high-feeding dishes, and in parler flesh; and yet even this also
does our Church allow to such as are in Timothies case, that have their (...)
often infirmities, and to them is permitted flesh and wine, but it must be
(...), as it is there in Timothy, a little to suffice nature: it is not the
^illing of our selves, but our lusts, no de^ay of nature, but chastisement of
sin that she aims at; and therefore forbids all die^ nourishing blood with
blood, not through a ^uperstitious abstinence, as it she did judaize in
consecrating mea^s, and placing more holiness in one dish then another, but
only that by the waterish and flaccid diet of fish, and so unapt for
nourishmen^, we might keep our bodies low, but our souls high, the flesh in
subjection to the spirit, and the appe^i^^ to the mind, hungring and thirsting
after righteousness, and lusting no more after fleshpots and onions, but
Mannah; which brings me to my third Quaere, the cur sit, the reasons why we
should fast, and tunc jejunabunt, and then shall they fast. Though according to
our Church Homily the civil respects of the Commonwealth may require a fa^t,
the narrow ^eas and shambles exact their Ember-weeks and Lents to increase the
breed of cattle, and maintein certain fish-trades; yet according to the
Scriptures intent and the Churches, we must sanctify a fast, prescribe these
forty days to a religious end, to bridle and keep in the lusts of the flesh,
so to prevent sins to come, and punish our selves for those already past. And
this last S. Paul calls (...) an holy chastising and afflicting himself for
that thorn in his flesh, which forced him to his watchings often, and his
fastings often, to his castigo corpus meum to correct the outward man, and
bring his body under the lash; and certainly to be abridged of that which
otherwise we might freely use, has in it the nature of a punishment, they are
the very words of the Psalmist, I wept and chastned my self with fasting:
chastned himself, a chastisement then it it is. And as it punishes for sin
past, so it prevents also for sins to com: and this was Christ's time of fasting
before temptation, who fasted to so good purpose, that the Tempter, like the
Pharisees, from that day forward never durst ask him any more questions, but
this only, What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth; there was no
meddling, no doing with him after his fasting. Now Christ abstein'd thus, not
for himself, for the Devil could not have prevailed had he not fasted; there
were no faulty desires of the flesh to be tamed, no possibility of a freer
and more easy assent and compliance of his soul with God, who was already
perfectly united to the Deity: But as for us he would suffer death, so for us
he would suffer hunger, that first as our Savior, this last as our example,
pointing us that had need (for he had none) the best way to encounter the evil
spirit of concupiscence, which is not cast out, no not kept out neither but by
fasting. Saturitas ventris semin^rium libidinis, a ^ul^ belly and a foul heart
scarce go uncoupled: for indeed how should they per membr^rum ordinem (says S.
August. in his 65 de tempore) ordo vitiorum intelligitur, as in the Anatomy of
our bodies the parts of gluttony and lust are linked together, so are the sins
themselves. And therefore the Apostle ioynes them, rioting and drunkenness,
chambering and wantonness; first rioting, and then wantonness, that leads on
this, and not only this, but a whole troop of rebellious actions, security,
disobedience, idolatry. Thus when the fools barns in the gospel were filled
with corn, there was no thought of God the benefactor, all the care was about
(...), soul take thy case, eat, drink and bemerry. And indeed this eating quite
takes away our stomach from all holy duties. I need not tell you of Adams
surfeit, the Isralites in their paradise of Canaan fell to eating 100, and by
eating fell, as he did, from their God; and this the Lord foretold them in the
31. of Deuteronomie: when says he I shall have brought Israel into the land
that flows with milk and honey, and they shall have eaten and filled
themselves, then will they turn unto other gods, then, and not till then: and
just so they did, for in the very next Chap. at the 15 ver: you have Jeshurun
(which is Jsraell) waxed fatt, and kicking; and then says the text, he
forsook God which made him. Another end of fasting is to elevate the soul, and
put her upon the wing of holy contemplation and prayer; for it stands with
reason, that so long as she is conversant in the kitchen, so long as her
spirits and faculties are spent in dispersing vapors and exhalations of meats,
she her self must needs be l^sse apt and free for heavenly emploiment. Full
bellies are fittest for ^est, and not the body, so much as the soul, is most
active with emtinesse: for this reason fasting and prayer go together in
Scripture, and as in Scripture, so in our Churches practice, solemn prayer
almost ever takes fasting to att^nd it. A third reason of fasting is, to
^estify our repentance by our penance, the prostration of our souls by the
humiliation of our bodies; and thus did the primitive times, by their course
diet and clothing, present their unworrhinesse of the benefits of this life,
and by casting ashes on their heads, speak themselves but dust, altogether
deserving to be as far underneath the earth, as they were above it; and this
repentance Christ implied to be the most real and unfeigned of all others,
when he told the Jews, That had the mighty works been done in Tire and Sid^n
which were done amongst them they would have repented; and is that all? no,
they would have repented sitting in sackcloth and ashes, their very clothes
and hair had done penance. For true repentance is not a bare turning to God,
but turning with fasting: they are Gods own words, Turn to me with fasting,
weeping and mourning. The belly must grieve and sympathize with the heart, and
the eye be as contrite as the mind. Repentance then must together with fasting
under the Law in Leviticus it was so, their solemn repentance was ever at the
time of their general fast: and they which had not the law (as Nineve^) nature
it self taught them to take this Physic, as we use all other, fasting; and
fasting we must take it, if we would have it work kindly. Nay Saint Basil in
his first dejejunto, says, it works not at all upon a full stomach: (...)
repentance without fasting is idle, (...) merely idle, without any stirring any
moving the ill humors atall. The meaning is according to S. James; As faith
without works, so repentance without fasting is little better then dead: and
again, As faith without works so fasting too without works is dead: and this is
another end of our fasts, the exercise of our charity and alms. To keep a fast
for a nation and relieve it not, is but to repeat that Sarcasme in the 2d of S.
James, Depart in peace, when they are already destroyed by war; warm your
selves and fill your bellies, without fire or meat. Could we everimagine how
our devotion should rout an enemy, or our fasts raise a siege? Joshua must
sight against Amalek as well as Moses pray; it were well then if they would
order it, that our hands may be lifted up no less then our votes and prayers,
and our Chests lie as open as our Churchdoors. For this is to fast says God by
his Prophet Isaiah, To deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor to thy
house; Israel was not chid for eating, but laying up of their Mannah; and
therefore says a Father, Ita jejuna ut alio manducante prandisse te gaude as,
so fast, that the poor may fare the better for it; let thy Eves be their
Festivals, thy Lent their Easter. And now we have got a fast for our time, let
us see whether we can find a time for our fast, a tunc for our jejunabant,
which is my last part to be handled, the circumstance or time of this fast,
implied in the Adverb then, And then they shall fast; and then. Allowing the
thing, we cannot choose but allow it a time, for there is a time for every thing
under the Sun: a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a
time to dance (says the preacher) to dance when the Bridegroom is with us, to
sit down and mourn when he is taken away, when the marriage feast is at an
end; and this is that then in my text, then shall they fast; that is, when the
Bridegroom is taken away; and the Bridegroom is taken away, says our Church
Homily, when we are cast down with sickness, grief of mind, or the like. As
for sickness it is a plain case that takes away the stomach quite, and the time
of grief is a time of fasting too. Thus Hannah when she was upbraided by her
adversary, wept: and how then? and did not eat says the 1 of Sam. 1. 7. nor
drink neither, I believe, unless her tears. So Ahab also when he could not
obtein the Vineyard, mourned: I, that is granted you will say; for it is wine that
makes glad the heart of man, and Naboth denied that; mourned? yes and fasted
says the text, no meat would down with him he was so vexed. And so it is here,
while Christ was with the Apostles, they could not grieve, for they had the
fullness of joy; but when that fullness of joy was to be taken away, then they
shall mourn, and tunc jejunabunt and then they shall fast, mourn and fast all
one in the text. Another time of Fasting is the time of danger; for when men
are in jeopardy, what pleasure can they take in meat; knowing not how soon they
may eat their last. When the children of Israel saw the Egyptians, at their
heels, they had no time then to think of their fleshpots and onyons. And this
then, this time of fasting is the most usual in all the Scripture; if a
plague, famine or Rabshekah be feared, sanctify a fast in all have, put on
sackcloath, send for the Arc. And thus was it with the Apostles, Christ was
their rock and sure tower of defense from all danger, and the fear of it: but
when this rock was removed, when Christ was once taken away, then they were at
St Paul's quotidie morimur, every hour in danger to be drawn to the stake, and
tunc jeiunabant, and then they did fast. Now if for the effect of sin we fast,
for the cause for sin it self much more: and this then, this time of fasting
for our sins, should we duly observe, our tunc would be nunc, our then
would be now, and as now ita nunc and semper and in secula, so both now and for
ever; for should we live always, we should sin always, and so fast
always. But this because we cannot, nay, were it possible we could, I
believe we would not; for were we left to our selves, our then would be then
when we list, and if we list and not else; I say therefore cause we neither
can fast always, neither will fast of our selves scarce at any time; the
primitive Church thought it fit to enjoin the people their set there; their
solemn days of fasting, which are these forty days now at hand, and the
wednesdays and fridaies of every week, and tunc jejunabant, and then says the
Church, they shall fast. And this is the Churches then; the Churches? yes and
the Scriptures then too; some of these days, if not all, coming under the
jurisdiction of this then in the text; for as for the wednesday and friday in
that magna and sancta hebdomada, that great and holy week, as the Fathers call
it, the Passion-week, the week next before Easter, it is confessed on every
side the bridegroom was taken from them; for on wednesday counsel was taken
against him, money was taken for him, and then (...), says the Evangelist, he
was taken, as good as taken away then; but upon the friday following, as we all
know, he was taken, and taken away quite; and therefore then in a more especial
manner they did fast: and not only then, in the Passion-week, but then on
those days (at least one of those days, the friday) ever after. For this then
must be interpreted of the whole time after the taking away of the bridegrooms
bodily presence; tum, tamdiu; then all that time and course of years till his
second coming. Now for this time of Lent something may be said to bring it near
the text: as that then when we fast for the Bridegroom, we should fast with the
Bridegroom (as he did) forty days; thus applying that precept of our Savior
(that we shall fast) to his own example, how we should fast. And this example
both the Apostles after Christ, and the Church after the Apostles have strictly
followed: whose intent it ever was in the celebration of these her holy
Solemnities, not only to inform us in the mysteries commemorated, but also,
and that chiefly, to conform us thereby unto him who is our head, and the
substance of all our rites and customs. Let us therefore who profess our selves
members of the Church, be like affected with the same Church in this holy
exercise of Fasting and Penance, the only way to render us conformable to our
great example in his sufferings. For repentance is the agony, the bloody
sweat, the cross of every Christian: whereby he dies unto sin, and is
crucified with his Savior. Each circumstance then of Christ's Passion, each
bloody Scene in this Tragedy must be re-acted on our own bodies; which are to
be spread upon the cross, as the Prophet was on the dead child, in answerable
extention to ^ll parts. First then the remembran^e o^ o^r sins, and holy cares
for a better life must be the thorns, and when our ill thoughts are mortified,
then is our head crowned with them. Severe Christian rigor is the gall and
vinegar; and when by an holy abstinence we came our wanton and rebellious
flesh, then drink we the bitter cup. Restraint from wonted courses of sin is
the hammer and nails, and the curbing of licentious actions is the striking
through our hands and our feet. In a word, deep remorse is the fatal spear, and
when the lifeblood of our reigning corruptions is let out, then are our hearts
pearc'd, and we crucified with our Savior. Which if we endeavor to be; the
same blessing shall be pronounced from Christ to us, which was from Christ to
his Disciples, Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh; blessed are
ye that hunger now, for you shall be satisfied, and that with an everlasting
Passover, the Lamb of God at the great Easter day, the day of the general
^^esurrection, and tunc non jejuntibunt, and then there shall be no mourning
nor fasting any more, but perpetual Halelujahs, and fullness of joy for ever:
of which fullness God of his infinite mercy make us all partakers. To which
God, etc.

FINIS.
THE Second Sermon, Which is that in Bp HALL'S Style, or Way of Preaching;
Delivered before the Clergy, at the AUTHORS own Ordination, in Christ-Church
Oxford.

1 TIMOTHY 4. 16. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine: continue in
them: for in doing this thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, Anno
Dom. 1656.

DEUTERONOMY. 33. VER. 8. the former part. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and
thine Vrim be with thy holy One.
AFter the sufferance of a forty years wildernesse-journey, and the more
rugged ways of a perverse people, now was Moses drawing to his long home. He
had brought the Israelites within sight of their long-look'd for inheritance,
but himself must enjoy the beatifical vision, and that Jerusalem whereof the
promised was but a type. The governors of God's Church would be thought but
poorly rewarded, were their wages only the milk and honey of a temporal
Canaan. He that sends them to dress his Vineyard is pleased to stand indebted
for a better penny then this earth is master of. To receive this, our Prophet
must ascend Mount Nebo, and die. And here since God had so well provided for
Moses, Moses will do his best for God's people; being not satisfied with his
own happiness, unless his charge may prosper; nor content to have been their
convoy all his life, except he might direct the way at his death also. It Is a
clear Sunset that commends the day, and the chief grace of the Theater is a
good com off: wherefore our Prophet reservs his best Scene for the last Act,
and in in the evening of his life shines most gloriously; breaking forth upon
the Tribes with a double ray of counsel and blessing. Counsel in the former
Chap. Set your hearts to do all the words of the Law, etc. How divine a care it
is while we are on earth to improve others for heaven, and after the assurance
of our own eternity, to help our brother to the same happiness. But counsel
is little worth, unless a blessing follow it; as that Sermon is unedifying
that is not seconded with a benediction. Now this is given in the Chap^* of my
text; so fit withal and pertinent to the Tribes, that each had a blessing
proper to its self. For of Reuben it is said, Let not his men be few; of
Benjamin, that he was the beloved of the Lord. Thus still the retinue, the
servants are entailed upon the firstborn, but the last is heir to his parent's
love, that is the young master, this the darling. All but Levi were for
temporal ends, and their legacies are answerable: Moses gives them as much as
they cared for. Zebulun and Issachar shall be filled with the treasures of sea
and land, and that is enough to stop their mouths. Benjamin shall be blessed with
repose and security, and he will gladly sit down with that. Lastly surround
Judah with a spacious crown, and large territories, you set him upon the
highest pinnacle of his ambition. But now it is not wealth, nor ease, no nor
honor that best suits with the Ephod: all worldy blessings are jewels of too
low a price, too faint a blaze and luster to be set there; And therefore of
Levi he said, etc.

The text conteins the Levites portion, and may be divided into three parts;
the Donor, the Donative, and (as our Law terms it) the Donee, or party
endowed. The Donor you have implied in the Pronoun Thy, and that is God, who
relates to each part; for it is Thy Thummim, and Thy Urim, and Thy holy One, all
are Gods. And so it is not our own perfection nor innate holiness, nor our own
illumination or private spirit, neither is this holy One one of our own making,
any invention of man, but an order founded by God himself. Secondly the
Donative is double, Thummim and Urim, which are perfection and illumination as
the Rabbis, holiness and learning as our own men interpret; the two main
things enquired after, not only by the Universitie in degrees, but the Church
in all her Ordinations. And lastly the party endowed with these gifts, the
holy One, includes the whole Tribe of Levi; by concomitance that of the Old, by
correspondence this of the New Testament. For Thummim and Urim respects the
Clergy in general, and is as large as bot^ Covenants. Of these particulars
very briefly, and first of the Donor as he severally relates to Thummim, Urim,
holy One* Non per nos-ipsos necviribus natura, sed perspiritum sanctum was the
doctrine of Saint Austine, and the Catholic Church: our will here being like a
lower sphere, quae non nisi mota movet: if no inspiration no cooperation; and
our graces are as the money in Benjamin's sack, of another putting in; all
springing from Christ, as the branches from the Vine, and cease to be graces
when they forget their Author. Our strength then is but borrowed, our going but
leading in God's hand; who is to us what his Cloud was to Israel; if he please
to make a stand, we know not which way to turn our selves; mere nature cannot
direct to heaven: and therefore we say well in our prayer, for thine is the
Power, and the Glori^, it being by that Power we come to this Glory. Secondly
as our Thummim, so our Urim too is from God; for there is no illumination but
proceeds a Patre luminum, says Saint James, from Him that enlightens every one
that coms into the world a Patre per modum naturae, as the child from the
father; a Patre luminum per modum emanationis, as the shine from the Sun. As
well then the Fierie-tongues as the Dove come from on high, Learning no less
then Innocence. Thus if Saint Paul have a door of Utterance, God himself keeps
the Key: if Isaiah's lips want purifying, no less then a Seraphin must expiate
them, and he too with no fire but the Altars: neither Prophets nor Apostles
can speak (...), as it is in Acts 2. the wonderful works of the Lord, unless
the Holy Ghost first bring the Tongues. But now quis vituperavit? not the most
factions but will agree that Thummim and Urim, all perfections and
illuminations, even those dim ones of their own private spirits are of God, but
this holy One not so far fetched; and therefore you take too much upon you, ye
sons of Levi, seeing all the Congregation is holy, even as your selves. And
it must needs be granted they are so; all the Congregation of the Lord
sanctified as well as his Priests, yet not to the same degree of holiness, but
they sicut populus, as Gods people, these sicut Aaron, as his peculiar
servants; they are holy it is true, but these holiest of holies. Hence it was
that when the Law kept Ordinations, certain pieces of the Sacrifice were put
into the Priests hands; and now instead of that, a Bible into ours: Not only
as a rule to direct, but a sacred witness of that profession, into which we
are by a Divine hand invested. Hence also it is that we so often meet with a
mittet operarios, and a dabit Angelos, all of Gods mission. And indeed who more
fit to appoint Laborers for the Vineyard, then the Lord of the Farm; who
Steward for the house, if not the Master. None then may usurp this holy
charge, assume this honor. We are Ambassadors; and it is treason to enter upon
an Embassy, before commanded by our Prince. And therefore to be (...) a man's
own ordainer, as Basil's word is, to clap down into Moses chair upon a vain
Enthusiasme is profane presumption; and not to undertake our Office, but to
invade it: being so esteemed of God, as may appear by that fearful Ironie to
the false Prophets, I sent them not, yet they run; run, knowing nor why, nor
whither* like Ahimaaz in Samuel, and at length like him too, they can tell no
tidings. Thus neither unbidden nor yet unprepared guests, may come to this
Supper of the Lord: For a wedding garment is required. Whom God imploies in his
service he calls, and whom he calls he clothes; gives them as well
abilities of doing, as authority to do: which leads me to my second part, the
double Donative, Thummim and Vrim, life and learning, the two maine things
enquired after by the Bishop in all Ordinations; And of Levi he said, Let thy
etc. Thummim and Urim, Religion takes place of Learning, and he must first be
good to himself, that will be so to others. For which end the ancient Fathers,
led by example of the Prophets and Apostles (says our Canon) appointed
Ember-weeks before Ordination, a strict severe government of our own
affections, ere we have antority to guide the peoples: example being the life
of doctrine; and therefore the Praedicants of old were called operarii, quia
opere magis quam ore praedicarent, as Stella glosser, and that both in respect
of our calling and charge. For our calling as it is most eminent, so most eyed,
and worst censured. If an Apostle rub but an ear of corn on the sabbath, it is
breaking of the day; the peoples moates are the Priests beams, and another
indifferency is my evil: somthings being expedient in respect of the man,
which are scandalous merely for his coat. None therefore to keep within so
strict lines as the Aaronite, being one ever under monitors. For behold (says
the Apostle) we are made a gazing-stock to the World, to Angels, to Men? to
men, which are our charge. Governors live not their own lives alone, but the
peoples; their actions being not personal, but epidemical, and whether good or
bad are held authentic; it being enough for the rout that their betters did
so. Do any of the rulers believe on him was thought sufficient argument why
others should not? Thus if Jeroboam transgress, he makes an Israel to sin;
and if Aaron set up an idol, a whole nation will worship it. Holiness then
becomes every man well, but best of all public persons; and that not only for
example of good, but liberty of controlling ill. The snuffers of the sanctuary
made to purge others, must be of pure gold themselves. Thus Herod feared John,
not 'cause he was a powerful teacher, but a Just man. This holiness casts a
more dazleing luster then any other accomplishment whatever. But let that
pass, and suppose this Thummim be not with the holy One, admit the Priest
sinful; shall the people notwithstanding follow his doctrine, his doctrine
whose life is not the use, his voice whose hand points a contrary way? Nothing
more, for what if the sacrificer be unclean, is the offering so? was the glory
of Israel, the Arc, any whit lessened when it came from the Philistines? did
the breath of the Lord his answers pass by the less regarded, 'cause a Saul
Prophesied? Scripture is scripture though the Devil speak it; no man's sins
should bring the service of God into contempt, nor may good be refused 'cause
the means are accidentally evil. Non ergomerita personarum sed officia
sacerdotum considerentur, says Ambrose in his 5 Chapter de iis qui mysteriis
initiantur: and it is a gross dull capacity that cannot distiuguish 'twixt the
work and the instrument, the weakness of the person and the power of the
function. You know no unclean viands were for the table of an Israelite, no
birds of prey ^it company for a Prophet; yet Sampson made much of his honey,
though in a putrified Lion; and if Ravens are sent to preserv an Eliah, he
willingly accepts their courtefie, and dislikes not the meat 'cause the waiters
were black. These then of the Law are less scrupulous then some of the
Gospel, who disdain the graces of God, when not served in the pure^t vessels,
that loath their Mannah, if not out of the Tabernacles golden pot, all Urim not
coupled with Thummim; The other part of the Donative.

Urim is a large word, and reciprocal with sapience in Tully, the science of
humane and divine matters; whence it seems the Levites divinity and scholarship
are not synonima's, at least not this and preaching? Lo a vision appeared to
me, says Ezekiel, a whirlwinde and a fire; to show, the Prophets of the Lord
must have light with them as well as noise, understanding as tongue. Gods
Ministers are Angels, and these called (...), from their manifold knowledge. I
speak this merely, for that there is a generation which square out the Divines
study by the Scripture Canon only, all other rules being crooked, and of no
use. Would you know the reason? The less learning the less stipend: and
indeed good Letters have not a little pined away, since Divinity began to
officiate at the tables end for the trencher. Now it is true Scripture was ever
the Levites predominant element; but if you will make him a perfect mixed body, the
Arts too are necessary ingredients. And therefore though Hadrian the sixth, in
his tract de ver a philsophia cries down humane learning with a noise of
Fathers, yet he concludes, utilem esse scientiam gentilium, dummodo in usum
christianum convertatur, that to shave and part the captive woman, and then
espouse her, was ever held lawful matrimony. Look back upon the two famous
patterns of Jewish and Christian divines; Moses learned in all the wisdom of
the Egyptians, and S. Paul wise in all the learning of the Grecians, a great
artist, and a good ling^i^^; and no less may we expect from the rest of the
Apostles, to whom it was not said, ^ollow me, and strait way be fishers; but
follow* and I will make you fishers. They were to learn, ere they were to
teach, to be Discipls, before Apostles. No man is born an Ar^isicer, his soul
coming as naked into the world as his body, not having so much freedom as to
set up in the meanest-trade without serving an apprenticeship And for that
dabitur in illa hora to speak without conning, was a promise made to the
Twelve, when they should be called to the bar, not to the pulpit. This place,
how ever some have made it scandalous, requires both learning and industry; and
thus much S. Paul intimated, when he sent for his books, finding as great want
of them, as his cloak in winter. Yet here notwithstanding this Urim is os so
large an extent, as compassing the whole body of knowledge; we must remember
that our most acute and clearest illumination is but dull and glimmering, and
though it be said to be Gods, yet it is not meant of that light which is tanquam
lux in lucido, sed lumen in diaphano, not as the Sun, but as the shine. And
therefore if any in this frail tenement of flesh, shall dare to hope for the
masterreach in Gods secrets of state, such I mean as put the great Apostle to
his gaze with (...) and (...), he mistakes his measure, and forgets that his
dwelling is in the dust. And why should I call for day where God will have
night, and covet to see that brightness, whose least ray will instantly blind
me; it being too strong an object for the weak eye of man's understanding? I
will rather admire God in his actions, and be content to know the Almighty no
farther then his Word shall reveal, where this light leaves me, I will cease
the quest, and boast of my ignorance; never desiring that Urim, that
illumination, which leads to utter darkness, nor that Thummim, that
holiness, which will unholy me. And this points at my last particular, the
party endowed with this gi^t, the Holy One.

We are all Gods, but not all Gods holy Ones. This title is proper to the
Priests hiraldry, a jewel only for Aarons breast plate. And certainly the office
being sacred, the name must be answerable. Now the Levite was thus styled from
a twofold holiness, that of his life, which you have heard, and another of
his person. For all sanctity is not inward, nor is all Thummim (perfection)
that of the soul. Gods holy one must be his fair one too, without blemish no
less in body, then in mind. Thus under the law no monstrous issue, no blind
seer, might offer the bread of his God Levit. 21. And shall the Evengelicall
Ministration be worse served then the Legal? while the Sacrifice is more
noble, shall the Priest be less? only the fattest in the herd, the fairest in
the flock were the oblations of the Law: and shall the poorest only of the
Tribe, the most de^ormed of all the issue, be the offerings of the Gospel? The
Lords house is no hospital; neither the sacrifice, nor the Priest must be
admitted unsound, or imperfect; and if not a maimed lamb, much less a maimed
Levite. God of all things will ^rooke no defilement in the Priesthood: we find
Miriam ad Aaron both in the same sin, yet Miriam only the Leper; least
(says S. Chrisostom, Hom. 3 ad Colos.) the uncleanness of the others person
should stick upon his office; and therefore I find a leprous King, but no
where a leprous Priest in all the Scripture. Now seeing our outward bearing and
persons must be blameless, why should not our condition be so? To effect this,
nothing better then a continual meditation of that solemn pomp and Ceremony
used in our Orders. When the reverend Prelate lays his hand on thy head,
remember thou art then manumniz'd from all secular ties, and sequestered no
less from the Callings of the people, then their vices: and certainly the holy
impression* of Episcopal hands set o^ from above, is such an Elixar, as by
con^action, if there be any disposition of goodness in the baser mettle, it
will render it of the property. Again, when thou take the Bible, with
authority to dispense the Word and Sacraments; Oh! let us not abuse our Masters
trust, in betraying that sacred pledge to the vain Pulpit applan^e and Church
flattery of a giddie multitude; but may that Apocalyptical curse be ever
before thee, of adding or detracting from the words of Gods book; quod dicitur
in falsatores hujus libri doctrinae, which is denounced (says a Father)
against such as ravish Scripture to force out doctrines for their own ends, and
then empty their rancour, by turning them to Uses. But above all, those divine
extasying words, Receive the Holy Ghost, strike through the soul; the very
sound comes cross me, and ties down those hands which otherwise might stab my
brother, that tongue which else might curse my King, or blaspheme my God.
Receive the Holy Ghost, the syllables are an history, and present my thoughts
with all those sacred breathings of the Spirit throughout the Scripture. Here I
find a single Prophet possessed of a double portion, and heir no less to
Eliah's Spirit, then his Mantle: there twelve Aprostles, each speaking with as
many tongues; whose powerful Rhetoric did convert thousands at a Sermon; their
edifying being a conquest, and their Proselites not so properly to be styled a
Congregation, as a people. Receive the Holy Ghost? Good God, what more can we
ask, or thou bestow! The holy Ghost? Why then (as S. Paul says) receive also
the gift of Prophecy by the same Spirit, the gift of Healing by the same
Spirit, the gift of Miracles by the same Spirit. But these are Apostolical
talents: and we, O Lord, the most unprofitable of thy servants, are altogether
unworthie the meanest of thy gifts: yet vouchsafe us, we beseech thee, who have
now devoted our selves for thy service, to be filled, though with the smallest
measure of thy holy Spirit, to be overshadowed but with a single feather of
that Dove, enlightened with the least ray of that Cloven-tongu'd fire; and this
for thy Gospels sake, for thy promise sake, for thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ his sake: to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be ever, as is
most, etc.

FINIS.
THE Third Sermon. Which is that in Dr Maine's and Mr Cartwright's Style, or
Way of Preaching; Delivered before the Universitie, at Saint MARYES in Oxford.

MAT. 10. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, Anno
Dom. 1656.

Canticles 2. Verse. 2. As the Lilly among the thorns; so is my love among the
daughters.
AS Abraham's mystical Ram in the thicket, when Isaac was offered up on mount
Moriah, and yet not sacrificed, was Christ crowned with thorns; so Solomon's
typical Lilly in the text, is Christ's Church enthroned among the briers: who
though she be born a King's daughter, yet is her coronet but in-lai'd with
thorns; and though the 45 Psalm clothes her with a robe of wrought gold, and
all glorious within, yet is this glory of her roial apparel at the best but
the glory of the Ermine, shadowed over and eclipsed with the black spots, and
that gold but the gold of the Psalmists furnace, seven times purified and
martyred in the flame. Now that the coat of Christ's Spouse has been thus
blazoned, all History both Ecclesiastical and Civil will be our Heralds, and
witness. Ensebius, with his fellow-pens of Church-storie, have sufficiently
written the Acts and Monuments of this truth: their volumnes being so many
books of Martyrs, in which you may read the Christian baptized in his own
blood, and receiving his confirmation from the fire; being condemned ad bestias
only for the Roman sport and recreation, and to the stake in usum nocturni
luminis, says Tacitus, to save the Citie-candle, and light home passengers in
a dark night. Our religion in the mean time being scandalized for superstitio
exitiabilis, the very fate and bane of Commonwealths, and the professors of it
for novatoresrerum, the grand Innovators and Boutefeus of the world. Insomuch
says Tertullian, that if an Earthquake shook town or territory, straight
Christianity was called in question; as if the breath of Christian prayers
vented in religous caves (the only Temples of those days) had raised that
subterraneous wind, and their groans caused the motion. And for this reason
etiam susp^ria and lac^rimae scribebantur says the historian, their very tears
were registered as the Malignant Party, and their ^ighs for plots against the
State. And all this ^t implere^^r, that Gods Word might be fulfilled, and
written the second time in the afflictions of his Church. Thus Nero persecuting
in the Roman story, is the red dragon driving the woman to the wilderness in
S. John's Prophecy; and the Churches martyrdom the truth of that type, the
sight of that vision, and even the revelation of the Apocalypse. Or if you
will, the Woman there is the Love here in the text, that Wilderness these
Thorns, representing to you the face of this glass, the original and person of
this picture or similitude: As the Lilly, etc.

This text you heard me now call a picture or similitude; in which picture, as
in all draughts of the pencil, you may behold the lights and the shadows, the
lights shining forth in the Lilly and the Love, the shadows masked under the
Thorns and the Daughters* for those black Thorns are as the shadow to this
white Lilly, and these soul daughters the foil to set off that fair Love. Now
as all pictures must have their place of view; so may it please you to look
upon, for a third particular, the seat or* standing of this Lilly, it is in
(...) in the middle, or among the Thorns; and last of all to vouchsafe a glance
or two upon the Artisan himself, implied in the particle my; As the Lilly
among the Thorns, so is my Love* my, who am the Limmer that has drawn and owes
this piece, whose hand protects it here, and will new trim and varnish it
hereafter, turning these lights into Glories and everlasting shines, and those
shadows into utter darkness. Thus have you from a rude pencil the chief lines
of this Landscape of the Church, and my present discourse; of all which as they
lie in the frame of the text, where you are first presented with the lights of
this piece, the Lilly and the Spouse, As the Lilly, so is my Love.

The Lilly is a flower of that brightness, not Solomon (says our Savior)
exalted on his throne, shined with that majesty as one of these humbled in the
valley, no^ were his robes half so glorious as their leaves. And as this flower
excels in an outward bravery, and gad^nesse of leaves, so in an inward
goodness of the stem; out-shining not only the King, but all his plants,
from his Cedar of Lebanus to the Hisope that grows on the wall; being of that
medicinal virtue with the Herbalist, idolatrous Israel might have received
from hence an antidote against the Serpents sting, and rebellious Pharaoh a new
skin for his blister'd flesh* Now though Christ's spouse in the text answers
all, and more then has been spoken of the Lilly; yet for the present I will
draw out this parallel but only in two lines; the one pointing to the humility
of Christ's Chuch, in the grows of the Lilly, which is but low, and therefore
called the Lilly of the valleys; the other to her Virgin purity, and innocence
of life, from the whiteness of the same flower; a color nature does die;
simple and so fittest for religion. I Will take my rise from the humility of
Christ's spouse, As the lilly, so is my love.

Aquinas his humility, the lowest of acts, and yet the highest of virtues,
would scarce speak good school divinity, had not our Savior preached it by
his actions: who not only died but lived for our salvation; teaching us a way
to mount upwards by descending, and to be exalted through humility. Thus he
that was the fulness of the Godhead, exinanivit se, emptied himself into a
man: he that dwelt in the highest regarded the lowliness of his Handmaiden, as
it is in the Magnificat, and the brightness of the Father became over-shadowed
with a veil of flesh. And as if for a God to be borne, and a Diety to enter a
body, were not sufficient humiliation; his whole life was but the Schools
twelve rounds or degrees of humility. For though we hear Christ preaching upon
the mount, in the 5. of Saint Matthew: yet were his doctrines there only of the
valleys, To rejoice when men shall revile, to be exceeding glad for a
persecution, so the twel^t period of that sermon; again, to have a cheek to
receive an injury, to go to law not to recover, but give away a garment, in the
40 ver: of the same chap: last of all to bless for a curse, to wish heaven to
such as desire your damnation, to deny even our selves, that is says a Father,
our great parts and eminent endowments; duri sermones hard lessons, and yet all
took out by our Savior; his hand directing the same way with his voice, and
what he taught was but his own example; showing, he enioyn'd no
impossibilities, in that he acted his own commands. Thus I find him on the
cross in the greatest agony for his persecutors, their blasphemies wrestling
with his benedictions; the Jews curse ascending heaven, and Christ's blessing
keeping it down: who not suffering them to enjoy their damnation, resolved
upon with so much plaudite and acclamation, his blood be upon us and our
children, opened the mouth of that blood into a prayer, and made it cry,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And this my God was
according to thy promise, the giving of a new commandment: for whereas the old
runns, I will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, thy law of the
Gospel proclaims, I will remit those sins unto the third and fourth
generation, I will show mercy upon thousands of them that hate me and not keep
my commandments. Now for the second act of our Saviors humility, the denial
of his eminent gifts, what greater could there be, then the forbidding his
patients to declare their cure, and desiring his miracles might be as invisible
as his Godhead. As if a miraculous health were the shame of the physician, and
a Lazarus raised to life, the spoiling of his practice. Or else how is it we
read in the Gospel, of our Saviors unlocking the mouth of the dumb, and then
crying, See you tell no man; which was to tie up that organ, which he had
before loosed; as he did in drawing the curtain from the blind man's eyes, and
yet commanding him not to see and take notice of his physician; or in restoring
the withered hand, and straitway drying it up again, in forbidding it is use;
and saying, point not at me. And therefore learn of me, was our Saviors saying
to his Church, for I am lowly in heart, Mat. 11. In heart, aflecting no vain
glory in my miracles, no high opinion of my great parts; which instructs us not
to commit Idolatry with our own bosom, and to fall down to the thoughts of our
hearts; by which we deifie these moulds of earth, as if we could raise
eternity out of ashes, or build immortality on pillars of dust; wherefore
learn of Christ to think meanly of our selves, and mistrust even what we know:
and this, says Aquinas, refraenat animum, is a bridle to curb and keep in our
hot-mettel'd and unweighed minds, from running upon every dangerous precipice;
the want of humility expelled our first parents paradise, the angeltheaven, and
may us too from the same joys for some men's eminencies are their vices, and a
good name as dangerous to them as a bad, their greatest parts being made their
greatest sins; and the rational soul to answer more at the last day, for it is
knowledge, then ignorance. Hence it is we hear Phisophy turned into Atheism, and
a deep discourse to subtle blasphemy; which dares censure the holy Ghost for no
good Philospher in placing the waters above the firmament, cause all their
elements are sublunary, and to dispute the first Chap. of Genesis out of the
Canon, for that it is no where to be found in the Physics. Thus they cry down
Moses by Aristotle, and as i^ the Devil were as great a mover of sedition in
the study, as in the shop, they raise a Brownisticall mutiny of the Arts
against Divinity, setting up that to preach which never took Orders. Nor stop
we here, but upon the same proud dotage of our able parts presume to remove
those Landmarks in Divinity, our Fathers have set; to leave the old beaten way
of the Church, trod by so many ages of Divines, and follow a peculiar tracke of
our private fancy leading to the-by ways of heresy and schism; God in his
just judgment, making all the travel and throws of our brain abortive, like
those untimely miscarriages of the womb not honored with a soul, or the shape
and lineaments of an infant. From this self conceit arise those sublimated
disputes of Faith, which make men forget their Charity; of Predestination, till
they Prove themselves none of the Elect; as also about the blessed Trinity,
till at last they believe there is no such thing: a mystery whe^ein our
quickest sight is as but one degree above blindness; and yet there are, who
have boasted to make it so clear and easy, as if they enjoyed the beatifical
vision in this life: and will have Christ's presence in the Eucharist to ^e as
visible, as though by a miraculous multiplying eye they saw him bodily move in
each crum of bread and drop of wine. And why should I call for day, where God
will have night, and covet to see that brightness, whose least ^ay will
instantly blind me? I will rather with Moses fall flat upon my face, humbly
admire that Dietie which I cannot conceive, and be content to know the
Almighty no farther then his Word shall reveal: where this light leaves me I
will cease the quest, and boast of my ignorance; never desiring that
illumination which leads to utter darkness, nor that holiness which will
unholy me: And this points at the other parallel before mentioned, the
whiteness of the Lilly, and the innocence or holiness of the Spouse, As the
Lilly, so is my love.

Christianity a bare name, Religion a ^^eer shadow; not as they appear in
themselves, but as made so by the Seemers of this age; who use Gods cause as
Hunters do a Scand, the more covertly to shoot at what game they please; making
their Religion their Part, and only personating their godliness; their
devotion being like the hangings of the scene, which they can take off and tack
on as they list. Thus Readiness sparing of Agag, and the best of the spoil was
pretended for ends holy; not for his own private table at any hand, but Gods
Altar; whose command he neglected to observe his worship, and offered up
disobedience in a sacrifice. And thus about an age since, that rebellion of the
frantic Sectarists in Germany was anabaptiz'd with the sanctified name of a
Reformation, and those barbarous Armies slick'd over with the plausible title
of lawful brotherly Assemblies, and a Christian Congregation: their burning of
Libraries was pretended for the encouraging of Learning; persuading the people,
that to take up arms against Charles their Emperor was only to protect his
office; and to destroy his person, that they might the better preserve his
dignity, and make his Crown the greatest Prince in Christendom: And yet these
were esteemed (no Saints indeed but) mere innocent holy men.

But now our Lillies whiteness is not of this color, Chist's Spouse her
innocence and holiness not of their Religion: the Kings daughter in the 45
Psalm. was all glorious within; if we be good Christians we are both sides
alike, and best at the core. No matter then for this bark and outside of
Religion, this skin and shell of Christianity, the heart and the reins are
those that God looks after: God? I and man too. For this Love, this Spouse in
my text, as she is most fair, so most eied, and worst censured by the
unbelieving world. Thus if an Apostle rub but an ear of corn on the Sabbath
it is breaking of the day: the Infidels moats are the Christians beams, and his
indifferency my evil; somthings being expedient in respect of the man, which
are scandalous m^erly for his Calling. None then to keep within so strict lines
as the Christian, being one ever under monitors; for behold (says the Apostle)
we are made a gazing stock to the world, to Angels, and to men. In^omuch that
we live not our own lives alone, but the life of the whole world; as if at our
Regeneration we took upon us no private persons, but the common nature, and
were not baptized men, but mankind: our actions being therefore not personal
but ecumenical, and whether good or bad are held authentic. Thus had not our
Savior paid tribute, it would have been thought sufficient argument why others
should not; it being enough for the Rout that their betters did so. No wonder
then if Sechem ravish, when the firstborn of Jacob commits incest; if an
Egyptian falls down to an Ox, when an Israelite worships a Calf; if Simon
Magus offers to buy the Holy Ghost; when an Apostle dares sell his Master.
Holiness then becoms every man well, but best of all the baptized; who is the
Mirror in which the unbeliever beholds heaven, and the Convoy to direct him
thither: Now if the glass be spotted, instead of an Angel we look upon a
fury, and if the conduct be falls, there is more danger in the guide then the
way; which has caused many Pagans to step back, having had one foot in the
Church, when they have seen Christians believe so well, and live so ill,
breaking the Commandments against the Creed, and contradicting the doctrine of
the seventh day by the practice of the other six. And here though I plead for
holiness, yet not the Pharisees, Touch me not, for I am holier then thou; no
holiness of the Separation, but what is diffusive, and holds communion with
all: for our Lilly is the Lilly of the valleys, and not of the garden; and
this Love in my text is seated among the daughters, the daughters of the whole
world, and neither of a Parlour nor a Cloister, a Conventicle nor a Nunnerie;
which leads me to my next particular, the seat or standing of the Lilly, it is
(...), in the middle, or among this thorns.

The blessed Trinity is therefore most perfect, cause most one, and man is
more or less God's image, as he does more or less resemble that Trinity,
which is one (...) says Nazian. Ora. 12. as well in respect of agreement as
essence; being therefore styled in Scripture Peace and Love, to show, that the
next way to set thee at opposition with thy God, is to divide thee from thy
brother, and to hazard thy interest in the head is to dis-joint thy self from
the members; being thus an enemy not only to thine own salvation, but thy
neighbors; to thine own, by refusing their goodness; to thy neighbors, by not
communicating thine. To prevent this, the Almighty has made thee a sociable
creature, and every part of this world as accessible and sociable as thy
creation: the Scythian may embrace the Moor. and the East join hands with the
West-Indian. Whilst then thou hold'st no communion with thy brother, thou
unman'st thy self, separating from thy humane nature; nay more, being not among
these Thorns thou art not with this Lilly; but like Donatus, confining to some
Africa, thou excommunicates thy self out of the Church Militant below, and
perchance the Triumphant above: as the ambition of those apostate Angels no
sooner distinguished them from the rest, but it threw then from heaven. Nor is
this separation destructive only of thy self, but of the whole Church; from
whose body every one that separates tears off a several limb, and becoms a
murderer of the whole. For which reason it has been ever the devils policy
(who is encouraged not so much by his own strength, as our weakness) first to
divide this army with banners, and then to assault through the breach; because
the conquest is easier against an hundred then against a thousand; especially
when the combatants fight with the public enemy against themselves: and that
too commonly either about a School-subtilty, or Churchceremonie; the usual
difference being not so much in the foundation, as the paint and dress of the
building; nay perchance a mere (...) (as Scotus upon the first of the Senten.
censures that grand controversy about the procession of the Holy Ghost) a
consent of opinions in contrary terms; as a sundry dialect makes not a several
language; both sides speaking the same way to heaven though in a diverse tone.
In these cases then no separation, only let thy charity pity thy brothers
mistreading, and speak it error in him, but no irreligion; in that he loves
God with as strong a flame, though of a weaker light, with as high a zeal,
though a lower knowledge; his slips (alas) being to him as part of his religion
and Creed, and errs merely least he should dishonor God. Leav him not therefore
for his errors in doctrine, nor yet for his errors in life: separate neither
from a particular Church nor a particular Congregation, either for the Priests
sin, or the peoples; refuse not to take the blessed Eucharist from him, or
receive it with these. For first, what if the Priest the sacrificer be unclean,
is the offering so? It Is a gross dull capaeity that cannot distinguish 'twixt
the work and the instrument, the weakness of the person and the power of the
function. Now as we may not separate from the Communion for the Priests folly,
so neither for the peoples. For what though some in the Congregation be
profane? Will thou thrust all into the pit of hell, because some few walk
near the brink? It Is a priveledge of the Church triumphant to be all fair, and
have no spot in her; the best proportioned body has not every part of an
equal comeliness, nor is beauty made up of one color. Our spouse in this
book of Canticles wears a black eye in a clear complextion; that is but her
natural beautie-speck: the moon's a glorious body for all her moles; the
Church a fair Lilly, for all the thorns. And what are those to me? Cannot I
enjoy the sweetness but I must needs prick my fingers? if I admonish the
sinner, and detest his sin, what is another profaennesse to my religion? Our
Savior could be of the same table with Publicans and sinners, yet none of
their counsel, eat of their meat without tasting their gall and bitterness.
And we read his Apostles did communicate with Judas, and yet not with his
treason; partake of the Paschal Lamb, without tasting the bitter herbs. And
now what remedy for this confused communion of the multitude? certainly none.
If the Children of God come to present themselves before his Throne, there
seldom misses a Satan in the midst, as we read Job 2: no cross or holy water
can keep him out. Our bells are not exorcists, they may clear the air if you
will, but of no evil spirits; neither is their sound so subtle to distinguish
'twixt good and bad, invites not the Publican and forbids the Pharisee, they
both came up to the Temple at the hour of prayer: there seldom being a
gathering together into the Arc, the Church, but some unclean beast enters;
not the most perfect Synod on earth, even that of the Apostles, but had its
Judas; and yet these Apostles were Chist's, and that Ark God's: which points to
my last particular, the Artisan or Limmer himself, that has drawn, and owes,
and will protect this piece, implied in the particle my; As the Lilly, so is
my Love.

God is in the world as the soul in the body, life and government; and as the
soul is in every part of the body, so is God in everypart of the world, no
quartermaster, but universal Monarch, a God every where, and every where wholly
a God; his power extending as well to an Ant as to a Man, to an Atome as to a
City, but not in the same degree: as his glory filled both Moses his bush,
and the space about it, but not with the same measure; the one being too holy
only for the Prophets shoo's, the other even for his feet. Thus do
Commonwealths inherit a greater share of the Almightie's Providence, then
single families; their laws being wrapped in his decrees, and their policies in
his counsels; plotting and contriving nothing but what meets with an Eternal
thought. And even amongst Commonwealths; some enjoy more, otherslesse of
divine protection; for though all Nations bear God's stamp and image, yet
Israel had his superscription too; those tribes were writ his, and none but
his; here was his lot, his inheritance, his Church; and where this is you have
still a greater influence of the Diety. And by this right of inheritance has
God jus patronatus, the perpetual Advousen of the Catholic Church: and
therefore well may he say in the text my love; mine, for I made her, there is
the right of Creation; mine, for I made her again, washed and cleans'd her,
there is the right of Regeneration; mine, for I bought her, there is the right
of Redemption; mine, for she is my self, my Spouse, there is nexus
indissolubilis, the right of matrimonial union. And as mine to love, so to
defend; the result and inference is natural; I am thine therefore save me, O
Lord, was the Prophets* Interest cannot stand without protection, as one
relation lives not without its brother: the hand says it is my head, therefore
I will guard it with my strength; the head replies it is my hand, therefore I
will advise it with my counsel. And thus it holds in all, save where is lack of
love, or power; but with God is want of neither: not of love, for he that
touches Israel touches the apple of Gods eye; nor of power, the agent being
omnipotent, able to compass his will both without means, and contrary to all.
Thus rather then his children shall perish, either by a deluge, or a drought,
by too much, or too little water, the red sea shall be divided into walls, and
the stony rock into springs: and if the Church has yet any adversaries more
merciless then water, ^he earth shall open from below, and bury them before
dead, or fire shall descend from above, and make them a sacrifice without an
offering: God never suffering this Lilly either to be cut down by the sword,
or burnt up by the fire of martyrdom. It Is true it may sometimes like a nipp'd
blossom hang down the head; nay, be driven by a winter of persecution to keep
house under ground, retire I mean to her ancient Chappel-grots and caves (as
flowers in hard weather depart to visit their mother-root) yet those places
shall not prove her grave, but sanctuary; and the enemies of Gods Church be no
more able to bury it in those vaults, then was the stone and guard of our
Saviors ^epulchre to lock him up at the third day, or then our graves shall be
to keep us down at the general Resurrection: for God has set bounds to the
Devil as well as the Sea, and chained him up from devouring his Church, as he
did that from drowning his Israelites. And after this manner do we meet with in
Ecclesiastical story now the full face of a Church, and by and by but one
cheek and an e^e; yet still the same hand that drew out protecting both. Thus
when the believing world was gathered together in Noah's floating Isle, what a
wonder of providence do I here meet with! one poor family called out of the
world, and as it were eight granes of corn fanned from a barn-full of chafe,
and yet for the increase but of these eight granes was the whole earth
preserved under the flood, else a shower of fire had purged that world, which
could not be cleans'd by a deluge. And here how securely does the Prophet Noah
ride out this uproare of heaven and waters; knowing that planted paradise was
not so firm as his Arc, whose anchor was his God, and he that owed the waters
steering the vessel. After this when the Church was upon the Altar, and now
about to be sacrificed in Isaac, when the sword was drawn, and the blow ready,
how did the Almighty prevent the execution; the sacrificer Abraham in the mean
time, whom it nearest concerned, being least touched; faith having wrought that
in the Patriarch which cruelty would in others, not to be sensible of his own
action: he contemns all fears, and overlooks all impossibilities; his heart
telling him, that the same hand that had raised Isaac from the dead womb of
Sarah, could raise that same Isaac again from his own urne; and the God, who
promised to increase a single person to the number of the stars, might (for all
he knew) make this single persons very dust to conceive and bring forth, and so
perform that almighty promise out of the ashes of his sacrifice. Last of all,
when this Isaac was multiplied to an Israel, and this Israel (God's Church) was
shackel'd (perchance for their forefathers selling Joseph to be a slave)
shackel'd I say with the Irons of Egypt, where their burdens were turned into
bondage, and their bondage into blood; their souls also being ever on the rack
of continual fear and suspense, least their bodies might be thrown into the
same Brickkills they had built, and become the fire to harden their own
handiwork: yet here how did God tie up Pharaoh's hands with plagues; and the
same voice that cried, Touch not mine Anointed, commanded likewise and my
Anointed touch not mine; turning their poisons into cordials, and their enemies
malice to their greatest improvement; in that he made them grow under their
burdens, and propagate through that inhumane destruction of the male-fruit of
their body: So still does Gods Vine bear the better for the pruning-hook, and
looks much fresher by being let blood. And thus with the same Prospective might
I show you God's providence over-shadowing the Christian Church no less then
the Jewish, which has had her Pharaohs, and her Wilderness, as also her
guardian fires and clouds; our persecutions being as many, and our deliverances
as great; and as the Jewish Church did multiply by afflictions, so also the
Christian* whose custom it was to bring her Martyrdoms to the Bank, and to put
out pers^^utions to Use and Interest. Thus a single grain of the Church cast
into the ground has returned an harvest, the blood of a private Christian
baptized a City of Unbelievers, and from the Martyrdom of the Twelve Apostles
have sprung as many nations of the same Faith: their blood like a second Deluge
covering the face of the earth, and their fires as well as their Gospel being
the light of the whole world.

And may thy Church (O Lord) shine still the light of the world, but not still
thus (O Lord) in fire; may thy Spouse thy Love look ever beautiful and ruddie,
but not with her own blood and martyrdom. To this end let thy Providence lie
alwais thy Churches Leiger here upon earth, working and counterplotting against
^ll Agents of the Prince of darkness. Protect, we beseech thee, thy Lilly both
in radice and in flore, from Rooters there, and from Branchers here; I mean
from such as strike either at her vitals by Heresy, or at her out^imbes by
persecution: and this even till that day when thy Love shall be married to thy
Lamb, and this Lilly transplanted into thy Paradise; where it shall flourish
with a continual spring, and remain like those Lillies of our Saviors in Saint
Matthew. That neither toil nor spin; changing her wreath of Thorns for a crown
of Stars, and her rod for a Scepter. And this blessed day God of his mercy
hasten for his Churches sake, Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen.

FINIS.
THE Fourth Sermon. Which is that in the PRESBYTERIAN Style, or Way of
Preaching; Delivered before the City at the Cathedral Church of Saint PAUL in
London.

MAT. 25. 34, 35. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

35. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave
me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, Anno
Dom. 1656.

Luke 16. 9. And I say unto you, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.
THis Parable presents to your view the reckoning, or bill of accounts of the
unjust Steward, and my text is the summa totalis of that bill, or the moral to
this parable; in which our Savior taught his Disciples then, and does us now,
how we should provide against that great Audit the day of Judgment. As for this
unjust Steward whether he were Saint Paul before his Conversion, as Theophylact
would have him, or the Jews as Tertullian: whether he be only the Rich-man, or
only the Statesman, or only the Churchman, or rather every man to whom any
charge is committed by God (as the Doctors have severally given in their
opinions) I will not dispute, as being not much to our purpose: sure I am he
was bad enough, yet not so bad neither but our Savior pickes good out of him;
at your physical Confectioner (the Apothecarie) extracts Treacle from the
Viper, and the most cordial of Antidotes from the deadliest poison. For what S.
Paul makes the Law to his Galathians, Christ has made this unjust Steward unto
us, a Schoolmaster to bring us unto God, and by his care for this world does
point us the way to the next, and that by way of commendation, quia prudenter
^git, non quia fraudulenter, not cause he dealt dishonestly, but wisely; so the
verse before my text; that he carried the business cleanly, handsomely; the
manner how, you may read from the 5 to the 8 ver. of this Chapter; and
therefore make you friends, learn of him, says Christ. Had it been learn of
me, as our Saviors precept was, Matthew. 11. 29. it had been an admirable
pattern: nay, had it been but Solomon's lesson, Go to the pismire Pro. 9. I
should not have marvelled, for she would have taught honest providence: but
learn of an unjust Steward; can there come any goodthing from one so evil? Yes,
For the children of this world are in their generation wiser then the children
of light, so the 8 ver. of this Chapt. therefore learn of him: what to do? To
make you friends. How? Of the unrighteous Mammon. Why? That when ye fail,
they may, etc.

Which three Queries will direct us to three General Parts for our division.
The first is the quid, the matter, to provide for our selves by making us
friends. The second the cujus, the manner to use the best means to get them,
unrighteous Mammon. The third the cuibono, the end, that when ye fail, they,
etc. Of which in their order, beginning with the first, the quid, the mattor,
to provide for our selves by making us friends.

And that I think is good counsel at any time: and as ever, so most especially
now, when brotherly affection is become so changeable and double-faced, as it is
hard to find a true friend; and liberality is grown so indirect and improper,
that it is shown now adays rather to enrich a Closet or Parlour then a
Christian, in clothing of walls sooner then men. Now the friends here meant are
the Angels say some, who are made out friends by works of mercy toward our
brethren; but the common tenet is the friends in my text are the poor, quos
Deus permisit egere ad illorum and nostram probationem, whom God suffers to
want, for the exercise of their patience and our charity: and the ordinary
exposition of make you friends, it, give Alms, make you friends by works of
Charity; which shall be the subject of the first part of my discourse; and so
much the rather, because the doctrine as well as the practice of it is almost
forgot. The Divinity of Justification by Faith alone, like one of Pharaoh's
lean kine has clean devoured the fat ones. And therefore my first particular
position, or doctrine raised from this general thesis, shall be to rectife your
understanding in this deep point of Justification by Faith, and Justification
by Works, to reconcile these two, and make them one.

The Position is this, That Faith and Works 1. Doctr-
must always be united, ever go hand in hand in a believer. It is evident to
all, except they be blind, that the eye alone sees in the body, ^et the eye
which sees is not alone in the body without the other senses; the forefinger
alone points, yet that finger is not alone on the hand; the hammer alone
strikes the bell, yet the hammer that strikes the bell is not alone in the
clock; the heat alone in the fire burns, and not the light, yet the heat is
not alone without the light; the helm alone guides the ship, and not the
tackling, yet the helm is not alone, nor without the tackling. Thus we are to
conceive, that though Faith alone does justify, yet that Faith which justifies
is not alone, but joined with Charity and good Works. Saint Bernard's
distinction of via r^gni and causa regnandi clears the truth in this point.
Though good Works are not the cause why God crowns us in heaven, yet we must
take them in our way to heaven, Mat. 5. 16. It is as impious to deny the
necessity, as to maintein the merits of good Works.

The first reason of the point wherefore 1. Reason.
Faith and good Works must always be united, always go hand in hand in a
Believer, is, because that God has joined good works and salvation together in
his Word, and what God has joined let not man put asunder. Now doing and life,
working and salvation, running and obteining, winning and wearing, overcoming
and reigning in holy Seripture evermore follow one the other: wherefore the
young man puts the question to our Savior, Mar. 10. 17. and the people
likewise, and the Publicans, *and the Soldiers to Saint John, Luke 3. 10, 12,
14. and the Keepers of the prison to Saint Pau^, Act. 16. 30. and the Jew^ to
Saint Peter, Act. 2. 37. What shall we do? Not what shall we say, or what shall
we believe? but what shall we do? This is the tenor of the Law, Do this and
thou shall live, Levit. 18. 5. Deuteronomy. 5. 33. And the Gospel also runs in the
same tune, Mat. 7. 24. And again, No^ the hearers, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified, James 1. 22.

A second reason of the point is, because ^. Reason.
that though Faith justify our Works before God, yet our Works justify our
Faith before men. Though the just shall live by his Faith, Hab. 2. 4. Yet this
his Faith must live by his Charity.

Let us therefore take from hence first a 1. Use.
word of Cantion, not to turn the doctrine of Free Justification into carnal
liberty, nor impose upon Christ's mercy what it will not bear, nor endeavor
to sever faith from good Works, least we sever our soul from life. I grant,
when we have done all we can we may, nay we must say, we are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17. 10. None may trust in their own righteousness, but on the
contrary all ought to pray that they may be found in Christ, not having their
own righteousness, Epb. 3. 9. yet their righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, or else they shall never enter
into the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 20.

In the second place this will serve for a 2. Use.
word of Reproof for all those that separate Faith and Works. Tell not me,
whoever thou art, of Faith without thy Works, nor of Prayers without thy Alms,
nor of piety without thy compassion, nor of real without thy charity; if the
hands be not Jacob's as well as the voice, I fear thou will appear before God
for no better then a mere Impostor and Cheat. If we are good trees by our
fruit men shall know us, Mat. 7. 15. by your fruit, not by your blossoms of
good purposes, or your leaves of good profession, but by the fruit of your
actions. What is your devotion when it is peevish; or your zeal when it is
malicious, or your purity when it is schismatical, or your conscience when it
is factious, a mover, a ringleader of sedition. Too too many in this rotten
age wherein we live are speakers, not workers; as if ostendere fidem the
Apostle Saint James his show thy Faith by thy Works were o^ tendere, to stretch
the jaws, to show thy Faith by strong Protistations. But this must not be a
work of the mouth, but hand. If a man question thee of thy faith, spare thy
lips and let thy mouth make answer. If words might be credited, if a bare
profession of the Gospel might be believed, no man would want faith; every one
would cry with the blind man to Christ, Lord I believ: what mouth would not
make one lie for its master? Nise videro, unless I see, says Thomas of
Christ's rising, so unless I see and feel thy says, I will not believe. If
therefore thou criest, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord with the
Jews, and with them do not obey the Lord of that Temple; if thou art only
Sermon-sick whilst thou art rocked in a Churchtempest abroad, and presently
do recover again as soon as thoudo'st lie at hull at home, if thy voice be
Jacobs, but thy hands Esau's; if thou do acknowledge God with thy tongue,
but deny him in thy life; profess a Christian, and live a Pagan; join
together Christ and Beliat, the Temple of God and the Temple of Devils, the
holy and the unholy Ghost; if thou do run to heaven one day, to hell six,
and do contradict the truth of those Sermons thou do hear by the errors
of thy life, I must tell thee by way of reproof, that this is the part of a
grand hypocrite, and not of a good Christian, and at the last day shall receiv
the portion of hypocrites in the lake of fire and brimstone.

In the third place you may here take unto 3. Use.
your selves a word of Admonition, to beware of these hypocrites, and this is
our Savior's own use, Mat. 7. 15. Beware, says Christ, of those that come to
you in sheeps clothing; in sheeps clothing with such a cast of mortification
and integrity, as if their conversation spoke nothing but innocence and
immaculatenesse, when within they are ravening wolves. A handsome garment is no
argument of a straight body, nor are those always the best men that make the
most show of Religion. All are not Nathanaels, Israelites indeed, that are of
Israel: many have Abraham to their father, but a few his children; many that
came out of his loins, but few that shall sit in his bosom. Therefore I say
again, take our Savior's advice; Beware of those that come to you in sheeps
clothing: you shall know them by their fruits, says Christ; fruits indeed to
the eye beautiful and glorious, but to the finger dust and smoke, like those
hypocritical apples, that well-complexion'd dust of Sodom: and so much shall
suffice for our first doctrinal position, raised from this first general part
of the Text.

The second Observation that I shall 2. Doctr.
draw from this general point of Charity and Almsdeeds, is, that this work is
not a free will offering, left to our selves to be done, or left undone, as we
think fit, but it is our duty, and we are bound to do it if we are able: and
this is proved from 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. It is the rich man's charge, precept, and
duty; and therefore what is here with our Savior a counsel, was with his
Apostle a precept. Charge the rich, says the aforementioned Epistle to Tim.
that they do good. It is not left to their free choice to do good if they
please, but it is laid upon them as their charge and duty, they must do good
Work^, and woe to them if they do not.

And the reason of the point is, because Reason.
God haih not made them owners, but servants, and servants not of their goods,
but the giver, not treasures, but stewards and Almoners.

And this dispensation and ordering of Use.
God's, that rich men should be his Stewards, may very well serve for a word of
encouragement and exhortation to those rich men to go on and glory in this
office of Stewardship, especially when they shall consider that the praise of a
Steward is more to lay out well, then to have received much, knowing that Well
done faithful servant Mat. 25. 21. is a thousand times a sweeter note then soul
take thine ease, Luk 12. 10. for that first is the voice of the Master
recompencing, this last of the Carnal Heart presuming; and what followed to the
one in the Gospel, but his Masters joy; what to the other, but the loss of his
soul. But what need here either our Saviors counsel, or his Apostles precept
you will say, for we shall have friends enough no doubt, so long as this Mammon in
our Text is our friend: we shall indeed; and therefore,

Our third Observation on the point shall 3. Doctr.
be, that in making of friends by works of Charity, we must use discretion
and prudence: and this will teach us First, Negatively who in this particular
are not to be our friends: Secondly, Positively who are to be these friends in
the Text. First then Negatively, those are not to be our friends, who when we
fail will not receive us into habitations; who will be ready to embrace all
the favors and good turns you shall confer upon them, but will return none back
again. These are such friends of whom holy Job in his 6 Chap. complained of;
like the brooks by the which the merchants do travel into Teman, frozen in
winter, and dried up in Summer: friends no longer then you can befriend them,
like leaves that fall from the trees when they begin to wither, and with Saint
Peter know not the man; such as will be your servant in a complement, and not
look upon you in a busines^e. These are the first sort of friends that are not
to be made of the unrighteous Mammon, common sense and reason forbids it.
Secondly you must not make those your friends, who though they may perchance
receive you into habitations, yet they cannot receive you into everlasting
habitations; though they are able to give you houses, they are not able to give
you heaven; and these are the rich in this world, of whom our Savior forewarns
you, Luke 6. 82, to 35. We therefore are to engage none of these to our
friendship, but such as when we fail, shall receive us into everlasting
habitations, and these are the poor and needy: which seemed such a paradox to
the Pharisees, as they derided Christ, ver. 14 of this Chap. whose laughter
occasioned the following Parable of Dives and Lazarous: had the Rich man there
made this Beggar his friend with b^ead (and a few crumbs would have done it)
himself had not afterward wanted water; but now it is but justice, that he
which denied a crum, should be denied a drop.

Now in the fou^th place for a fourth observation 4. Doctr.
upon the point you are to take notice, that if you will be Gods Almoners and
Stewards, to disburse to the poor, God will be your pay-matter, and undertake
for the poor; if you will be their friend here, he will be your friend both
here and hereafter. To prove this, you must know that these words of my Text
were not spoken, as if the poor were able of themselves to be our friends, but
God undertakes for them; he has given his word, and entered bond for every
act of Charity, whether i be a work of piety to his Church, or mercy to the
poor. And first for piety, He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, says our Savior, Matthew. 10. shall ^eive a Prophets reward, either in
the b^^ssin^s of earth, with the widow of Sarepta, 1 King. 17. 14. whose cruse
and meal did not waste, of which the Man of God had a cake* or in the
blessings of the womb with the Shunamite, who for her Candlestick and Stool
received life from the deadnes^e of her womb, a son when she was barren, 2
King. 4. there is for piety.

Secondly for mercy; give, and it shall be given unto you, says the 6 of
Saint Luke: He that commands the one, promises the other. Alms never undid
their owner, nor is Charity so ill a servant, as to leave the master a beggar.
And again, He that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Pro. 19: and if God
freely gives us what we may lend, will he not much more pay us what we have
lent, and give us because we have given; that first is his bounty, this last
but his justice.

Now from this last Observation may be 1. Use.
gathered by way of Use, the happiness both of Poor and Rich. And first of the
Poor, when he shall consider himself God's seedplot, his plow'd-land which God
has so blessed and improved with the showers and dew of heaven, that if you
chance but to throw in a single grain, even one poor mite of your charity, it
shall return an hundred fold; low earth and you shall reap heaven.

Secondly from hence appears the blessed 2. Use.
condition of the Rich. Oh how happy is that man, that may be a creditor to
his Maker: heaven and earth shall become empty, before he shall want a roial
payment; never any was a looser by God; For God returns large consideration and
interest for what he takes up, and paics not the use for the principal, but the
principal for the use; not six in the hundred, but an hundred for six, and who
then would not be an usurer to the Almighty. But you will reply, I have talents
committed to my charge, knew I but the best way to improve them, I would
willingly give, but I see my alms abused.

To direct you therefore, in this great and necessary duty of Christianity, I
shall hold out unto you 4. general rules of giving alms, and out of each of
these 4. general rules draw out several particular directions. The 4.
general rules are these. First the unjust stewards rule, in my text. Secondly
Solomon's rule. Thirdly Christ's rule. Fourthly Gods rule.

For the first, the unjust stewards rule, that 1. Rule.
will teach you how to give alms, from these particular directions. First
says the 5. ver. of this Chap. he called his masters debtors, and stayed not
till they called him Abraham and Lot are said to fit in the door of the Tent
to call in strangers; they need not knock: commonly they that crave least have
the most need. For there are many persons, that have nothing left them, but
misery and modesty, and toward such we must add two circumstances of Charity.
First to enquire them out. Secondly to convey our relief so to them, as we do
not make them ashamed.

Secondly, the second particular direction from this unjust steward was this,
that what he did was with dispatch; he called his Masters debtors, and bid them
sit down quickly, verse 6. vt hilarem it a celerom datorem diligit Deus; God
delights in expedition as well as cheerfulness: give alms with a cheerful
heart and countenance, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver, 2 Cor: 2. 7: and therefore give quickly, when the power is in
thine hand, and the need is in thy neighbor, and thy neighbor at the door. He
gives twice, that relieves speedily. The more speed, the more comfort. Neither
the times are in our own disposing, nor our selves. If God had see us a day,
and made our wealth inseparable, there were no danger in delay. But now our
incertainty if it quickens not deceives us. How many have meant well and done
nothing, loosing their crown with lingering: to whom that they would have done
good, it is not ^o great praise as it is dishonor, that they might have done
it; their deaths oft-times preventing their desires, and making their good
incentions the Wards of their Executors, who many times prove the executioners
of their wills and estates.

From hence then take a word of advice 1. Use
and caution; let their wracksbe ourwarning, who are equally mortal, equally
fickle. It is a woeful and remediless complaint, that the end of our days
should outrun the beginning of our good works: which are commonly so don, as
the poor may thank our deathbeds for them, and not us; our disease rather then
our Charity. For he that gives not till he dies, shows that he would not give
then if he could keep it: and they that give thus give by their testaments it
is true, but I can scarce say they give by their wills: the good man's praise
Psalm. 112. was that himself dispersed his goods, and not left them behind him;
and his distribution is seconded with this retribution of Gods, his
righteousness indureth for ever. The Saints of God are like Dorcas in the
Acts, rich in good works which she did herself, and not entrusted others to
do them, being her own executrix.

Secondly, let this be an use of exhortation and encouragement, to do good in
^. Use.
your life time. Our Savior tells us Mat. 5. that our good works, are our
lights; Let your light so shine, as m^n may see your good works, and glorify
your father which is in heaven. Now which of you will have his candle brought
behind him, and not rather carried before, that he may see which way it goes,
and which way himself goes by it. Do good therefore in your life: early
beneficence has no danger, many joys Isa. 58. 8. For first, the conscience of
good don. Secondly the prayers and blessings of the relieved; Thirdly, the
gratulations of the Saints, are as so many perpetual comforters, which will
make your life pleasant, and your death happy; when every one of you may say to
his Soul with that rich man in the Gospel, but upon better grounds, Soul take
thine case, for thou have treasure laid up, not for many years, but for ever.

Thirdly, as this unjust steward dealt his alms speedily, so also bountifully;
ver. 6. For which, divinity has no particular and set rule: because Charity is
not ^^t by a thread, as justice; but only in general, and at large; that it be
proportionable to our ability, parallel to our means, according to what a man
has, was Saint Paul's to them of Corinth 1 Cor. 8. Liberality is as well seen
in a little as in much; in a few scattered crumbs, as the rich gluttons thronged
table; in the poor widows mite, as the vaste offerings of the treasu^ie; in the
good Samaritane's drops of wine and oil, as in all the Vines and Olive-yards
of Jurie. For charity ( say the Schools) is of what a man has, and not of
what he has not. If thy purse will not hold out to a sepulcher for Christ, with
Joseph of Arimathea, yet with the Mary's, a pound or two of spice would be
seen. If silver and gold thou have none, yet with Saint Peter in the Acts, such
as thou have give unto the poor; and with that Apostle, let at least thy shadow
be a covering for their nakedness, if thy substance cannot reach to a garment.
It was our Saviors promise in the Gospel, That he which gave a cup of cold
water, should not lose his reward; and certainly I can never be so poor as to
want this. Where the widows cruse of oil and meal was low, the Prophet did not
look for a feast, but for a cake.

Lastly, though he was bountiful, yet with discretion and difference; fifty to
one, and but twenty to another; the most to those who were most likely to
help. Do good to all, but especially to those of the household of faith, was the
Apostles advice, Galat. 6. 10. let the righteous man have the greatest share in
your Mammon of unrighteousness. Our rule then of doing good, must be a rule of
wisdom and charity; of wisdom in making good choice of the parties, of
charity in hoping the best of them. Charitatis error salutaris est, we seldom
fin in charity: admit their prayers whom thou have relieved are not acceptable
to God, yet thy Almsdeeds are; the beggar may be damned, when the giver shall
be saved. To instruct you therefore more particularly in this case take with
you these three directions: First, According to thy abilite give to all men
that need, and in equal needs give first to good men rather then to bad men;
and if the needs be unequal, do so too; provided that the need of the poorest
be not violent, nor extreme: but if an evil man be in extreme necessity, he is
to be relieved rather then a good man who can ^a^e longer, and may subsist
without it; and if he be a good man, he will desire it should be so, because
himself is bound to save the life of his brother with doing some inconvenience
to himself: and no difference of virtue or vice can make the ease of one beggar
equal with the life of another Secondly, give no Alms to vicious persons, if
such Alms will support their sin, as if they will continue in idleness; if
they will not work, let them not eat, 2 These. 3. 10. or if they will spend it
in drunkenness and wantonness. Such persons when they are reduced to very
great want, must be relieved in such proportions as may not relieve their dying
lust, but may refresh their faint and dying bodies. Thirdly, the best objects
of charity are poor housekeepers that labor hard, and are burdened with many
children; or gentlemen fallen into sad poverty, especially if by innocent
misfortune; (and if their crimes brought them into it, yet they are to be
relieved according to the former rule;) persecuted persons, widows and
fatherless children, putting them to honest trades or Schools of learning; and
search into the needs of numerous and meaner families; and when thou spiest a
multitude of poor* Christians in one family, conceive that family to be an
hospital of God's own erecting, into which the charity of well-disposed
Christians is to be cast. And so much for the first of our four general rules
of Almsgiving, drawn from the Unjust Steward.

Our second general rule is taken from Solomon, 2. Rule.
in that charitable advice of his, Eccle. 11. 1. Throw thy bread upon the
waters; from whence you may observe, First that it is not da, a thing utterly
given away, bur mitte, a thing sent abroad, like an adventure at sea, which
shall another day return with great advantage. And then Secondly it is bread,
not a stone: when thy brother asks, thou must give him an Alms to fill his
belly, not a reproach to break his heart. He that gives Alms must do it in
mercy; for Alms without mercy, are like prayers without devotion, or religion
without humility. Thy charity then must be distributed in mercy, that is out
of a true sense of the calamity of thy brother, first feeling it in thy self
in some proportion, and then eudeavouring to ease thy self and thy brother of
the common calamity. If thou have no money, yet thou must have mercy, and art
bound to pity the poor, and pray for them, and throw thy holy desires and
devotions into the treasury of the Church; and if thou do what thou art
able, be it little or great, corporal or spiritual, the charity of alms, or
the charity of prayers, a cup of wine, or a cup of water, if it be but love to
the brethren, or a desire to help all, or any of Christ's poor, it shall be
accepted according to what a man has, not according to what he has not. For
love is all this, and all the other Commandments: and it will express it
self where it can, and where it cannot yet it i^ love still, and it is also
sorrow that it cannot. Now against this rule they offend who give Alms out of
custom, or to upbraid the poverty of their brother, or to make him mercenarie
and obliged, or with any unhandsom circumstances.

Thirdly, it must be de pane tuo, of thine own bread, not another; thou must
not undo an hundred men, their wives and children, and build a poor hospital
to keep seven; but of this more hereafter.

In the fourth place it must be super aquas, upon the waters, expounded in the
following ver: thus give thy portion to seven, and to eight, we must not heap
all our liberality on one, but contrive it that it may extend to many. Ali^dest
dare pauperibus, aliud ditare pauperem; it is one thing to give an alm^,
another thing to give an estate. He dispersed and gave to the poor, was the
good man's praise Psalm. 112. there must be distribution, and then all is well.
But now although in giving alms to beggars, and persons of low rank, it is
better to give little to each, that we may give to the more, so extending our
alms to many persons; yet in cases of religion, as in building Hospitalls,
Colleges, and houses for devotion; and in supplying the accidental wants of
decayed Persons, fallen from great plenty to great necssity; it is better to
unite our alms, then to disperse them, to make a noble relief and maintenance
to one, and to restore him to comfort, then to support merely his natural
needs, and keep him alive only, unrescued from sad discomforts.

Lastly it is said here, Throw thy bread upon the waters, i. e. upon the
standing waters, says a Father, the running waters will shift for themselves:
they that abide in their places, whether Hospitalls, or Universities, are like
standing waters, most subject to putrefaction: and yet by the way these last
are not to undergo neither those unjust aspersions of dumb dogg^, or drones;
for though they stand in the marketplace, yet they stand not idly there, not
altogether unwilling to go into the viney ard, had they a vineyard to go into;
ready to be hired, would any one give them their penny. And this shall suffice
for our second general rule, Solomon's rule of giving alms.

Our third general rule of direction 3. Rule.
in this particular, is Christ's own rule, which you have set down Mat. 5. 16.
where in the First place note that they must be works; which is a word that
implies difficulty, and pain, and labor, and is acc^mpanied with some
loathnesse and conluctation; do such works for Gods sake as are hard for thee
to do. In such a word does God deliver his Commandment of the Sabbath; not
that word which in that language signifies ordinary and easy works, but servile
and laborious works, toilsome and painful works, those works thou may not do
upon the Sabbath. But those works in the virtue of the precept of this text
thou must do in the sight of men, those that are hard for thee to do. David
would not consecrat^ nor offer unto God that which cost him nothing. First he
would buy Aranna's threshing floor at a valuable price, 1 Samuel 24. 14. and then
he would dedicate it to God. To give old clothes past wearing to the poor, is
not so good a work, as to make new for them. To give a little of your
superfluities, not so acceptable as the widows gift, who gave all. To give a
poor Soul a farthing at that door where you give a plaier a shilling, is not
equal dealing, for this is to give God the refuse of thy wheat. Amos 8. 6. but
do thou some such things as are truly works in our sense, such as are against
the nature and ordinary practice of worldly men to do; some things by which
they may see that thou do prefer God before honor, and wife, and children;
and had rather build and endow some place for Gods service, then power out
money to multiply titles of honor upon thy self, or enlarge jointures and
portions to an unnecessary and unmeasurable proportion, when there is enough
done before.

Secondly these works must be good works. They are not good works how
magnificent soever, if they are not directed to good ends. Aseditious end
vitiates the best work^ great contributions have been raised, and great sums
given for the maintenance of such refractory persons, as by opposing the
government and discipline of the Church, have drawn upon themselves silencings,
and suspentions, and deprivations, but this has a seditious end; give so then
as that thou may sincerely say, God gave me this to give thus, and so it is a
good work. Thus it must be a work, something of some importance, and a good
work not depraved with an ill end; and then in the last place, it must be your
work, that they may see your good works.

They are not your works if that which you give be not your own, nor is it your
own if it were ill gotten at the first: how long soever it has been possessed,
and how often soever it has been transformed, from money to ware, from ware to
land, from land to office, from office to honor; the money, the ware, the
land, the office, the honor, is none of thine if in thy knowledge it were ill
got at the first. Zacheus. Luke 19. 8. gives half his goods to the poor, but it
is half of his own: for there might be goods in his house, which were none of
his: therefore in the same instrument, he passes that scrutiny, ^f I havetaken
anything unjustly, I restore it fourfold. First let that which was ill gotten
be deducted and restored, and then of the rest which is truly thine own give
cheerfully. When Moses says that our years are seventy, if we deduct from
that term all the hours of our unnecessary sleep, of superfluous sittings at
feasts, of curiosity in dressing, of largeness in recreations, of plotting and
compassing of vanities or sins, scarce any man of seventy, would be ten years
old when he dies. If we should deal so with worldly men's estates, (defalce
unjust gettings) it would abridge and extenuate many a swelling inventory. Till
this defalcation, this scrutiny be made, that you know what is your own, what is
other men's, as your tomb shall be but a monumen^ of your rotten bones, how much
gold or marble soever is bestowed upon it; so that hospital, that
free-schoole, that college, that you shall build and endow, will be but a
monument of your bribery, your extortion, your oppression; and God, who will
not be in debt, (though he ow you nothing that built it) may be pleased to give
the reward of all that to them, from whom that which was spent upon it was
unjustly taken; for the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous,
Prove. 13. 22. the finner may do p^o^s works, and the righteous may be rewarded
for them; the world may think of one founder, and God knows another.

We are now at length, come to our last 4. Rule.
general rule of giving alms, which is Gods way and method of giving alms.
Which I shall hold out unto you in this position. Gods way of giving alms, is
a free and a large giving of what is merely his own, looking for no recompense
again. To explain this, that you may see that all these conditions are
required, to this goodness of God, and in all of them who desire to imitate
God in this particular.

First, he that is bountiful, must be a giver and bestower of good things, and
all he bestows, it must be by way of gift, not by way of requital unto, or by
desert from the party he bestows all on. Thus Christ says Luke 6, 33. that to
do good to those who have done or do good to us, is not thank-worthy, nor is it
bounty; but God is therefore truly good, because he simply merely, and
absolutely, gives away all which he bestows: for he was not, nor can any way
become beholding to any of his creatures, nor had formerly received any thing
from them which might move him hereunto. So Romans 11. 35. who has etc. Nay
until he gave us a being we were not capable of so much, as receiving any
good thing from him.

Secondly, he who is truly termed good, or bountiful, all that he gives away
must be his own; and so all which God bestows it is his own* So Psalm: 24. 1.
The earth is the Lords, the ground we tread on, the place we dwell in, he is
our Landlord. But is that all? for the house may be the Landlords, when the
furniture is the Tenants, therefore he further adds, and the fullness of it is
his also, i e, all the things that fill the world, all the furniture and
provision of it: both all the movables, So Psalm: 50. 11. 12. the cattle and
the fowls upon a thousand hills are mine, says he, and also all the standing
goods, the corn and the oil, which you set and plant are mine, Hos: 2. 9. yea
and the Psalmist in the same 24. Psalm. adds further, that they who dwell
therein are his also; not the house and furniture only, but the inhabitants
themselves. And this by the most sure and most Sovereign title that can be,
better then that of purchase or inheritance, of and from another: for he has
made them; all is thine because all comes of thee, says the same David 1 Chronicles: 29. 11, 12. And all things are not only of him, but through him Romans 11.
36. i e. they cannot stand nor subsitst without him.

Thirdly, he must give largely; it is not bounty else: now God is therefore
said to be rich in goodness, because he is abundant in it; so we find it
comparing Psalm. 33. 5* with Psalm. 104. 24. in which it is said that the earth
is full of his goodness, and his riches; which we may judge of, by what he
says verse 27. of Psalm 104. of what an house he keeps, and what multitudes he
feeds, all these says the Psalmist wait on thee etc. King Ahasuerus to show
his bounty, made a feast to his chief Subjects, but it was but for half a
year, and not to all: some few half years more would well nigh have beggard
him: but God does this continually. The greatest and most bountiful of men,
when they would express the largest of their bounty, speak but of giving
half of their Kingdoms; so Herod, and he did but talk so neither. but God*
bestows whole worlds and Kingdoms, as Daniell speaks Dan. 4. 35. and gives
them to whom he pleases.

Fourthly, he that is bountiful must give all he gives freely and willingly,
which though I put together, yet may imply two distinct things; as first, that
he that gives must be a free agent in it, who is at his choice whether he would
give any thing away or no. The Sun does much good to the world, it affords a
large light, and even half the world at once is full of its glory, yea and all
this light is its own, not borrowed as that of the Moon and Stars is; yet this
Sun cannot be called good or bountiful, because it sends forth this light
necessarily, and naturally, and cannot choose but do so, neither can it draw in
its beams: but God is a free giver; he was at his choice whether he would
have made the world or no, and can yet when he pleases withdraw his Spirit,
and then all things perish, Psalm. 104. 29. Secondly it must be willingly also,
i. e. no way constreined or wrung from him who is to be called bountiful. Now
of God it is said, that he gives all away with delight; for Psalm. 104* 31.
having spoken of ^eeding every living thing, and of other the like works of his
goodness, he concludes with this, God rejoiceth in all his works; i. e. does
all the good he does with delight: It does him good, as it were, to see the
poor creatures feed. The last requisite in bounty, is to look for no
recompense for the time to come: So says Christ, Luke 6 34. If you give, etc.
but ver. 35. So does not your heavenly father. For says he, Do good, and hope
for nothing again, so shall you be like your Father; and the reason is,
because he is so great and so high a God, as nothing we do can reach him, as
David speaks, Psalm. 16. 2. My goodness extends not unto thee, he is too high
to receive any benefit by what we do. And this shall suffice for the four
General Rules of giving Alms, and also of the first general part which we
observed in the division of these words, the quid, the matter, what we are to
do, and that is to provide for our selves by making us friends.

The second General that we held out to 2. General.
you in the division, was the Manner, to use the best means to get these
friends, unrighteous Mammon. Where in the first place I shall resolve a doubt,
and withal the meaning of this expression, The Mammon of unrighteousness. How
comes it to pass that this Mammon, which is the subject of so much good,
should deserve a name so bad? why is it styled the Mammon of unrighteusnesse?
you are to know therefore that wealth is called the Mammon of unrighteousness
for two reasons; the first taken from the cause, the other from the effect.

1. First from the cause, for that wealth is an instrument and cause of much
iniquity. In Cyrus his Court, the Counselors shall be fee'd, that the
building of the Temple may not go on, Ezra 4. and if Saint Paul would but have
said tantum dabo to Felix in the Acts, there had been more Rhetoric in the
Apostles fee, then in all Tertullus his starched Oratory. For this reason Simon
Magus, when he sued in the 8 of the Acts for the holy Ghost, trusted more to
his Mammon, then his Familiars; being consident, there was greater power in
money then in all the Devils in hell, to have conjured, if it might have been,
even the Apostles themselves. And therefore it was the Devils last assault and
battery against our Savior in the 4 of St. Matt: For it any promise could have
seduced Christ, it had been that of the worlds Kingdom and glory: he is the
Son of God indeed, that for such again will not cast himself from the
pinacles of the Temple. It would be no hard work to manifest this truth through
every age of the Church, were it not too visible in our own.

And therefore, I shall from hence, in the 1. Use.
first place, draw an use of reproof for the Ministers of these times. I would
to God I could not say (but I must) even of our own divine Profession, that
which our Savior of his Twelve, Ye are clean, but not all; for how many have
these few year^ brought forth, which having been heretofore forward and eager
for conformity to the doctrine and discipline of this Church, do now seek to
wave and decline both; and that not out of malice or ambition, vices that move
with a kind of life and spirit, but out of that base, earthie, dunghil-sin
Avarice. These are they that long for the Wedge of gold more then the
Babilonish garment, and so themselves may put up the means of a Bishop, care
not who puts on the robes. These are they which make use of the Priest's office
like him in Samuel, only for a piece of bread, and will with that Chaplain of
Micah's, Judge. 17, set you up Idols if you give them but silver. Men that
measure their religion by their fortunes, inclining ever not to what weighs
most, but what advantageth: Saint Augustines Amphibions in Christianity;
Hermophrodite Divines; now a Sectarist, and then a Conformist, and next a
Sectarist again; now an Episcopal man, then a Presbyterian, after that an
Independent; any thing to keep his own, and to get more and more of the Mammon
of unrighteousness.

Secondly from hence let me give them a 2. Use.
word of Dehortation, from all such corrupt sordid courses, whereby they make
Divinity a Trade, and the Pulpit a Shop, where they vent their doctrines
according to the fashions of the Time, not the truth; forgetting that solemn
pomp and Ceremony used in their Orders; where when they received the Bible
from the holy man, with authority to divide the Word and Sacraments, it was not
given to abuse their Masters trust, in betraying that sacred pledge either to
Pulpit-applause, or Pulpit-gain, to the flattery of the giddie multitude, or
the reward.

Secondly this Mammon is called unrighteous Mammon, or the riches of iniquity,
ab effectu, from the effect, because it commonly makes men unrighteous,
endangering the soul of the possessor; and therefore the Church Liturgy does
teach us to pray, In all time of our wealth good Lord deliver us; there being
as great danger in the multitude of temporal blessings, as there was in the
multitude of fish, John 21. where if Christ had not seconded their great
draught with divine help, they had lost both the ship and themselves.

From this expression thus interpreted 1. Doctr.
our first consideration shall be that of our Savior, Mat. 19. 24. that it is a
very hard thing for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Gold is the
heaviest of all metals, no wonder then if it sometimes carries the rich man
downwards. It Is hard for the soul clogged with many weights to ascend to
heaven. Laban and Nabal think only of their Sheep-shearing, and making merry
when they have done, their business is thought on, not their salvation: so
great an enemy is our temporal happiness to our eternal; the love of this
world being that great gulf betwixt Abraham's bos^me and us. Secondly if it be
so hard for the rich, 2. Doctr.
then surely it is as easy for the poor to enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
which is our second consideration upon the point.

Whether a storm or calm are most dangerous, Jonah's Whale or his Gourd,
whether prosperity have lost, or adversity recovered more I know not; certain
I am, none prays so heartily for his daily bread as he that wants it: misery
like Pharaoh's plagues sends them to their prayers that never thought of God
when they were well. Outward losses are inwardly gainful, and it is good for us
that we have been afflicted, nay it would be worse with us were it not
sometimes thus bad; many, had they more wealth would be more wicked, and if
they were not kept short of this world would come short of the next, and then
it had been better for them had it not been so well. I know it is pity that
fair weather should do any harm, and yet it is often seen, we even adore those
Physicians in our sickness, which being recovered, we only salute with a
complement: abundance makes many forget that God, which want would make crouch
to; like Pharaoh's Butler, shaking off his friend with his shackles; or like
beggars, that are no sooner served, but they are gone. Thus I hear Israel
praying in Egypt, quarrelling in the wilderness: When they were at their
Brick-kills they would be at their devotion, and no sooner are they at ease,
but they are wrangling for their fleshpots. I think many a man had not been so
bad had he been but poor. It is the saying of a wise Father, That Solomon's
riches did him more hurt then his wisdom did him good. Wealth like knowledge
puffs up, when poverty (as their infirmities did many in the Gospel) makes men
flock to Christ.

But then in the Third place, I would not have any one here think I speak this
to bar rich men heaven, God forbid. For though it is hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, yet he may enter notwithstanding, the gate
of heaven stands open for him as well as for the poor: and as it is Scripture.
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven, so it is also as
true. Blessed are the rich, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Which shall be our third consideration 3. Doctrine.
upon the point, that heaven gate stands open for the rich, as well as the
poor. Thus Adam and Noah flew up to heaven, with the double monarchy of the
world upon their backs: for they were sole Emperors both of the East and West,
and the whole universe. The Patriarchs also did climb to heaven with much
wealth; many holy Kings with massy Crowns and scepters. It is not wealth
therefore as wealth, but sin that is the clogg that keeps men from ascending;
the burden of covetous desires being more heavy to an empty soul, then much
treasure to the full; for not the mere possession and use of riches offends,
but the affectation. And to this purpose Lombard puts in his observation with a
non dicit propheta, the prophet sai^s not in the Psalm. 62. 10. have not riches,
but set not your heart upon them; which is the true meaning likewise of Prove.
23. 5. for cash not your eyes, in the English is, set not your heart in the
original, as the 4 ver. also testifies; so that the error hangs not upon those,
but our selves; not on riches but that which Idols them, our heart. And
therefore Moses gave a strong caveat to the Israelites, that when their flocks
and herds increased, and their silver and their gold was multiplied, they
should beware least their hearts were lifted up, and so they should forget the
Lord their God, Deuter. 8. 13. Those sublunary creatures raise not distraction
in us, so we make them not our center, if we rest not in them, if we can look
through them to heaven, we may by a good use of them come to heaven, and be
received into these everlasting habitations of the Text.

The use then of this particular consideration 1. Use.
is, first to direct thee, either to abate of thy load, if thou find it too
pressing (which may be done either by loving less, or giving more) or else to
add to thy strength and activity, that thou may ascend: it is more
commendable, by how much more hard to climb to heaven with a burden. But if
the soul be not so active and nimble as to carry up it is self and such a load,
we must with Eliah drop our mantle upon the Prophets, disperse our goods to the
poor, it being better going to heaven naked, then to hell in purple. For when
we are naked these friends of my text shall cloth us with the garment of
righteousness, and when we want, they shall receive us into everlasting
habitations.

Secondly, here is a word of comfort both 2. Use.
to poor and rich, when they shall think upon the goodness of God, who has
opened heaven gates both to the poor and rich. Art thou poor? he that wore a
crown of thorns for thee, has taught thee of thorns and tribulations to make a
crown of glory. Art thou rich? he that is Lord of heaven and earth instructs
thee from this text to attain ev^rlasting habitations. So the poor and ri^ch,
the one by suffering, the other by doing well, may meet at the last day with
rich Abraham, and poor Lazarus, in the Kingdom of heaven. Thus have I don with
a third consideration upon the point.

Now in the fourth place, our fourth consideration 4. Doctrine.
shall be de modo, touching the manner how far we are to desire, and in what
respects to entertain this unrighteous mammon. And doubtless we may entertain
this unrighteous Mammon in my text not only as a servant, but a friend, but by
no means as a Lord. There is virtue in the true use of it, if there be a
qualification in our desires. And therefore Saint Augustine (10 ser: de
tempore. 5 ser. De Verbis Apost. and cap: 10 de civit dei.) disputing of that
impossible analogy between heaven and a rich man; a camel, and the eye of a
needle; would have a rich man understood there cupidum rerum temporalium, and
de talibus superb^entem, such an one as joines avarice to riches, and pride to
avarice: not prohibiting a moderate and timely care of necessary temporals,
but their inordinate appetite; not their propriety and possession, but the
difficulty and eagerness of the pursuit. A wise man, as he will not make
riches the object of his pursuit, so not of his refusal; non amat divitias sed
mavult. He weighs them so evenly 'twixt desire and scorn, that he does neither
undervalue nor indulge them, he makes not his mind his chest, but his house;
in the which he does not lock, but lodge them: he loves them not properly, but
by way of comparison; not as they are riches, but as they are not poverty. Yes
too as they are riches, they may not only be temperately loved and desired,
but prayed for, prayed for as our daily bread; not absolutely as for our
spiritual improvement but by way of restriction: first humbly with submission
to the will of God; then conditionally, so they prove advantageous, either to
our civil or moral good.

And the reasons of the point are first this: 1. Reas.
For if riches are pursued either with an unlawful or unbridled desire, they
lead our reason captive, blindfold our intellectuals, and so dampe and dead all
the faculties of the inward man, that in way of conscience and religion we are
benumbed merely; Naball himself not so stony and chu^^ish, not half so supine
and stupid as we. And therefore your earthly sensualists have this woeful brand
set upon them by the Spirit of God, they are men of this world, they have their
portion in this life only, Psalm. 17.

Secondly we are not to set our hearts 2. Reason.
upon Riches, because riches have nothing substantial in them that may allure
us, but our custom of admiring them. And to cut out our desires by presidents
of custom, is at once folly and madness: it is miserable to follow error by
example. That this man huggs his Mammon, is no authority for my avarice: I must
chalk out my proceedingsby the line of God's command, square them by the rule
of divine truth, and that tells me riches are but snares, vanities, shadows,
nothing, 1 Timothy 6. and Mat. 13. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is
not, faith the Wiseman: For certainly riches make themselves wings, they fly
away as an Eagle toward heaven, Prove. 18. Mark, all their pomp i^ without
certainty or station: things not only fleeting, but voluble: they steal not
from us, but fly away. Their ebb i^ as sudden, as their flow doubtful; and
therefore Psalm. 62. presupposes the one with a si affluxerint, if they flow
about thee, as if their increase were merely casual: but if they do, what then?
Set not your heart upon them, says the same Psalm.

Thus having shown you how you may 5. Doctr.
lawfully desire riches, I shall now in the fi^e place declare, how you may as
lawfully use them. And to this purpose every Christian ought to imitate the
high pattern of his Creator, whose best riches is his bounty; He that has
all, gives all, reservs nothing; in our Creation he gave us our selves, in our
Redemption he gave us himself, and in giving himself for us, gave us our selves
again that were lost. Only good use then commends earthly possessions, and he
alone knows the true use of this unrighteous Mammon, that receives it merely to
disburse it. For what commendation is it to be the keeper of the best earth?
That which is the common Coffer of all the rich Mines, the earth, we do but
tread upon and account vile, because it hides those treasures: whereas the
skilful metallist that refines these precious veins for public use, is
rewarded and honored. If therefore your wealth and your will be not both good,
if your hands be full and your hearts empty, you deserve rather pity then
commendation, and may be said to have riches indeed, but not goods nor
blessings, your burdens being greater then your estates, and your selves
richer in sorrows then in metalls: and this was the rich gluttons case in the
Gospel, who was damned, non quia abstulerat aliena, sed quod non donarat sua,
not for taking any thing from poor Lazarus, but because he relieved not his
wants. It Is reported of Warram Archbishop of Canterbury, being on his
deathbed sent his Steward to see what store of coin was in his treasury; and
when answer was brought that there was either very little, or none at all, the
good man cried, in mirum sic oportuit, that it was very fitting it should be
so; for when, said he, could I die better, then when I am thus even with the
world.

Last of all, our last consideration shall be 6. Doctrine.
this; that though we must, as I said, give of our goods to the poor; yet we
must not give any of our ill gotten goods to the poor, though we may make to
our selves fri^nds of the mammon of unrighteousness, yet we may not make to
our selves friends by riches unlawfully gotten: God is not pleased with such
sacrifice. You know Zacheus his division Luke 19. Half my goods I give to the
poor, and if, etc. Restituit aliena, dedit sua, says Ambrose, he restored
other men's, but gave his own. That Is given to the poor is given to me, says
Christ, shall we then make our Savior a receiver of stolen good's? God
forbid. Yet one case there is, where ill gotten goods must be bestowed on pious
uses, of necessity; and that is, when we know not the right owners, nor where
to find them to make restitution: in this case Saint Augustine must be
followed; Acquisisti male, impende jambene, thou have gotten them ill, bestow
them well. However what is so bestowed is not alms neither: and therefore it
is that generally cheaters and robbers cannot be truly and properly said to
give alms of what they have cheated and robbed, unless they cannot tell the
persons whom they have injured, or the proportions; and in such cases they are
to give those unknown portions to the poor by way of restitution, for it is no
alms: Only God is the supreme Lord to whom those escheats devolue, and the
poor are his receivers; And therefore are said in my Text, to receive you into
everlasting habitations, which is my last general part of the division being
the end and motive to good works, That when ye fail, etc.

In the handling of which part I shall First propose to your consideration
three brief positions, and then proceed to a more full explication of this
general head.

For the Positions, the First is this; that if 1. Position.
men were their own friends, they would make others so with their Mammon, and
while they are on earth, provide for heaven. Blessed are the merciful, for
they shall receive mercy, was our Saviors in the Gospel. God's promises
though they be gracious, yet they are confined, and he only shall receive
mercy, that shows it: The Almighty being therefore bountiful to us, that we
might be so to others; promising, that if we feast those that cannot bid us
again, and build for those that cannot lodge us again; We shall be made
partakers of that Mariage-feast, and those habitations, whose maker and builder
is God. If men then were their own friends, they would make others so with
this Mammon; Why should the rust of that gold rise up in judgment against thee,
the right use of which will place thee with those, that shall sit in judgment?
Turning thy Talents into Cities, and saying the foundation of that building,
whose walls reach up to heaven. And that is our First Po^ition. But can good
works, purchase these eternal habitations? By no means. And therefore

Our Second Position is this: That not 2. Position.
our good works, But Christ's merits, are the formal cause of our Salvation.
For neither the virtue of the works, they be but the fruits of charity; nor
the virtue of charity, that is but the fruit of faith; nor the virtue of faith,
that is but an instrument to apprehend Christ; but he alone our Savior alone by
his merits has made this purchase, and prepared those mansions for us. And yet
mistake me not, there is no less necessity of good works, then if you should
be saved by them; and that though you cannot be saved by them, as the
meritorious causes of your glory, yet that you cannot be saved without them, as
the necessary effects and arguments of that grace which brings glory. Which is
our Second Position upon the point.

Our third runns thus: The poor by 3. Position.
their prayers receive us into those eternal habitations which Christ bestows
and confers upon us. Now the poor here meant in the Text, are either Pauperes
spiritu, the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of God. Mat 5. or
Pauperes sacculo, the poor in purse, and these by their prayers shall receive
thee into heaven. For as Christ is said to receive those alms on earth which
the poor put up, and not he: so the poor in heaven are said to receive us into
everlasting habitations, which Christ shall bestow, and not they. Can you
conceive how the Queen of Sheba and men of Nineve shall rise up at the last
day? In the same manner, but for a better end, shall the men women and children
of your Hospitals rise up and testify on your behalf, saying, Sweet Jesus! had
it not been for these, and these Benefactors, we had perished for want. As
therefore Saint Paul said to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 1. Ye are our hope,
cause these at the last day would witness how he had labored for their
salvation; so may every one of you say of all those to whom you have done good,
You are our hope; for that they shall testify your good works before men and
Angels, and justify that sentence which shall receiv you into everlasting
habitations. These are the three brief Positions I mentioned.

Now that we may come to a more full explication of the point, these
everlasting habitations according to several Expositors are severally
interpreted; for first, to be received into these everlasting habitations, is
to be taken into the protection of God, according to Psalm. 90. 1. which is
interpreted by the next Psalm. 1, ad 4. ver. from which first interpretation our
position shall be, That it is better to give away all that we have to the
poor, and have God with nothing, then all the world without God. To have God
with nothing, did I say? Nay in having him we have all things, says Saint
Cyprian de Coen. Dom. cum Dei sint omnia. Since all things are God's, to him
that has God nothing can be wanting, except he be wanting unto God: nothing
says the Father, no good thing says the Prophet; the young Lions do lack and
suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good,
Psalm. 34. Though all earthly persecutions entrench thee, and misery seems to
come upon thee like an armed man, and thou art fallen into the jaws of those
enemies, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword, yet
Angels shall encampe about thee, and the Lord of Hosts shall be thy buckler and
thy shield; the neighing of the horse, the noise of the trumpet shall not
invade thee; or if they do, and at such a strait that the arm of flesh grows
weak, yet his mercy is great unto the heavens, and his truth reaches unto the
clouds: the glorious host above shall muster all their forces to assist thee;
the stars shall fight for thee, and thunder speak loud unto thy enemies. Thus
in the height of miseries God shall be thy castle and strong tower, and under
the shadow of his wings shall be thy refuge, till these calamities be
overpast. God never leaves his in their extremities, whether in the Cave, or
in the Mountain; in the Den, or in the Dungeon; he is always there both in
his power and assistance, and sometimes in his person too: when all natural
supplies grow hopeless, God purveies for his children by his miracles: rocks
shall burst with water, and Ravens provide bread, and clouds drop fatness, and
heavens shower mannah, and Angels administer comforts, which when we are naked
shall cloth us, and receive us, or rather usher us into these everlasting
habitations.

Now besides this exposition of the words, these everlasting habitations may
receive a double interpretation; one in respect of the everlasting fame and
glory of your name in this world, the other in regard of your everlasting
reward in the next: and that first branch has a double relation; one to your
self, the other to your posterity: and truly even this part of the reward and
retribution, namely in this life, is worth a great deal of your cost and alms,
that God shall establish your posterity in the world, and in the good opinion
of good men. The righteous shall have hope in his death, Prove. 14. 32. i. e.
hope for himself in another world, and hope of his posterity in this world;
for, says he, he leaves an inheritance to his children's children, Prove.
13. 22. i. e. an inheritance out of which he has taken and restored all that
was unjustly got from men, and taken a bountiful part which he has offered to
God in pious uses, that the rest may descend free from all claims and
encumbrances upon his children's children. The righteous is merciful and
lends, Psalm. 37. 26. merciful as his Father is merciful in perpetual, not in
transitory endowments (for God did not set up his lights, his Sun and Moon for
a day, but for ever; and such should our light, our good works be) He is
merciful and lends. To whom? for to the poor he gives, he looks for no
return from them; yet he lends, he that has pity on the poor, lends to
the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. The righteous is merciful and lends, and then as
David adds, his seed is blessed; blessed in this which follows there, that he
shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever; which he ratifies again,
Surely he shall not be removed for ever, i. e. he shall never be moved in his
posterity.

Secondly as he is blessed that way, blessed in the establishment of his
possession upon his childrens children; so he is blessed in this, that his
honor and good name shall be powered out as a fragrant oil upon his posterity,
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 6. Their
memory shall be always alive, and always fresh in their posterity, when
the name of the wicked shall rot. So then the fruit of the righteous is a tree
of life, Prove. 11. 30. i. e. the righteous shall produce plants that shall grow
up and flourish, so his posterity shall be a tree of life to many generations.

The other interpretation of everlasting habitations, is in regard of your
everlasting reward in the next world: but before I speak of your reward in the
next world, I will speak a word or two of your reward in this world, and show
you how God will reward you with grace in this world, before he rewards you
with glory in the next; by giving you the grace to use those temporal
blessings which he has given you to his glory here, and to your glory both
here and hereafter: which shall be cleared to you from Mat. 5. 16. Let your
light so shine, etc. Your Father is not meant here as if men should glorify
God as the common Father of all by Creation, nor as he is the Father of some in
a more particular consideration, in giving them large portions, great
patrimonies in this world: for thus he may be my Father, and yet dis-inherit
me; he may give me plenty of temporal blessings, and withold from me spiritual
and eternal blessings. These are not the Paternities of the Text, that men
should glorify God as the Father of all men by Creation, nor as the Father of
all rich men, by their large patrimonies, but as he is your Father, as he is
made yours, as he is become yours by that particular grace of using the temporal
blessings which he has given you to his glory, In letting your light shine
before men.

Upon which our first doctrinal Observation shall be, That it were better God
disinherited 1. Doctrine.
us, so as to give us nothing, then that he gave us not the grace to use that,
that he gave us, well. Without this all his bread were stones, all his fishes
serpents, all his temporal liberality and blessings, a mere malediction and
curse. How much happier had that man been, that has wasted thousands in play,
in riot, in wantonness, in sinful excesses, if his parents had left him no
more at first, then he has left himself at last, how much nearer to the
Kingdom of heaven had he been, if he had been born a beggar here. Nay though
he have done no ill of such excessive kinds, how much happier had he been, if
he had had nothing left him, if he have don no good.

The second Observation in this particular 2. Doctr.
shall be, That it is a fearful thing for rich men, not to use their riches for
God's glory. There cannot be a more fearful commination upon man, nor a more
dangerous dereliction from God, then when God says Psalm: 50* 8, 12. I will not
reprove thee for thy sacrifices; Though thou offer none, I care not; i will never
tell thee of it, nor reprove thee for it; I will not reprove thee for thy
sacrifices. And when he says, as he does there, If I be hungry I will not tell
thee, I will not awake thy charity; I will not excite thee, nor provoke thee
with any occasion of feeding me, in feeding the poor. When God shall say to
thee, I care not whether you come to Church or no, whether you pray or not,
repent or no, confess, receive or no; this is a fearful dereliction: so it
is when he says to a rich man, I care not whether your light shine out, or no;
whether men see your good works, or no; I can provide for my Glory otherwise.
For certainly God has not determined his glory, and his purpose, so much in
that, to make some men rich, that the poor might be releeved, for that ends in
a bodily releife; as in this, that he has made some men poor, whereby the rich
might have occasion to exercise their charity; for that riches to spiritual
happiness. For which use the poor do not so much need the rich, as the rich
need the poor; the poor may better be saved without the rich, then the rich
without the poor. But when men shall see that that God who is the Father of us
all by creating us, and the Father of all the rich, by enriching them, is also
become your Father, yours by adoption, yours by infusion of that particular
grace to do good with your goods; then are you made blessed instruments to that
which God seeks here, his glory, they shall glorify your father which is in
heaven; and then your Father which is in heaven will glorify you. Herein is my
Father glorified, says Christ, John. 15. 8. that ye bear much fruit. The seed
sowed in good ground bore some a Hundred fold, the least Thirty, Mark. 4. 20.
The seed in this case is the example that is before you of those good men whose
life has shined out so, that you have seen their good works. Let this seed,
these good examples bring forth Hundreds, and Sixties, and Thirties in you,
much fruit: for herein is your Father glorified that you bear much fruit. Of
which plentiful increase I am afraid there is one great hindrance that passes
through many of you, i. e. that when your Will lies by you, in which some
little lamp of this light is set up, something given to God in pious uses; if a
Ship miscarry, if a Debtor break, if your Estate be any way empaired, the
First that suffers, the first that is blotted out of the Will, is God and his
legacy: And if their estates increase, portions increase, and perchance other
legacies; but Gods portion and legacy stands at a stay.

Now let me from hence give you a double use* as our Savior did of his
passion: Christ left two uses, of his passion, application, and Imitation: he
suffered for us; 1. Pet. 2. 22. For us, i. e. that we might make his death
ours, apply his death; And then as if followers there, he left us an example.
So Christ gives us two uses of the reformation of religion; First the Doctrine
how to do good works, without relying on them, as meritorous; and then
example. Many, very many men in this City, Whose lights have shined out before
you, and you have seen their good works; That as this noble City has justly
acquired the reputation; and the testimony of all who have had occasion to
consider their dealings in that kind, that they deal most faithfully, most
justly, most providently in all things which are committed to their trust, for
pious uses from others, not only in a full employment of that which was given,
but in an improvement thereof, and then an employment of that improvement to
the same pious uses* so every man in his particular, may propose to himself
some of those blessed examples, which have risen among your selves, and follow
that, and exceed that: that as your Lights are Torches, and not petty Candles,
and your Torches better then others Torches, so he also may be a larger example
to others, then others have been to him: For herein is your Father glorified,
if you bear much fruit; and that is the end of all that we all do, that men
seeing it may glorify our Father which is in heaven, that our Father which is
in heaven may glorify us, by receiving us into these everlasting habitations,
which is the last interpretation of the words, our eternal reward in heaven.

Of which everlasting habitations of this eternal reward I know not well what
to say. And indeed it is not for a finite intellect to conceive, much less to
express those infinite joies which God has prepared (says the Apostle) for
them that love him, 1 Cor* 2. 9. And those that think to attein to the knowledge
of these eternal habitations by speculation, will be reckoned as curious
searchers into God's secrets, and may justly expect the reproof of the
Galileans, Acts 1. Why stana ye gazing up into Heaven. Nevertheless to
satisfy you as far as the Scripture, and the Ancient Doctors of the Catholic
Church warrant me, I will observe this method in explaining these eternal
habitations, which is all one with eternal life. I will first show you what
this eternal life is by the privation of it, what the life of heaven is by the
life of hell; and then I will give you a glimpse (for a full sight it is
impossible) what it is in its self.

For the first the privation of this life 1. Doctr.
which is hell our first position or Doctrine shall be this; There are some
things concerning hell, in which a man may go beyond his reason, and yet those
things have no relation to his faith. For that there is an hell, a damnation,
an eternal life there; and why it is; and when it is; it is clear enough from
Scripture: but what this damuation is, neither the tongue of good Angels, that
know damnation by the contrary, by the fruition of salvation; Nor the tongue of
bad Angels, who know damnation by a lamentable experience, is able to express
it. There are things in which a man may go beyond his reason, and yet not meet
with faith neither: of such a kind are those things that concern the locality
of hell, and the materiality of the torments thereof. For that hell is a
certain and limited place, beginning here, and ending there: and extending no
farther; or that the torments of hell, be material, or elementary torments,
which in natural consideration can have no consideration, no affection, or
appliablenesse to the tormenting of a spirit; these things neither sets my
reason, nor the bind my faith; neither opinion, that it is, or is not* so, does
command our reason so, but that probable reasons may be brought on the other
side; neither opinion does so command our faith, but that a man may be saved,
though he think the contrary. Our instruction therefore is, that in such a
point it is always lawful to think so: as we find does most advance, and
exalt our own devotion, and Gods glory, in our estimation. But now in the
Second place when we shall have given to these words, by which hell is
expressed in the scripture the heaviest signification, that either the nature
of those words can admit in themselves, or a^ they are types and
representations of hell; as fire and brimstone, and weeping, and gnashing, and
darkness, and the worm; and as they are laid together by the Prophet, Isa.
30. 33. Tophet, ( i. e. Hell) is deep and large (there is the capacity and
extent, room enough) it is a pile of fire and much wood (there is the
durablenesse of it) and the breath of the Lord to kindle it like a stream of
brimstone (there is the vehemency of it): when all is done; the hell of hells,
the torment of torments is, the everlasting absence of God, and the everlasting
impossibility of ever returning to his presence.

This then is our second Position of our 2. Doctr.
discourse in this particular, that hell is the privation of the beatificall
vision of the blessed Trinity. And this I shall amplify by giveing you the
several degrees of this privation. First in general, for the foundation of all
the rest, you are to know that the torments and miseries of hell are thus
described, by our blessed Savior, Matt: 25. 4. depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his angels. In this word from me
is the height of paint, the extremity of torment: and thus I will prove it.
Frst it is fearful to undergo pain, though that pain be but momentary: as for
instance, to thrust a finger into the fire, though but for the turning of a
hand, or to have but one single drop of brimstone fall into the eye, the misery
but of this single drop of brimstone were unsufferable. But then Secondly, for
the whole man to lie under everlasting Cataracts, and showers of Brimstone: to
have the body eternally fed upon by a fire that never goes out, and the soul
by a worm that never dies, the misery of this as far surmounts that other, as
eternity exceeds time; and yet this is not all. For thirdly, the damned sinner
must go from Christ into this eternity of torment. Depart from me ye cursed,
into everlasting fire. Where the first part of the sentence is incomparably the
heaviest; the departing from Christ worse then the everlasting fire: the
intensiveness of that fire, the air of that brimstone, the anguish of that
worm, the discord of that howling, the gnashing of those teeh is no
comparable, no considerable part of the torment, in respect of this departing
from Christ. Which is the privation of the sight of God, the banishment from
the presence of God, an absolute hopelesnesse, an utter impossibility of ever
coming to that which sustaines the miserable in this world; who though they see
no sun here, yet they shall see the son of God there. This depart from me
then is the perfection of horror, the very essential form and quiddity of
damnation it self. The righteous they depart, they go to^, but they go with
Christ into heaven, the other must go from Christ into hell. Into hell did I
say, why that is not so much neither. It were an happiness to go to hell with
Christ, no joy, no blisseat all to the righteous to go without Christ into
heaven. For heaven is hell without Christ, and hell with Christ is heaven; and
the reason of this is, because the happiness of the Saints does not consist in
the place where they are, but in the company which they enjoy: their beatitude
is not bounded and terminated by any etheriall dimensions of space, any
supernatural localities, but it is comprehended in the Beatificall Vision of
the Fathers power, the Sons wisdom, the Holy-Ghosts goodness; it is
swallowed up in that extati^all ravishing contemplation of the incomparable
beauty, the unutterable and unconceivable glory of the blessed Trinity; the
privation of which Beatificall Vision exceeds the miseries and torments, those
matchless, those endless miseries and torments even of hell it self. And thus
have I given you a general description, of this privation of the Beatifical
Vision, what it is in the general notion of it.

But then in the second place, to come (as I promised) to the several
particular degrees of this privation; there is comprehended in this privation
of the Beatifical Vision in the first place, a privation of the care of God,
that a damned sinner is out of his care, out of his thought. It is a fearful
thing, says the Apostle, to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10.
13. Yet there was a case in which David found it an ease to fall into the hands
of the living God, but to fall out of the hands of the living God is an horror
beyond our expression, beyond our imagination: that God should let my soul fall
out of his hands into a bottomless pit, and roll an unremoveable stone upon
it, and leave it to that which i^ finds there (and it shall find that there
which it never imagined till it came there) and never think any more of that
soul, never have any more to do withit. Then secondly a second degree of this
privation of the Beatifical Vision i^, that herein does consist a privation of
the general providence of God, that such an one is out of his general
providence as well as his particular care: that of that Providence of God that
studies the life of every Weed, and Worm, and Ant, of every Spider and Toad,
and Viper, there should never any beam flow out upon me, never any ray dart
upon me, never any line center in me: That the most contemptible creatures
under heaven, and the most loathsome creatures under heaven, and the most
venomous creatures under heaven, should be entertained and protected under the
shadow of his wing; and I, only I, excluded as a certain prey for the Raven
and Dragon of the bottomless pit. Thirdly here is a privation of the power of
God; that that God who looked upon me when I was nothing, and called me by his
omnipotent power when I was not, as though I had been, out of the womb and
depth of darkness, will not look upon me now: when, though amiserable and a
banished and a damned creature, yet I am his creature still and contribute
something to his glory, even in my damnation. Lastly which is the highest
degree of this Privation, here is an eternal privation of the mercy of God:
That that God who has often looked upon me even in my foulest uncleanness,
and vilest sins: who when I had shut out the eye of the day, the Sun; and the
eye of the night, the taper, and the eyes of all the world with curtains, and
windows, and doors, did yet see me, and see me in mercy too, by making me see
that he saw me, and sometimes brought me to a present remorse, and for that
time to a forbearing of that sin, I was then acting, should now so turn himself
from me to his glorious Saints and Angels, as that no Saint nor Angel, nor
Christ Jesus himself should ever pray him to look toward me more, never
remember him that such a soul there is* That that God who has so often said to
my soul, Why will thou die? and so often sworn to my soul, As the Lord lives I
would not have thee die but live, will nether let me die nor live, but die an
everlasting life, and live an everlasting death: That that God, who when he
could not get into me by standing and knocking at my heart, by his ordinary
means of entering by his Word, and Ministershis mercies, has applied his
judgments, and has shak'd the house this body with Agues and Palsies, and
has set this house on fire with Fevers and calentures, and frighted the master
of the house, my soul, with horrors and heavy apprehensions, and so made and
forced an entrance into me; That that God should frustrate all his own
purposes, and practices upon me, and leave me and cast me away, as though I had
cost him nothing, that this God at last at the hour of death, should let this
Soul go away, as a smoke, as a vapor, as a bubble, and that then this Soul
cannot be so happy, as to be a smoke, a vapor, nor a bubble, but must lie in
darkness, as long as the Lord of light is light it is self, and never spark of
that lighe reach to my Soul; what Tophet is not Paradise? what brimstone is not
amber? what gnashing of teeth is not music? what gnawing of the worm is not a
tickling? what torment is not a marriage bed to this damnation? to be secluded
eternally, eternally, eternally from the sight of God. And thus have I shown
you what this eternal life is by the privation of it, what the life of heaven
is by the life of hell, I will now endeavor to give you a glimpse, for a full
sight it is impossible, of these everlasting habitations, this eternal life in
it self.

And here in my expressions of these everlasting habitations, I will take a new
course, and only tell you this of them, that they cannot be expressed. For if
that beloved aisciple, whose head lay near his Masters heart, who from the
bosom of his Lord drank deep of the heavenly wisdom, if Saint John I say brake
of his Revelation with a nemo scit no man knows, Apoca: 2. 17. needs must I
leave you at this time with a Theologia negativa, a negative divinity, or
divine ignorance, and only tell you what is not heaven. The plumage of the
swan appears more fair, when it is opposed to the ravens blackness; and we
may best conjecture at the joys above, if we consider the miseries here
below. This life of ours if it were not short, yet it is miserable, and if it
were not miserable, yet it is short. In this world are a world of troubles, we
have no resting place here says the Prophet; glory and rest are two things
that meet not here: the glorious life is not the most quiet, and the quiet life
is for the most part inglorious; riches and honor like Absolons mule do
sometimes leave their Master in extremity. A consideration if well digested,
which would gather our divided thoughts and rouse up our Souls to seek first
the Kingdom of heaven; and then we know coetera adjicientur other things shall
be added unto us. And indeed when heaven is once named all other things are but
and cetera's, not worth the naming. But now for heaven it is observed by those
that are skilled in the holy tongue, that in the sacred name Jehova are none
but literae quiescentes, mystically impliing thus much unto us, that Deus est
centrum quietatiuum, that God is the God of rest; in whose presence there is
joy, and fullness of joy, and joy for evermore, as David sings. When once we
shall be planted in that celestial paradise, there shall no apple of
contention grow between God and us. It is Nazianzens note, upon that divine
antheme, of three parts, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, good will
toward men, Luke 2. pugnas and dissidia nescire deum and angelos, that there
are no broils nor brabbles in heaven. There shall the Soul be satisfied in all
her desires: there shall be no actual or potentiall evil; no actual, because
grace being consummate in the Saints, excludes all sin; no poetential, for they
being confirmed in goodness, cannot sin. There shall be no sorrow, nor tears
the effect of sorrow, those rivers of our eyes shall be dried up; there shall
be no more death, for resurrectio erit mors mortis. At that jubilee of glory,
the conqueror shall be disarmed, and we whom death has overcome, shall
overcome death. Our bodies rising first immortal, not subject to any more
disease or death, we shall not any more stand in need of those ordinary helps
of meat and drink, by which our nature is preserved: for it shall then be our
meat and drink to do our Fathers will. Secondly, our bodies shall rise
glorious, the just shall shine like the sun in the firm ament; says the
Prophet, and qualis erit splendour animarum, quando solis claritatem habebit lux
corporum, and how great then shall the splendor of our Souls be, when that of
our bodies shall exceed the Suns. And to confirm the verity and solidity of
this glory, it shall not only be revealed unto us, but (says the Apostle) in
us, Jerusalem (as the Kings daughter) is all glorious within. Thirdly, they
shall be perfect, every defective member shall be restored to it is inregrity.
Jacob shall not halt, nor Isaac be blind, nor Mephibosheth be lame. Fourthly,
our bodies shall be raised impassionate, free from such passions, as may hurt
and offend, but not from the passions of joy, the joy of the soul, shall be the
soul of joy. Lastly, they shall be spiritual, that is in quality, not in
substance; they shall still remain the same quantitative bodies, bounded and
limited with their natural dimensions. For otherwise how could Job see God with
the same eyes, he had while he lived. Our bodies therefore shall be endued with
most unspeakable perfections, and most perfectly clarified from all
imperfections, but they shall not be disrobed of their natural properties:
briefly they shall be spiritual in a threefold sense. Fist in that they shall
be wholly freed from all earthly drossy corruptions, all the senses shall be
more subtle, the body it is self shall become more light, and apt to motion;
and as near the nature and quality of a spirit as a body may be. Secondly,
cause they shall be no more upheld, and maintained by earthly means and
helps, but be preserved by spiritual means, i e. by the power of Gods holy
Spirit. What use shall there be of the creature, when the Creator himself the
Lord of heaven and earth is in place. And in these two respects especially,
they shall be (...), equal to angels. Thirdly they shall be Spiritual because
they shall never rebel, but be always subject and obedient to the regenerate
soul, without contradiction they shall obey the motions of the spirit. Other
particulars I cease to enquire, cause the Scripture does forbear to deliver
them; and in the silence of the Holy Ghost I will not be curious: least by this
means I loose my self, in the labyrinth of these everlasting habitations,
whereto the Arts never taught an entrance in; nor Divinity ever discovered a
passage out. The greatest light we have (which is but dimm neither) is held out
unto us by Scripture, and the primitive Doctors of the Church, in these
particulars of eternal life, or eternal habitations: first in the comfort that
the Saints shall partake of there, Secondly in their joy, Thirdly in the sight,
and Lastly in the knowledge which the Saints shall have of the blessed Trinity
in heaven. And first as to the comfort, this is in some sort expressed, John 14
2. In my fathers house are many mansions. Where our Savior administers
several Recipees of comfort to his afflcted disciples, by reason of his going
away: and of this comfort the first beam is, that that state which he promises
them, and in them all faithful believers, is a house; it has a foundation, no
earthquake shall shake it; it has a wall, no artillery shall batter it; it
has a roof, no tempest shall pierce it. It is a house that affords security,
and that is one degree of comfort. And then Secondly it is his Fathers house, a
house in which he has interest; and that is another degree of this
consolation. It was his fathers, and so his; and his, and so ours; for we are
not joint purchasers of heaven with the Saints; but we are coheirs with Christ
Jesus: by death we are gathered to our fathers in nature, and by death through
his mercy gathered to his father also, where we shall have a full satisfaction,
in that wherein Saint Philip placed all satisfaction, Lord show us thy Father
and it is enough, John the 4. 8. We shall see his father, and see him made ours
in Christ. And then a third degree of this comfort is, that in this house of
his fathers, thus by him made ours, there are mansions, which word in the
original, and latin, and our language, signifies a remaining, an abiding, and
fixing, and denotes the perpetuity, the everlastingnesse of that state, an
everlasting State; and yet a state but of one day, because no night shall
overtake or determine it, but such a day as is not of a thousand years, which
is the longest measure of any day in scripture, but a thousand Millions of
Millions of generations; a day that has no pridie nor postridie, yesterday
does not usher it in, nor to morrow shall not drive it out. Methusalem with all
his hundreds of years, Genesis 5. Was but a mushrom of a nights growth to this
day. And all the four Monarchies, with all their thousands of years, and all
the powerful Kings, and all the bueatiful Queens of the world, were but a bed
of flowers, some gathered at six, some at seven, some at eight, all in one
morning in respect of this day. In all the two thousand years of nature, before
the law given by Moses, and the two thousand years of law before the Gospel
given by Christ, and the too thousand years of grace, which are runnig now, (of
which last hour, we have heard three quarters strike already, more then sixteen
hundred of this last two thousand spent) in all this six thousand, and in all
those which God may be pleased to add, in this house of his Fathers in heaven
there was never heard quarter-clock to strike, never seen minute glass to run.
No time less then it is self would serve to express this time, which is
intended in this word mansions: which is also exalted with another beam a
fourth beam of comfort, that they are also many; in my Fathers house are many
mansions. In which circumstance we do consider the comfort of our society and
conversation in heaven, since society and conversation is noe great element and
ingredient into the comfort which we have in this world. First we shall have an
association with Christ himself, for where he is it is his promise that we also
shall be, John 14. Secondly we shall have an association with the Angels, and
such an one as we shall be such as they. Thirdly we shall have an association
with the Saints, and not only to be such as they, but to be they; and to be
with all those who come from the East etc. Mat. 9. 11. Where we shall be so far
from being enemies to one another, as that we shall not be strangers to one
another; and so far from envying one another, as that all that every one has
shall be every others possession: where all Souls shall be so entirely knit
together, as if there were but one Soul, and God so entirely knit to every
Soul, as if there were as many Gods as Souls.

And this is that glimpse of the eternal life I promised you; a mere cursorie
sight and view of those everlasting habitations and mansions in the Text: and
here as I have given you a glimpse of the comforts, so let me beg leave of your
patience to present you with a taste of the joys of heaven likewise: and it
shall be a taste, most properly so called; For it shall be but of one drop of
the Fountain of life; I mean that drop which Dives in Hell desired to cool his
tongue with: which must not be so understood, as if the pains of hell were so
small that they might be quenched by one drop of water; but rather thus, that
one drop of water, where Abraham and Lazarus are, is of that infinite virtue,
as could it be but dropped into the pains of hell, it would quench them all. Now
the greatness of these joies may be comprehended both by the fullness of the
objects in heaven; and also the fullness of our enjoiying the objects there. The
objects in heaven are many, but the sum of all is God, whom we shall see face
to face; and in him all that is good and joifull; for as looking in a glass
we see the glass, our selves, and most things that are in the room about it:
so in the glass of the blessed Trinity, we shall by the Beatifical Vision,
see the glory of that Trinity, our selves, an our own glory, and all the
Angels, Saints and pleasures that are about that Trinity. And as our joy shall
be full, in regard of the fullness of the object, so it shall be full too in
regard of our fullness of enjoying that object. We shall feel this joy with
all the powers and faculties of our souls, ever beholding, though always
satisfied, and ever drinking, yet still thirsting, not with any thirst of
dryness, but with a thirst of desire after that water of life, those rivers of
joy, which are said Psalm. 46. 4. to make glad the city of the Lord. And thus
as I have given you a taste of these joies from the Scriptures drop of water,
so now should I give you all those rivers of Rhetorical expressions, should I
open all the floodgates of Oratorie, with which the Primitive Doctors of the
Church have endeavored to express those joies, all would prove but as one drop
of water in respect of the infinite ocean of those joies. And this may appear
from that story of Saint Augustine concerning Saint Jerome, of whom Saint
Augustine says, quae Hieronimus nescivit nullus hominum unquam scivit, that
that S. Jerome knew not, no man ever knew: and S. Cyril (to whom S. Augustine
said that) said also to Saint Augustine in magnifying Saint Jerome, that when a
Catholic Priest disputed with an Heretic, and cited a passage of Saint
Jerome, and the Heretic said, Jerome lied, instantly he was struck dumb. Yet
of this last and everlasting joy and glory of Heaven, in the fruition of God,
Saint Jerome would adventure to say nothing, no not then when he was divested
of his mortal body, dead: for as soon as he died at Bethlem he came instantly
to Hippo Saint Augustines Bishopric, and though he told him Hieronymi anima
sum, I am the soul of that Jerome to whom thou art now writing about the joies
and glory of heaven, yet he said no more of that but this, Quid quaeris brev^
immittere vascule totum mare? Can thou hope to pour the whole sea into a
thimble, or take the whole world into thy hand? And yet that is casier then to
comprehend the joy and ^he glory of heaven in this life. Nor is there any
thing that makes this more incomprehensible then that semper in 1 These. 4. 17.
that we shall be with God for ever* For this eternity, this everlastingness, is
not only incomprehensible to us in this life, but even in heaven, we can never
know it experimentally, no not in heaven: and all knowledge in heaven is
experimental; as all knowledge in this world is causal, (we know a thing if we
know the cause thereof) so the knowledge in heaven is effectual,
experimental; we know it because we have found it to be so. The endowments of
the blessed, those which the school calls dotes beatorum, are ordinarily
delivered to be these three, visio, dilectio, fruitio, the sight of God, the
love of God, and the fruition, the enjoying, the possessing of God. Now as no
man can know what it is to see God in heaven but by experimental and actual
seeing of him there, nor what it is to love God there, but by such an actual
and experimental love of him; nor what it is to enjoy and possess God, but by
an actual enjoying, and experimental possessing of him; so can no man tell what
the eternity and everlastingnesse of all these is, till he has passed through
that eternity, and that everlastingnesse; and that he can never do. For if it
could be passed through, then it were not eternity. How barren a thing is
Arithmetic? and yet Arithmetic will tell you how many grains of sand will
fill this hollow vault to the firmament. How empty a thing is Rhetoric? and
yet Rhetoric will make absent and remote things present to your understanding.
How weak a thing is Poetry? and yet Poetry is a counterfeit creation, and
makes things which are not as though they were; how infirm, how impotent, are
all assisttances if they be put to express this eternity? The best help that I
can assign you, is to use well aeternum vestrum, your own, as Saint Gregory
calls our whole course of this life, aet^rnum nostrum our eternity; aequum est
ut qui in aeterno suo pecaverit, in aeterno de^ puniatur, says he, it is but
justice, that he that has sinned out his own eternity, should suffer out Gods
eternity. So if you suffer out your own eternity, in submitting your selves to
God in the whole course of your life, in surrendering your will entirely to
his, and glorifying him in a constant patience under all your tribulations, it
is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you, and to you which are troubled rest with us, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6. And thus much
shall suffice for the joies of these eternal habitations.

The third and fourth particulars (that I mentioned before) to illustrate these
ever lasting habitations in the text, are the sight and the knowledge which the
Saints shall have of the blessed Trinity there. And both these are held out
unto us in that single text of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see
through a glass darkly, but then face to face: now I know in part, but then
shall I know even as I also am known. Now as for the sight of God here, our
theater is the world, our Medium and Glass is the creature, and our light is
reason; and as for our knowledge of God here, our Academy is the Church, our
Medium the Ordinances of the Church, and our light, the light of Faith: so we
may consider the same terms, First for the sight of God, and then for the
knowledge of God in the next life.

First the sphere, the place where we shall see him, is Heaven. He that asks me
what heaven is, means not to hear me, but silence me: he knows I cannot tell
him: When I meet him there, I shall be able to tell him, and then he will be as
able to tell me: yet then we shall be but able to tell one another this that we
enjoy is heaven; but the tongue of Angels, the tongue of gloried Saints, shall
not be able to express what that heaven is: for even in heaven our faculties
shall be finite. Heaven is not a place that was created, for all places that
were created shall be dissolved. God did not Plant a Paradise for himself, and
remove to that; as he planted a Paradise for Adam, and removed him to that. But
God is still where he was before the World was made. And in that place where
there are more Sunns, then there are Stars in the firmament: for all the Saints
are suns; and more light inanother sun, the Son of righteousness, the Son of
glory, the Son of God, then in all them; in that illustration, in that
emanation, that effusion of beams of Glory, which began not to shine six
Thousand years ago, but six Thousand millions of millions ago; and had been
six thousand millions of millions before that, in those eternal, in those
uncreated heavensshall we see God. This is our sphere, and that which we are
fain to call our place. And then our Medium, our way to see them, is Patefactio
sui, Gods laying himself open, his manifestation, his revelation, his
evisceration, and unbowelling of himself to us there. Does God never afford
this manifestation of himself in his essence to any in this life? We cannot
answer yea nor no, without offending a great part in the School. There are that
say, that it is fere de Fide, little less then an Article of Faith that it
has been so; And Aquinas denies it so absolutely, as that his followers
interpret him De absoluta potentia, that God by his absolute power cannot make
a man, remaining a mortal man, and under the definition of a mortal man,
capable of seeing his essence; As we may truly say, that God cannot make a
beast remaining in that nature capable of grace or Glory. Now as it is fairly
argued that Christ suffered not the very torments of very hell, because it is
essential to the torments of hell to be eternal, they were not torments of hell,
if they received an end; So it is fairly argued too that neither Adam in his
ecstasy in Paradise, nor Moses in his conversation in the mount, nor the other
Apostles in the transfiguration of Christ, nor Saint Paul in his rapture to the
third heavens, saw the essence of God; because he that is admitted to the sight
of God, can never look off, nor lose that sight again. Only in heaven shall
God proceed to this patefaction, this manifestation, this revelation of
himself, and that by the light of Glory. The light of Glory is such a light,
as that our Schoolmen dare not say confidently, that every beam of it is not
all of it. For as the essence of God is indivisible, and he that sees any of
it, sees al of it; so is the light of glory communicated entirely to every
blessed soul. To this light of glory, the light of honor, is but a glowworm,
and majesty it self but a twilight; nay that Gospel its self, which the Apostle
calls the glorious Gospel, is but a star of the least magnitude. And if I
cannot tell what to call this light by which I shall see it, what shall I call
that which I shall see by it, the essence of God himself? and yet there is
something else then this fight of God intended in that which remains; I shall
not only see God face, to face, but I shall know him, and know him even as I
also am known.

In this consideration God alone is all; in all the former there was a place,
and a means, and a light; here for this perfect knowledge of God, God is all
those. Then says the Apostle God shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Here God
does all in all, but here he does all by instruments, even in the infusing of
Faith, he works by the ministry of the Gospel: but there he shall be all in
all, do all in all immediately by himself; for Christ shall deliver up the
Kingdom to God even the Father; his Kingdom is the administration of his
Church by his ordinances in the Church: at the resurrection there shall be an
end of that Kingdom; no more Church, no more working upon men by Preaching,
but God himself shall be all in all: therefore it is said, in heaven there is
no Temple; but God himself is the Temple, Apoc. 21. 22. God is the service and
music, Psalm, and Sermon, and Sacrament, and all. We shall live upon the word,
and hear never a word. Here God is not all in all, where he is at all in any
man, that man is well. Wisdom in Solomon, it was well with Solomon because God
was wisdom with him; and patience in Job, and faith in Peter, and zeal in
Paul, but there was something in all these that God was not. But in heaven he
shall be so all in all, that every soul shall have every perfection in it is
self, and the perfection of these perfections shall be, that their sight shall
be face to face, and their knowledge as they are known.

But now for the first of these privileges, how shall we see God face to face;
is it allwaies a declaration of Gods favor, when God shows his face? No; I
will set my face against that soul, Levit. 17. 10. but when there is light
joined with it, it is a declaration of favor; this was the blessing that God
taught Moses for Aaron, Number. 6 25 The Lord make his face shine upon thee. And
there we shall see him face to face by the light of his countenance, which is
the light of glory. But what shall we see by seeing God so face to face? we
shall see whatever we can be the better for seeing. First, all things that men
believed here, they shall see there; and therefore let us me ditate upon no
other thing on earth, then we would be glad to think on in heaven; and this
consideration would put many frivolous, and many fond thoughts out of our mind.
This then we shall get concerning our selves by seeing God face to face; but what
concerning God? We shall see God as he is in his essence. Why? did all that
are said to have seen God face to face see his essence? No. In earth God
assumed some material things to appear in, and is said to have been seen face
to face when he was seen in those assumed forms. But in heaven there is no
material thing to be assumed, and if God be seen face to face there, he is
seen in his essence. Saint Augustine sums it up, fully upon those words, In
thy light we shall see light, te scil. in te, We shall see thee in thee, i. e.
says he, face to face.

And then secondly what is it, To know him as we are known: it is not
expressed in the Text so: that is only that we shall know so, not that we
shall know God so; but the frame and context of the place has drawn that
unanime Exposition from all, that it is meant of our knowledge of God then. A
comprehensive knowledge of God it cannot be; to comprehend, is to know a thing
as well as that thing can be known; and we can never know God so, but that he
will know himself better. Our know ledge cannot be so dilated, nor God
condensed or contracted so, as that we can know him that way comprehensively.
It cannot be such a knowledge of God as God has of himself, nor as God has
of us; for God comprehends us and all this world, and all the worlds that he
could have made, and himself. But it is not a similitudinis non aequalitatis,
as God knows me, so shall I know God, but I shall not know God so as God knows
me. It is not quantum, but sicut, not as much, but as truly. As the fire does
as truly shine as the Sun shines, though it shine not out so far, nor to so
many purposes. So then I shall know God so, as that there shall be nothing in
me to hinder me from knowing God: which cannot be said of the nature of man,
though regenerate, upon earth, no* nor of the nature of an Angel in heaven left
to it self, till both have received a super-illustration from the light of
glory. And so it shall be a knowledge so like his knowledge, as it shall
produce a love like his love, and we shall love him as he loves us. For say the
Fathers, whom Oecumenius has compacted, I shall know him, i. e. embrace him,
adhere to him. What an holiday shall this be, which no working day shall ever
follow. By knowing and loving the unchangeable, the immutable God, mutabimur in
immutabilitatem, we shall be changed into an unchangeablenesse says that
Father, that never said any thing but extraordinary (Saint Augustine). He
says more; If God should be seen and known in hell, hell in an instant would
be heaven. How many heavens are there in heaven? how is heaven multiplied to
every soul in heaven? where infinite other happinesses are crowned with this
sight, and this knowledge of God there. And how shall all those heavens be
renewed to us every day, that shall be as glad to see and to know God millions
of ages after every days seeing and knowing as the first hour of looking upon
his face? And as this seeing, this knowing of God crowns all other joies and
glories even in heaven, so this very crown is crowned; there grows from this an
higher glory, which is that we shall be made partakers of the divine nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. Immortal as the Father, righteous as the Son, and full of all
comfort as the Holy Ghost. To which blessed Trinity be ever (as is most due)
ascribed all Honor, and Glory, Dominion, and Power, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE Fifth Sermon. Which is that in the INDEPENDENT Style, or Way of Preaching;
Never delivered before any Congregation, and now proposed only as a pattern,
or example of that way of preaching.

HEB. 11. 24. By Faith Moses, when he came to years, refused to be called the
son of Pharaoh's daughter.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Archer, at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, Anno
Dom. 1656.

Luke 9. 23. And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.
AFter our blessed Savior had made known to his Disciples, and the rest, that
the Son of man must suffer many things, and be reproved of the Elders, and of
the High Priests, and be slain, verse. 22. foreseeing that a great many, who
now did cry him up, and highly magnify him, would then be ashamed of him; he
tells all such, ver. 26. That whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my
words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his glory.
And again, foreseeing likewise that the same men would lose their souls to save
their lives; he tells them, that whosoever will save his life, shall lose it;
and whosoever shall lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it, ver. 24.
Lastly understanding by the same divine foresight of his, that diverse who were
now his professed Disciples, and thronged after him, would upon his
imprisonment and trial forsake him, and follow him no longer then they might
follow him in safety; he lays them down in my Text the nature and condition
of a Disciple; and the necessary duty of every Christian: telling them plainly
in this 23 ver. what they must trust to, if they ever intend to be his
Disciples, followers of him. And he said unto them all (all of them, his own
twelve Apostles as well as the rest of the people, he excepts none) if any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and
follow me.

Which words, according to the best expositors, hold out this sense unto you in
their Paraphrase. If any man will be my Disciple, will be a Christian; for that
is the meaning of coming after me, of following me; let him deny himself, i.
e his honors, preferments, riches, pleasures: and not only these carnal
outward things, but all inward and spiritual endowments likewise; all
administrations, ordinances, gifts, graces, hopes, comforts, enjoiments; nay
even our religion, and heaven it self must be denied by us, resigned up of us,
and laid at Christ's feet. For this is to deny a man'sself; when there is
nothing left of self, nothing left to self; but every thing condemned in us,
taken from us, and made odious unto us in comparison of Christ. Now the taking
up of the Cross will be easily explained, what its full importance extends to;
namely the voluntary embracing of shame, and contumely (for the Cross was a
contumelious death, Heb. 12. 2.) as likewise the loss of your goods,
liberties, and lives for Christ: which are said in the Text to be taken up;
not when we bring them unnecessarily upon our own shoulders (for that is to
pull the Cross upon us) but when by the providence of God they are laid in our
way to Christ; so that we cannot follow Christ, we cannot be Christ's
Disciples, but it must become detriment and damage to us: then voluntarily to
undergo that detriment or damage whatever it is; to take up that Cross, be
that cross never so painful and bloody; and patiently and cheerfully to bear
that cross, is the duty without which a man cannot be Christ's Disciple,
cannot be a Christian. And these two duties, that of self-denial, and this of
taking up the cross, I may very properly call peculiar-Christian-Gospel
duties: because they were never so much as in kind required before by God in
the Old Testament, nor yet by the laws of nature; nor thirdly by the Canons of
any other Religion in the world.

I shall at present insist only upon the first of these two duties: In the
making ou^ of the which unto you, I shall present you with these five
particulars of self-denial: First, the denial of our honors, preferments,
riches, pleasures, lusts, and all our carnal sinful enjoiments. Secondly the
denial of our will and affections. Thirdly of our gifts and graces. Fourthly
our very Religion and Christianity, which you may perchance think it is the
highest sin to deny, yet we must deny even that. And further, that which
concerns us something nearer then our Religion, we must in the Fifth and last
place deny even our own salvation, and heaven its self. And these Five parts I
shall call the Five steps, or stairs that make up the story, and lead to the
top, the very highest point of Self-denial. I call them stairs, because that
one i^ still higher then the other, as the Second degree of Self-denial is an
higher step or stair then the First; and so likewise in the rest.

I will begin at the first and lowest step or stair of Self-denial, the denying
of our honors, preferments, riches, pleasures, losts, and all our carnal
finful enjoiments. And here first for your honors, preferments, and greatness,
you must be ready to deny these, first by doing, secondly by suffering for
Christ: first by doing, by an humble submission to the meanest service God
shall call you to for his Name and Churches sake; though that service may seem
to cloud your honors, and eclipse your greatness never so much in the eye of
the world. You should count it an honorable emploiment to draw water and cut
wood for the use of the Sanctuary, and a far greater addition to your birth
and place, to be a poor doorkeeper in the house of your God, then to be a
Lord Chamberlain to Princes.

Secondly by Suffering you are to deny your selves herein, by being willing to
suffer the greatest scandals and indignitics that can be thrown upon you for
the cause of Christ. Though all your friends and acquaintance, your father,
mother, husband, wife should cast you off and abandon you for ever, you must be
content to be deprived of all your relations and allies, of all you are born
unto, or hope for; to lose your honors, liberty and life to boo^, if God shall
call you to it for his Names sake, with that brave resolution of Hesters, If I
perish I perish, Hest. 4. 16. If I be undone I am undone for God's glory, and
his Churches good.

And the reason wherefore Christ teaches you to deny your selves herein is,
'cause you are to take up your Cross and follow Christ, i. e. must expect
reproaches, afflictions, tribulations for the name and sake of Christ, Joh 16.
33. A man that has not learned this lesson of Christ, can never suffer with
comfort and joy. O says wise Self, when it eyes those persecutions that are
like to befall those that follow Christ, may I not pass by such a truth, and
such a practice and yet get heaven? What need I to adventure my self upon such
hardships, when perchance by the neglecting of such or such an opinion, or
practice, I may attein my liberty, my reputation, but on the contrary the
self-denying Christian, when he com^ to submit to Gospel Ordinances, which are
contemptible in the eyes of the world, for which he is like to suffer shame
and disgrace, yet let me submit to Christ, says he, to every Truth, to every
Ordinance, although I suffer loss in the world, reproach and shame from my
friends and acquaintance, though I lose the love of my best friends, whether
father, mother, husband, wife, yet says the self-denying Christian, Christ
has said, that whosoever loves father or mother better then me, is not
worthy of me: And this love of Christ constrains me to deny my self, and
follow Christ in all conditions. Thus you see the self-denying soul, and none
else, is meet to be a disciple, a follower of Christ; because he is most ready
to take up the Cross and follow him.

Secondly we must deny our selves as in our great places, and honors, and
dignities, so likewise in our profits, pleasures, in all our carnal worldly
enjoiments. Oh how hard is it for a poor crcature to deny himself in this! How
hard is it for a rich man, says our blessed Savior, to enter into the kingdom
of heaven, Luke 18. 24. The world is a common bait wherewith the Devil enticeth
men to fin, as Judas Anan^as; nay Christ himself is set upon with this
temptation, Mat. 4. But when Christ comes into a soul, he teaches that soul to
deny it self, to look upon the world as Christ did, as a very empty thing; he
gives power to overcome the world, 1 John 5. 4. For whatsoever is born of God
overcomes the world. All our worldly desires therefore, and pleasures, and
enjoiments must be denied by us; we must use the things of the world as though
we used them not. We must be so dead to the world, as to see all things that
are now in our possession to be none of ours, so that the very worst things in
the world that can befall us will be good to us: all that before were crosses
and afflictions now will be joy and comfort, 'cause we shall see it to be the
will of the Father; and we shall have peace in every condition. We shall have
as much comfort in a dungeon, as in the possession of the greatest state in the
world. We shall cast our care upon God, and trust him as well with our bodies
as with our souls. We shall not so much care for to morrow, we shall see enough
in God to satisfy us both for to morrow and for ever: For the earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof, says the Psalm. 24. 1. All the labor of men
under the Sun is but for two things, food and raiment; now when we are ascended
to God by denying our selves, we shall know that God is able to feed us, and
cloth us as miraculously as he did the children of Israel in the wilderness.
And thus much shall suffice for our first step or stair of self-denial, the
denial of our honors, preferments, riches pleasures, lusts, and all our carnal
sinful enjoiments:

The second now follows, which is the denial of our will and affections.
First then for our will, we must deny our selves in that, as well as our
Savior did. If we will come after Christ, be followers of Christ; we must
tread in this step, and follow him in this track and path, as well as the
former. And indeed our blessed Savior began betimes in the denial of his own
will. For when he was but twelve years old, we find him at this work, doing
the will of his Father, Luke 2. 49. And he said unto them, how is it that ye
sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? not
fulfilling his own will, or doing his own business, but both were his Fathers.
And as he began this course betimes, when he was but twelve years old, so he
continued it likewise through the whole course of his life. In his preaching,
as you heard before, he did not his own work, nor fulfilled his own will, but
his Fathers; and as in his preaching, so in his praying like-wise, one of his
first petitions was Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven; and this
petition was made good even through his whole life, and death. Through his
life, John 4. 34. Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that
sent me, and to finish his wo^k. And Secondly in his very death and Passion,
which was full of this self-denying Spirit. For even there also his saying was,
Not my will, but thine be done. Luke 22. 42.

Thus you see that our Savior both praying, preaching, living, and dying,
denied himself, and his ^own will: now let us go and do so likewise; let us
learn ^ather to deny our selves, and our own wills, then Gods Christ, who is the
Saints pattern, did always so walk as to please God. John 8. 29. And he
that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I do always
those things that please him: And as he was our pattern, so he teaches us by
his Apostle the same lesson, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Furthermore, then we beseech you,
brethren: and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how
ye ought to walk, and to please God, so ye Would abound more and more. As if
the Apostle had said, that which you receive of us, is that you ought to walk
according to the example of Christ; to please God though you thereby should
displease your selves. And this is a soul taught by Gods Spirit, when he
prefers the pleasing of the Lord before himself, the fulfilling of his will
before his own. This being once learned, is that which would carry you along,
through all oppsition in a way of truth. Perhaps the poor creature resolving
with flesh and blood, may be reedy to conclude sometimes, if I submit to this
way, to this truth, I must expect reproach, persecution. Now it would
wonderfully please carnal will and reason to conceal such a truth in
unrighteousoesse; but when a Soul comes to this, it is my duty to fulfill Gods
will, and not my own; O then I dare not but do it; come what will come I cannot
but do it. Truly you who indeed love the Lord Jesus, that love will constrain
you to please him, though you displease your selves, to fulfill his will by
denying your own. This Christ himself teaches and by his own example, has
given us an example so to do, John 4. 34. Jesus says unto them, My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Oh blessed example, to
be imitated by all the Saints; what shall Jesus Christ when he was but twelve
years old dony himself, his own will; and shall not the Saints do it, his
disciples, his followers, at fifty, and sixty, and eighty do as much?

But Christ has not only given us his example and pattern, but has enjoined
us thereunto also, under penalty of damnation, Matt: 7 21. Not every one that
says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that
does the will of my Father which is in heaven. And the Apostle, Ephe. 6. 6.
exhorting servants to be obedient to their Masters, says, Not with
eye-service, as men pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart: This self-will is the cause of much stir and division in
the world. What is the cause of this war among us, but self-will? One will
establish one religion, another, another religion, or else the Nation must rue
it. This self-will is it that causes discontents and troubles in Families. The
husband will have his will, and the wife her will. This causes contention in
Churches among the Saints; when every one will have his own mind, his own way,
his own will, will please himself whoever be displeased. And therefore to
prevent these and the like inconveniences, let us deny our own wills after the
example of Christ, and submit to the will of God in every thing. Let Gods will,
his unknown will, his undesired will (by any but himself) be done by us and,
upon us. Whatever his will be concerning any, let it take place in them and
upon them to the utmost. Let not me nor any else be what we would, but what
Gods will pleases to have us; and let us pray with our Savior, Thy will be
done in earth as it is in heaven: that so Gods whole will and counsel may be
fulfilled upon us, without so much as desiring him to give us the least account
of it, until he pleases himself. If God please to suffer us to be lead into
folly, sin, death, hell, any thing, let him do what he will, carry us whether
he will. Let our own will wholly die in us, that it may never avoid any thing
more, nor choose any thing more in any kind, but as Gods will shall choose for
us, and avoid for us. For my own particular, let it be so that I perish for
ever, I had rather have it so, then have mine own will fulfilled. I know my own
will so well that I desire to have it crossed, even in the things that nearest
concern me. I would not be saved as I have a mind to be saved, I would not go
to heaven in my own way, and after my own will. And on the contrary, I have
such a taste though that be but a small one, of the excellency of the hidden will
of God, that I would not have it crossed, no not in those things that tend to
my greatest prejudice. If it be Gods will that I must be damned, I must deny my
self in yielding to this will of God, and be content for Gods glory to
subscribe my own damnation. Nowthis may deserve the name of self-resignation,
and the denying of our own wills; which is the second stepof Selfe-denyall.

We now come to hold out unto you the third step, or degree of our great
Gospelduty of Self-denial; namely, the denial of our gifts and our graces,
the fruits and improvments of our endowments, whether natural or spiritual. And
first for our natural gifts and endowments: there is naturally in every man,
selfe-boasting in the creatures own wisdom, and apprehended self-excellency.
There is a disposition of nature, even in the Saints to be exalted above
measure, not only in those graces received from Christ, but in their own
personal excellencies. Saint Paul 2 Cor: 12. 7. Was sensible of both, And lest
I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of the revelation,
there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
me, lest I should be exalted above measure. And there is in every child of God
a natural disposition to spiritual pride: he that knows any thing knows it.
This is the filthiness of the spirit that the Saints are liable unto. Truly we
have very little cause to glory in any thing, except in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor.
4. 7. Therefore the Prophet says, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
nor the strong man in his strength, but let him that glories glory in this,
that he understands and knows the Lord. It is the exhortation of Christ to
his disciples, Luke 10. 22. All things are delivered to me of my Father, and
no man knows who the Son is, but the Father, and who the Father is, but the
Son, and to whom the Son will reveal him; and this lesson Saint Paul learned,
and every Christian in some good measure must learn, Gal. 6. 14. But God forbid
that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Let us therefore in the first
place deny our Selfe-sufficiency and Selfe-strength. There is a natural
disposition in the creature to think that it has power in it self to act
toward God; hut where Christ comes in power, he teaches men to deny this
principle, Jeh. 15. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in
me, and I in him the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do
nothing. And the Apostle that had experience of the workings of God confesses
it, 1 Cor. 15. 10 But by the grace of God I am what I am: and his grace which
was bestowed upon me, was not in vain: but I labored more abundantly then they
all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was in me. And the reason wherefore
we are to deny our self-sufficiencie and selfstrength, is, that so we may be
able to hold out in the evil day, when a man is put to it either by his
spiritual, or temporal enemies. Men standing upon their own strength are gone,
Isa. 40 30 Even the youths shall faint and he weary, and the young men shall
utterly fall: they that apprehend a power in themselves to stand, but ver. 31.
They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength; they that see an
insufficiency in themselves, and trust upon the Name of the Lord, etc. Psalm.
145. 1. Christ would have his work to be a perf^ct and full work, his Covenant
a sure Covenant, Isa. 55. 3. Incline your ear, and come unto me: he^r, and your
soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the
sure mercies of David. Therefore he undertakes not only to being men into the
Covenant, but to keep them there, Jerem. 32 40. And I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good, but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. It is in
the strength of Christ the believer stands, Job. 15. 5. You cannnot pray or
perform any duty acceptable, Ro^. 8. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be
uttered. Much less stand and hold out to the end against all spiritual
oppositions a Christian is to enc^unter with all. We are therefore to deny all
our selfstrength, and selfsufficiencie, and so likewise all our selfwisedom,
and knowledge, and whatever natural gifts and endowments are in us more eminent
then the rest. Men are naturally too wise for Christ; so were the Grecians, 1
Cor. 1. 22. and therefore the Apostle exhorts the Church to take heed of
self-wisdom, 1 Cor. 3. 18. Let no man deceivhimself: If any man among you
seems to be wise in this world, let him become afool, that he may be wise.
The readiest way to attain wisdom, is to lay all our wisdom down at the
feet of Christ: I beseech you consider this, has Christ taught your souls
this lesson? Is your wisdom heavenly born wisdom, or is it earthly? Is it
your own or God's? This is your own wisdom, Jam. 3. 13. but see ver. 17. But
the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality,
and without hypocrisy. It is all heavenly like him whose it is; but man'^
wisdom is all earthly, sinful, divelish, which is the reason wherefore we are
here to deny it.

Then secondly as we are to deny all our natural gifts and parts, so likewise
all our spiritual, all our graces, all our fruits and improvements in spiritual
matters, and this must be done in a double respect: First in respect of the end
of those graces; we must deny our selves herein by doing all for God, and not
fo our selves; for his glory, and not our own. Secondly in respect of the
means, by referring all to God, and not to our selves, to his strength and his
assistance, and not our own. First then we must deny our selves in the end of
our receiving these gifts and graces. The Prophet Hosea, Chap. 10. 1. calls
Israel an empty Vine, that brought forth fruit: Empty, and yet bringing forth
fruit, how can these stand together? Yes, very well. For Israel was an empty
Vine, though they brought forth fruit, because the fruit was not such as ought
to grow upon them, such as was proper to the root they seemed to grow in; as
Wells are said to be empty when they are not full of water, though they are
full of air: so here an empty Vine, 'cause it brought forth all its fruit,
whether good or bad, to its self: which was not proper for the people and
servants of God to do; that is, those ends that did draw up the sap and did put
it forth into fruit, were drawn but from themselves, they bring them not forth
principally to God, and for him. All their prayers, all their affections in
holy duties, if they examine the reason of them all, the ends that run in them
all, they will find they are taken from themselves: and though the assistance
wherewith they are enabled to do what they do is more then their own, yet their
ends are no higher then themselves, and so employ the assistance God gives
them, for themselves. Now ^he end for which a true branch brings forth fruit
is, that Christ may be glorified: thus Romans 7. 4. Wherefore my brethren, ye
also are become dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should be
married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should
bring forth fruit unto God, when married to Christ, they are said to bring
forth fruit unto God, which is spoke in opposition to bringing forth fruit to a
man's self. There is indeed a natural disposition in the creature, to seeck
himself, and his own ends and glory in every thing, Phil. 2. 21. For all seek
their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Therefore the Apostle
exhor^s the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no man seek his own glory; and
Christ teaches his to ^ay down all self ends at his feet, and to seek him and
hi^ honor so, that now whatever the Christian does it is for Christ: if he
preach, it is Christ, and for Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 5. For we preach not our selves,
but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. All
that ever the Saints do, they do for the honor of Christ, 2 These. 1. 12. That
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him,
according to the grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. And why? They are
not their own, they are bought with a price; therefore they are to glorify God
in their bodies, and spirits, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. But may not a Christian seek
himself in any case? may he not seek his own good, his own credit? Yes without
question, he may seek his own good, his own credit, but he may not seek
himself: he may not seek himself alone, but first the glory of God, and
seeking to glorify God, he must of necessity seek his own glory: for God
has so joined his glory and the Saints together, that it is impossible to
glorify the Lord, but the glory of the Christian must be included in it. For
this is the Saints rule, 1 Cor. 10 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. This is the Saints privilege,
Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose.

Secondly as we are to deny all our spiritual gifts and graces in respect of
the end of those graces, by doing all for God and and not for our selves, for
his glory, and not our own; so in the second place we are to deny those
graces in respect of the means, by referring all to God, and not to our selves;
to his strength and his assistance, and not our own. For as we must do all
things for God as the end, so also we must refer all things to God as the
means, acknowledging our selves to do all things in his strength, and by his
assistance. For as it is essential to thee, if thou be a true branch of the
Vine, a true Christian, to do all for another, as your end, namely to God; so
to do all in the strength of another as your sole assistant, namely Christ, who
works all in you, and through whose strength, says Paul, I am able to do all
things, and nothing without it, Phil. 4. 13. Therefore we find both these
joined, Phil. 1. 11. Being filled with the fruits of righthousness, which are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God* the latter is meant as the
final cause, the other as the efficient. Now temporary believers, as they do
all principally for themselves, so also all as from themselves; and as they do
not make God their end, so nor Christ their root, because they fetch not their
strength, their sap to do all they do from Christ by Faith, and from their
Union with him; And the reason is, because they are never emptied of
themselves, which is the root they grow upon, both in regard of their own ends,
and also of their own efficiencie of working: whereas we must all be brought
to nothing in our selves both in regard of Self-aims, and also Selfabilities.
But indeed it is as hard a thing for us, both in respect of natural, and also
spiritual endowments, to live out of our selves, and fetch all from another, as
not to live to our selves but to another. We are full of our own strength as
well as of our own ends: and although we do receive all our strength from
Christ, and so all we do in what is good, is from him, yet we do not honor
Christ in receiving it, by doing all as in his strength, and so do not do it as
in him; but though we receive all from Christ, yet we work with it as it were
our own stock, and so glory as the Apostle speaks, as if we had not received
it. And thus though the sap and liveliness which stirrs us to any spiritual
duty is really and indeed efficiently from Christ, yet we work with it as if
all proceeded from our selves, because we neither receive our strength by
faith, nor act by faith that strength received as men acted by Christ, and
working in Christ; being supported with the pride and self*sufficiencie of our
own gifts and parts: whereas all true believers are emptied first of their own
strength and ability, and so walk as those who can do nothing without Christ,
as those who are not able to love or believe one moment more without him. And
therefore a true believer being thus sensible of his own insufficiency and
unabilitie, does (when he is at any time assisted in spiritual duties)
attribute all to Christ when he has done: he glories not in himself as of
himself, but as he is a man in Christ, and that as he is a man in Christ he did
it, and no otherwise. So the Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 2. 5. I knew a man in Christ
above fourteen years ago, etc. -- Of such an one will I glory, yet of my self
I will not glory, but in mine infirmities. And yet it was himself he speaks
of, but yet not in himself as of himself, but as he was a man in Christ, and no
otherwise. We have done with our third step or degree of Selfe-denyal, the
denial of our gifts and graces both natural and spiritual.

And as we have denied these natural and spiritual endowments, so in the fourth
place we must deny our very religion, our christianity for Christ. This seems
at the first sight a contradiction, but it is only a high expression, or if
you Please to call it so, a new light of Self-denial. For I do not mean so to
deny our Christianity, as to become Jews, Turks, or Infidels; but so to deny
it, as to resign it up unto Christ, to lay it at Christ's feet; so to deny it
as not to rely upon it, as the only dispensation and appearance whereby God is
able to reveal himself unto his people: for can thou measure the ways,
thoughts and various appearances of God, whom thou thy self call infinite,
and unmeasurable? Art thou sure he can appear no otherwisa then according to
what thou exspectest he will? Call but to mind the religion of the Jews: what
religion that ever was since the foundation of the world, I will not except our
own Christian religion, was more confirmed by miracles then this? what religion
for it is time had the presence of God more in it; set up by the peculiar
appointment of the Almighty; the Doctrine written in Tables of stone with his
own finger; the discipline in every circumstance, and ceremony, and Punctilio,
dictated not by his Spirit only, but by the express word of his own mouth.
Had the Christian religion, for doctrine and discipline, been as punctually set
down and enjoined, the Real Presence had not erected so many stakes and
gibbets; nor the ceremonies of the Church raised so many armies in Christendom,
as we find by woeful experience they have done. And now what is become of all
the divine right and confirmation; of all the pomp and glory of the Jewish
Church and religion? Is it not called off all and the dross and dung even in
the very righteousness of it, Phil. 3. 8. And the doctrine and discipline base
and beggarly elements, by the same Apostle, Gal: 4. 9. Insomuch that I here
profess before you all, that ever since I knew any thing of religion; nothing
has more amazed and staggered my reason; then that God should first establish,
and afterward disanull the same relgion; and secondly, that the Apostles
should set so low a rate upon, should have so mean, base, and contemptible an
esteem of any thing, that was at any time set up and avowed by God. Neither
know I how to answer the Jew, should he urge this very argument home to me,
then by crying out with the Apostle, upon the same account and ground we now
mention; O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33.
Thou see therefore that the Jews were cozened (who were as confident as thou
can be, that it should not be so with them as it was;) is it then so
impossible that thou should ever be deceived in what thou further expectest,
because thou have gone a step or two beyond these Jews? Is that which thou
have attained and hoped for, of such an enduring nature, that it can never
pass away? The Jews knew Christ under the law, and it was a very glorious
knowledge, compared with any knowledge the heathen had; but what became of that
knowledge? It vanished and became of no account, as you have heard. And so
likewise Christians have known Christ under the Gospel, and this kind of
knowledge does far excel that which was imparted to the Jews; Gospel-faith,
Gospel-love, Gospel-obedience, do infinitely surpass any legal qualifications
and performances whatsoever: but with all consider this, may not these Gospel
dispensations pass away? may not these duties be swallowed up in higher and
more spiritualized duties, and the? glory of these fall before a greater glory
In all these then thou must deny thy self, thou must resign them up, and lay
them all at Christ's feet. And how this religion of ours which we now profess,
must be denied by us, and be resigned up of us, I shall endeavor to show you in
these following particulars. First we mu^t deny all ordinances and
administrations, so as to rest and rely upon them: and here first for the
ordinance of ministerial preaching, we must not ^est, not put our confidence
and faith upon that, because as it is Isa. 54. 13. We shall be all taught of
God. Now the teaching of men, and the teaching of God, differ as the light of
the Moon, and the light of the Sun; that shines by the help of this, this from
it is own light. The teachings of men is this Moonlight, which in Gods time
must vanish. For this Moonlight, this conveying knowledge to others by helps
and means, is to be swallowed up into the light of the Sun, that God may
become all in all, Jer. 31. 34 And they shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for they shall all
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; for
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more. By the
mentioning of Sun and Moon in this place, God speaks to the capacity of men,
and points out the whole creation of night and day, and that all creature-helps
and means should fail, though they were and are as glorious helps as the Sun,
that gives light to the day, or as the Moon that gives light to the night; and
that the time will come, that God himself will be the light of men without
creature-helps or means; and these teachings of God shall never cease. Then
secondly, as we are to deny the Ordinance of Preaching, so likewise of Praying,
and Fasting, and all ordinances whatsoever; so as I said before to rest upon
them, to lay our faith upon them. And the reason is, cause that Ordinances are
nothing without the Lord. Every one will confess that the letter is a dead
letter without the Spirit; and the Ordinances are mere forms without God's
appearance in them: and therefore our design is to couple the Lord and
Ordinances together, and we cannot endure to hear of the parting of them;
though many now adays do, who cry, so we have Ordinances we are well. Now
this is that we must deny, or else it will appear that we promise to our selves
something from the bare outward form of an Ordinance, and so like the
Israelites we are hankering after the fleshpots of Egypt, though they had
better meat in the wilderness, yet their fleshpots run in their minds. So
though God offer himself, and though the Saints tell you they cannot find God
in such and such forms, but find him abundantly good in the spirit, and they
find that he recompenses the want of all forms in the spirit, and presses you
to wait till God appears to you in the spirit: O! say you, I can never believe
that God should do it without an Ordinance, or that God should strengthen you
without an Ordinance. God, think you, with an Ordinance can strengthen me, and
deliver me, and save me out of temptation, not otherwise. This is to say, that
the Ordinance, or fleshly form, does add something to God. If you confess God
to be all in an Ordinance, you must confess him to be all without an
Ordinance, to be sufficient of himself. I desire not to be mistaken, I judge
not those that find God in Ordinances and outward forms. Let them wait upon
God, and let them receive and partake of the benefit of the Ordinance, and let
them bless God for it, and be faithful to their own principles; and let them
be sweet to others. But when we do find God in a Form, and in an Ordinance, to
say he is not to be found and enjoyed any other way; this is not a right
spirit, and this is to be resigned up and denied by us.

A maine and principal reason of the point is, that God alone may be exalted.
For as civil forms are accompanied with many corrupt, yet cleaving interests;
so spiritual administrations, are attended in their Proselites with flesh,
form, and self, which do many times deprave and corrupt the Administration,
and render it ineffectuall to the end for which it was appointed. And as it is
the design of God to purge the civil administration from its dregs and filth,
so the Lord carries on the same designs in paring away all humane interests
from the spiritual, that so he alone may be exalted; besides as civil forms
are not the substance but the outside only, and appearanee of that equity and
reason which they ought to represent; So is it with the spiritual, as being
only supplemental to our wants, absence, weakness, until such time as we come
to live in the very life or substance its self. So that spiritual
administrations being of an inferior and entervening notion, cannot possibly
hold forth the most complete and glorious way of enjoyment, which in the
Scripture is said to be by sight, and not by faith; and such a sight as is not
in form, or glass, but face to face. The sight which Moses had of God, as it
did transcend the ordinary discovery to common Saints* so it was far inferior
to this vision; for Moses saw but the backpa^t of God. And yet as their
sacrifices did t^^e out the true sacrifices which we enjoy; so this vision, in
regard of the immediateness of it, bears some proportion with that glorious
discovery in the Saints, where God shall be seen as he is: but this discovery
is darkened and veiled in the outward form, even in the design of God
himself; for the weak understanding being not able to behold the brightness
of this presence (as the Israelites fled from the sight of God) it is the
pleasure of the Father to cast a veil over his glory, which vail is the form,
that so the discoveries thereof may be born by us. Our enjoy ments will be
then most sublime, when this vail is rent a sunder, and way made to the Holy of
Holies, or the naked glory by the power and purity of the spirit. In the mean
time the form is proportioned to the darkness of the fleshly understanding,
and therefore it is that the glory is limited and confined therein; and given
out according to the measure of our stature by degrees; this justifies the
design and wisdom of God in choosing these ways and methods in the
manifestation of himself. For the occasion of spiritual administrations is the
darkness and weakness of the creature, all which make up a bundle of
necessities, which are thus summed up. Man being clouded with a dark and
mistie understanding, stands at a great distance from the clear light of God,
by reason wheros he apprehends nothing but what is suitable to himself, and
his enjoiment is answerable to his light; that is, weak and glimmering. But God
stoops down to humane frailty, and gives out himself in weak appearances,
Mosaical forms, which are as mediums between God and us. But when this
darkness and distance is removed by the power of God, man becomes near, and
his enjoiments immediate, which must needs be the best, because nearest the
fountain. For the appearances of God, like the beams of the Sun, the farther
they pass, the more weak and imperfect are they, as to us. Hence it is that
God in spirit being the most immediate appearance, is therefore strongest; God
in flesh the next to that, but of an inferior cognizance and operation. And
the deeper God descends into flesh, as into the sacrifices of old* the more is
his glory clothed upon, and by consequence the more dark and obscure is his
presence, and our enjoiment. So that still while we are within the compass of
appearances, they may afford us a good but not the most excellent life. For the
highest life is above all appearances, even in the substance it self. For which
is better, to live in the appearance of a thing, or in the thing it self? in
the branch, or in the tree? in the root or in the rind? To live in the
substance is a life fuller of heavenly contemplation and rest. For as the days
of God's labor were common and ordinary, but the day of his rest sanctified
and holy; so it is with the Saints: The life of a Christian under
administrations and forms is the day of his labor, and he meets with many
uncertainties, disappointments, and troubles in the outward form, as the
experience of Saints can witness. But the life above is the day of his rest,
wherein he studies all things, and sees them to be very good, yea and cease
from his works as God did from his.

But did not God himself ordain Form, and where did he abrogate it, you will
say? I answer: As there was a time to plant, so there is a time to pluck up
what was planted. For Form was never created as a standing rule, but as a
temporary help to serve a turn; which when it is once accomplished, the means
cease, as having ushered in the end. Neither is the abrogation of Form only in
the letter, but in the discovery of an higher glory, which darkens the first,
as the Sun darkens the stars. So that the discovery of Gospel-forms is the
abrogation of Legal, and the Gospel administration in external rites gives way
to an higher glory. And yet there are some hints in the letter of this glorious
state, as Isa. 25. and Rev. 21. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Nevertheless we, according to his
promise, look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
Though the glory of the mysteries contained in it are to be experimented in
us. You Will say Christ and his Apostles submitted to the outward Form. It Is true,
Christ in the flesh was made under the Law, and submitted to Circumcision as
well as Baptism; he under-went the state of death or sorrow, and the state of
flesh or form, Heb. 5. 7. Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able
to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared: Wherein he prayed, and
at the last was raised up to the state of mirth, or immediate discovery,
wherein he did rejoice. So that Christ in the flesh is the figure of several
administrations, and every Christian is an emblem in one stage or another of
his life. Some live in a crucified, some in a glorified Jesus; some live in his
life, some in his death; some live in Christ after the flesh, others in Christ
after the spirit. And amongst these the highest pitch of a Christian is, Christ
risen, or rather sitting at God's right hand: for here is immediatenesse of
favor and enjoiment. But in the mean time Ordinances and Administrations take
place after one sort or other, till this state come. For as the appearances of
God are stronger or weaker, so administrations are of several sorts; the most
eminent are, Paradifical, Legal, and Evangelical.

Paradifical administrations then took place, when the angelical nature being
clothed upon with a humane appearance, did contemplate its Maker in things
below himself the clear stream of the whole creation; and the heavenly spirit
being likewise clothed upon, was a proportionated subject to entertain that
discovery. This administration did not contein the most complete enjoiment. For
here the vail was first set up, and man of necessity must have ceased to his
being or form, though he had never sinned, that so he might be raised up to an
higher enjoiment. This administration was but for a season; for when flesh and
self had defiled the stream, the glory crept inward, and was withdrawn from our
view, and in came a multitude of helps to usher in but a review of the same
glory, this was the original of legal sacrifices and administrations. But as
the fountain was cleared by degrees, and the imagerendred more perspicuous, so
Gospel administrations succeeded in the place of the Legal, as differing only
from them in degrees of light.

These administrations are not distinguished by fleshly Epoches or Periods of
time, but are interchangeably managed within the Saints, according to their
degrees of light, as being partly bond, and partly free; partly in the flesh,
form, and letter, partly in the spirit and power Which state is a state of
confusion and mixture, not of purity. The death of Christ himself did not
straitwaies determine the Legal administration: for the Apostles and Believers
did continue to observe them until such time as an higher discovery was made
known within them, and even then when an higher discovery was made known unto
them, when they were perfectly under a Gospel state, yet had they but the first
fruits of the spirit, and were in the dark in many things. Yea Saint Paul holds
forth a state atteinable by the Saints which he himself came short of, Phil. 4.
which John saw by the spirit of prophecy, Rev. 21.

And if any shall deny this new state, let us reason a little from concessions
and grants, and see what the enjoiment of a Christian may amount to. It is
granted by all, and cannot be denied, that the letter of the word holds forth
more glory then is yet attained, and that many prophesies are to be fulfilled
relating to that glory of the Saints, among which that in the Revelations is
one, as likewise that perfection is to be pressed after, Heb. 6. which
certainly is more then uprightness; for the Apostle speaks to upright Saints.
Now what this glory, these new heavens, this state of perfection, is the
dispute and question of these days, which to me is resolved thus. That there
is a glorious state of the Saints to be discovered in the last days,
consisting not in a fleshly paradise, or material enjoiment, but in the true
vision of God in the spirit and high light of heavenly glory. This state was
the hope and joy of the Prophets, Apostles and other Christians who foresaw the
day thereof. And well might it be so, considering the many mysteries contained
therein, which no other state can attein unto. For here the Christian sees all
things in the light of God. Here is opened unchangeable glory, and essential
will, perfect freedom, restitution of all things, heavenly rest. There man
cease, questions are resolved, union cleared, and all expectations satisfied.
And thus have you seen the first particular, wherein we must deny our
Religion, it is in relation to Ordinances, and Forms, and administrations.

Secondly in the second place, we must deny our religion in respect of the
Scriptures, so as to rest upon the letter, and to prefer it above the teaching
of the spirit in it. Hear this all you that idolize Scripture so much, as to
prefer those writings before the God of the Apostles and Prophets: it is very
possible that a man may attain to the litteral knowledge of the Scriptures, and
may speak largely of the history thereof, and draw conclusions, and raise many
uses for the present support of a troubled soul, or for the restraining of lewd
practices, and direction of a civil conversation; and yet they that speak, and
they that hear, may be not only unacquainted with, but enemies to that spirit
of truth; by which those Prophets and Apostles write. For it is not the
Apostles writings, but the spirit that dwells in them, that did inspire their
hearts, that gives life and peace to us all. And therefore when the Prophets
Isa. Jerem. and Ezekiel, spoke what they saw from God, they spoke Thus says
the Lord, out of experience of what they saw and felt; and they were called
true Prophets. But when others rose up that spoke their words and writings, and
then applied them to another age and generation of men, saying, Thus says the
Lord, as the other did; they were called false Prophets; because they had seen
nothing themselves of God, but walked by the legs and saw by the eyes of the
true Prophets. For God does not threaten death to every city of every age of
the world, as to Sodom and Gomrorha; neither captivity to every people as he
did to Israel under Nebuchadnezar in Babylon. Neither does he promise victory,
or deliverance to every army, or people, from enemies, as he did to Irsael in
Jehosophats time. Now if any man. speak and assures others of victory, when
God purposes destruction; or speaks destruction, when God purposes a victory,
these men speak at random, and though they speak the very words of the
Scriptures, yet they speak not the mind of him that gives life, or destroys,
and so having seen nothing from him, they are to be reckoned among the false
Pr^phets, they run before they are sent. A man may know the Scripture, and yet
be an arch enemy to the God of the Scripture, as the Jews were. They knew the
writings of Moses, who writ of Jesus Christ; and yet they persecuted and killed
Jesus Christ, because they knew him not. For if they had known him to have been
of the power of God, they would not have killed him. And so many nowadayes do
know Scripture, and yet may, and do persecute the spirit of the Scripture,
through ignorance and unbelief. Truly friends, it is not the knowledge of the
Scripture only, but the knowledge of the God of the Scripture, as God is
pleased to make known himself by his mighty working in you, that gives life
and peace to you. If you know and speak Scripture, and can see nothing of God;
you are like Parrats, that speak the words of another, as you have been taught
by humane education. But if the same anointing or power of God dwell in you, as
did appear in the Prophets, and Apostles that writ; then you can see into that
mystery of the Scripture; and so can speak the mind of the Scriptures; though
you should never see, hear, nor read the Scripture from men. If your peace and
comfort in God should only remain with you, while you are either hearing, or
reading Scriptures, or while you have any society of such as can speak and
discourse thereof; and then find again that your peace and comfort is gone,
when you are deprived by any occasion of that society of Saints, truly let me
tell you, that though you prize and know the Scripture, yet there is a great
strangeness between, you and the God of the Scripture. Many enjoy outward
reading, and hearing, and Saints Communion, and they are in peace, and they
live in heaven as they conceive* and it is a sweet life, but it is not the
life. For if the wisdom of God hedge up all these enjoyments with thorns, and
leave these poor souls alone, (as it was Christ's case, all forsook him and
fled,) why then here is your trial. For when God has denied you the
opportunities of hearing, reading, praying, and Saints fellowship; does not
your heart now look for those helps, and mourn in their absence. If it be so
with you, (as I know it is with you) then where is your knowledge, experience,
and peace, in and with God? It shows plainly that at such a time we sucked
refreshment: from the creatures breasts, but not from God.

We are now come to the ^ast particular, in respect of which we must deny our
religion, and that is in respect of the Author of it, our blessed Savior. And
herein we must first deny all false Christ's; secondly all false opinions of the
true Christ; thirdly, we must deny but in a Christian qualified sense, even the
true Christ himself. First then we must deny all false Christ's, you will find
false Christ's coming with signs and wonders Matt: 24. 24. For there shall
arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and
wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect.
You shall have Christ's to do what you desire; Christ's to show you signs and
wonders, as you gape after, but they shall be false Christ's; and this shall be
your judgment. God in judgment has false Christ's for false Seekers, false
Inquirers. This is the plague of the flesh, it shall have what it does desire,
one that will open Scriptures, do mighty miracles, show great gifts, and yet
all this is but a false Christ, and the very elect, so far as is possible,
shall be deceived therewith. Therefore let it be our special care to deny
these false Christ's, most especially in these antichristian times wherein we
live; in which you shall have Christ's come upon you more then you would have.
If you go into the desert there is Christ; if into the city there is Christ;
some shall say lo here, others lo there, you shall have false Christ's every
where, a false spirit, a false resurrection, a false glory, a false god,
continually offering themselves unto you; lo here, lo there. Such excellent
glorious high ravishing, wonderful discoveries of spiritual things, that they
shall say plainly to you I am Christ. Such things so far excelling all that
ever you have known, so heavenly, so glorious, as thereby you shall be able to
say with open face, here is Christ. You shall have a light above men and Angels,
and ye^ all this shall b^ but a delusion. I suppose you are not acquainted with
this as yet; but you shall have ^uch glorious discoveries, in such illustrious
brightness, majesty and authority, that shall absolutely say in you, I am the
Christ: I am the Lord; I am the Son of the living God. In Fzekiel 28. 2.
There Is a type of the false appearance of God in the world; -- Because thine
heart is listed up, and thou haist said, I am a God, I sit in the seat of God,
in the amidst of the seas: yet thou art a man and not God, though thou set
thine heart as the heart of God. You shall be so enlarged in understanding,
that you shall think your selves wiser then Daniel, that you shall see through
all the mystery of Daniel, through all the dark prophesies of Daniel, as a
clear thing; yet there will be a false Christ, an antichrist under all this: go
not after, says our Savior Luke. 17. 23. And they shall say to you, see here,
or see there: go not after them, nor follow them. Such appearances will present
themselves unto you, and invite you to the discovery, and clear understanding
of the dark places of Scripture, but says God, follow them not; They are such
as if it were possible, they should deceive the very elect.

Now in the second place, as we must deny all false Christ's, so we must
likewise deny all false opinions of the true Christ. To this purpose is that,
Matt: 24. 23. Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or there:
believe it not. The sum is this, Christ will be spoken by no man, no man will
be able to speak Christ, to say here is Christ; Christ will be understood and
known by no man; while we are men we cannot understand and know Christ, till we
are raised up in Christ, we understand not Christ. None but Christ can speak
Christ, non but Christ, can declare Christ. It is not the Kingdom of God if
man be able to declare it, and utter it. Let no man say lo here, or lo there.
This is the wretchedness of man to be something in himself, to take part
himself, and to give part to Christ; or to say here I am when he is not, or
this is Christ when it is not Christ. It is the speech of some, I am in Christ,
and Christ in me. He is in spiritual things, he is in preaching, and in
praying, but he is not in outward things. Lo here he is, when I am wrapped up in
heavenly enjoyments, but when I am in my business, in my calling, I cannot say
he is here* This voice is the same with that in Luke: 17. 21. Neither shall
they say, Lo here, or lo there: for behold the kingdom of God is within you.
Lo here is Christ, and there is Christ, and here he is not, and there he is
not. To shut Christ out of any place, out of any thing, these are false
opinions of Christ. This is the wickedness of man to exclude or include
Christ, to make him be one where and not another where. For Christ is weakness
as well as strength, darkness as well as light, Christ in me, Christ in all.
The Lord in triumph, the Lord crucified* the Lord exalting, the Lord humbling,
the Lord in life, the Lord in death, the Lord here blessing, the Lord there
cursing, this is Christ. If you cannot see him in one thing as well as in
another, in wicked men as well as in good men, you cannot see him at all.
Here Is the narrowness of the heart of every man (a sensible creature, full of
observation and his own reason) saying, Lo here is Christ, lo there is Christ;
here he is not, there he is not, narrowing of him in their own observation: he
is in me when I am so qualified, and he is not in me when I am not so
qualified; not knowing that he is in some trampled on under the feet of his
enemies, and yet there in glory. In some he is at the top, in some he is at
the bottom, in some withering, in some bringing forth fruit; in some sweetening
and moderateing their natures, in some letting forth wrath and enmity.

In the third place, as we must deny all false Christ's, and all false opinions
of the true Christ, so thirdly must we deny, but in a Christian qualified
sense, even the true Christ himself. As thus for instance: The Saints and
children of God shall not enjoy Christ, till they have denied Christ, and
rejected him. You must forsake him, and leave him, and be Pharisees, and
persecute him before you can be crowned with him; that which is in a high
degree malignity in the Pharisees, is in a less degree in the Disciples; the
Pharisees killing, and the Disciples departing, it is all flesh, man-weaknesse
and ignorance. Before any man see the kingdom of God he must first reject it.
Ye shall be offended at Christ, you shall stumble and fall, and reject him
before you find him. You shall never be acquainted with Christ till you have
denied him, and murdered him. I know you are ready to say, What must we be
guilty of this wickedness? is there such wretchedness in the heart of man to
do thus? Thus speaks the flesh; but th^s says the Lord, the Son of man must
suffer many things from this generation. Christ must suffer by some, and be
rejected by others: Some are so wicked as to kill him, others so unbelieving as
to forsake him; some revile him, others shake their heads, and cannot tell what
to think of him: some cry out violently against him, others are not able to
speak a word son him; you shall never see the Lord, till you can say, This is
he whom I have denied, this is he whom I have pierced, this is he whom I have
reviled and hated. Thus speaks Christ, if you stand upon terms and say, What
we crucify Christ? God forbid: what we that are his own people, Jews and
Disciples; we that are his own dear children, and shall be saved by him? To
whom Christ will say, if I suffer not by you, I will not be a deliverer to you;
I will save none but those that kill me. If you will not own that you have
slain me, you shall not enjoy me: you shall never eat my flesh and drink my
blood, unless you slay my flesh and spill my blood. Jesus Christ suffers by
all men, which is clear in this, that in all ye have, in all that ye do, in
all that ye are, in all that ye speak, nothing is free from the blood of
Jesus; nothing that you do, speak, or act, in the highest, devoutest and most
glorious way, is any thing else but murder and blood, killing the Lord of
life. Yea it is necessary he must suffer by you, he will not find a throne in
you till he has found a grave in you, he will not be raised in you till he
has been dead and buried in you. You shall never see him in the Resurrection,
till you see him killed, and then he will rise again in your hearts, with
healing in his wings, to your everlasting joy and comfort.

Then secondly we must deny Christ according to the ministration of the flesh,
according to the history, and the reason is, because that the whole history
of Christ will profit you nothing, nor all that you know, except you find
experimentally the same things done in you by the Spirit. I beseech you
therefore be not offended when as we say, that Christ according to the history
of him only, and according to his ministration in the flesh, is but a form in
which God does appear to us, and in which God does give us a map of salvation;
thou know it not to be thy real salvation, except it be revealed within thee
by the Spirit. Jesus Christ is called the image of the invisible God. God comes
forth to be seen in the flesh of Christ as in an image, it is not the naked
appearance of God, but it is an image or representation of God. Now we know
the image serves in the absence of the lively face of the living person, and so
do all these same transactions of Jesus Christ, they serve till the kingdom of
God become to us in the spirit. And therefore as Christ said, we may be bold
to say after him, The flesh profits nothing. If you only know Christ as
dying and rising without you, it will profit you nothing, unless you know him
as dying and rising within you. Any man is capable of remembering the story of
Christ, and rehearsing it if he have but common reason, and can say as well as
another that Christ died for him, and can throw himself upon Christ, and can
hang upon Christ, this is not faith, this is not salvation; for says James,
Faith without works is dead: and Romans 8. 2. For the law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus, has `made me free from the law of sin and death: he does not
say that such a proposition or text of the Gospel did set him free; he does not
say, that the hearing that Christ died for the sins of men does set him free.
No: there was the Spirit of life in Christ, as well as the law or letter, it is
that entails life upon Christ and his seed. There is an outward Covenant, and
there is an inward Spirit: The outward Covenant is this, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed: and may not any man pretend to be in this Covenant, of
this seed? do not thousands profess themselves to be so? Do not thousands in
the world say, Lord, Lord, Lord, and press to enter into heaven? We cannot put
a difference betwixt one or other except we know this truth: for they say they
are within the Covenant, and of Christ's seed: and what hold they forth for
this, they hold forth the confession of Christ, and say that he died for their
sin, and rose for their justification; and this they believe, and upon this
they lay their souls for salvation. May not the veriest hypocrite do so as well
as the truest Saint? but here is that which puts the difference, when the spirit
of Christ brings this Covenant to the heart of a poor creature, when the Spirit
of Adoption, the Spirit of sonship, revealing God as our Father, revealing God
in Union with us, our righteousness, and our strength, he does indeed seal us
to the day of Redemption; he sets apart Christ's sheep, and this distinguishes
them from the other. So that if you lay salvation upon an historical Christ,
you will be deceived. If you would have that in which you may confide, you must
have Christ revealed in you in the Spirit; you must have the same Spirit of
Faith that was in Christ, and the same spirit of power that wrought in him: you
must have the same eternal spirit, by which you must offer up your bodies,
offer up your flesh to God as a sacrifice; yea your selves, and your own
righteousness; this is true salvation, this is salvation manifested unto life.

To make this yet more clear I shall show you the difference between Christ in
the flesh, and Christ in the Saints; between that work of God within us, and
that work of God in Christ; the latter is the truth of the former:
Sanctifiethem through thy truth, Joh. 17. 17. that is, do thou act those things
really in them, which are done in a figure for them upon me: there is the
truth. I desire to clear this to you by some familiar experience. You know that
Jesus Christ is said to die for our sins, and rise for our justification. Here
is now Christ in the flesh, here is his ministration. Why now hereupon
salvation is preached to men, and they are told that God is reconciled, for he
has sent his Son; there is nothing to be done, God is reconciled, his justice
satitfied, only believ. Here is the outward difpensation. But now a poor soul,
notwithstanding all this, lies under the guilt and weight of sin, whereby he
cannot believe, or take comfort in these glad tidings. Do you not see that
there is need of another ministration? Is there not need of the Law of the
Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, as well as the proposition of the Gospel. You
come and show a poor soul the proposition of the Gospel, that whosoever
believes in Christ shall have eternal life. Yet all this while the poor soul
lies dead; till not only the letter, but the spirit of the Gospel comes and
appears to him; till Christ appears not only in his first Court, that is his
own flesh, or the letter of the Gospel, but the inmost place of all, that is,
in this man's conscience. For we may allude to Heb. 9. 24. That Christ is not
entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true,
but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. These
words are spoke figuratively. It is true he went visibly into heaven, that is a
place remote from their sight, a cloud received him out of their sight. The
true heaven, and that heaven where Christ does appear to the comfort and
releife of a poor soul; is the conscience of a poor sinner, and that is called
heaven, because as heaven is the place of God; so is the heart of man. He is
said ^o be the searcher of the heart, God sits there and wounds, and heales
there, that is God's true place. It is not in the understanding of a man in the
Notions there; but it is in the heart of man, there it is gone. Christ in the
spirit is in the heart of his people, that is Christ's place, and there it is
that Christ Jesus speaks a word for a poor soul* there it is, that Christ
Jesus sits as King in our conscience. Christ may offer himself long enough in
the letter, in the history of the Gospel; but if he appear not in the spirit,
and sit in our consciences to quiet them; we shall never have any true
understanding of the word. Now for this reason I shall desire you to look
within your selves, and I make no question but if you do wait upon God without
prejudicate spirits; he will clear this truth unto you.

And now while I come to some application of this truth, I shall desire you in
the fear of God not to mistake me. Let us take heed of idolizing even the
humanity of Jesus Christ himself, of idolizing his doings and his sufferings.
We see God through these doings and sufferings of Jesus Christ as through a
glass: but it is not blasphemy to say, that a believer may come to see a love
born unto him above and before the manifestation of it in the sufferings of
Jesus Christ; he may see it in God himself, though by Christ. Do not think you
know so much as you need to know in knowing the flesh of Christ, in knowing the
man Christ Jesus; for unless you know God in his appearance, under that form
you mistake Christ, and make him an Idol. I am nothing says Christ; and he
that sends is greater then he that is sent* If God be greater then Christ, then
Christ himself is but a medium through which you come to be acquainted with
God, and in which you must not rest. Take heed of being offended when you shall
hear such like doctrine as this, that the sufferings of Christ for us were as
it were but a parable in which God spoke to us; and that God's heart was not
set upon the having of a little blood for the sins of the people, but that
herein he premeditately (if we look upon it in the original contrivance) would
commend his love to us, and herein (if we relate to the lapsed estate of man)
he considers us poor creatures as we are, and speaks to our childishness and
weakness, who being made under such a Law, and having incurred the curse,
could not see how there could be a reconciliation without bloodshedding. Be
not offended when you hear that there is a greater work done by the Spirit in
the Saints, then was the offering up the flesh of Christ. That there is a
greater sacrifice offered up to God, when as the old Adam, man's own
righteousness and strength is crucified and offered up to God; I say a greater
sacrifice then the sacrificing of the flesh of Christ himself, if you take the
flesh of Christ without the mystery. For that sacrifice was indeed the root as
well as the figure of this sacrifice.

And in the second place, if so be you need to be warned of idolizing the
humanity of Christ, much more of idolizing other forms. There are two sort of
forms wherein God appears to the world. There is the humanity of Christ, which
is the highest and most immediate form and appearance of God; and there are
ordinances in which God appears as it were at the second hand, and by
reflection; as when the Sun appears by the Rainbow, or when it makes another
Sun like its self in a watery cloud, which is but the Sun by reflection: so
Ordinances are but the shadow as it were of the image; and thus Christ is the
image of the Father, but Ordinances are but shadows of that image; therefore
take heed of idolizing Forms. Your interest lies in knowing the Father, not in
knowing any Form whatever. And take heed of censuring and judging spiritual
discoveries; take heed of being offended, if we say there is an higher thing
then Ordinances, then Fasting and Praying, yea then Believing too; and that is,
seeing the Father, and knowing the Father without a Form, manifesting and
revealing himself in his own immediate light.

Now by the by, let me give you this necessary caution; let no man think that
there is no use of Christ, and no use of prayer, and preaching, and other
Ordinances. No, this cannot be inferred from the Doctrine, this only may be
inferred that this is not that glorious rest, where a Christian is to sit down.
Forms are but helps, and God does by Forms, bring us to know himself without
a Form: and no man knows the Father, but he that knows him by Christ whom he
did send, therefore you cannot cast away those Forms; the Scriptures will last
so long as there is ought of them to be fulfilled. But that which we are
contending toward in all these means is the knowing of the Father; and then
we shall see that simplicity and unity that is in the truth, then we shall see
all those knots loosed, and dark ways opened; then we shall see that all
those things of Christ coming, and dying and suffering for us, were but as it
were parables. Now this is the sum of the Gospel, that God loves believers, and
is their righteousness, and their strength, and love, and faith; and all not
thus resolved into the Father, is but a parable that does cloud the Father.
They were not ordained to cloud the Father, but they do through our weakness
cloud the Father from us. They were ordained that they might insinuate and
convey according to our capacities the knowledge of the Father into us. But as I
said before, in all Forms there is weakness, and Forms shall be done away,
as time hastens to be no more, and then God shall be all in all.

I have already brought you up four of those five stairs or degrees of
Christian Selfe-denyall: there remains only the last, the Denial of our
salvation and heaven it is self for Christ, of which but in a word. Oh what a
stir there is with Christians to resign up a few lusts to God! which
notwithstanding they know, and sensibly feel, that it is their greatest
happiness to part with, and yet how far are they from attaining even this
also; but who in this Nation dares resign up his righteousness in Christ, and
go and lie in the grave with the wicked? It is no very easy task with
Christians to give up themselves to God at present for him to do what he will
with them; so he will bring them to heaven at the last. Thou can trust God,
O Christian, in this present appearance of God to thee, as a Savior of thee:
thou can love this sweetness, kindness, grace and goodness of his to
thee; thou can give up thy self to him to do what he will with thee, so he
he will bring thee to this salvation; this thou have attained to in some good
measure, with much difficulty and striving: but who dares say unto God, take me
and throw me into hell, and let me lit there till I fall in love with it for
thy sake, till I come to know and feel thee there, till I can embrace thee and
hugg thee there, and fall in love with thee there, and be able to enjoy thee in
the midst of those everlasting torments? Ah miserable is that man that is
afraid of hell, and is fain to court God to free him from hell, and to cross
and deny himself for fear of being in danger of hell. That life deserves not
the name of life, that can loose any of it is strength, vigor, pleasure,
sweetness, enjoyments, in the midst of everlasting burnings. For if sin could
defile God, where were his holiness? and if death or hell could entrench upon
his life or joys, (which life of his, is also made our life by his Son) any
where to dampe or interrupt that life, or those joys, that life would most
certainly prove but a weak a perishing life, and those joys frail momentary
joys, obnoxious to the intermixtures of death and sorrow. And just the very
same may be said of our life, and our joys; of our salvation, and our heaven
it is self. If thou be wise then, deny thy self in all these things; in thy
will and affections; in thy gifts and thy graces; in thy religion; and even in
thy very salvation and heaven its self: resign them up all unto Christ, lay
them all at Christ's feet. Least whilst thou look for most happiness from
God, for greatest neernesse to and intimacy with God; thou should be cast
behind his back for too much prizing and over-valuing these things. It Is true,
perchance that thou have sweetly enjoyed God, not only at a distance in
longing desires, but nearer at hand in close embraces: gifts, graces,
ordinances, duties, spiritual-exercises of all kinds, you have been well
acquainted with; and have known how to suck life from them; but now you must
deny all these, you must follow Christ, and learn to suck life even from life
it is self: being dead in your selves to all these, you must have no party, no
interest, no principle, no will, no desire, no gift, no grace, no salvation, no
heaven of your own; but you must lie like the clay before the Potter, freely
delivering up your selves into his hands, to be new molded any way, into any
form he himself has a mind to. All the creatures must pass away and be
denied, and whatsoever appears in you, and to you, must be God: the creature
must be swallowed up; there must be nothing left but the Lord in being, the
Lord in motion and operation: even so Lord Jesus for thy mercy sake. Amen.

FINIS.
Wright's 5 Sermons in five several Styles or Ways of Preaching.


