A Chronological Account OF THE Age of the World; At the Birth of every one of
the Ancient Fathers, from Adam to the Flood of Noah, the Kings of Judah, the
Captivity of Babylon, and the End thereof, till the Death of the Messiah To
which are Added Several Remarks concerning the End of the First Six Thousand
Years of this World's-Age, and what may be expected for a Thousand Years thence
next following, and some thoughts concerning the End of the World. As Also A
Brief Exposition OF THE Thirteenth of the Revelations: Much differing from all
that ever was before it. Wherein is Set forth; First, Who the TWO BEASTS
therein mentioned are. Secondly, When they began. Thirdly, How long they are to
Continue. Fourthly, When their End shall be. Wherein that M^stical Number of
666, is fully Explained. By William Wright of Colledge-Green, Dublin.

DVBLIN: Printed by J. (...) in St. Nicholas cholas-street, and are to be Sold
(...) of Dublin, 1700.

To the Reverend the Provost Vice-Provost, Fellows and Scholars, of Trinity
College in DUBLIN.
Reverend Sirs,
I Am your Tenant, even almost under the Droppings of your House* and although
unknown to many of you, yet ready to Serve the meanest of you, in any thing in
my Power; having but a small Portion of what you have attained to.
Nevertheless, my Experience as to length of Time is Double, (I do believe to
the Oldest of you) being above Eighty One Years of Age: Having seen more
Changes and Revolutions in the World, then you have done; which caused me to
search what has been done before my Time; and also to consider, what Ground we
have in the Holy Scriptures; to know and believe what may be expected for the
time to come: and though it be too late for me to think, to attain to such
advantages, as the meanest of you Excel me in; yet if he that had but one
Talent, had Improved it, he had not been Rejected by his Lord; Matthew 25. 15.
And as Peter said to the Lame-Man Acts 3, Silver and Gold have I none, but such
as he had, he freely gave him. So I say, Tongues, Languages, Arts, Sciences,
Rhetoric, and Eloquence I have none; but such as I have I humbly present unto
you; and although there is nothing herein, but what you may easily find out by
Searching as I have done; yet by the method I have taken, it may be Serviceable
in sparing some Labor, in the ready finding out of every thing, or Prooff
therein mentioned at the very first sight. which if Accepted and Approved of by
You, may Encourage him further to proceed. Who is

Reverend Sirs your meanest and most Humble Servant. William Wright.

To the Reader.
^ll who have not, nor ever shall Worship the Beast or his Image, whose Names
^re Written in The Book of Life, of what Perswassion soever they be, Grace,
Health and Peace be given from him who was, and is, and is to come; the
Almighty: and from Jesus Christ the Faithful Witness, and First Fruits of ^em
that Slept.

^T is the General Use of Authors and Writers of Books, to Dedicate ^ them to
some Great or Noble Person or other; from whom they either ^ have Recieved, or
expect to Recieve, some Favorable Gratuitie, ^ard or Preferment; and some (it
may be) does it out of Flattery and ^pocrisie, to please Men that are in Great
Places; to the End they may ^steemed or preferred by them.

^ome Dedicate their Books to those they Love best, or to such as they ^w or
Believe will take most delight in the Subject their Boook Treats of; ^ such I
most Commend; and hereby Follow their Example, in Dedi^ing this my Strange and
Small Piece, to those whom I Judge to be the ^y Fit and most Proper Judges
amongst Men in this matter; not that all every one, whose Names are Written in
the Book of Life, are Proper Judges ^his case; for it is not given to all such
to Understand or Know this ^eat Mystery. Neither was it to be Revealed to any
till toward the ^^. (As in Daniel 12. 9.) which is now drawing near. But as it
Differs ^m all that went before it, so it has no Dependancy upon the
Judgment Opinion of any Person whatsoever that ever yet Handled this Text, or
^rit upon this Chapter: so I have I hope, Built my Work upon that ^e and firm
Foundation, that God has given forth by his Holy Spirit to the ^ophets and
Holy-Men of Old; I mean the Scriptures of Truth. what I have and there for my
Purpose, as to the opening this Mystery, I have, I hope, ^ the Special
Assistance of the True Spirit of God, made Use of, for the bet^ Clearing and
Confirming of what is writ in the following Discourse. Ne^theless I make use of
Authentic History, such as agrees and accords with the Scriptures. Nay I make
use of some, that not any of the former Expo^ ever made use of; and it may be,
that some will think it very strange, I should make use of the Alcoran of
Mahomet, to prove the Latter Beast, ^ the very Image of the First. But to such
I say, Try all Things, Read and ^sider with True Understanding, (if God has
given it) and with Impartial^ and withal keep Prejudice out of your Mind; and
be equal in your Thou^ like a true Balance, which does Justice to all that
trys it: wit^ which, no Man shall ever Reap the Profit which otherwise by a
Meek and ^ biased Mind, he may (by the Blessing of God) do in whatsoever he
Rea^* Therefore I pray observe, that the Text tells us plainly, That there were
Two B^ that did arise, the first out of the Sea, Rev. 13. 1. The Second out of
the E^ verse 11. These Two Beasts cannot be both One, as many Famous and Le^ed
Writers of this Subject has said. Which hereafter shall be named unto y^ who
all of them, make both the Two Beasts to be one Person, or one by ^^cessions of
Persons which cannot be.

But Mr. Naper, who of all the rest I have Named, was the Second or T^ that
Writ of this Chapter, (as hereafter may appear,) he did Guess at it, an^ his
Arguments Paraphrasical, Exposition, Analysis, Solution, Notes, Rea^ and
Historical Amplifications, and Applications he even fills up his Book; ^
thereby even Darkens the Text; so that it is made more Dark by his W^ing than
without it.

Now all of the said Writers make the Latter Beast one and the same wit^ First;
which argues, that every one of them Successively had their Depend^ (I am
afraid) one upon another: the Latter on the Former; not duly ^sidering the
True foundation that all ought to Build upon, rather than ^ the Opinions of
other Men.

I do believe, there is not one True Understanding Christian that has Rea^ or
any of the aforesaid Expositions (so called upon this Thirteenth Chap^ that
can, or will safely say, they do believe their Exposition to be the ^ Sense and
Meaning of the Text; notwithstanding they are Covered and C^^ed over with
several un-necessary Words, (as is before mentioned) some ^^ one sorts of words
hard to be understood, and some other sorts which ^ nothing to the true meaning
of the Text, nor to the Understanding of suc^ want that degree of Learning
which they had; and some if not all, by w^ placing the Beginning or Rise of
these two Beasts, do, and must needs E^^ to their ending: for so long as the
one that came up out of the Sea, cam^ ^ore the other that Rose out of the
Earth, so long shall the Latter continue ^ on the Earth after the First be
Destroyed, I do verily Beileve, except those ^ the Days that God will shorten
for his Elects sake, as Christ says, Mat^w 24. 22. Now that these Two Beasts,
which all the aforesaid ^positors and diverse more, would Join together, or have
the Actions both fulfilled in one Person, or in one Power, or in the Succession
one Person upholding that Power: I don't only prove the con^ry, (for the very
Letter of the Scriptures sufficiently proves it) but I also ^e, that these Two
Beasts were mentioned in several Scriptures in the Old ^^ament by several
names, long before ever they appeared in the World; and ^at their Actions
should be: for otherwise it is a thing Incredible, that the ^^tter Beast
mentioned at the Eleventh verse, (and so to the end of the Chap^,) which was to
do such Great and Strange things, that the Holy Spirit of ^d (which revealed
all to those that Writ the Scriptures,) should not make ^ention of this Second
Beast as well as the First; therefore on the contrary, I ^ believe, that he was
both mentioned and made known to the Prophets of ^ld; and in particular to
Ezekiel, Daniel and to Zechariah, and to others, a^ve a Thousand Years before
either of these Two Beasts appeared in the World, ^d so by these Prophets made
Known to us, if we can but believe them; and ^ve any measure of that Spirit in
us, to understand them, which they had.

Object. Now some may think, that we who now Live, (or others after us,) ^ many
Ages and Generations since these Mysteries were Foretold, that it should ^^
harder for any Person in this Age to understand them now, than it was for ^ose
that then Lived when they were newly spoken.

Answer. In Answer to which, I recomend the Reader to these several Scrip^^res
beforementioned as Jer. 23. 20. and Chap. 30. 24. Dan. 12. 4. 7. 9, as ^so
these that follow: Ezekiel 38. 8. After many Days thou shall ^ visited in the
Latter Years etc. These words seem to be spoken ^ the Destruction of the Magog
Latter of these Two Beasts, mentioned ^ the following Discourse; to wit, the
Turk or Successor of Mahomet. But for ^ant of Printing they were not Known but
to a very few in this World. And ^ Daniel 10. 14 there the Angel makes Daniel
to understand what shall befall ^is People in the Latter Days; for yet the
Vision is for many Days says the ^ngel (as much as to say for many Years) then
to come, and now above Two ^housand one Hundred and Forty Four Years since thy
People, says the Angel ^ Daniel, (meaning the Jews, he himself being one of
them) for whom most certainly God has a Blessing in store, after the End and
Destruction* Two Beasts that are Reigning.

Likewise in Joel 2. 28. 29. And it shall come to pass afterward, that ^ pour
out my Spirit upon all Flesh; to wit upon Old Men, Young Men, Ser^ and
Handmaids, Jews and Gentiles etc. all sorts.

Object. But it may be Admired by some, why the First of these Two Beast^ ^ing
the Greatest Idolator in the World, and the Greatest Persecuto^ the best of
Christ's Flock; that God should suffer him to Live so long, ^ not to Destroy
him as he did Pharaoh; he having Destroyed so many ^ lions of God's best
Servants; as by his means have been Murdered, Massa^ and Martyred.

Answ. But let all such consider, that God always was, is, and ever wi^ as good
as his word; and punctual in his promises; and he has declared to all ^ that
this Beast must continue One Thousand Two Hundred and Sixty Days; w^ Men of all
Perswations, understand to be Years:) and God will not de^^ him of his Limited
and Appointed Time, which He himself has Appoi^^ for it may be it is all the
Joyful Portion that Beast shall have: Neverthele^ is filling up the measure of
his Iniquity all the while, as is the other Beast a^

Therefore, Let all wait in Faith, and with Patience, with Humility True
Submission to God saying, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done in Eart^ it is in
Heaven; for he will in his own Appointed Time, bring all to End ^^ has
determined. And as he Remembered the unkindness of Ameleck t^ People Israel
above Four Hundred Years, till the Sins of Ameleck were at full, 1 Samuel 15. 23.
So assuredly will God do with these Two Beasts ^^ his appointed time shall
come; and their Crying Sins are at the Height, and ^ Abominations come to the
Full: then will be the Time that God will re^ with them, when his Promise is
fulfilled concerning them and their appo^^ Time Expired.

In the mean time many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be Incre^^
Daniel the 12. 14.

^^^nological Account of the Years of the WORLD;
^^m Adam, to the Birth of every one of the Ancient Fathers of the Rightous
Line to the Flood of Noah; who was the Tenth from Adam, and so on to Abraham
who was the Tenth from Noah, and the Twentieth from Adam, and so on to the
Death and Suffering of the Mesiah, who then fulfilled the Promise made by the
Father to Adam 4000 Years before: Proved by the Scriptures of Truth in the
Method following.

their Birth Proved. worlds Age 1 ADam Created the 1st Year of world 2 he Begat
Seth when he was 130 Gen, 5. 3. 0130 3 Seth being 105, Begat Enos 105 verse 6.
0235 4 Enos at his age of 90, Begat Cainan 090 verse 9. 0325 5 thence to
Mehelael 070 verse 12. 0395 6 thence to (...) Jared 065 verse 15. 0460 7 thence
to (...) Enoch 162 verse 18 0622 8 thence to Methusala 065 verse 21 0687 9
thence to Lamech 187 verse 25 0874 10 thence to Noah, the Tenth from Adam 182
verse 28. 1056 11 thence to Shem, Ham and Japhet 500 verse 32 1556 thence to
the Flood 100 Genesis 7. 11. 1656 12 thence to Arphaxad after the Flood 002 Chap.
11. 10. 1658 13 thence to Selah 035 verse 12 1693 14 thence to Eber 030 verse
14 1723 15 thence to Peleg 034 verse 16 1757 16 thence to Rue 030 verse 18 1787
17 thence to Serug 032 verse 20 1819 18 thence to Nahor 030 verse 22 1849 19
thence to Terah 029 verse 24 1878 20 thence to Abraham the 20th from Adam 070
verse 26 1948 from his birth to his Call out of Caldea 052 2000 Noah ^^ed till
^ 58 ^ar of A^^^ham ^. Genesis 9. ^. Now is the World Two Thousand Years Old, at
which time God renewed his Promise to Abraham, which he had made to Adam Two
Thousand Years before, saying to Abraham that in thee shall all the Families of
the Earth be Blessed. Chap. 12. 3. and Chap. 18. 18. and Chap, 22. 18. Genesis 12.
3. Sodom desroyed in Anno Mundi 2047. From Abrams Age of 52 to Isaac's birth
048 Genesis 25. 26. 20^ now is Abram 100. thence to Jacob 060 2^^ Jacob stood
before Pharaoh at his age of 130 Chap. 47. 9. 28. 22^ after which Moses was
Born 135 Exodus 2. 2 23^ He led Israel out of Egpyt when he was 080 Exodus 7. 7.
24^ He led Israel in the Wilderness afterwa. 040 Deuteronomy. 2, 7. 24^ Joshua
Conquered and Ruled 040 Josh. 23. 1. 25^ the Elders that outlived him 027
Judges 2. 7. 25^ they sin against God and he brought Chushan K. of Mesopotamia
against them for 008 Chap, 25^ Othniel Subdued him and Ruled Israel for 040
verse 11. 26^ then Eglon K. of Moab oppressed them 018 verse 14. 26^
Left Handed Ehud slew Eglon and Ruled 080 verse 30. 27^ Jabin K. of Canaan
oppressed them 020 Chap. 4. 3. 27^ Delivered by Debora and Barac, she judged
040 Chap. 5. 31 27^ The Midianites oppress grieveously for 007 Chap. 6. 27^
Subdued by Gideon who Judged them 040 Chap. 8. 28 28^ Abimelech Ruled Wickedly
for 003 Chap. 9. 22 28^ Tolo Judged 23, Jair 22. together 045 Chap. 10. 23 28^
the Philistines and Amonites oppress for 018 Chap. 11 28^ Subdued by Jephthah
who Judged 006 Chap. 12, 7 28^ Ibson Judged 7 Years. Elon 10 in all 017 verse
13. 14 29^ Abdon Judged 8 008 Chap. 13. 1, 29^ The Philistines oppress again
040 29^ About this time is Sampson Born, who is said to Judge Israel 20 Years,
and Ely is said to Judge 40; but both was while the Philistines Ruled,
therefore not to be here Accounted: Ely Judged as High Priest only. Judges 14.
4. Chap. 15. 9, 10, 29^ 1 Samuel 7. 15 and Chap. 8. 5, 3^^ Now Samuel Succeeds
Ely, and he and Saul Ruled and Judged Israel for 40, after the 40 Years that
the Philistines Ruled. after which David Reigned 040 1 Kings 2, 11 040 Now
Solomon after he had Reigned 3 003 (...) Years, begun to Build the Temple,
(...) 3 Years being added to the Years since they left Egypt, and it makes just
580, in Anno Mundi 3033. 3033 But to proceed, Soloman Reigned afterward 37 037
1 Kings 11. 42 3070 Rehoboam Reigned 017 Chap. 14. 21 3087 Abijam or Abijah 03
2 Chronicles. 13. 2 3090 Asa Reigned 41 Chap. 16. 13 3131 Jehosaphat 25 Chap. 20. 31
3156 Jehoram 08 Chap. 21. 20 3164 Ahasiah 01 Chap: 22. 2 3165 Athaliah the
Queen 07 verse 12 3272 Johas 40 Chap. 24. 1 3212 Amaziah 29 Chap. 25. 1 3241
Vzziah or Azariah 52 Chap. 26. 13 3293 Jotham 16 Chap. 27. 1 3309 Ahaz 16 Chap.
28. 1 3325 Hezekiah 29 Chap. 29. 1 3354 Manasseh 55 Chap. 33. 1 3409 Amon 02
verse 21. 3411 Josiah 31 Chap. 34. 1 3442 Jehojakim or Eliakim is all one, 2 Chronicles 36. 4. he Reigned in Jerusalem: but Nebuchadnezar carried him to Babylon.
Jehojachin Son of Jehojakim or Eliakim being made King Reigned 3 Months and 10
Days; and was carried to Babylon: also both Reigned but 6 Months and 10 Da^s.
Chap. 36 Daniel 1. 1 verse 6 verse 9 verse 11 At the end of Josiah's Reign who
Reigned (Jehoahaz 3 Months, and Jehojachin 3 Months,) Jehojakim was carried to
Babylon after he had Reigned 2 Years, for in the 3d Year of his Reign
Nebuchadnezar took him. 31 2 Chronicles. 34. 1 Chap. 36. 5 verse 9 3442 02 Dan. 1. 1
3444 Now doubtless begins the Captivity, and although Zedekiah was said to
Reign 11 Years, ^et he was made K. by Nebuchadnezar to whom he was in (...) ^is
Reign is not here to be Accounted; for he Rebelled against him and broke his
Oath: so here comes in the Captivity, which continued 70 Years, and which ended
the Babylonian or Caldean Monarchy, or Empire; which was in the first Year of
Cyrus King of Persia who gave out a Proclamation or a Command to Build the
House of the Lord in Jerusalem as you may see in 2 Chronicles. 36. 21, 22, 23. and
in Ezra 1. 1. 3. 70 2 Chronicles. 36 21, 22, 23 Ezra 1. 1. verse 2, 3 3^ From this
Command of Cyrus to Christ's Suffering, we are not to reckon full 70 Weeks or
490 Years, as some account, but only 69 Weeks and an half, or 486 Years: for in
Dan, 9 25. it is said, there shall be 7 Weeks, and Threescore and 2 Weeks; that
is 69 and After Threescore and 2 Weeks shall the Messiah be cut off, and at
verse 27, it is said, He shall confirm the Covenant with many for one Week; and
in the midst of the Week he shall cause the Sacrifices and Oblations to cease;
And that was when he was Offered up once for all. Dan, 9. 25, 26 verse 27
Hebrews 9 40^

SO that by this true Account, our Blessed Savior Suffered for Man's
Salvation, in the Fourth Thousand Year of the World; or as some Account in the
80th Jubilee from the Creation, Forty Hundred Year after the first Promise made
to Adam and his Wife. For the Jubilee being Fifty Years, 4000 or Forty Hundred
Years, makes 80 Jubilies or 4000 Years. Leviticus 25. 9, 10, 11, etc, 4000 And
the best Authors do conclude, that Christ Died in the 4000 Year of the World;
and to begin with the Travels of the Partriarchs, written by Henry Bunting, and
Printed at London, in Anno Domini 1629: in page the 416, he says, That the
Angel Gabril in the Year of the World 3967, declared to the Virgin Mary the
Conception of Christ, in which Year he was Born; to which if we add 33 being
the time he lived on Earth, it makes up just 4000. And in page 431 he says,
That Christ was brought from Bethlehem to Jerusalem and presented in the Temple
in the same Year 3967; to which add 33, and it makes just the same 4000 Years
as aforesaid. There are above Twenty places more in the said Mr. Buntin's Book,
that concludes Christ Died in the 4000 Year of the World or 80th Jubilee; as
says Thomas Heynes in his General View of the Holy Scriptures, page 159 and
Mr. Thomas Brightman in his Exposition on the Revelations, page 1083, goes one
Year over, and makes the World to be at Christ's Death 4001: which is so near
the matter that it admits of no Dispute. I could name many Authors that hits
the very Year, of 4000 at Christ's Death: but I am not willing to enlarge
beyond what I intended, for my intention was to make a Short, Brief and True
Chronicle. It is said, that Solomon in the 4th Year of his Reign began to Build
the House of the Lord in the 480th Year after the Children of Israel came out
of the Land of Egypt, 1 Kings 6. 12; but by Collecting the several Years from
the first of Judges to the 16th, and so on to Solomon's 4th Year, and you will
find it to be 580 Years. So that Dr. William Howel and some of the Ancients are
of Opinion, that there are an 100 Years ommited in that of the 1 Kings 6. 12;
which as he says (in his Sacrad History, page 44) might be ommited by the
Neglect or want of Care of the Clerks or Scribes that first Writ it, it being
but the Historical part of the Scripture. It is said that Shamgar who slew 600
Philistines with an Ox Goad, that he Judged Israel, but how long is not
mentioned. It is likewise said that Sampson Judged Israel 20 Years; and Ely
Judged 40; but all this time was while the Philistines Ruled over Israel:
therefore I leave out the time that Shamgar, Sampson and Ely Judged, out of
this Account, because their time of Judging was in the 40 Years that the
Philistines Ruled; and yet for all that, I find 580 Years instead of 480,
mentioned as aforesaid. Ju^ 3. ^ Acts 13 And further to strengthen what is
aforesaid, see what St. Paul says in the 13th of the Acts and 18th verse, and
so on he confirms the same, speaking of the Children of Israel he says, that
about the space of 40 Years God suffered their manners in the Wilderness. (that
was when Moses led them out of Egypt) So here let us begin a New Account, from
their coming out of Egypt to the 4th Year of Solomon. They were led by Moses in
the Wilderness 040 Years Joshua Subdued and Divided the Land 007 After that he
gave them Judges, (whereof Joshua was the first) by the Space of 450 Years
Afterward they desired a King, and God gave them Saul the Son of Kish by the
Space of 040 Afterward David Reigned 1 Kings 2. 11 040 After David to the
beginning of Solomon's 4th Year 003 So by St. Paul's account also he makes it
580 So that Doubtless there is an Omission of an Hundred Years in that 1 Kings
6. 12. Now observe that at the end of 2000 Years after the Promise made to
Adam, which happened to be in the 52d Year of Abraham's Life, the same Lord God
renewed his Promise to Abraham, which he had made to Adam just 2000 Years
before. Now certainly Abraham could not be less than 30 or 32 Years Old when he
took Sarah to Wife; for all his Predecessors for Six or Seven Generations
before took them Wives or had their Firstborn about that Age, and they Lived
in Vr, their Native Country in Chaldea for 20 Years more, at least, before God
called Abraham to leave his Country: for his Wife (it is said) was barren, and
there must needs be some Space of time to prove her Barrenness. See Genesis 11
^enesis ^ and 17 And if Abram took Sarah at his Age of 32, then was Sarah but
22; for she was Ten Years younger than he, and 20 Years after, when Abraham was
52, God then called him out of his Native Country, to go into a Land which he
would show him; and withal Renewed to Abraham the Promise he had made to Adam,
just 2000 Years before; in which time were Twenty Generations; that was Ten
from Adam to Noah; and Ten from Noah to Abraham as before. Genesis 2, 3. So
that it is very considerable to be Observed, that as God Renewed his Promise to
Abraham, which he had made to Adam just 2000 Years before, so that just 2000
Years more by the Death of the Messiah, God fulfilled his first Promise made to
Adam, and his Second made Abraham, by Bruising the Serpent's Head, by the Death
and Suffering of Christ our Blessed Savior and Redeemer, at the end of the
Second 2000 Years, or the end of 4000 Years from Adam. When I was but a child
of about 8. or 9, Years old, I was a diligent listner to all Men's Discourse; so
that I would forsake my play-fellows and stand at the backs of the Men (if
Discoursing) to hear their discourse; about which time I heard some say that
the World was to continue 6000 Years; which they divided thus; 2000 before the
Law; 2000 under the Law; and 2000 under the Gospel; and this dicourse I do
remember since before the Year 1630, which this Year 1700 is now 70 Years
since; which I have pondered in my mind, but I find that they were much out of
the way: for if they had placed the first 2000 Years from the Creation, to the
two and fiftieth Year of Abram's age, (being the time when GOD called him out
of his Native Country, and renewed the promise to him which he made to Adam
2000 Years before,) and from thence to the Death of Christ other 2000; and the
Third 2000 in Anno Domi. 2033 if so their discourse had been more credible and
more true, and very certain. So that in Anno. Dom. 1700. being 1667. Years
since the Suffering of Christ, to which add 4000. that was before his Death,
and since Adams Creation to this present Year of our LORD 1700; the world is
just 5667 Years old, as has been proved: so that 333. Years hence, the world
will be 6000 Years old; before which time there well be neither Pope nor Turk
left in this world, I hope and believe. But then look for the Resurrection of
the just, or first Resurection; and the Beginning of the Seventh Thousand Year,
wherein Christ shall Reign; and at the end thereof will be the second, or
latter Resurection, and the Dissolution of this world, as you may see in Rev.
20, v. 5. 6. and 1 These. 4 16. the dead in Christ shall rise first: so that
from this present Year of our LORD 1700 there is but 333. Years to come, to
complete and fulfill all Prophesies; and to end the 6000 Years of this evil
world: and to Raise the Righteous from their Graves to meet the LORD Christ in
the Air, at his coming, and to Reign with him, and wait upon him for the 1000
Years, till the Second or latter Resurection; and for ever; where and how he
shall apoint them. And then Blessed indeed shall they be for ever, to whom the
LORD shall say, come ye Blessed, etc. but endless we will be to them, to whom
it shall be said, Go ye Curssed or, Depart ye Curssed into Everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angles Math. 25. 41. But blessed and Holy is he
that has part in the first Resurrection; for on such the Second Death has no
power: but they shall be Priests of GOD, and of Christ; and shall Reign with
him a 1000 Years, Rev. 20. 6. At or about the end thereof, Satan who was
chained up for 1000 Years, shall then be Loosed for a little Season, v. 3, and
shall go out to Deceive the Nations, which are in the four Quarters of the
Earth, as he had formerly done before he was bound up to make them wicked
against the Second or last Resurection; then says John v. 1, 2, I saw the Dead
Small and Great stand before GOD, and the Books was opened, and another Book
was opened, which is the Book of life; and the Dead were Judged out of those
things which were written in the Books, according to their works Cha. 20. 12.
and Cha. 14, 13, and the Sea gave up the dead, which was in it, and Death and
Hell Delivered up the dead that were in them; and they were judged every Man
according to their works, Now observe and consider, First, that in or about the
Year of the world 1780. Babel the Tower and City of confusion, was in building
but God confounded their work and Language. Secondly consider also from the
Birth of Christ, till the Year of Christ 1780. MISTIRY BABYLON THE GREAT; THE
CHIEF CITY OF IDOLATRY AND CONFUSION, may, and I hope will come to her last
end, or the end of that beast, or Antichrist his 1260 Days or Years. Thirdly,
consider to Begin the 2300. Days (which doubtless are years) mentioned in
Daniel 8. 14. I say to Begin them before the Birth of Christ 520. Years, and
from thence to Hormisda Bishop of Rome, and First that was called Partriarch
there; and also the First that was, (or strove to be) called Universal Bishop;
tho he held not that Title above 2 Years: I say from the Birth of Christ, to
the said Hormisda, was Just 520 Years more, which makes 1040 to which add the
whole time of Antichrist, or the Beast 1260, and all these numbers will end
together in Anno. Domini. 1780. Then shall the Sanctuary be Cleansed as the
Angel told Daniel Chap. 8. 14. 15. etc. that is just 80. Years to be completed
from this present Year 1700. viz. the Year 1780. which I hope, and believe is
all the time that that Beast or Antichrist has to Reign. Mr. John Tillinghurst
a Minister in Yarmouth in Norfolk, in or about the Year 1651. or 52 Printed a
Book in large Octavo, called the Knowledge of times; wherein he strove to end
all the aforesaid Numbers in the Year 1656. but there was more desired that it
might prove true, then did belive it to be true* but when it was seen to fail,
to Excuse the mistake, they added ten Years more to Antichrists Reign, and in
1666. down he must by all means: but I bore my Testimony against both those
periods, as having no Foundation, or right time of beginning his Account. I
could recite many Errors in Mr. Tillinghurst's book, although at that time, it
was highly esteemed and cried up: but I am loath to enlarge any more at this
time; therefore what I have hear already writ, I leave to the serious
consideration of every one that takes delight in the knowledge of these things,
and of the times, which if it may be approved of or desired, or servicable to
this present or future generations, that any thing therein be worthy of praise,
give that to God only; and if the like of it was ever done by any before, yet
it was not done by any so Meanly Learned as the Writer thereof, much of whose
Knowledge in these things he has gathered by dicourse, long Experience, much
reading the Holy Scriptures, in which he delighted most; also in Chronicles and
other Authentic History, But his chief Instructor was God. I am now past 81
years of Age, and believe, that a child born this Year 1700, and shall live so
long in this World as I have done, may see the last Pope that will bear sway in
ROME. At the Death of Belshazzar, was the end of the Babilonian or Caldean
Monarchy, Dan. 5. At which time the Median or Persian Monarchy began to be
Great; soon after which time the Jews were Delivered out of Captivity, about
the Year of the World 3510, after which the Persian Monarchy continued about
214 as some Account, which ended about Anno Mundi, 3724. About which time it
was Subdued by the Grecian Monarch, Alexander the Great; after whose Death his
Dominions were Confused and Divided into several Divisions, but chiefly Four;
all which about 234 Years more, were Subdued by Julius Caesar the First Roman
Emperor, in or about the Year of the World 3956: And now they leave off to
Reckon in all public Account, by the Year of the World; and from thenceforth
all is Reckoned from the beginning of Caesar's Reign, when he had Subdued all
the forenamed Monarchies to the Obedience of Rome; and that Account was
continued all along during the Reigns of all the Heathen Emperors, till
Constantine the Great; about which time they begun to Account from the Nativity
of our Redeemer Christ Jesus. Now observe, John Writ the Revelations in the
time of that Account, which began when Julius Caesar began to Reign, which was
before the Nativity of Christ just 44 Years. To which if we add after Christ's
Nativity 622, it makes up that Mistical Number of (Revel. 13, and the 18 or
last verse, which John says is the Number of a Man which was to Rise, and did
Rise in that very Year. As I have in the following book more at large set
forth, and sufficiently proved Mahomet to be the Second Beast mentioned in the
13 of the Revelations, and the very Image of the Pope who is the first Beast
there mentioned.

To find how many Shekles make a TALENT.
IN Exodus 38. 26 and 29 it is there said, that 603550 Men offered every Man a
Bekah or an half Shekle; one half thereof is 301775 whole Shekles, according to
the Shekle of the Sanctuary, which by computation, is Two Shillings and
Sixpence, or Half a Crown English.

One half of that Sum is 150887 whole Crowns, and one Half Crown. Half of the
said Crowns make 75443 and an half, these are Angels or half Pounds, Half of
the said Angels makes 37721 Pounds, Ten Shillings. The Total of this Great
Offering amounts (being Reckoned after our English Pounds) to the Sum of 37721
Pounds 17 Shilllings and 6 Pence.

Now to know how many of these make a Talent. the 301775 being Shekles or half
Crowns, and being Divided by 3000, the Quotient will be 100, (that is an
Hundred Talents) and 1775 Shekles remaining, so that this remainder is but part
of a Talent, and so would 2999 be but part because it wanted one of 3000 which
is a Talent, So that 3000 Shekles of the Sanctuary, which is a Talent, is in
Value of English Money 375 Pound. But if we Reckon 3000 of the common Shekles,
it comes but to one half of the Shekle of the Sanctuary, which is but 187 Pound
ten Shillings.

Certain Scriptures Justifying and Vindicating just and Lawful Weights,
Balances and Measures, and Condemning those that Use the contrary.
Levi. 19th verse 35. YE shall do no Unrighteousness in Judgment, in Mete, Yard
Weight, or in Measure. verse 36. Just Balances, just Weights, a just Ephah and
a just Hin shall ye have. Deuteronomy. 25. verse 13. Thou shall not have in thy Bag
diverse weigth, a great, and a small (that is a great one to Buy by, and a small
one to Sell by.) verse 14. Thou shall not have in thine House diverse Measures a
great and a small. [* Beware of this you that are Gulilty] verse 15. But thou
shall have a Perfect and Just Weight, a Perfect and Just Measure shall thou
have, that thy Days may be long lengthened in the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. For all that do such things, and all that do Unrighteously, are an
Abomination unto the Lord thy God. verse 16. Prove. 11. 1 A False Balance is
Abomination to the Lord, a just Weight in his Delight. Chapter 16. 11 A just Weight
and Balance are the Lords, all the Weights of the Bag are his Work. Chapter 20. 10
Diverse Weights and diverse Measures, both of them are a like Abomination to the
Lord. Chapter 20. 23. Diverse Weights are an Abomination unto the Lord, And a false
Balance is not good. ^ 6. ^ 11. Shall I count them pure with the wicked
Balance, and with the Bag of Deceitful Weights. ^7. 12 Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. ^6. 31.
For this is the Law and the Prophets.

Adam stands, the first of all.
Although in him we all did Fall.
Seth was raised in Abel's stead,
Who was by Wicked Cain struck Dead.
When Seth an Hundred Years and Five.
Enos his Son became alive.
When he had Lived Ninty Year*
Cainain his Son did then appear.
Maheleal at Seventy more,
Jared his Son Named before.
Jared Righteous Enoch Sprung,
Methsala begun.
Lamech Father unto Noah,
Adam I find so:
Noah made an Ark to save himself;
Wife, Sons and Daughters and their Wealth;
All this he did, at God's Command
Before the Lord Destroyed the Land.
Arphaxad next, the Son of Shem,

Selah and Eber next I find.
Peleg and Reu of the same Kind.
Serug, Nahor and Terah;
Abraham we draw,
Which was the Tenth from Noah and then
The Twentieth from the first of Men,
To whom the Promise God renewed,
Which Christ did at his Death conclude.
FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT To the Reader.
IN the Printing of this small Chronicle, I found that it did ^ Fill Two Sheets
of Paper; therefore (with the Advice of ^ Printer,) I added something which I
thought convenient ^ be known, to fill up the Second Sheet; concerning Sheck^
Talents* Just Weights and Measures, and some other things: A^ when I had so
done, I thought these Two Sheets too little to be pu^lished alone; and
therefore I have added to them, Ten She^ more, which here follows, being; A
Brief Exposition of the Th^^teenth Chapter of the Revelation; concerning the
Two Beasts ther^ mentioned, wherein that Mistical Number of 666 is fully
Explai^ed, not to belong to the First Beast, mentioned in the first Ten ver^^
which doubtless is the Pope: but there are Eight verses more, whi^^ properly
belongs to the Second Beast; to whom the Number does a^ belong, (and not the
Pope;) although so many Famous and Lear^ed Men have endeavored to make that
Number belong to hi^ not Building upon the right Foundation, which was the
cause ^ their Great Mistake, as to the Number and the Person also, to whi^^ it
does properly belong, as by Reading and Understanding the fo^lowing Discourse
may Satisfy the Impartial Reader, although Exceedingly Differs from all that
ever yet was made public as ^ the Latter Beast.


