Word of seasonable and sound Counsel, Laid down in several Proposals, which
takes in very much of the Sense and Agreement of the good People of these
Nations, both touching the Work, and touching the suitable Workmen thereunto,
which the wonderful Appearance and Providence of the Righteous Lord, seems to
Point at in this our day.
Humbly Tendered and Presented unto those that are in eminent Place in this
juncture of Affairs, both in a Civil and in a Military Capacity. By diverse
well Affected persons to the general Peace, Prosperity and Liberty of these
Nations; Inhabiting in and about the City of Westminster.
As an Essay in order to a well grounded Unity, Peace, and Settlement, etc.
1. FIrst, It is humbly proposed, That you would so set the Lord of Hosts
before your eyes, who has very eminently appeared in your sight all along, on
the behalf of his People, and that good and righteous Cause, that has been
still on your hearts to travel with, that you may stand in awe of his Majesty,
and walk in his fear all the day long, yea all the days of your lives, and so
in his fear as not at any time, to step before him, start aside from him, or
stay behind him, but to adhear unto him, and to follow him both closely and
fully.

2. Secondly, That you would in his fear diligently search and try your hearts
and ways, to the end you may find out, what has been your great Evils, and
Miscarriages and unsuitable behavour before his Majesty, in reference either to
self-seeking, treacherous dealing, covenant breaking, or such like Provocations
whether heretofore or in this late hour of temptation. And having found out
what is amiss in any of these respects, that you would humble your souls
before the Lord of Hosts for the same, give glory to him, and take shame to
your selves, if perhaps your Provocations may be forgiven you, so as further to
delight to make use of you in carring on those great and glorious designs of
his, which undoubtedly he is about to effect (and that according to Prophecies)
in these last days of the world, in which we live.

3. Thirdly, That having done thus, you that have the fear of the Lord and his
goodness upon your hearts, and favor that righteous Cause that he and his
People have appeared in, that you, we say, laying aside all self-seeking,
animosity and Prejudice, would endeavor in a peaceable and friendly uniting
each to other, and as one man in this juncture of time, to improve your wisdom
and interest the utmost, to Prevent the great design of your grand Adversary,
which is to divide and destroy both you and us: And that you will seek to
effect this by a speedy, unanimous, and vigorous resolving upon such things, as
tends to the uniting the hearts of, the honest party in these Nations and to
the bringing forth those good things, which takes in the common just
concernments of all men, and have been so much Pretended to, and so often
declared for; which being effected, cannot fail to be accompanied with such a
Presence and blessing from the Lord, and with such a common concurrance of all
unbyased men, as will undoubtedly secure yourselves and these Nations from such
hazards, as in such a Posture as this they are every moment exposed unto, and
to exalt them above other Nations, in the enjoyment of abundance of Peace,
Prosperity and Liberty.

The things humbly tendered, as meet to be by you in the fear of the Lord
speedily resolved upon, and in his strength (in this juncture of Affairs)
unanimously and vigorously Prosecuted, in order to attain the end before
specified, are as follows.
1. First, Let it be in the fear of the Lord resolved; That singular care shall
be taken from time to time, that the Arrears of the poor Soldiers, the
Pentions of the poor Pentioners, and the Public faith debts, of the poor
Creditors of these Nations, (whose straights presses them sore, and makes them
to sigh, and whose sighs and cries goes up unto Heaven, and will have their
returns) may be speedily and out of the first receipts discharged and cleared.
2. Secondly, That singular care shall be taken from time to time, that the poor
in general thorowout these Nations, which are very numerous now, (by reason of
the decay of Trade, and other ways) may be so provided for, and in such sort,
that all the Impotent may be releived, and all the able may be employed. 3.
Thirdly, That there shall be a speedy and effectual course taken to rectify
the Laws, and the Maladministration thereof, by bringing them into a Brief,
Plain, and easy Method and Form; and as near the Laws of that famous
Commonwealth of Israel, as the nature and Constitution of a Gentile State
(under the present dispensation of light and grace) will admit; and so, that as
much strife and contention between man and man as may be, might be prevented,
and what by such a Provision cannot be prevented, might be with as much ease
and speed, and with as little expense of Money and irritation of spirit as may
be, fully redressed, so that loving kindness, judgment and righteousness, which
the righteous Lord himself delights to be exercised in on the earth, may be
found and felt in our Land, to the great contentment and rejoicing of the
inhabitants thereof. 4. Fourthly, That singular care shall be forthwith taken
about that perplexing business of Tithes, which being continued as now it is,
stands but as a relict of Monarchy, and as a witness against these Nations, as
if they denied the change of the Priesthood that was under the Law, or that
Christ Jesus was come in the flesh, is also a thing that looks, so unlike the
maintenance of a true Gospel Ministry, and which is as some conceive the very
fomenter, and nourisher of a Persecuting, and imposing Spirit in these Nations;
by reason whereof, even under the greatest Profession of liberty, many tender
Consciences have been daily perplexed, and very much of the Land of the Nation
has lain unimproved, which is rendered by many, as a great reason of the
scarceness of Corn, which hazards a Famine of times in the Nation. 5. Fifthly,
That the very much decayed Trade of this Nation, both in these famous Cities of
London and Westminster, and other Places (so universally complained of) and by
the many sad effects so fully Demonstrated, may now through special care be
forthwith revived, by easing the troublesome and vexatious burdens that lies
upon it, and by putting it under a good regulation and Government; That the
Seas may be so guarded, that being propounded as the ground of the Customs;
that the Trade, Treasure, and strength of these Nations, may not so often fall
into the hands of the enemies. 6. Sixthly, That all the Relicts and Props of
corrupt Monarchy, thorowout these Nations, which do but wait and serve for its
return, and have entrencht upon the freeborn Peoples Rights, and Liberties
upon a Civil account, shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily
removed. 7. Seventhly, That all the Relicts and Props of Hierchy, thorowout
these Nations, which do but wait and serve for its return, and have entrenched
upon the Peoples Rights, and Liberties, upon a Religious account, shall be
forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily removed. 8. Eighthly, That all
those horrible corruptions, abuses, and mischiefs, which have crept into houses
that have been erected and maintained by free Donation, for Charitable uses,
and also all those corruptions and abuses, that are found in the Prisons
thorowout these Nations, and especially those of the Kings Bench, the Fleet,
Newgate, and Ludgate, shall be forthwith diligently enquired into, and speedily
removed. 9. Ninthly, That none shall be forced upon any Public employment in
this Commonwealth against his will and consent, and that whosoever is employed
from time to time in the management of the affairs thereof, from the highest
unto the lowest, shall receive out of the public Revenue, a suitable recompense
and encouragement for his service therein: and then in case any shall be found
taking bribes, either directly, or indirectly, or otherwise unfaithful in the
trust committed to him, he shall be severely punished, and forthwith cashiered.
10. Tenthly, that some substantial Laws, relating to Liberty and Freedom, both
upon a Civil, and upon a Religious account, whereby every man may be preserved
safe in his person, name and estate, from the violence of another, under what
pretense soever; that such we say, may be laid as Fundamentals in the bottom
of your Government, as that which has been gotten with so much difficulty, and
is the price of so much blood and treasure; Let these be known to be as the
Laws of the Meads and Persians, that cannot be altered, no not by future
Representatives; and among other, let this be one; That in case any
Representive of the people, shall presume by the Major vote to alter or make
void these or any of these first Fundamentals, they shall be looked upon as
violating the trust committed to them, and such act and acts of theirs, shall
be deemed void and null to all intents and purpuses, as if the same had never
been, and shall be no ways obleiging upon the consciences of the good people
of these three Nations. And moreover, that the person, or persons, that first
moved therein, shall be judged Traitors to the Liberties of the People, and of
his Country in the highest degree, and proceeded against accordingly. 11.
Eleventhly, That none of the freeborn People of these Nations, shall be
arrested, imprisoned, banished, condemned, or sentenced to the loss of Life,
Limb, Estate, or Liberty, or be any otherwise molested, or distressed, after a
very short time prefixed, but by the lawful Judgment of their Peers, or by
virtue of, and according to some known, approved, published Law, or Laws of
these Nations. 12. Lastly, That for the more certain, speedy and through
effecting hereof, whereby deeds may demonstrate, that these are not only words,
but even resolves by the finger of God set on your hearts; Let men be found out
and employed of a suitable Spirit to these resolves, with whom you may in the
name and fear of the Lord engage and resolve to stand, or fall, live or die
together, in a through pursuit thereof, in order to the putting of all sorts of
men into a better and more flourishing capacity then that wherein now they are;
so that interest may engage them there to remain, and as one man to rise up and
withstand a return; and in order to enjoy, as in ancient times, their free
Representatives; Let the Persons be according to Jethro's Counsel, able men,
fearing God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and such as are in a good
measure freed by the Spirit of the Gospel, from imposing upon the consciences
of others, in things that relate to the worship and service of God, as having
learned by experience, that it is not by might, nor by power, that things of
that nature are carried on, and that the wrath of man does not at all
accomplish the righteousness of God.
Thus doing, you will demonstrate that the Lord of Hosts, who has from time to
time so wonderfully saved us, is now indeed become our Judge, our Lawgiver,
and our King, and that he has put it into your hearts, to proclaim that fast
which he has chosen, and so much delighted in, thorowout these Nations, which
is to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the
oppressed go free, and to break every yoke; to deal your bread to the hungry,
to bring the poor that are cast out to your house, when you see the naked to
cover him, and not to hide your selves from your own flesh.

Thus doing, you may be sure, that your light shall break forth as the morning,
and your health shall spring forth speedily, and your righteousness shall go
before you, and the glory of the Lord shall be your reerward; so shall you call
and the Lord shall answer; you shall cry, and he shall say, here I am. Thus
your light shall rise in obscurity, and your darkness be as the noon day, and
the Lord shall guide you continually and satifie your soul in drought, and make
fat your bones, and you shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of
water whose waters shall not fail. Thus doing you shall build the old waste
places, and shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and be called
the Repairers of the breach, and the Restorers of paths to dwell in. And thus
Judgment shall return unto righteousness, and all the upright in heart in these
Nations shall follow it, which that the Lord of Hosts will graciously grant, is
and shall be the humble, earnest, and constant prayer, and request, of his, and
your unworthy Servants, etc.

Consider what we say, and the Lord give you understanding and Courage to do
his Will.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Elephant and Castle near Temple-Barre, 1659.


