To all who are Advertised by G. Keith, of a Meeting intended to be held by
him, at Turners-Hall, the 11th of the 11th Month, called January, 1699.
WHereas, G. K. has Summoned several of the People called Quakers, to the said
Meeting, promising, There to lay open (what he calls) their great Fallacy and
Sophistry: I thought it convenient, being one of the Summoned, to give you the
following brief Relation.

G. Keith, (as by his Words and Books has appeared) did, for about Thirty
Years, pretend to be in Society and Fellowship with the People called Quakers;
during which time, he did repeatedly Vindicate, against our then Adversaries,
those Doctrines to be Scriptural, Primitive and Christian, which are most
surely believed by us, and have so been, ever since we were a People; and did
pledge his Inward sense given him (as he said) by the Spirit of God, that we
were in Religion, and an agreeable Practice, truly Christian.

But the Man becoming Exalted, grew Contentious and Unchristian in his
Behavior, by his continuance in which, he did, Anno 95. exclude himself from
our Society and Fellowship: Since this, his increasing Envy has led him into a
Disturbance of Mind, which in its course, resembles the returns of a Delirious
Affliction, for that he has annually, since then, presumed to erect a
mock-Theatre, thereby abusing his Pretense to Permission by Civil Authority; on
which, while he endeavors to make us the subjects of his own, and the Peoples,
Laughter and Odium, he makes himself the Object of our Pity, and Impartial Men's
Contempt.

He does indeed speak Loud of the Discovery of Gross and Vile Errors, and
Antichristian Principles, which he says we hold, and which by Ocular
Inspection, he says, he will present: But till his Eyes, like Eve's, were
opened by his Fall, he did not lay open either Vile Errors, or Antichristian
Principles, held by us, neither from his own Ocular Inspection in our Books,
nor from his pretended Inward Sense of our Preaching.

And with respect to this his peremptory Summons, and appointment of Matter,
Time and Place; I say, That as we in common with all Protestant Dissenters, are
intitul'd to the peaceable Profession of our Christian Principles, we might be
deemed Imprudent to call it in Question, by obeying the petulant Summons of
this single Disturber; who, while he is noising it, That we are Repugnant to
all true Protestants, shows not that himself is agreeable to any, in that he is
not declared to be of any Society of Christians; nor has he, since his
Defection from us, yet published, that I know of, what Community it is, which
he judges to be in Doctrine and Practice, the most Christian.

And though he by continuing this his distempered Frolic, seems not at all, or
not sufficiently to have considered that Act of Parliament, the Intent of which
in its Preamble is declared to be, to Unite the King's Protestant Subjects in
Interest and Affection: Yet we are too sensible of the benefit received
thereby, to Trifle away That, for which we account our selves so thankfully
engaged to our Superiors.

And to be absent from such Meetings we are yet the more strictly engaged, when
we call to mind, the ill use which was made of the presence of some of our
Friends but the last Year, at a Place and Time appointed by a few uneasy
Clergymen in Norfolk for the same purpose.

Yet if our Adversaries will say, We are Erroneous in Principle; though we meet
them not, they are not therefore without means of publishing their Sentiments
of us by the Press, as appears by their many Books: And I hope we shall not be
without the like means to refute Calumny, and Satisfy the Impartial, which we
have hitherto done; in several Answers, both to this Man, and other our
Adversaries.

Joseph Wyeth.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court, in Gracious-Street,
1699.


