THE REMONSTRANCE OF THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, To the House of COMMONS Assembled
in PARLIAMENT. Preferred to them by the hands of the SPEAKER.

Printed Anno Dom. 1643.

THE REMONSTRANCE Of the Commons of England to the House of Commons assembled
in Parliament, preferred to them by the hands of their SPEAKER.
Master Speaker,
PRejudge us not, we pray you, because the title of this paper is a
Remonstrance, not a Petition; the cause is, for that Petitions have had ill
success of late, yet the matter will be the same, though the form differ.

We send this (whatsoever ye will call it) to the Honorable House of Commons,
who are the representative Body of the whole Commons of England, and we desire
to present it by you who are the Speaker of that House.

The end of our desire is Peace, and we hope we shall not err in the way, when
we entreat you to be our Mediator. Master Speaker, all that we desire of you,
is to deliver this to the House, to procure it to be read, and to obtain as
good an answer unto us, as you may.

And now we address our selves to the honorable House it self.

When this Parliament was called (after several unhappy breaches of some
former) we comforted our selves with a hope of a redress of all our
grievances, and we made choice of you for our Knights, Citizens and Burgesses,
to serve for us there, and we did put our confidence in you, and believed that
you according to our trust without any by respects, would have studied only
the peace and good of the Kingdom, and we cannot be yet out of hope, but that
ye will perform in the end.

But you must not take it amiss, if as persons grieved, we tell you where our
griefs lie. And to prepare our Cure the better, we must desire you to call to
your remembrances.

1. That we are still the true body of the Commons of England; you, but the
representative.

2. That we have not so delegated the power to you, as to make you the
governors of us and of our estates, you are in truth but our Procurators, to
speak for us in the great Council.

3. That in right we ought to have access to those whom we have thus chosen,
and to the whole House, as there shall be cause to impart our desires unto you,
and you ought not to refuse us.

4. That by involving our votes in yours, we had no purpose to make you
perpetual Dictators.

5. That we never intended, that you should have that latitude of power as to
imbark us all in a Civil War, to the destruction of us and our posterities.

6. Much less had we a thought, that by any your votes ye would or could draw
us into any Acts of disloyalty or disobedience against our natural Liege Lord,
to whom by the laws of God and man, we do owe and will pay all allegiance and
fidelity.

Wherefore, we must claim this freedom which belongs unto us, as freeborn
Subjects, and as persons interessed in the good and safety of this Kingdom, as
well as your selves, that ye will speedily take those things into your wise and
Religious Considerations, which belong to our peace, and which we out of the
deep sense of our present miseries, and of the apparent ruin of us all (if not
timely prevented) do now offer unto you.

None of which shall be any new fancies, or dreams of distempered brains, but
shall be such as have their grounds upon apparent truth, and a clear evidence.

For first, we do profess to all the world that we are resolved with our
lives and fortunes to maintain the true Protestant Religion established by the
Laws in this Church of England. To maintain our well settled Government under a
Monarchy, according to the known Laws of this Land. To maintain the just
liberty of our persons and Property of our Estates, acording to the Rule of
those Laws. To maintain the just privileges of Parliament, without which our
Laws can hardly be continued.

And in the asserting of these, we believe we have the concurrence of both the
Houses of Parliament, for such have been their daily Protestations from time to
time.

And for the Kings Majesty's Opinion herein; he has by many declarations,
solemn protestations and religious vows, before God and Man, declared himself
so fully and so freely, that it is his unchangeable Resolution to live and die
in the maintenance of all these, that we hold our selves bounden in reverence
to his person, and in Christianity, to believe that he will faithfully perform
his word with his people.

And we have this further assurance thereof, in that he has descended so low
from his Throne, as to acknowledge some errors which have slipped him in his
bypast government, and to undertake not to give way to the like hereafter.

We wish with all our hearts, that you would with the same ingenuity
acknowledge your errors also, and amend them; so might we soon (by Gods
blessing) have our peace restored again, and by your industries made a happy
Nation.

Let us then clearly and freely express in what things we find our selves
grieved, which have been voted, ordered, and acted by you during this
Parliament, whereby the cure intended is become worse then the disease under
which we formerly languished; and we must with as much clearness and freedom
protest against them, if they be not speedily reformed and remedied.

The particulars are these.

1. That under the color of advancing the true Protestant Religion,
encouragement is given to Anabaptists, Brownists, and all manner of Sectaries,
which multiply in every Corner; which must be reformed, or our true Religion is
lost.

2. Under the pretense of hatred of Popery (which we also detest, as far as
their superstitions and idolatrous tenets are inconsistent with the true
reformed Protestant Religion) the book of Common Prayer (which is established
by Law) is cried down by many, and all decent orders in Gods outward worship;
and every man left to the dictate of his private spirit: but let the Laws
against Papists and Sectaries (the two extremes) be put in due execution, we
shall thank you for it.

3, Under the color of regulating the Ecclesiastical Courts, and taking away
the High Commission Court, all spiritual Jurisdiction (for the coercive part
thereof, which is the life of the Law) is taken away, so that now no heinous
crimes, inquirable by those Courts, as Adultery, Incest, etc. can be punished:
No Heresy or Schism reformed: No Church can be enforced to be repaired: No
Church-office^* as Churchwardens, etc. are compellable to take upon them their
offices, or perform their duties, no not to provide Bread and Wine for the
Communion: No Parsons or Vicars can be enforced to attend their Cures, or to
give satisfaction for the pains of them who do: No Tithes can be recovered by
their Law, nor other Church Duties. We beseech you think what will be the end
of these things at the last.

4. Under the name of reforming the Church Government, ye endeavor to take away
the function, and very being of Church Governors, as Bishops, and their
Assistants the Deans and Chapters, so to take away the preferments of learned
men, and the encouragements of learning: In the name of God let the abuses be
taken away, but not the good uses also.

5. For the rectifying of matters amiss in Church Discipline, and some things
in Doctrine also, (as is pretended) an Assembly of Divines is propounded to be
convocated and consulted with: the matter is right, but the manner is surely
amiss, and so we are likely to lose the benefit of the substance for the
errors in the circumstance; which is, That in this intended Convocation, the
Divines are not nominated by Divines, who can best judge of their abilities
(which is the legal way) the greatest part of those who are named, are known
or justly suspected to be persons ill disposed to the peace of the Church, and
addicted too much to Innovation; you your selves (being all Laymen) are to be
the only Judges of what shall be propounded, and what determined; the Divines
but your assistants, and the King is totally to be excluded from having any
Voice or hand in it: And (as it is propounded) this is to be a perpetual
Convocation, if the Houses of Parliament so please.

6. Under the color of freedom of Preaching, seditious Sermons are preached
daily, even in the hearing of many of your selves, who traduce the Kings sacred
Person, slander His Government, and in express terms, encourage the
maintaining and continuing of this unnatural and unchristian civil War, and
yet none are punished for it; which makes us fear that this is, and long has
been made by some, to be the the principal engine to kindle this fire of hell,
to the just scandal of all good men, and slander of our Religion, this
doctrine coming so close to that of the Jesuits.

7. And diverse worthy, learned, and painful Preachers have been committed to
prison by you for delivering their consciences freely and religiously, and
preaching obedience to their Sovereign. These things we observe unto you, as
tending mainly against the maintaining and propagation of the true Protestant
Religion.

Touching that part which concerns the maintaining of the Laws, we shall
observe also some things unto you, wherein your own practice differs much from
your professions: a preposterous way to persuade us, or any other bystanders.

1. Ye assume that power to your selves, that ye by a bare Vote without an Act
of Parliament, may expound or alter a known Law; whereas the Commons house
formerly assumed to themselves no such power, but in order toward the making
of a new Law: nor did the House of Peers challenge any such thing: But they
having the power of Juarcature, as Judges they proceed according to the rules
of the known Laws, and upon their honors are answerable for the justness of
their Judgments, as other Courts are upon their oaths.

2. You make your own orders and ordinances to be as Laws, and compel them to
be observed, and with a stricter hand which may bind the members of your House
in their privileges, but have not, nor ever had the force of Laws, until by
both Houses and the Kings consent they were confirmed.

3. And for your own observation of the Laws of the Landye take your selves to
be so far above the reach of them, that by your orders and ordinances ye
enjoyne the Judges and Ministers of justice to forbear (contrary to their
oaths) to proceed in their ordinary courses, where ye please.

4. Ye make an Ordinance to put the Militia of the Kingdom into such hands as
ye please, and shall confide in, and this without the King, and expressly
against His Command.

5. Ye possess your selves of the Navy Royal, and appoint Admiralls and other
Officers by Sea without the King, and use those ships against the King himself.

6 Ye take the Kings Castles, Forts, and Ports, the places of greatest strength
in the Kingdom, and keep them against the King himself, as Hull, and
Portsmouth, and Windsore Castle; and these three last actions appear to us to
have been done by Define, for

7 The pretense at first was for the preservation of the kingdom, against some
foreign Enemy; but when none appeared in many months, (and we now believe
none such in truth ever were) a war for the Parliament, against the King
himself was raised for the preservation of the King.

8 And those who refuse to join in this war with you, or to contribute unto
it, with giving or lending of money, horse, arms etc. ye proscribe as
Malignants, and persons ill affected to the Commonwealth; although we see not
how it can be less then Treason against the King to join with you therein.

9 But to all those who are your Commanders or Officers of your Army, ye give
large and even profuse entertainments and rewards; but out of our purses, who
give you little thanks for it. Thus much may suffice to give a taste how the
Laws are and are likely to be maintained in the course we are now in.

And for the Liberty of our persons, and Propriety of our Estates, we shall say
a little in the next place, and by a few particulars judge what we may hope for
therein.

1 Ye take the Kings Treasure, ye intercept his revenue, possess his houses of
access, and all these for his own service; and if any attend him or assist
him, they are condemned as Malignants, Popish, evil Counselors and Enemies to
the State.

2 Ye have by messages endeavored to persuade our Brethren of Scotland to
join with you in your Rebellion against your Sovereign, and this was not done
by some private men alone, but ordered by the Votes of your House.

3 Ye condemn the Rebels in Ireland (and that very justly) for their horrid
rebellion there, and yet your selves do greater and more horrid acts of
barbarous hostility against your King, even in his own person, in England: and
when ye have been charged with it, ye would excuse it by saying, that it was
not your fault, but the fault of the King himself, and of the Counselors and
Cavaliers about him, that he went himself in person into the battle, which he
did with that magnanimity and Kingly courage, as will add to his honor and
your shame whilst the world endures. Thus your action is become odious to God
and Man, and your excuse for it ridiculous.

4 And as if ye had shaken off all subjection, and yourselves become a State
independent, ye have treated by your Agents with foreign States: Such an
usurpation upon Sovereignty as was never yet attempted in this Kingdom.

5 Ye command your own orders, ordinances, and Declarations to be printed and
published cum privilegio: But if any thing come from the King, which may truly
inform and disabuse the people, ye forbid those to be published, and commit
them to prison who do it.

6. That moneys advanced by gift, or adventure, or act of Parliament, and
soldiers prepared for Ireland to reduce the Rebels there, ye have from time to
time diverted to maintain this unnatural War in England; so ye do visibly
loose the Kingdom of Ireland, that ye may be the better enabled to loose the
Kingdom of England also.

7. Ye have showed your selves so adverse from peace, that ye have voted there
shall be no cessation of Arms, lest by a free treaty a peace might ensue;
This is your carriage toward the King himself.

And lest ye might be accused to be juster to the subject then ye are toward
your Sovereigne, these things ye have done to the subject also.

1. Ye have made an Ordinance that the twentieth part of men's estates must be
paid toward the maintenance of this Rebellion, and ye appoint those who shall
value that twentieth part; and why by the same reason ye take not the tenth
part, or the one half, we see not; and for the levying of it, ye ordain your
Collectors shall distraine for the sum assessed, and sell the distress; and if
no distress can be found, the persons of these notable offenders are to be
imprisoned, and they and their families banished from their habitations.

2. But lest this should not have the color of Law sufficient to blind the
world, ye have lately made an Ordinance for the Inhabitants of the Counties of
Northampton, Rutland, Derby, etc. to pay and be assessed (by Assessors named in
your Act) in imitation of the Statute lately made for the 400000. l. and this,
as is probable, shall in convenient time be extended to the who Kingdom: so
ye first cast your selves into a necessity to get money, by making an impious
war upon your Sovereigne, and then out of that necessity ye compel your
fellow subjects (who abominate the war) to maintain it.

3. And ye have yet a shorter and a surer way; where ye understand there is
any Money, or Plate, or Goods to be had, ye send a Party of Horse or
Dragooners, or other strength, to fetch it as out of an enemies Country,
because the owners are good Subjects to the King, or you suspect them to be
so; and that alone is crime sufficient to apprehend them, to judge them' and
take execution upon them, and all this without the Ceremony of Law, by your
absolute and omnipotent power, which cannot err.

4. You discharge Apprentices and Servants from their Masters services, without
consent of their Masters and Dames, and either persuade them or compel them to
serve you in your Army against the King: This is indeed the Liberty of the
Subject.

5. Ye have imprisoned many for petitioning unto you, (as if that alone were a
crime) if the matter of the Petition do not flatter you in your present courses.

6. And others ye have imprisoned, some for petitioning, and some for intending
to petition to the King, (as those Gentlemen of Hertfordshire and Westminster)
And yet God be praised, the way is open to petition to him in heavne, and he
will hear us in his good time.

Lastly, for your Privileges of Parliament.

1. First, ye forbid us to dispute them, ye alone are (as ye say) the Judges
of them; but in former ages those also might be and have been judged by the
Laws of the Kingdom; only of offenses committed by your own Members against
your House, of these ye are the proper Judges; and of the elections of your
Members.

2. Yet these we conceive under your good favors, are to be thus confined,
that every Member of your House has and ought to have as free liberty as any
of them, to deliver his opinion upon any emergent occasion, and not to be
committed, as some have been, -- or put out of the house, as others have been,
forspeaking freely against the sense of the House, or rather of some members
thereof.

3. The privileges of your House were never challenged till now, to extend to
any Member which should commit Treason, or Felony: but ye have now declared
that no Member of the House, nor any others employed by you in this horrid
Rebellion, should be questioned for Treason, but in Parliament; or at least by
leave of the House.

4. Ye have made a close Committee (as you call it) wherein a very few Members
of your House only are privy to your Counsels, and what those few conclude
upon, is summatily reported to the House, and that taken upon trust by an
implicit faith of all the rest.

5. Many of the present Members of your House have had their elections
questioned, but if they incline to those positions which ye lay down to your
selves to uphold your tyrannical and usurped Government: ye are so busied in
the great affairs of State, that in two years space (for so long and longer
ye have continued this Parliament already) ye have no leisure to determine
those questions, lest you should loose such a one from your party.

6. Sometimes when a matter of importance has been in debate, ye have put it
to the question, and upon the question it has been determined, and the same
question again resumed at another time, better prepared for the purpose, and
determined quite contrary; this we are well assured was not the Privilege of
former Parliaments, when many of us were Members thereof.

We do believe ye have many just Privileges for the freedom of your persons,
for freedom of speech; but we never did believe that ye had a Privilege to
take the Scepter into your hands, to levy a War against your King, and to
compel others to join with you in so execrable an act. We wish from our
hearts that all these Observations were but fables and fictions, (as we have
met with many from you to amuse us) but they are all undeniably true; our
conditions therefore are most miserable, when thus instead of maintaining the
true Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the just Liberty and propriety
of the Subject, and just Privileges of Parliament, they are all of them
radically and fundamentally destroyed, and that by you, whose duties and
professions are daily to the contrary, And if any thing can be added to our
misery, it is this, that we cannot see through the time, when this intolerable
yoke of slavery which ye put upon your fellow subjects, shall have an end,
seeing by the art of a few ye have contrived an Act, whereby ye have
perfidiously overreached both the King and people, to make this present
Parliament to be perpetual at your pleasures, that so your arbitrary power and
tyranny over the Kingdom, might be perpetuated.

Yet one thing more may be added to our unhappiness.

Fuisse foelices, We were lately a happy people, and are now on a sudden
reduced to such a depth of unhappiness, that we are made a spectacle to the
whole world, and the very object of their scorn: For,

We are (before we were aware of it) cast in a War, a civil War, an
irreligious and barbarous War, against our Sovereign, our natural Liege
Lord.

We are put into an inevitable way of poverty.

By being wasted in all quarters and corners of the Kingdom one by another:

By loosing our commerce at home, it being intercepted by the Armies, and
almost no depts paid, occasioned specially by the privileges of your Members,
and such as ye privilege:

By loosing our trade abroad, it being cast into the hand of strangers.

We loose our season for tillage and husbandry, which must of necessity
introduce a Famine; and Famine does but usher in a Pestilence: And War,
Famine, and Pestilence, are the three great and fearful Judgments of God
upon a Nation.

Nothing can redeem us out of their calamities, but a speedy Peace; and to
prepare it, a cessation of Arms: And then by good Laws, as ye have already
happily begun, to amend what is or has been amiss, without plucking up the
foundations of Government.

We beseech you therefore at the last, to lay aside your affections, and in
your judgments to provide for us, and for your selves, and for the honor of
our religion, the peace of our consciences, the preservation of our lives and
estates, and for the salvation of our poor souls, to have pity upon us, bind
up our bleeding wounds, cure the distractions of the time, and make up the
breaches between the King and people, occasioned only by a misunderstanding.

And if these our Petitions, or Complaints, or Remonstrances (call them what ye
will) may prevail with you, we doubt not, but that the King of His grace and
goodness will be entreated to bury all your bypast actions in an act of
oblivion, that neither the present age, nor the ages to come, may to the shame
of this Nation, have cause to remember what has happened here in this last and
worst age of this world.

But if all this, and all which is your great judgments ye can add unto it,
shall not move you; We do and shall protest to all the world, that with the
hazard of our lives and fortunes, and of all we can call ours; we shall
endeavor to vindicate our selves from these inhumane courses. Sed meliora
speramus. We hope for better things.

And we shall incessantly pray to God to perfect our hopes, by blessing your
Counsels.

FJNJS.

