A Word in Season: OR, AN ESSAY To Promote Good-Husbandry IN Hard and Difficult
Times: Being, in part, Advice from a Gentleman, to his Son a Tradesman in
London.

Lately communicated by way of Letter.

Nec quicquam sapit, qui sibi non sapit. LONDON, Printed for Eliz. Whitlock,
near Stationers' Hall, MDCXCVII.

A Word in Season: OR, An ESSAY to Promote Good-Husbandry, etc.
THAT great Statesman and Lord Treasurer Burleigh, in Queen Elizabeth's days,
thought fit to give to his Son these prudent Precepts following, among others;
viz. First, (says he,) as touching the Government of your House; Let your
Hospitality be moderate, equal to the measure of your Estate; and beware you
spend riot above three parts of the four of your Estate and Revenue, nor above
one third part thereof in your House; for the other two thirds will but defray
Extraordinaries, which always surmount your Ordinary by much: for otherwise you
shall live like Beggars, in continual Want; and the needy Man can never live
happily nor contented, being broke and distracted with Worldly Cares.

Banish Drunkenness our of your Houses, and affect him not that is in love with
it; for it is a Vice that impairs the Health, consumes Wealth, and transforms
Man into a Beast; a Sin of no small rank, and ordinary station, and that never
walks unattended with a train of Misdemeanors at the heels.

Beware of Surety ship for your best Friend: For he that pays another Man's
Debts, goes the way to leave other Men to pay his, and seeks his own
overthrow.

In borrowing of Money, be evermore careful of your Word; for he that has a
care to keep day of Payment, is Lord Commander (many times) of another Man's
Purse.

Strive not to enrich your self by Oppression or Unlawful Gain; for a little
evil gotten, shall not only melt away it self like Dew before the Sun, but
likewise shall consume with it self also that which was more lawfully acquired.
How then shall it melt away in haste, when all the whole Lump is corrupted with
Injustice and Wrong? And also, as for such an one, if he die rich, well he may
have Mourners to his Grave, but he shall be sure to find few Comforters at his
Judgment.

Be Studious and Industrious in thy Youth; knowing that if by thy Labor thou
accomplishest any thing that is good, the Labor passes away, but the Good
remains to thy use and comfort: and it is less pain to be Studious in Youth,
than a grief to be Ignorant in thy Age.

And as to Society; consider, that corrupt Company is more infectious than
corrupt Air; therefore be advised in thy choice. -- If the Good keep company
with the Good, both are made better; if the Evil with the Evil, both are made
worse: for, according to the Proverb, Such as the Company is, such is the Man.

Strive to subdue thy Appetites and Affections, and forbear whatever is dear
unto thy Body, being any way prejudicial to thy Soul.

Live virtuously and honestly, that thou may die patiently and comfortably:
for who lives most virtuously, will die most willingly.

Afflict not thy Body with too much unnecessary Physic, but furnish thy Mind
with Knowledge, Virtue and Goodness; and so to be prepared for a time of
Affliction, and time of Exercise. And surely that Man's End shall be easy and
happy, whom Death finds, although with a weak Body, yet with a strong, virtuous
and healthful Soul.

He is worthy to fall, who tempts himself; and therefore shun the Occasions of
Evil, and then thou have half overcome thy Enemy.

Labor to keep a good Conscience for thy Comforter; for he that is
disfurnished thereof, has Fear for his Bedfellow, Care for his Companion, and
the Sting of Guilt for his Torment.

In all thy attempts, let Honesty be thy aim; -- and forget not in thy Youth to
be mindful of thy End: for though the Old Man cannot live long, yet the Young
Man may die quickly.

Be steadfast in thy Promise, and constant in a good Resolution.

Now, as to the Employment of a Soldier; he that sets up his rest to live by
that Profession (in my opinion) can hardly be an honest Man, or a good
Christian: for that every War is of it self unjust; the good Cause may make it
lawful. -- Besides, Soldiers in Peace are as Chimneys in Summer, or like Dogs
past hunting, or as Women when their Beauty is at an end.

Unto which, I think, I may not improperly add that famous Saying of the Great
Man, Monsieur Monluc, Marshal of France; viz. But that the Mercies of God were
transcendent and unlimitted, we Soldiers, (says he,) and Men of Arms and War,
could never be saved; in regard of our Profaneness, and Debaucheries, and
Wickedness, and of our Rapine, Cruelties and Devastations which accompany us.

Another worthy Author tells us; Good-Husbandry may well stand with great
Honor, as Breadth with Height. And I may add, With great Charity to the Poor.

Accordingly it is related of that noble Peer of this Kingdom, the Earl of
Darby, in Queen Elizabeth's days, who by his Thriftiness repaired his Estate,
yet was famous for his Hospitality and Charity; His House was a College of
Discipline, -- and who always furnished the industrious Poor with Work and
Employment; who is said, once a Month to look into his Income, and once a Week
into his Disbursements, that none should wrong him, nor be wronged by him.

As also it is related of that worthy Prelate, Bishop Mountague, in King
Charles the First's Reign; That as Nature had inclined him to Magnificence; so
his Virtue had inclined him also to Frugality.

One has well said, That Frugality is the Left Hand of Fortune, as Diligence
is the Right. And the witty Italian has this common Proverb, That if Frugality
be a Vice, it never disinherited any Man.

But it is worthy of our further Consideration (I humbly conceive) that old
Saying, Nunquam prospere succedunt res humanae ubi negliguntur Divinae (i. e.)
That worldly Affairs are never long prosperous and successful, where God and
Religion are neglected. And accordingly in our English Proverb; That Prayer and
Provinder hinder no work, but rather farther it. And above all, let us often
think of our blessed Savior's words; That wan shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4.4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
As also of those words of Solomon, Prove. 10.22. The blessing of the Lord makes
rich, (and with this great advantage annexed to it,) It adds no sorrow with it.
This therefore is of great advantage to us, and in this lies our
Good-Husbandry, even for the things of this life, the blessing of the Most High
upon our Riches, and upon all our Affairs.

But the highest piece of Good-Husbandry consists, doubtless, in principally
minding the present and future Advantage and Welfare of our Souls and Minds,
(which is truly our selves.) And to instruct in this Good-Husbandry was a great
and principal end of our blessed Savior's coming into the World, both of his
Doctrine and Example: for as he tells us, Mat. 16.26. What will it profit a man
to gain the whole world, and to lose his own soul, etc. And, Seek the kingdom
of God first of all (says he) and his righteousness, and then we have our
Savior's assurance, that all these things of the world shall be added to us,
Mat. 6.33. so far as his wisdom thinks fit and convenient for us.

Excellent therefore is that advice pursuant to our blessed Savior's
aforesaid, contained in this Latin Verse; Omnia si perdas, animam servare
memento; (i.e.) In the loss of all that thou have, be sure to secure thy Soul,
and its eternal Welfare.

I shall proceed with the Advice of the great and wise Heathen Philosopher
Aristotle, who stares that to be the most deserable proportion of all worldly
Felicities and Enjoyments, which is most consistent with Men's devoting
themselves to the business of Religion; and that to be either too much, or too
little, of Wealth, Honor or Power, etc. when Men are hindered in their
Meditations on God, or their Worshipping of him.

And no wonder a late Author bewails the Folly and Ill-Husbandry of Men; viz.
Alas (says he) Man would, only live, and cares not to know how to live well.
That which a Man should especially and only know, is that which he knows
least, and cares least to know.

Now, why may not I here add, and not improperly also, (as a principal piece of
Good-Husbandry,) That great Virtue of Honesty and Integrity of Heart and Life,
according to that excellent Aphorism and wise Saying, Sola honesta utilia, (i.
e.) Only honest things are profitable: And more-especially when honest Socrates
used to curse those who separated Profit from Honesty.

Piety holds (says one) the first place in the rank of our Duties: It is the
most noble Virtue, and concerns Religion, and the Worship of God, and is a
thing of great importance; whence it is dangerous, and yet very easy to err,
and be mistaken therein.

Religion loves and honors God, settles a Man in Peace and Rest, lodges in
a liberal, free and generous Soul; but Superstition (says he) on the contrary,
is a frantic Error, (as St. Augustine says,) It fears Friends, corrupts
those that love it. It is the disease of a weak Mind, which being infected
therewith, can never be at rest. And Varro says of it thus; Religious Men fear
God for Love; and the Superstitious for Punishment.

Now, true Religion (says another worthy Author) is in truth the strongest
exciter to the virtue of Integrity, fixing and engraving it upon the Heart of
Man; making such deep impressions thereof upon the Soul, that a Man shall even
prefer Death, to the foregoing of his Duty.

And also Monsieur Charron tells us; That the end and effect of true Religion,
is, faithfully to yield all the Honor and Glory unto God, and all the Benefit
unto Man. We are to serve God with our Heart and Spirit, answerable to his
Nature. And the most acceptable Sacrifice unto God, is, an innocent Soul, a
harmless Life. A pure Mind is the best Service of God: the most religious
worshipping him, is, to follow him, to imitate him. Yet nevertheless, we are not
to contemn and disdain the Outward Public Worship of God, which must be an
assistant to the other. To be brief: We must think, speak and deal with God, as
if all the World did behold us; we must live and converse with the whole World,
as if God saw us: and we are not to separate Piety from Honesty; for the one
cannot be without the other entire and perfect. Now (says he) here are two
Rocks whereof we must take heed; for there are some who wholly give themselves
to the Worship and Service of God, taking no care at all of true Virtue and
Honesty, whereof they have no taste; a Vice noted as natural to the Jews, who
were so besotted with this Outward Devotion, placing their Confidence therein,
that they thought themselves discharged of all Duty; yea, they were made more
hardy hereby to do any wickedness: From whence arose that Proverb, An Angel in
the Church, and a Devil in the House: nay, they make Piety a Cover for Impiety:
-- they allege their Offices of Devotion, to extenuate or make recompense for
their Sin and Iniquity. Others there are quite contrary, who make no account
but of Virtue and Honesty, little caring for any thing that belongs to
Religion; a fault of many Philosophers, and which is likewise too common among
our Atheists. Now, the first is far more easy, and of greater show, and the
fault of vulgar Spirits. The second is far more difficult and laborious in the
performance, of less show, and is the fault of the more gallant and generous
Spirits. The Pharisees were religious and wicked; and some of the Philosophers
were good and virtuous, but yet irreligious. And, alas! may it not be said,
What execrable Wickedness has Zeal for Religion brought forth? so much is God
injured and abused: For the unjustest War that has ever been in the world,
Religion incontinent has been brought to stake to defend it; according to that
Saying, Tantum Relligio potuit suadere malorum; (i. e.) Nothing but the
pretense of Religion, that could have prevailed with Men to have been so wicked
as they have proved. But he that has Religion without Honesty, I will not say
(says he) that he is more wicked, but far more dangerous than he that has
neither the one or the other: Not that Religion teaches us, nor any way
forwards wickedness, (as some foolishly affirm;) but the reason is, that,
having no taste, nor image or conceit of Honesty, but by the Imagination; and
for the service of Religion; and that thinking that to be an honest Man, is no
other thing, than to be careful to advance Religion, they believe all things
whatsoever, be it Treachery, Sedition, Rebellion, Treason, or any other Crimes,
to be not only lawful and sufferable, being covered with Zeal and Care of
Religion, but also commendable and meritorious; yea, worthy of Canonization, if
it serve for the progress and advancement of Religion, and the overthrow of
their Adversaries.

And the said Mr. Charron also says; That the fear of a present Evil to fall
upon us, stirs up in us Choler and Courage, which are Passions strangely
violent, and wholly pervert Reason: and besides; he that has a meaning to go
astray, believes every thing as he would have it, and not as it is indeed.
Accordingly, heretofore, Dr. Stillingfleet, when Dean of St. Paul's, in one of
his printed Sermons, tells us; That no Man will sooner affirm a thing to be
false, than he that knows it to be against his Interest to believe it to be
true. And even Old Geofry Chancer long since has told us; That English men,
what they not like, they will never understand.

But the said worthy Monsieur Charron before mentioned, tells us; That there is
in a wise and good Man a true Honesty and a true Piety joined and married
together, and both of them complete and crowned with the Grace of God, which he
will deny to none that shall ask it of him Mar. 15.11. Mar. 7.11. As St.
Augustine says, Deus dat spiritum sanctum petentibus eum, (i.e.) God gives
his Spirit to such as heartily ask it of him.

And another tells us; Man is a strange kind of noxious Animal very
mischievous without Religion and Honesty: for of all the goods that are in Man,
Virtue and Honesty is the first and principal, and which does excel Knowledge
and Dexterity; and we cannot but confess, that the Will where Virtue and
Goodness lodges, is of all others the most excellent: for in truth, Honesty is
a lightning Ray of the Divinity, a stream and dependant on the Eternal Law;
which is God himself and his Will. As nothing can be just, which proceeds not
from Reason; so true Honesty is free, manly, generous, pleasant, cheerful,
equal, uniform, and constant; not altering its pace or gate for the wind, the
time, the occasion.

True Honesty is a right, firm disposition of the Will to follow the counsel of
Reason: It is an active, valiant, manly and effectual Goodness that is required
in us; which is an easy and constant affection toward that which is good,
right, just, according to Reason and Nature. Every Man therefore should be, or
desire to be, an Honest Man, because he is a Man; and he that takes no care to
be such, is a Monster, and renounceth himselt. I would have my honest Man
(says a Heathen) never to consent to any thing that is evil; these are things
inseparable, (that is to say) to be, and to be willing to be, an Honest Man.

And also that honest Heathen Socrates tells us; That an honest Man may suffer
evil, but will never do any: for it is not permitted at any time for a Man to
leave Virtue and Honesty, and therefore away with all Injustice and Wrong, all
Treachery, Disloyalty, Rebellion and Treason. Indeed, all Passion of Choler,
Envy, Hatred, Avarice, Concupiscence, and Self-love (says one) is the deadly
poison of the Judgment. and of all good Understanding: and every Man's
particular Profit and Interest, is the worst poison of true Judgment and
Affection.

It is a happy thing (says Plato) for a Man to go through his private Affairs,
without Injustice. Perjury and Treachery is, in a certain sense, more base and
execrable than Atheism: for it is a less sin to contemn God' than to mock him.
As an honest Man never wrongeth any one, so I would have an honest Man (says
he) never to consent to any Evil; for you sin twice, when you do but humor him
that does evil, which an honest Man never does. And that to do good where there
is danger and pain, is the part of an Honest Man, and of Virtue and Goodness:
But there must (says Monsieur Charron) be, to make my Honest Man complete, the
Grace of God, whereby his Honesty, Goodness and Virtue has life, and is
brought forth in his due time, and receives its last and perfect portraiture.
And as there is nothing, doubtless, to be preferred before bodily Health, but
Honesty, which is the Health of the Soul; so also it is the best Policy and
Good-Husbandry, to sow good and honest Actions; for then a Man may expect an
harvest answerable; For (as Socrates said) the Just Man and the Happy Man are
all one. And indeed, the said excellent Author aforesaid, Monsieur Charron,
further discourses to us; Honesty is far more worthy, firm stable and amiable
than Profit, which in a moment vanishes. And he further says; That Justice in
general, is the giving to every Man what of right belongs to him. And that
great Philosopher Heraclitus advises us, above all things, to combat Injustice
and Wrong, and to suppress it with all our might, as we would do the most
devouring Fire. And it has been observed, above all, for a Man to wrong and
injure the Innocent,) is to wrong God himself. And herein especially it is the
part of a generous Mind to take part with the weaker Side, and to succor the
Afflicted.

A late worthy Author tells us; He that will mark it well, shall find not only
more honest People, but also those more excellent in all kind of Virtue, among
those that know little, than among those who know most; and therefore it has
been complained of in the world, that simple and open Virtue was turned into
obscure and crafty Knowledge; and that in truth, Atheism, Error, Sects, and all
the troubles of the world, have risen from the Men of Art and Knowledge, as the
wise Seneca long since observed and complained of? viz. That when Men came to
be learned, many times, they ceased then to be morally honest and virtuous. But
this, certainly, is from the abuse of Learning and Knowledge, which are in
themselves a great benefit and advantage to Humane Nature.

It was an excellent and noble Character that was given of that great Lawyer
and Judge, Sir John Fineux, in King Henry VIIIth's Reign; That he hated nothing
but what was Dishonest, he feared nothing but was Ignoble, and loved nothing
but what was Just.

And it is related also of that Excellent, Learned and Valiant Knight, Sir
Philip Sidney, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; That he taught England the Majesty
of Honest Dealing, and the Interest of being Religious; and that he found no
Wisdom without Religion and Honesty. And it was further said of him; That none
was more fearful of doing Evil, and none more resolved to suffer in a just
Cause. For (as it has been well observed) a good Conscience breeds great
Resolution, and an innocent Soul is impregnable. Accordingly is that Saying of
Horace, of a Virtuous and Honest Man; Justum and tenacem propositi virum, and
(i. e.) He is such whom neither the Madness of the People, the He at of the
Rabble, calling for an evil thing, nor the Face of a Tyrant menacing and
commanding it, can shake his virtuous stedfastess; who is, I may add, semper
idem, always the same honest Man, and Hands fixed as a Rock in a tempestuous
Sea. And in truth, Honesty, Integrity and Fidelity was accounted by the wise
Heathens to be the great Pillars which supported the Universe, and without
which, no Kingdom or Government could possibly subsist; and they always looked
upon such Persons who once had abandoned their Honesty and Fidelity, to be no
other but as noxious Animals (as Wolves and Tigers) fit to be hunted out of the
World by all Mankind. As also it is very wisely observed; That Fidelity and
Honesty was like Life; which when it is once gone and parted from the Body,
never returns again. It has been observed also; That the first commitment of a
Wrong, usually puts a Man upon a thousand Injuries to support that one.

And it is further truly observed; That Simplicity and Truth is a great and
wise thing, but Cunning and Deceit is mean and foolish: As also that proverbial
Saying truly instructs us; viz. That Frost and Fraud may hold for a time, but
they will both of them have dirty ends. And accordingly while the little Policy
and Tricks of crafty Men expose them at last to Ruin and Destruction,
Integrity will be its own Security. No wonder then die wise Heathen Seneca
cries out; O quantum mali est nimium subtilitatis! (i. e.) O what a great evil
is too much Subtilty!

Now, let all honest Men be encouraged; that although the world should become so
much Knave, that it should become a vice to be honest; yet (says a worthy
Author) Let us consider, that he that is entirely and genuinely honest is the
Figure and Representation of the Deity, will draw down a protection against all
the Injuries of any that shall dare to abuse it. And therefore it was long
since resolved on by the wise Heathen Antisthenes; That it is better with a few
good Men to fight against an Army of bad, than with swarms and shoals of bad
men to have a few good men his enemies.

And let us take a short view of the true and proper Effects of our Holy
Christian Religion in the Primitive Times, (as a late worthy Prelate of our
Church informs us from Minutins Felix,) viz. he thus speaks of them; He that is
careful to preserve his Innocence, honors his Lord: He that observes Justice
in his Dealings, offers a Sacrifice to God; He that abstains from Fraud,
presents a Peace Offering; and he that relieves his Neighbor, brings an ample
Expiation: These are our Sacrifices, and these the Solemnity of our Devotion;
and with us, he passes for the most religious Man, that is most honest. -- In
short, says he, they knew no other terms of Salvation, but the habitual
Practice of Piety and Devotion, of Justice and Honesty, of Mercy and Charity,
of Humility and Meekness, of Temperance and Sobriety, of Continence and
Chastity, of Obedience and Subjection to Government, of Unity and peaceable
Dispositions among themselves; but above all of Heavenly-mindedness and
Contempt of the World; and although they made allowance for the Lapses and
Infirmities of Humane Nature, yet they looked upon a Christian that was
habitually vicious, as the grossest of contradictions. And now may we not truly
cry out and say, Aut non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Christiani, (i. e.)
Eith^^ ^^^s is not the true Description of our Christianity, or (...) now in
our days are not Christians. Those that (...) ^^^est to their own Principles of
Christianity, may (...) themselves with this Consideration; That Inte^^^^^
(...) lasts Power, and Plainness survives Policy; a noble (...) Virtue is
lasting. And also that Virtue and Integ^^^^ cannot lie long hid or suppressed;
for the time will come that shall raise it again, (yea, after it is buried,)
and deliver it from the malignity of the Age that oppresses it. Immortal Glory
is the shadow of it, and keeps it company whether we will or no.

Honesty (said Zeno) is the chief part of Good; and that an Honest Life is the
Happy; for that rejoices in the present, and fears not the future. And a worthy
Christian Author tells us; That Light is not more inseparable from a Sunbeam,
than Peace and Pleasure of Soul is from a state of Purity, Integrity, and
Honesty of Mind and Heart; which Chearsulness of Heart is their Duty, and which
the Psalmist exhorts them to, Psalm. 33.1, 2. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye
righteous, for praise is comely for the upright: For, he loves righteousness
and judgment. And why may not I here mention that great piece of the Happiness
of Mankind, Friendship, as an attendent upon Honesty; when, as the wise
Heathen, Antisthenes, tells us, That Honest Men are all Friends? And I heartily
pray, that we may all in this Nation become Honest Men, that so we may be all
Friends; which doubtless would be our greatest Happiness and Welfare.

Doubtless, there is a great deal of truth in that brief Motto of that
Religious Emperor (as Grotius calls him) Matthias; Concordia lumine major,
(i.e.) That Unity and Concord is a greater Blessing than Light and Knowledge.
And may I not therefore use the words of a late worthy Author; What more
desirable thing could it be, to see but a few at least to pay that regard to
this blessing of Friendship as it deserves; and that a few instances would
certainly be some comfort in th^^ ^^^^rable Age wherein we live, when the Vices
and (...) of Mankind seem to have banished it almost qui^^ (...) ^f the world.

To conclude: What (...)? when Christians in our days come so (...) Heathens in
Integrity and Fidelity, whom (...) come short of Heaven? yea, when the (...)
even sinned away all sense of Sin, and lost the distinctions between Good and
Evil? It has been observed, That the Eye chat Sin shuts, Pain opens. God grant
our present Sufferings may be medicinable to us, that so our iniquities may not
be our ruin. And doubtless, a true and hearty Repentance would be one of the
greatest pieces of Good-Husbandry we could pitch upon, and the wisest and best
way to promote our great Interest and Safety. Which God in mercy grant to us.
Amen.

FINIS.

