CONSIDERATIONS ON Mr. Harrington's COMMONWEALTH OF OCEANA: Restrained to the
first part of the Preliminaries.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand at the Golden ball in Paul's Churchyard.
1657.

A Letter sent to Dr. W. W. of W. C. By whom the Author was desired to give his
judgment concerning the Commonwealth of OCEANA.
SIR,
I Am to give you thanks for the occasion you have given me of reading the
Commonwealth of Oceana; which Book I find to be so much the Discourse of good
companies, that not to have seen it would expose a man to some shame: But to
deal freely with you, I have cause to complain of your severity in imposing a
necessity upon me to give you my thoughts about it; for in a matter of so
obscure and intricate speculation as the principles of Government, it will be
difficult not to lose the way, especially for one very little acquainted in the
Resorts of Learning and Experience. Yet to show you Sir, that my own
convenience is not allowed to be an Exception against any of your commands,
with this you shall receive some Papers, and in them an account of such things
wherein either Mr. Harringtons want of demonstration, or my own want of
capacity have not suffered me to receive satisfaction.

Those men Sir, who have the good fortune to have part in your friendship, a^e
not more in love with any of your virtues, then with the generous freedom you
maintain in an Age overrun with passion and soureness: It is not enough with
you, for the ruining a man, to be told that he is of such a party or
persuasion, but Truth and Merit are never strangers to your good opinion, in
what Country soever they have been brought up: This is the Prerogative of your
judgment, which being able to pass sentence upon every particular, is not put
to take things in gross upon the credit of any faction or company of men. The
knowledge of this fair temper gives me assurance that though I had in charge
from you to put down what I could object to Mr. Harrington's Oceana, the
liberty will not be unaceptable that I take in telling you, There are in it
many things deserving praise, a sprightly expression, and a sort of Oratory well
becoming a Gentleman, good remarques out of ancient and modern Histories, and
a judgment not ill founded on past and present policy, were it not for a
certain violence in seeking to draw all things into servitude to his Hypothesis.

Having thus let you know that I do not mean to fall out with the whole Book,
it is fit that next I inform you what part of it I resolve to attacque; And in
that my choice shall be directed by the imitation of good Greyhounds who if let
slip at the whole Herd, will, run at none but the Leading Deer: The first part
of the Preliminaries is that I fasten on, which is the Groundwork of the whole
Discourse, and consisting in the debate of universal and rational notions of
government, asserted by examples of the Greek and Roman History will very
properly become the subject of a Disquisition. As for the following model of a
Commonwealth, Mr. Harrington has by transcribing her Orders very wisely put
himself under the Protection of the most serene Republique of Venice, against
whom I have no inclination to make War, at this time especially when doing so
would look like an Association with the Turk, the common enemy of Christendom.

In making out this Design I have not been able to find out any more proper
Method then to follow Mr. Harrington foot by foot, setting down the Passages in
him to which every thing refers, though I am sensible how disadvantageous this
is by cutting off all Ellegancy and freeness of Expression, which is no more
to be expected from one who ties himself to such a Method, then an high Dance
from a Man in Fetters: Besides, whereas to read it over thoroughly for the
understanding of it, is more then a Book can often obtain of the Reader; This
Piece will lie a great deal more at his mercy, seeing that to make sense of
it, it will be requisite to read so much of Mr. Harrington as it pretends to
answer.

But I beseech you Sir, are not We the writers of Politiques somewhat a
ridiculous sort of People? Is it not a fine piece of folly for private men
sitting in their Cabinets to rack their brains about models of government?
Certainly our Labors make a very pleasant Recreation for those great
Personages who sitting at the Helm of Affairs have by their large Experience
not only acquired the perfect art of Ruling, but have attained also to the
Comprehension of the Nature and Foundation of Government: To them I believe We
shall appear just as Wise as the Philosopher who read a Lecture of the Duty of
a good Commander before the greatest Captain of his Age.

To be exempted from this Censure will be a very great kindness which is in
your Power to do me by imprisoning these Papers in some close place from
whence they can make no Escape; They are I confess so absolutely made yours
that there remains with me no Power over them, but only to beg of you that
your favor to them may not prove want of justice to me.

I am not ignorant Sir with what artifice and importunity Mr. Harrington has
courted opposition from others. And you have told me, that he has professed
himself not capable of any greater kindness or obligation, then to have
objections made against what he had published. Upon which account I should
think it not unjust or unreasonable to expect, that these Animadversions should
not be any offense or provocation to him; And yet I am not without some reason
to suspect the contrary: since I have seen by his rigor to Dr. Fern, that Mr.
Harrington is of a nature that does not willingly admit of Opposition. In
earnest sir, to speak frankly, his usage of the Doctor appears to me very
harsh, and I can make no better of it then if he should press a Gentleman so
far as to whisper a modest Challenge into his Ear, and then with the help of
his Footboy make a street-Debate of that which ought to be decided in the way
of Honor. Yet I shall be very little liable to this Danger, both because it is
likely he will think me below his Revenge, and because not knowing me he will
be at a loss how to aim his blows in the Dark.

If then these Papers happen at any time to be so disposed of by you that they
come to give Mr. Harrington the trouble of looking on them, I desire he may
only know they were wrote by a Person who though he agrees not with his
judgment has a great respect for his good parts, And that he is one who
neither is nor ever hopes to be within the reach of his Agrarian: If you please
he may be assured also that I am none of the University, which he complains
has been about his Ears, not having the least interestin a Gown. But perhaps
this last declaration was needless, since it may be hoped that Mr. Harrington
does not yet think so meanly of the University as to believe so slight a Piece
could proceed from any Member of it.

However I may mistake in my Apprehensions of Government, I give it you upon my
word Sir, I know very well what belongs to Obedience, as you shall receive
Testimony whenever you please to honor with any more of your commands

The humblest of Your faithful Servants.


Considerations on the Commonwealth of OCEANA.
Page 1.

JAnotti divides the whole series of Government into two Periods, The one
ending with the liberty of Rome, was the Course of Ancient Prudence, followed
by the Greeks and Romans; The other being the Course of modern Prudence, was
introduced by the Huns, Goths and Vandals, etc.

Jannoti's Division of Government, (of which the Author of Oceana is so well
persuaded that he builds up his Definitions of Government, and the frame of his
whole Discourse upon it) may safely be admitted if he means only that the
Greeks and Romans were before the Goths and Vandals, or that Solon and Brutus
were dead long before Theodoricus or Genseric were born; But if his intention
be (as Mr. Harrington seems to understand him) that before Caesar in the time
of Ancient Prudence the Greeks and Romans observed a way of Government free
from those imputations of passion and violence with which the government of
succeeding ages (and that generally proves to be Monarchical) is chargeable,
it will be necessary to propose some Considerations.

1. It seems to be a defect of Experience to think that the Greek and Roman
actions are only considerable in Antiquity; It is very frequent with such as
have been conversant with Greek and Roman Authors to be led by them into a
belief that the rest of the World were a rude inconsiderable people, etc. which
is a term they very much delight in, altogether barbarous. This humor was even
among them a mean and servile addiction to narrow Principles, and a piece of
very Pedanticall pride; but in us who have not the same temptation of interest,
it would be downright folly. In this question the Examples of the Babylonians,
Persians, and Egyptians, (not to insist upon the new discoveries of the Chinese
History) cannot without gross partiality be neglected; and their government
will not only be found to have been Monarchical, but also in a more absolute
and arbitrary form (if I mistake not very much) then is to be met with at
present in any kingdom of Europe.

2. But then, they who have not yet passed their Novitiat in History are not
ignorant that originally all Government among the Greeks was Regal; At the War
of Troy we find them commanded by their Kings and Princes, and Thucydides Lib. 1
says expressly that it was not till after the taking of Troy, which filled
Greece with arrogance and riches, that hereditary Monarchies degenerated into
tyrannies. And then it was that the Grecians out of an extreme a version to
that which was the cause of their present sufferings, slipped into Popular
Government; not that upon calm and mature Debates they found it best, but that
they might put themselves at the greatest distance (which spirit usually
accompanies all Reformations) from that with which they were grown into
dislike. Yet Macedon an important part of Greece, and that which lifted the
Grecian name to the highest pitch of glory, never suffered this change, but
continued under a successive Royalty.

3. The foundation of the Roman state was in Kingship; and if it be considered
how accidental, tumultuary, and violent the change was, there will be very
little from thence to be inferred to the credit of the succeeding government.

After these Considerations I must profess I am not convinced of any utility in
this Division of ancient and modern prudence, or that a Court of Claims would
allow of the pretentions to ancient prudence, which are laid by that kind of
government which Oceana endeavors to assert.

Page* 2. Relation being had unto these two times, Government (to define it
according to ancient Prudence) is an Act instituting and preserving a Civil
society of men upon the foundation of common Right or Interest; or it is the
Empire of Laws and not of men.

And Government (according unto Modern Prudence) is an Act whereby some man or
few men subject a City or a Nation, and rule it according to his or their
private Interest, which may be said to be the Empire of men and not of Laws.

If then this Division of government have lost it is credit, the Definitions of
the several Members of it need not be considered further then that they come
not at all up to the first and remotest Notions of government, in the
foundation and origination of it, about which is all the difficulty; and being
here neglected, there is little reason to hope the subsequent Discourse can
have in it the Light of probable satisfaction, much less the force of
infallible Demonstration.

Ibid. The former kind is that which Machiavell has gone about to retrive, and
Leviathan goes about to destroy, etc.

I do not think my self bound to undertake all Challenges that are sent to Mr.
Hobs: but the easiness of the Defense in this Particular that Men Govern and
not Laws, tempts me to be his second. To say that Laws do or can Govern, is to
amuse our selves with a form of speech, as when we say Time or Age or Death
does such a thing; To which indeed the Fancy of Poets or Superstition of Women
may adapt a Person, and give a Power of Action; but Wise men know they are only
expressions of such Accidents and Qualifications as belong to things and
Persons. He that requires Obedience from another, cannot rationally do so
unless he declare what those things are, both to be done and not to be done,
in which this obedience is to be paid; This Declaration of the Will of the
sovereign Power is called Law, which if it outlives the person whose Will it
was, it is only because the persons who succeed in power are presumed to have
the same Will, unless they manifest the contrary, and that is the abrogation of
a Law: So that still the Government is not in the Law, but in the person whose
Will gives a being to that law. This declared Will of those who have power is
of the Essence of law; the punishment expressed, I conceive is not so; For it is
enough for me to obey the Will of a person, that I know has power to hurt me,
though I do not know particularly what the hurt is he will do me; and
therefore as some laws are, so all might have been with leaving the punishment
at the discretion of the Magistrate.

In the similitude, the great Gun is not well traversed to this point. If the
Proportion of things be accurately considered, it will appear that the laden
Canon answers not to the laws but to the power of the person whose Will creates
those laws, without which power he might be as as safely disobeyed, as that
Gunner may be contemned who has neither powder nor Bullet in his Piece.

The whole force of the next Objection against Mr. Hobs amounts but to this;
That because Hervey in his Circulation has followed the principles of nature;
therefore Aristotle and Cicero have done so in their Discourses of Government.

Page 3. Government according to the Ancients is of three kinds; the government
of one man, or of the better sort, or of the whole People: which by their more
learned Names are called Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. Legislators
having found these three Governments at best to be naught, have invented
another consisting of a mixture of them all which only is good.

The partition of Government, with reference to the persons in whose hands it
is, into Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy, without Question is very
natural; for necessarily either One or All, or some number between both must
have the power; nor do I see how we can have a Conception of any other
Government, unless at the same time we can conceive the power may be resident
in more then All, or less then One. It is not to be denied but that in History
the names of Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy are to be found applied to
such governments, the parts of which severally taken may serve to compound a
new individual Government differing from all of them: But this Mixture and
Difference is no more then this (which not being enough attended to, has been
the cause of great Mistakes) that some points of the Government are administered
by one or few persons, or by the body of the people; as perhaps one single
person governs the Militia, some select few dispatch affairs of State, the
whole people meet for Election of Officers; And yet the Sovereignty or supreme
power belongs but to one of these three; and the Actions in which it is truly
seated are no ways communicable to the other two.

Page 3. The Principles of Government are twofold; the goods of the Mind, and
the goods of Fortune. The goods of the mind are natural or acquired virtues, as
Wisdom, Courage, etc. The goods of Fortune are Riches. To the goods of Mind,
answers Authority; to the goods of Fortune, Power or Empire.

In considering the Principles of Government, Mr. Harrington gives us cause to
complain of a great Disappointment; We hoped to receive from his hand that
satisfaction about them, which several great Wits have in vain studied to
derive to us; but we find him instead of the first principles thrusting upon us
such things as are at best but fair endowments of persons fit to be entrusted
with a Government already settled or resolved on. The Wisdom, Courage, or
Riches of another man can never give him a Title to my obedience, nor take from
me that liberty with which I was born: There must be something before all these
in the Nature of Government, without which it will be as unjust to define
Sovereignty and subjection, as it would be to oblige Mr. Harrington to give his
clothes or money to the next man he meets wiser or richer then himself.

Page 4. Empire is of two kinds; Domestic and National; or Foreign and
Provincial. Domestic Empire is founded on Dominion.

Dominion is Propriety Real or Personal, that is to say, in Lands, or in
money and goods.

Lands are held by the Proprietors in some Proportion; and such as is the
Proportion or Balance of Dominion or Property in Land, such is the nature of
the Empire.

Page 5. Unto Propriety producing Empire it is required that it should have
some certain root or foothold, which except in Land, it cannot have, being
otherwise as it were upon the Wing.

Nevertheless in such Cities as subsist most by Trade and have little or no
land, as Hollandand Genoa, the Balance of treasure may be equal to that of
Land.

There is a great Contention between Leviathan and Oceana (whose names might
seem to promise a better Agreement) whether power or propriety be the
Foundation of Dominion; but they seem to me to mean the same things; For what
is propriety but Riches? and Riches are (Page 3.) confessed to be power: The
Difference then is only in Words; and propriety the Balance; the Agrarian,
etc. make up only a new Lexicon to express those things we knew before.

But the Assertion will appear too positive that propriety producing Empire
consists only in land, except in such places as Holland and Genoa which have
little or no land: Experience instructs us that it is not a large possession in
lands, but an Estate in ready money which is proper for carrying on a great and
sudden Enterprise. And we know of what importance Banks or Monti are, even in
other places besides Amsterdam and Genoa. I will propose a Case, which was once
so near being a true one, that I presume it cannot be rejected as improbable.
England is defined to have been under the Gothic Balance, that is, having the
propriety in the hands of a Nobility and Clergy, and consequently to have been
a mixed Monarchy, where the King was not absolute: To a King of England, Hen. 7.
was the first proposition of discovering America made by Columbus, which if it
had been embraced, the Silver of Potosi had sailed up the Thames instead of the
Guadalquivir, and by this the Kings Revenue would annually have been increased
above a Million, the rest coming into the hands of private Merchants and
Adventurers, and not of the principal Nobility. In this case I ask whether
this Accession of Revenue would not have preponderated on the Kings part, and
changed the Balance, though the Lands at home had still been possessed by the
Nobility in the same Proportion as before. It is not to be doubted but that a
Revenue sufficient to maintain a Force able to bear down all Opposition, does
equally conduce to Empire, whither it arises from the Rents of lands, the
Profits of ready moneys, the Duties payable upon Manufactures and Traffic, or
any other kind of Income.

That Empire is well divided into National and Provincial, shall be admitted
without Opposition, if I may be satisfied in this demand, whether there may not
be a mixture of these two, by which the Balance of Government shall receive
Alteration: which in effect differs little from this, That the several parts
of a National Empire may so poise one another as to produce a new Balance.
For example, The Crowns of Castile and Arragon were of a differing Balance,
the power of the King being more absolute in the former, and the interest of
the Communalty greater in the latter; The union of these two Crowns did not
render the Government of Arragon purely foreign or provincial; And yet the
Balance in Arragon has been so far changed by it, that the power of the King
has devoured the Interest of the people. This is no nice and unprofitable
speculation; for it is the case of almost all the present Soveraignties in
Europe, hardly any one of which is all of one piece, but is composed of
distinct Provinces differing in Genius, Laws, Customs and Balance, which have
come to be united at distant times, and by as various Titles.

Page 10. Says Solomon, there is an evil which I have seen under the Sun
which proceeds from the Ruler; and Eccles. 10. 15. Sad complaints, that the
Principle of Power, and of Authority do not twine in the wreath of Empire.
Wherefore, etc.

I know not how it comes about, but Mr. Harrington has taken up a very great
unkindnesse for the Clergy, which (though it be most discovered toward the end
of the book, and in another little Discourse of a later Date) here begins to
manifest it self: For he invades one part of their Office without asking their
leave; He falls a preaching, and taking that of Solomon for his Text, I have
seen servants upon horses, etc. he proceeds to make us a very goodly Sermon.

Page 10. and 11. The soul of man is Mistress of two potent Rivals, the one
Reason, the other Passion, etc.

From thence he slips into some Metaphysical considerations of the soul of Man,
and its operations, which being translated to Government must evince the Truth
of this Assertion, That a Commonwealth is an Empire of Laws and not of men. If
I could be persuaded he were so far in earnest as to expect any Man should be
convinced by the Metaphorical use of two or three Words, some further
considerations might be proposed; In the mean while it is enough to desire,
that seeing the whole force of the Argument rests upon the similitude of
Government with the soul of Man, we may be instructed what the soul is, and
what the whole Philosophy belonging to it: And then and not before, will it be
time to consider how far the similitude between that and Government will hold
true.

Page 12. There is a Reason which is the Interest of Mankind, or of the whole.
Now if we see even in those Natural Agents, etc. Hooker B. 1.

The Argumentation about the Reason or Interest of Mankind is little less
infirm: For the Question being, Whether there be any such primary Interest of
Mankind differing from that of every particular Man, He takes it for granted
there is such a common right or Interest, more excellent then that of the
parts, without proffering any other proof then the Testimonies of Hooker and
Grotius; Whose Opinions cannot oblige us beyond the Reasons on which they are
founded. Mr. Hooker's Expressions are altogether figurative, and it is easier
to prove from them that Things wanting sense make Discourses and act by
Election, then that there is such a thing as a common Interest of Mankind. For
Grotius his words, They carry a great Restriction with them, and the way of
producing Action in Beasts is so different from the Emanation of humane Reason,
that the Inference from one to the other must needs be very weak.

Page 12 and 13. But it may be said the Difficulty remains yet; for be the
Interest of Popular government right Reason, a man does not look upon Reason as
it is right or wrong in it self, etc.

And therefore it was a very judicious part to foresee that the Difficulty
would still remain, and no less ingeniously done to confess That a man does
not look upon reason as it is right in it self, but as it makes for him or
against him; That is, that the common Interest stoops to every man's peculiar
one. But we are promised a solution so facile, that it is obvious to such as
have the Green sickness. Let two Girls, says he, have a Cake given between
them, that each may have what is due: Divide says the one that I may choose,
or I will divide and you shall choose; And this is the whole mystery of a
Commonwealth. An Oven it seems is the best Emblem of the World, and a
Bake-house the only School of Policy. Let us obey Mr. Harrington when he send
us in Pistrinam, and consider a while this mystery. The Cake was given that
each might have what was due; so the Laws of this society proceeded not from
any Natural Right, or from the consent of the Girls, but were limited by the
Person who gave the Cake with this intent that it might be equally divided
between them. Again, these Girls live under the Discipline of the Rod, that
is, under a Government already established, and she that had been wronged in the
Division might upon appeal to the School Mistress or the Person who gave them
the Cake, have obtained an equal share. But now suppose the two girls had met
by chance, and found the Cake in their way, and suppose them out of the
influence of all such persons whose power might constrain them to an equal
Division, must we still believe they would have strained courtesy, and not
rather think the stronger of the two Girls would have eaten up the whole Cake
if she found her stomach serve her for it? This is no great mystery, but will
be found to be the true Case of a Common wealth: For either Government is
founded upon Paternity and the Natural Advantage the first Father had over all
the rest of Mankind who were his sons, and then there will be no such thing as
dividing and choosing, but being content with what portion he allows; Or else
Government flows from the increase of strength and power in some Man or Men to
whose Will the rest submit, that by their submission they may avoid such
mischief as otherwise would be brought upon them; And then here also there is
no room for dividing and choosing, but acquiescing in the Will of him whose
power cannot be resisted. There may perhaps be degrees of this power as it more
or less exceeds the strength and force of those who are to obey, the proportion
of which degrees being duly observed will I conceive teach us the true Nature
of those things which are commonly reputed to be Conditions imposed upon the
supreme power. If the power of the Government exceed in any great proportion
the power of those that are under his Government, so that he stands not in need
of any thing he can have from them, The Government becomes absolute and
unlimited; But if he exceeds them in a less proportion and be in continual want
of something that they may allow him, he must buy it by some concessions or
other as cheap as he can; But this amounts not to a mixture of the Government;
for without an excess in Power there can be no Government. Thus a General of an
Army sitting down before two Towns, the one very weak, the other of good
strength, will have the first at discretion, to the second he allows good and
honorable Conditions, out of a desire to save his time or Men, or to preserve
the place from being defaced, and the Ammunition imbezeled: Or to take Mr.
Harrington's own example, The stronger Girl gives the other a piece of Cake to
fetch her some water to drink after it. Since Mr. Harrington has brought
these Actors upon the Stage, he will not I hope take it ill if one of the
Girls give him an Answer; and tell him in her proper style, That his Cake is
dough.

Page 13. A Commonwealth is but a Civil society of men: Let us take twenty
men, and forthwith make a Commonwealth; six of these will be wiser then the
other fourteen, and by the eminency of their Parts acquire an influence, that
is, Authoritas Patrum. Wherefore this can be no other then a Natural
Aristocracy diffused by God throughout the whole body of Mankind.

In the next example of the twenty men, the Paralogism lies in this. Let us
take twenty men, says he, and forthwith make a Commonwealth; He first supposes
them a Commonwealth, and then considers how they would dispose of the
Government; But it is to be denied that they could ever have been a
Commonwealth, unless in one of the cases last expressed, in which the Government
would not have been free for them to dispose of. The sense of want among Men
that are in equality of power, may beget a desire of Exchange; as let me have
your Horse and you shall have my Cow, which is the Fountain of private
Contracts; but it is not to be with reason imagined that this should be enough
to make a Man part with a natural Freedom, and put himself into the hands of a
Power from which he can afterward have no shield though it should be used to
his own Destruction.

But Mr. Harrington has not in this lost his way without company; for I have
observed very frequently that while men profess to consider of the Principles
of Government, they fall upon Notions which are the mere Effects of Government,
not unlike the complaint of Grotius, that they who treat of Jus Gentium do
commonly mistake some part of the Roman Jus Civil for it.

To consider this instance of the twenty men a little further. What security
can Mr. Harrington give us, that the six in their consultations shall not aim
rather at their own advantage then that of the fourteen, and so make use of the
eminence of their parts to circumvent the rest? Or on the other fide how shall
we be satisfied that the fourteen will not soon begin to think themselves wise
enough to consult too, and making use of their excess in power pull the fix off
their Cushions, where they must needs appear to sit at better Ease then the
fourteen were in while they stood at the Door waiting for the Result of their
Debates.

I am willing to gratify Mr. Harrington with his Partition of them into six
and fourteen; but if I had been in an humor of contradiction, it had been as
free for me to have said that some one of the twenty would have excelled all
the rest in Judgment, Experience, Courage and height of Genius, and then told
him that had been a Natural Monarchy established by God himself over Mankind.

Page 14. The Decrees of the Senate are never Laws, nor so called, but
Senatusconsulta.

In exchange of this fair dealing, I expect Mr. Harrington should inform me
what it is he means when he says the Decrees of the Senate are never Laws, nor
so called, but Senatus consulta; The word Senatus consultum is a Latin name,
and belongs not properly to the Decrees of any Senate but that of the Romans;
so I must at present necessarily understand him, That the Roman Senatus
consulta never were Laws. It is true they were not called Leges, no more were
the Plebiscita, the Edicta Praetorum, and other parts of the Roman Jus Civil;
but they had the power of Laws, and equally with them required the obedience of
the whole Roman people. Coepit Senatus se interponere, and quicquid
constituisset, observabatur; Idque D. de origin juris. P. necessarium deinde
quia.
jus appellabatur Senatus consultum. Thus the Senatus consultum Macedonianum,
with many more came to have a place allowed them by Justinian in the
compilement of the Roman Laws. Nor can it be pretended that the Senatus
consulta were (like the orders of one single house of Parliament) binding only
to their own members; for though it were so at first with the Plebiscita, to
avoid the discord which was by it occasioned, It was soon agreed that the
distinct Decrees of the Senate and People should be extended to the Nature of
Laws, and oblige the whole body Cujac. com. ad. s.
of the Commonwealth, as is proved by Cujacius.

To lay down what has been said upon a smaller Scale: It has been shown, That
Ancient Prudence differs not from Modern, and serves not at all to enforce
Oceana's project of Government; That Commonwealths are no more then Monarchys
the Empire of Laws and not of Men; That there is no such thing as a mixed
Government, but that the supreme Power and the Actions in which it truly and
properly resides must belong to one or all or some Number between both; That
Oceana falls short in considering the principles of government, and takes for
Principles things that are a great deal on this side of them; That to say
propriety is the foundation of Empire is all one to say that power is; That
this propriety may as well consist in ready Money, or any other foreign
Revenue as in Possession of Lands; That there is a Balance producible by
distinct Government united into one person, which Mr. Harrington did not
consider; That the common Right or Interest of Mankind, differing from that of
every particular Man, is not firmly made out to us; That the notion of dividing
and choosing cannot subsist; And that the Instances alleged for it are
mistaken; That the consent of the people is an improbable and weak Hypothesis
of the Original of Government, which is better deduced either from Paternity or
Force; And finally that there can be no Government without excess of power.

After this I hope it will appear no ill grounded confidence in me to say, that
there is very little, if any thing, of consequence in the first and General
part of the Preliminaries left unanswered: And the principal Stones being thus
taken from the Foundation, a little Wind will be enough to reverse the
superstructure.

Page 15. Now whether I have rightly transcribed these Principles of a
Commonwealth out of Nature, I shall appeal unto God, and to the World. Unto God
in the Fabric of a Commonwealth of Israel: And unto the World in the Universal
series of Ancient Prudence.

I am now come to Mr. Harrington's Appeal to past Ages for justifying these
Principles of a Commonwealth; which Appeal is made to God in the Fabric of the
Commonwealth of Israel, and unto the World in the Universal series of Ancient
Prudence. Of the Commonwealth of Israel, anon; For the World I must remind Mr.
Harrington of my just complaint put in against him for partiality in omitting
the Examples of the Assyrians, Persians, and Egyptians, and all other old
Monarchical Governments, which certainly are included in the Universal series
of Ancient Prudence. But perhaps I am too blame to think Mr. Harrington should
have less Discretion then a common Attorney, who will be sure to examine only
those Witnesses that seem to make for the cause in which he is entertained.

One particular in this appears more then strange to me; It is, that having
said the Heathens have all written their Commonwealths, as if they had no other
Copy but that of Israel in the holy Scriptures, (Page 18) in the Enumeration he
brings in Switz and Holland. Which is it? Are these two within the series of
Ancient Prudence, or must they be reckoned among the Heathen Commonwealths?

I applied my self so late to the reading and considering of Oceana, that
before I could reach so far as to examine what is asserted concerning the
Commonwealth of Israel, I was made a spectatour of the Paper-combat between the
Author and Dr. Fern, the publication of which proclaims the Author's conceit
of the Victory. He indeed deserves the reputation of making rude Charges, and
in these Disputes the last Reply gains the Opinion of the same Advantage, as in
Battles it does to stay last upon the Field. If the Doctor's Leisure and
Inclination serves him, we may see the Fight renewed; However there is so much
reason to expect that some of the Clergy (against all of whom the Author has
declared War) will undertake the Quarrel, that I think it cannot justly be
counted any subterfuge in me to wave this part of the Dispute, and leave it in
the hands of those men whose Interest and Obligation gives them a propriety in
it.

Not to examine then whether it be a true or false Picture which Mr. Harrington
has drawn of the Republique of Israel, I will only consider how far we are now
bound to work after that Original, and whether there may not be Proportion,
Force and Beauty in the Face of Government, though it differs from the Air of
that of Israel: And this the rather, because the Commonwealth of Israel seems
proposed with more Authority then belongs to a bare Example, and the Christian
World accused of blindness or negligence (Page 18) for not transcribing from it.

It must not be denied but that whatsoever shall appear to have been an
establishment of God in the Jewish Republique, is to be allowed consonant to
the Laws of Grotius de jure bell. and pac. lib. 1.
Nature, Justice and Wisdom; seeing a Legislator supremely Good, Just and
Wise, cannot be supposed to have made Laws which do not bear the impression and
character of that hand from which they proceed. Yet if we should admit of Mr.
Harrington's Position that the people of Israel had the power of confirming all
their Laws, so that without their consent they had not (Page 16 and 17) been
Laws, We must abate much of the precedent Proposition; for it is a great deal
less to be the Adviser or Perswader of a thing then to be the Author and
Commander of it. He instances in this power of the people in that Act where
they make God King, Exodus 19. So that in his Opinion the Laws given in that
and the next Chapters (for they are but a continuation of the same Action) take
their validity from the consent of the people, who had a liberty of dissenting
by which they might have exempted from those Laws. These Laws are the Ten
Commandments, and if the people of Israel need not have been subjected to them
without their own consents, there is no reason but we should enjoy the same
privilege. In this Mr. Harrington proves an huge benefactour to Mankind; for
he has with no greater expense then the withholding their consents asserted
them into the mighty Liberty of being free from the whole Moral Law. But I ask
pardon for this Digression, and come to another consideration of the influence
of the Jewish constitutions upon our practice.

It is now lawful in making of Laws and modelling a Commonwealth to tread in
the steps of Moses unless in such things as either by their own Nature
terminated with the Revelation of the Gospel, or have been altered by some
general or special constitutions of Christ.

Beyond these considerations I am not aware of any prerogative of Authority
belonging to the Israelitish more then any other Republique: For a Law can
oblige only those to whom it is given, which were the children of Israel only;
And as no other Nation was at that time (according to the opinion of the
soberer of the Jews themselves) bound to observe the Jewish Laws or form of
Government; so it would be much more unreasonable at this distance of time and
place, to impose upon us any Obligation of following either their Government or
their Laws. In considering of Laws and frames of Government it is not enough to
look at the Dignity of the Legislator, but regard must be had also to
circumstances of times, places, and persons, with which the Lawgiver is often
so fettered that he cannot take those Resolutions which in themselves are best.
Now there were many conditions and qualifications of the people of Israel
vastly differing from the present Age, some of which I shall have occasion to
touch when I speak of the Agrarian.

Here I will not conceal the pleasure I have taken in observing that though Mr.
Harrington professes a great Enmity to Mr. Hobs his politiques, underhand
notwithstanding he holds a correspondence with him, and does silently swallow
down such Notions as Mr. Hobs has chewed for him: Of this sort is the Fancy of
the compact between God and the children of Israel, by virtue of which he
received the Civil Power, and was enabled to enact Laws for them; His conceits
taken from the Notation of the Words (...) and (...) are also of the same breed.

Page 20. Let me invite Leviathan who of all other Governments gives the
advantage unto Monarchy for Perfection, to a better disquisition of it by these
three Assertions.

The invitation sent to Mr. Hobs is not I presume so personally intended to
him, but that it may indifferently concern any Man who concurs with him in
giving the Advantage for perfection unto Monarchy of all other Governments: In
that Proposition I acknowledge my self a Zelote, and have Temerity enough to
expose my body to the receiving those Blows which were aimed at another Head.

Ibid. The first, (which requires no proof) That the Perfection of Government
lies upon such a Libration in the frame of it, that no man nor men, in or
under it, can have the Interest; or having the interest can have the Power to
disturb it with Sedition.

Though Mr. Harrington thinks the first Assertion requires no proof, it may
admit of some Explanation. To give such a Government as no Man nor Men in or
under it, can have the Interest to disturb with Sedition, is altogether
impossible; For that were to suppose there should not be in an whole country
one Ambitious Boor man who might hope for Advantage, nor one Vicious Rich man
who might expect security from the perturbation of the Government: The whole
matter then must be reduced to the want of power to do it. And that will
appear to be in no other Libration but this, That the Power of which the
Governor is possessed does so vastly exceed the power remaining with those who
are to obey, that in case of a contest it must be desperately unreasonable for
them to hope to maintain their Cause and Party. The true Method then of
attaining to perfection in Government, is to make the Governor absolute; for
if there be any who can Dispute upon probable Terms the power with him, the
State can never be free from Tumult and Sedition.

Ibid. The second, That Monarchy reaching the Perfection of the kind, reaches
not unto the Perfection of Government, but must have some dangerous flaw in it.
For proof of this

Monarchy is either by Arms or by a Nobility: A Monarchy by Arms, as that of
the Turk, has this incurable Flaw, That the Janissaries have frequent Interest
and perpetual Power to raise sedition, and tear the Prince himself in Pieces.
In a Monarchy by a Nobility, (as of late in Oceana) the flaw is this, that the
Nobility had frequent Interest and Perpetual power by their Retainers and
Tenants to raise sedition, and to levy a lasting War. Wherefore neither of
these is a perfect Government.

But this is not attainable in a Monarchy, says Mr. Harrington's second
Assertion; For a King being but a single Person, that kind of Government has
this Flaw in it, that the Instruments of Ruling whether they be an Army or a
Nobility, have both interest and power to disturb the government; for the proof
of which the Examples of Turkey and Oceana are proposed.

In a Monarchy by Arms it is indeed very apparent that the Mutinies of the
Soldatesca are always dangerous, and often Fatal; But then they happen solely
among the Militia of the Court; for the Troops dispersed through the Provinces
(upon whom the security of the Government depends) can seldom, perhaps never,
be shown to have caused such Disorders; And yet such a Militia at Court seems
necessary for the preservation of the Prince's person, and the Reputation of
the Government: But it will not be hard to find a Temperament, by which all may
be secured, which I think will lie in this, That the Guards of the King's
person be not increased beyond necessity of security, that they be not suffered
to stagnate at Court, but be by a perpetual circulation drawn out upon service,
and chiefly that they consist not of one entire Body united under the same
Head, but be divided into distinct Parties and Commands: As we may see in
France, where though (in proportion to the extent of their Dominions) the Kings
Guards be more numerous then those of the Roman or Turkish Emperors; yet being
divided into the distinct Bodies of French, Scotch and Switz Guards, under
their several Colonels and Captains, they have never been the Authors of any
the least Sedition. And in Turkey of late years they begin to learn the Art of
poising the Janissaries by the Spahis, and so have frequently evaded the danger
of their Mutinies.

In like manner in Monarchy by a Nobility, there never arises any Danger to the
Crown, but when either a great part of the Sovereign power is put into the
hands of the Nobility as in Germany and Poland, or when some Person or Family
is suffered to overtop the rest in Riches, Commands, and Dependence, as Princes
of the blood and Lorrain not long since in France, and of old the Montforts and
the Nevils in England. The first is a vicious constitution of the Government,
and a Monarchy only in name; the second easily admits of this cure, That these
Great Ones be reduced to a less volumn, and levelled into an equality with the
rest of their Order.

But I see no Necessity of admitting the Division of Monarchies which Mr.
Harrington has made, when the most Natural and Excellent form of Monarchical
Government arises from the Mixture of them both. The Prince who governs merely
by an Army, not only is exposed to the danger of their Mutinies, but is also
forced to run this hazard, That upon any potent Invasion, the loss of a Battle
or two draws inevitably along with it the loss of his Crown: On the other side
he that rests wholly upon a Nobilty, leaves himself in a manner at their
Discretion, and is with no great difficulty Dispossessed of the Throne. Let me
then have leave to assert that the perfection of Monarchy is free from those
flaws which are charged upon it, and that it consists in Governing by a
Nobility weighty enough to keep the people under; yet not tall enough, in any
particular person, to measure with the Prince; And by a moderate Army kept up
under the Notion of Guards and Garrisons, which may be sufficient to strangle
all Seditions in the Cradle.

In this place it will be no great impertinence to desire to know of Mr.
Harrington his Opinion of the Way of Governing by Councels, which I confess I
have always thought admirable; I do not mean such as are coordinate with the
Prince, (which have been seen in the World) but such as those of Spain, purely
of Advice and Dispatch, with power only to inform and persuade, not limit the
Princes Will: For almost all the weaknesses which have been thought incident to
Monarchy, are by this course prevented, and if there be any steadiness and
maturity in the Senate of a Commonwealth, this takes it all in. If the Delays
of the Spanish Councels be objected, the answer is obvious, that they proceed
more from the grave retired temper of the Spanish Nation, then from the Nature
of these Councels; And this objection is much more forcible against all Popular
Governments.

Page 20. and 21. The third, that Popular Government reaching the Perfection of
the kind, reaches the Perfection of Government, and has no flaw in it, for
which kind of Constitution I have something more to say then Leviathan has
said, or ever will be able to say for Monarchy; As

1. That it is the Government was never conquered by any Monarch, from the
beginning of the World unto this day; for if the Commonwealths of Greece came
under the yoke of the Kings of Macedon, they were first broken by themse^ves.

The third Assertion remains, which shall receive a Discussion through all the
five Branches of it.

1. The first of which seems intended for a trial of our Noses, whether they
will serve us to discover the Fallacy of an Inference from the prosperous
success of Arms, to the Perfection of Government: As if on the one side great
and well policed Empires had not been subverted by people so eloigned from the
perfection of government, that we scarce know of any thing to tie them together
but the desire of Booty; And on the other side we had not the Examples of the
little Republiques of Ragusa and San Marino, which are commended for their
upright and equal frame of Government, and yet have hardly extended their
Dominions beyond the size of an handsome Manor. It is not the perfection of
the Government, but the populosity of a Nation, the natural Valor of the
Inhabitants, the Abundance of Horses, Arms, and other things necessary for the
equipping of an Army, assisted with a good Military Discipline, that Quality a
people for Conquest; And where these concur, Victory is intailed upon them,
whether it be of one Monarch over another, or of a Commonwealth over a people
of the same form of Government. Nay, I will add of a Monarch over a
Commonwealth, though Mr. Harrington has pawned his Credit that this was never
known from the beginning of the World unto this day. He foresaw the instance
that might be made of the Kings of Macedon and Commonwealths of Greece, ^^^d
therefore would have us believe that had not happened if they had not been first
broken by themselves; At this rate of arguing Mr. Harrington shall have much
ado to produce any one Feat of Arms of a Commonwealth, which will not be
easily stripped of it is Glory by attributing the success to some Miscarriage or
Disorder of the Enemy. And it is worth observing, that to evade the F^rce of
this Instance, He admits of something in the Commonwealths of Greece that will
evince them to have been of a turbulent mutinous Temper, and ignorant of their
true Interest. But to help a bad Memory, let me ask Mr. Harrington what he
thinks of the little Grecian Republiques planted round the coast^ of Asia
Minor, and of the servitude into which they were brought first by the Lydian,
Pausan. messen.
and then by the Persian Monarchs, the asserting whose Liberties was the most
plausible pretense the other Greeks had for the Persian War? What account
likewise is to be given of the Sicilian Commonwealths, which (before that the
Island came under the Power of the Carthaginians and Romans) were reduced under
the yoke of one Monarch? And, not to wander in the obscure Paths of Antiquity,
let me beg his judgment of the Commonwealth of Genua, which fell under the
Dominion of the Dukes of Milan, and afterward (upon pretense of their Title) of
the Kings of France. If it be told me that this Commonwealth subsists to this
day, I shall only need to reply that Andrew Doria did rather erect a new then
restore an old Republique, (as will appear by the alterations he made in the
Laws and Form of the old Government) and that it is altogether as rational to
fortify the claim of the present States of Holland from the freedom enjoyed by
the Ancient Batavians, as to pretend that the present Commonwealths of Genua is
the same with what it was before it paid obedience to the Dukes of Milan. I
will afflict Mr. Harrington but with one particular more, and that is of the
Florentine Republique, which having chased away all of the Family of Medici,
and restored it self to a plenary Liberty, was by the Arms of Charles
Guicciard. lib. 20.
the 5th. under the Command first of the Prince of Orange, and then of Don
Ferrando Gonzaga, forced to submit to that Monarchical Government which it now
acknowledges.

Page 21. 2. That it is the Government that has frequently led mighty Monarchs
in Triumph.

2. In the second Mr. Harrington runs upon the Foil, it being only the
conversion of the First.

Ibid 3. That it is the Government which if i^ h^ve been seditions, it has not
been from any imperfection in the kind, but in the particular Constitution,
which where ever the like has happened, m^st have been unequal.

3. The third Branch is, methinks, a very pleasant One, and not unlike the
Procedure of the judiciary Astrologers; Who grounding their Art upon wild and
Arbitray, but as they pretend, infallible Notions, are fain to appeal to the
success of some few lucky Predictions; And when these are confronted with the
foul and ridiculous Mistakes of the greatest Masters of their Art, They
presently shelter themselves under this answer, That the Error is not in the
rules of Art but in the Man, who therefore is convinced to have mistaken in his
calculation, because his Predictions have not been justified by the Event. So
if we complain of the seditions which have infested almost all Commonwealths
that ever were, Mr. Harrington tells us, It has not been from any imperfection
in the kind, but in the particular Constitution; which where ever the like has
happened must have been unequal. For my part I despair of cutting off the
Retreat, and think him to be dealt with only by those who know how to drive the
Irish from a Bog.

Ibid. 4. That it is the Government which if it have been any thing near equal
was never seditious; or let him show me what sedition has happened in
Lacedaemon or Venice.

4. We shall have somewhat firmer footing in the Next, in which the
Commonwealths of Lacedaemon and Venice are brought upon the Carpet for such as
by the equality of their Government have been redeemed from all Seditions. Of
Lacedaemon first.

If Lacedaemon has enjoyed a more then ordinary exemption from Domestic
Troubles, it is upon the same Account that he that works his Horse hard and
gives him no Provender is secure of being run away with: The design of Lycurgus
in framing their Laws seems only to have looked at making them good Soldiers,
and accordingly they were seldom free from War, and when they were, the
hardness of their Diet, Plutarch. in Licurg.
the strictness of their Conversation, the Toil of their Sports and Exercises
made Peace it self little less rigorous then War uses to be, The greatest
landed man in the whole Country had not enough to maintain a Teme, and for
personal Estate, all but Iron money being prohibited, what would now go into
one of our little Pockets, with them would have loaded a Wagon; Riches, Luxury
and Excess, being thus banished, it is no wonder they continued quiet, seeing
there was nothing left for which they should contend; the condition of the
meanest Spartan being in every point (bating merely the Reputation of Power) as
desirable as that of their Kings. And yet even thus they did not escape.

For first, They were infested with frequent and dangerous sollevations of
their Helots or slaves; These Mr. Harrington has no reason to call external
Commotions, (Page 167.) being the Helots were not strangers but inhabitants and
spread over the Face of the whole Country; Nay more, They were Fundamental and
Essential to the Commonwealth; For the Spartans were by their Laws and
Institution to neglect all Occupations, even Agriculture it self, and attend
solely to the service of the Public, which could not possibly have been done
unless they had had the Helots to perform those Offices.

And then have they often been in distractions about the succession to the
Crown, some of which it will be proper to relate. A quarrel breaking out
between the two Kings Cleomenes and Demaratus, the latter was accused of
Bastardy, and as it was then the custom of Greece in difficult cases, a
reference is made to the Oracle Pausan. Lacon.
at Delphos, which having been bribed by Cleomenes, pronounces against
Demaratus, who thereupon is deposed and seeks Protection from the King of
Persia to the prejudice not only of the Laconian, but of the whole Grecian
Interest. Of the same nature was the contention about the succession, when by
the power of Lysander and his faction Agesilaus was promoted to the Crown, with
the Plutar. Agesil.
Exclusion of Leotychides the true heir. But much more Fatal was the contest
between Cleonymus and his Nephew Arens the son of Acrotatus, who being Jure
Representationis (as the Modern Lawyers speak) preferred before him, Cleonimus
made shift to get some forces together with which he gave beginning to a civil
War in which the City Z^rax was destroyed, and which was far worse Pausan.
Lacon. Plutarch. Pyrr.
he drew King Pyrrhus into the Country, who made himself Master of the
Campagna, besieged the capital City, and reduced the Commonwealth to the last
Gasp. The Reign of Agis and Cleomenes were so full of Turbulency and Sedition,
that it is sufficient to name them.

Nor have they been privileged from another sort of Attempts, which being
secretly managed by some few Conspirators discover not themselves till the
danger be almost inevitable; This will appear by the Treason contrived in the
beginning of Agesilaus reign, at Xenoph. Gr. Hist. lib. 3.
which time the Republique was in its greatest health and vigor at home and
highest Reputation abroad; The Author of this conspiracy waa one Cinadon a bold
gallant young fellow who excited by ambition was resolved to make himself
Master of the State, and had engaged in the Design diverse Persons of courage
and execution, provided them with Arms, and had prepared all things ready to
fall upon the King, the Ephori and the Senate in the Marketplace, which being
done He made no doubt by a plausible Declaration to draw over to his Party the
slaves, the mean People and the Borderers. Things were at this Pass when one
of the conspirators revealed all to the Ephori, by whose extraordinary Wisdom
and conduct the Heads of the Party were surprised, and the Design broke in
pieces. The practice of Lysander for altering the Government shall not be
insisted on; for though the Contrivance was admirable, yet the Discovery having
been prevented by his Death, it will not be amiss to let it sleep with him.

The City of Venice is possessed, by Mr. Harrington's own confession, of several
Advantages by the benefit of her situation, which she were not to expect from
the manner of her Government; Among these there is just cause to reckon her
Immunity from Seditions, which notwithstanding has not been so entire that we
need be put upon any difficulty in the retriving of Instances to prove she has
been subject to Tumults and Faction.

Not to insist upon the continual Disorders to which she was exposed before the
settlement of the Commonwealth upon the Election of her Dukes, Let Giannotti be
the computer and from the first to Seba^tian Ciani the 39th. Duke, We shall
have an account of three Donato Giannotti.
Dukes meeting with violent Deaths by intestine broiles, and of Nine who after
having suffered Excaecation died in Exile. In the time of Duke Piero Gradenigo
(under whom the Commonwealth received it is last Reiglement about 360 years ago)
We meet first with Marrino Boccon who not finding the new constitutions to his
Gust endeavored to opp^se them by open Force: But the memory of this Attempt
is lost in that more great and dangerous One (which happened also in the Reign
of the same Duke though not till the year 1311) of Bajamonte Tiepoli, by which
the Commonwealth was reduced to that Exigence, that the only hope of her
preservation consisted in the well defending the stairs of the Gasp. Contarim.
Palace of St. Mark. After that in the year 1355. the Health of the
Commonwealth became her Disease, I mean the power of the Dukes by which she had
gained so much Order, Grace, and Firmness, was made an Instrument to the
mabition of Duke Marin Falier for dissolving the Frame of the Government; But
at this Time the Power of the Dieci was salutary to the Republique in the
Deposition and Execution of Falier.

Of late days indeed the Commonwealth of Venice has enjoyed tranquillity
enough at home, (for though partialities and factions be kept up between the
Old and New families of Noblem^n, yet having never made any scandalous
Eruptions, they do but little harm) for which She is a Debtor to the nice and
dangerous Estate of her Affairs abroad; On the one side She is next Neighbor
to the Devouring Ottomon Empire, and on the other her Frontire reaches to the
Territories of the King of Spain, a Prince of as good Appetite though of a
slower digestion; Nay the Rope himself for all his Age and Holiness has
often endeavored to commit a Rape upon her: In this condition it is no more
wonder that the Apprehension of a Public Enemy begets Union and Concord
within her self, then it is to find Agreement among the Mariners of that Ship
which is ready to be boarded by Pirates.

Page 22. 5. That it is the Government, which attaining unto perfect equality,
has such a libration in the frame of it, that no man living can show which way
any man or men in or under it, can contract such Interest or Power as should be
able to disturb the Commonwealth with Sedition; Wherefore an equal
Commonwealth is that only which is without flaw, and contains in it the full
Perfection of Government.

5. After all this in answer to the fifth Branch, I will only tell Mr.
Harrington that the Libration He speaks of in Government, is of the same Nature
with a perpetual Motion in Mechanics; for as the one is not attainable as long
as there is in Matter a resistance to Motion, or a Propensity in it by which it
is determined to some other Motion; So will the other be impossible as long as
Men have private Interests and Passions by which they are biassed from the
public Ends of Government: And as all Motion will grow faint and expire
unless renewed by the hand of a continual Mover; so there is no Frame of Laws
or Constitution of Government which will not decay and come to Ruin unless
repaired by the Prudence and Dexterity of those who Govern. Now that this may
not be expected from a Monarch as well as from a Senate or any Assembly of Men,
I have not yet met with any conviction, but rather find it reasonable to think
that where Debates are clearest, the Results of them most secret, and the
Execution sudden, (which are the Advantages of a Monarchy) there the Disorders
of a State will soonest be discovered, and the necessary Remedies best applied.

Ibid. In an equal Commonwealth there can be no more strife, then there can be
overballance in equal weights; Wherefore the Commonwealth of Venice being that
which of all others is the most equal in the Constition, is that wherein there
never happened strife between the Senate and the People.

Wherefore it is not this pretended equality of a Commonwealth that causes her
stability and security, but rather the contrary; For, a^ Mr. Harrington has
well observed, (Page 5.) where there are two Parties in a Republique with
equal power, (as in that of Rome the Nobility had one half and the People the
other half) Confusion and Misery are there entailed: And to avoid this there
can be no way but to make the Commonwealth very unequal, that is to make the
scale of Power gravitate on the part of those persons who are possessed of the
Government. This will be found to be the practice of Venice, which though
alleged as the example of a most equal One, is as much as any in the World,
an unequal Commonwealth; The power there is wholly in the hands of the Noble
Families, who make up the number of about 3000 heads, though formerly they have
amounted to 4500, and the people are not concerned in it more then that they
are admitted to the Offices of Chancellours and Secretary ship, which are
places of no power though of some Trust: Nor is it material perhaps not true)
which Mr. Harrington (Page 9.) has delivered, that the Senate of Venice at the
first Institution took in the whole people; for the Question belongs not to the
first Original Institution which was rude and not well digested, but to the
present Frame of that Republique a^ it was perfected under the Government of
Piero Gradenigo. To conclude this point, Contarini himself a Noble Venetian and
very likely to discern the true temper of their Government, when he enquires
into the reasons of the fidelity of the Venetian people to the Senate, never
thinks upon this equality in the constitution of the Commonwealth, but proposes
the plenty of Bread, the Provision made for the poor by so many Hospitals, the
lucrative employment of Artificers in the Arsenal, things purely Accidental and
Extrinsecal, as the most probable causes which can be assigned of so happy an
Effect.

Ibid. An equal Commonwealth is such an one as is equal both in her Balance
or foundation, and in the superstructures, that is to say, in her Agrarian Law,
and in her Rotation.

An equal Agrarian is a perpetual Law establishing and preserving the balance
of Dominion, by such a Distribution, that no one man or number of men within
the compass of the Few or Aristocracy, can come to overpower the whole people
by their Possession in Lands.

To him that makes propriety, and that in Lands, the Foundation of Empire, the
establishing an Agrarian is of absolute Necessity, that by it the power may be
fixed in those hands to whom it was at first committed: But if an Estate in
ready money, or any other Revenue conduces as much to Empire as the Possession
of Lands, (which was shown in its Place) the true importance of an Agrarian
will come to no more but this, that the government be provided of a Revenue
sufficient to make good that advantage of Power which it enjoys over all
persons and parties living under that Government. The examples of an Agrarian
are so infrequent that Mr. Harrington is constrained to wave all but two
Commonwealths, and can find in the whole extent of History only Israel and
Lacedaemon to fasten upon. What the Nature of these Agrarians was, and how they
differ from that which Mr. Harrington goes about to establish, w^l be the
business of my present Disquisition.

When in obedience to God's command Abraham had abandoned his native soil, and
the inheritance of his Fathers, and like an Adventurer in prosecution of his
Fortune had wandered as far as the Land of Canaan, He received a promise of God
in reward of this submission that his posterity should enjoy as a possession
the Land in which he now l^ved as a stranger; The hopes of seeing this promise
performed had always so much influence upon the Israelites, that when in Egyp^
they fell into an Affliction of the greatest Pressure and Duration that ever
Nation suffered, They not only bore up against it by their care in maintaining
their National Interest, but with extraordinary Diligence attended to the
preserving their Genealogies through their Tribes and Families: The time of
impletion of the Promise being come, There was no Man that was able to make out
his descent from Abraham by Jacob, but had an unquestionable Title to the
Possession of the Land, and consequently it was necessary to divide the Land
viritim among the people of Israel. Yet it will not be easy to determine
whether they all inherited by equail Portions, or whether in the Division
respect was had to the Princes of Tribes and Heads of Families. The Public
Division upon the return of the Survey (Jos. cap. 18.) it is evident went no
further then to assign by lot the Seat of every Tribe, or at most of the
Families in that Tribe; For the shares of particular Men it appears not how
they were laid out (unless in the cases of Joshuae and Ca^eb which were
peculiars) except the place in Numbers, cap. 26. 54. belongs to them, To many
thou shall give the more inheritance, and to few thou shall give the less
inheritance; to every one shall his inheritance be given according to those
that were numbered of him. But it is more probable that this is meant of
families then of persons, if we consider that the Dignity of the Princes and
Heads of Families could not have been preferved without some Advantage in
Estate; And besides if none could have been Rich, none could have been Poor,
and yet we find Poor abounding in the Commonwealth of Israel even to that
extremity as to addict themselves into servitude. Let the Nature of this
Division of Lands be what it will, ^are was taken for the preservation of the
people in and upon it; and therefore there could be no alienation of Land but
with a Defeasance or power of redemption, and once within 50 years, in the
Jubilee, all Sales were rescinded and lands reverted to the possession of the
former owners. The most considerable though withal most obvious observation
concerning the Jewish Agrarian remains, which is that having extirpated the
inhabitants of the Land, they might Tailler en plein drap, and so avoid the
almost insuperable Difficulties which will cleave to a project that must be
introduced by alteration of possession.

This was the condition of the Jewish Agrarian, which will, if I mistake not,
prove very little conformable to the Notion Mr. Harrington has of it; He
thinks not upon the promise of God to Abraham, but considers the Division of
the Lands as a politic constitution upon which the Government was founded,
though in the whole History of the Bible there be not the least Footstep of
such a Design: But in the name of Wonder how can this Agrarian be the
foundation of that Government which had subsisted more then 45 year without it?
The Constitution of the Jewish Government by Mr. Harringtons compute (Pa. 16)
bears date before the sending the dozen spies to discover the Land, but from
that Action to the Division of the Land was 45 years, Jos. 14. 10. Again, If
this Agrarian was meant as Fundamental to the Government, the provision was
weak and not proper for the attaining the End proposed, there being nothing in
the nature of the Agrarian to hinder but that the whole Country might for the
space of near 50 years, that is the time between two Jubiles, have come into
the hands of one Man, which had been enough to destroy the Balance and turn
the Agrarian it self, as well as all other points of the Government, out of
Doors.

As to the Agrarian of Lacedaemon, it may be comprehended by what has been
already said of that Commonwealth, that the Design of Lycurgus in it was not so
much to attain an equality in the Frame of the Government, as to drive into
Exile Riches, and the Effects of them Luxury and Debauchery: This will further
appear by his endeavor to introduce this Law not only into Real but Personal
Estate, though afterward he laid it down upon experience that it proved of too
hard Digestion, and instead of it substituted the Law forbidding all but
Iron-money by which in a way more secret and artificial he obtained the fame
End: The same is manifest also by the Proportion of Lands which he assigned to
every particular Man, which might have been far greater without endangering the
Equality of the Commonwealth, The success also is clearly of the same side; for
no sooner had Lysander by filling the City with Gold and Silver broke the Vow,
as I may call it, of Voluntary poverty, but the Commonwealth fell in Virtue and
Reputation though she continued a long time after firm in her Agrarian. It is
to me as strange as any thing in History that Lycurgus should find credit
enough to settle a Government which carried along with it so much want and
hardship for particular Men, that the total Absence of Government could scarce
have put them into a worse Condition; The Laws that he made prohibiting the use
of those things, to enjoy which with security, is that only which to other Men
makes the yoke of Laws, supportable: But it may well be thought, this would
have been impossible to Lycurgus, had he not wisely obtained Responce from
D^lphos, magnifying his person and the Government he went about to introduce
after which all Resistance would have been downright Impiety and Disobedience
to the Gods. And whosoever shall have the Fortune to be the Founder of such a
Government must encounter a very superstitious people* apt to be wrought up
into a Belief that their Legislator holds a more then ordinary Correspondence
with Heaven.

But all this will seem to concern Mr. Harrington very little, who (though to
bring his Agrarian into Credit he had before made a great flourish with that of
Lacedaemon) does let us know (Page 106.) that there is much Dissimilitude
between the Agrarians of Lacedaemon and Oceana; Indeed he is thus far in the
right, that the Voice of the first was, Every man shall be thus Poor; but that
of the latter is, No man shall be more then thus Rich. I will then leave the
Ashes of Lycurgus at peace, and examine a little the Moddel of the Agrarian
which Mr. Harrington has propounded to the World.

1. The first Discovery I make of it, is that it is Unjust. If it be truly
asserted that Government is founded on Propriety (Page 4.) then Propriety
subsists in Nature before Government, and Government is to be fitted to
Propriety, not Propriety to Government. How great a sin then would it be
against the first and purest Notions of justice to bring in a Government not
only differing from but directly destructive of the settled propriety of
Oceana, in which there are confessed (Page 101.) to be 300 persons whose Estates
exceed the Standard of 2000 l. per annum. Let me not be choakt with the Example
of Lacedaemon till Mr. Harrington has shown Us the power of his persuasion
with the Nobility of Oceana, as Lycurgus with them of Lacedaemon, to throw up
their Lands to be parcelled by his Agrarian, (Page 113.) And when that is done,
I shall cease to complain of the injustice of it. Not need any one of these 300
be put to own a shame for preferring his own Interest before that of a whole
Nation; for though when Government is once fixed, it may be fit to submit
Private to Public utility, when the Question is of choosing a Government,
every particular Man is left to his own Native Right, which cannot be
prescribed against by the Interest of all the rest of Mankind. But in this Case
the Interest of three hundred is not balanced with that of a whole Nation, but
that of some few extravagant spirits, who by making Dams in the Current of
other men's Estates, hope to derive some Water to their own parcht Fortunes.

2. In the second Place the Nature of this Agrarian is such that it can never
be Fixed, but as 2000 l. is held now to be a due Standard of Estates, so
hereafter they may be brought down to 1000 l. or a far less Sum; For the whole
Body of the People being entrusted with giving a Vote and keeping a Sword, may
easily either by the way of Counsel or Arms agree to make this Change, in which
they need not value the Opposition of such as enjoy 2000 l. whose greatest
number can never exceed Five thousand persons, (Page 100.) a Company too
inconsiderable to withstand Two hundred thousand Men. (Page 200.) It will not
be enough to reply that the Law by which the Agrarian shall be settled will
hinder this, For it is not to be imagined that those Five thousand can have a
more Legal Title to their 2000 l. then the Three hundred now have to the
Surplus above 2000 l. Wherefore this Agrarian must needs be unfixt and
flitting, and cannot terminate in any thing but Levelling, or at least Reducing
the Rate of Estates to that pass, that the keeping it from going any lower
shall be the Concern of a greater Number of Men then they make up who have an
Interest in the further debasing of it.

3. But thirdly. As the Jews who have no Land are everywhere great Traders; so
the possession of Lands being limited by this Agrarian, Men who are either
Covetous or Ambitious, will employ themselves and Estates in Foreign
Traffic, which being in a manner wholly ingrost by the Capital City of
Oceana; that City already too great will immediately grow into an Excess of
Power and Riches very dangerous to the Commonwealth. The Republique of Venice
would long since have been sensible of this inconvenience, but that her Extent
being no greater then the Isles on which the City stands; (for Mr. Harrington
has truly observed that to all her other Dominions her Government is
provincial) the increase of that one place is the equal Augmentation of the
whole Commonwealth. But the case stands not so with our Neighbors of Holland,
where every Province consisting of the Union of several Towns, and the
Republique of the Union of those Provinces, the Town of Amsterdam has within a
few years been so aggrandized by Commerce, that it is become of almost equal
importance with all the other Provinces, and has been able of late to exercise
a Tyranny in the Disposal of some public Affairs much to the prejudice both
of the Liberty and Interest of the Residue of the Union. An equal if not
greater incommodity to Oceana would be created by the Agrarian, which making
Emporium a City of Princes, would render the Country a Commonwealth of
Cottagers, able to dispute precedence with the Beggars Bush.

4. Another Consideration suggests it self from the great Difficulty in making
this Agrarian equal and steady; Not only in reference to the various Tenures
and Rents of Land in Oceana, (which with all other Objections produced by Mr.
Harrington himself (Page 88.) I on purpose omit) but with respect to the Flux
and Inconstant value of Money by which this Agrarian is computed; We have the
experience of all Ancient Surveys of Lands and Rates of Commodities how vastly
they recede from the present Estimation of Money, which having no natural Value
rises and falls by a thousand Accidents; And who knows but that 2000 l. per
annum, may Two hundred years hence differ as much in Value from this present
Age, as 2000 l. per annum does now from what it did Two hundred years ago? So
the Agrarian which is represented as the firm immovable Basis of the
Commonwealth, must like a floating Bridge undergo all the Vicissitudes which
Money is subject to in its Ebbs and Flows.

But if there were as many Demonstrations to Evince an Agrarian as there are
Arguments to impugn it, I should notwithstanding despair of the issue,
because it must make War against an Universal and Immemoriall custom; The
power of Custom is without doubt more prevalent then that of Reason, and there
is nothing of such Difficulty as to persuade Men, at once and crudely, that
they and their Forefathers have lived in an Error.

Page 22. As the Agrarian answers unto the Foundation, so does Rotation unto
the superstructures.

Equal Rotation is equal vicissitude in Government, or succession unto
Magistracy conferred for Convenient Terms, enjoying equal vacations as take in
the whole body by Parts, succeeding others through the free Election or
suffrage of the People.

The contrary whereunto is Prolongation of Magistracy, which trashing the wheel
of Rotation, destroys the life or Natural motion of a Commonwealth.

That Ancient Republiques have through a malicious jealousy made it unlawful
even for persons of the clearest Merit to continue long in Command, but have by
a perpetual vicissitude substituted new Men in the Government, is manifest
enough; but with what success will best appear by Veturius, Varro, Mancinus,
and the residue of weak and passionate Commanders which have by this means come
to be employed by the Romans: And no less by the rabble of Generals often made
use of by the Athenians, while Men of Valor and Conduct have lain by the
Walls. It is an Argument of much imperfection in a Government not to dare to
employ the whole Virtue of her Citizens. And those Orders must needs be against
Nature which excluding persons of the best Qualifications, give Admission to
others who have nothing to commend them but their Art in Canvasing for the
suffrages of the people. Yet this Law has been as often broke as a
Commonwealth has been brought into any Exigency; for the hazard of trusting
Affairs in weak hands then appearing, no scruple has been made to trample upon
this Order for giving the power to some able Man at that time rendered
incapable by the Vacation this Law requires. The continuation of the Consulship
to Marius is sufficient to be alleged for proof of this, though if occasion
were it might be backed by plenty of Examples. The Dilemma into which a
Commonwealth is in this case brought is very dangerous; For either she must
receive a Mortal wound from without, or she must give her self one by gaining
the Habit of infringing such Orders as are necessary for her Preservation. I
know not what Advantage Mr. Harrington may foresee from the Orders of this
Rotation, (Page 213.) for my part I can discover no other Effect of it but
this, That in a Commonwealth like that of Oceana taking in the many (For in
Venice Mr. Harrington Page 24. confesses it to be otherwise) where every Man
will press forward toward Magistracy, This Law by taking off at the end of one
year some Officers, and All at the end of three, will keep the Republique in a
perpetual Minority, no Man having time allowed him to gain that experience
which may serve to lead the Commonwealth to the understanding her True Interest
either at home or abroad.

Were the Agrarian he aims at once established, the Nobility would be so
thoroughly plumed, that they would be just as strong of wing as Wildfoule are in
moulting time. And therefore where Mr. Harrington goes about (Page 25.) to
persuade the people they need not fear the Nobility, I am of Opinion he might
have spared his Pains as I shall mine in any further Consideration of the first
part of his Preliminaries, seeing what remains of any Consequence will properly
belong to those Men to whom I have recommended the Disquisition of the Jewish
Commonwealth.

FINIS.

