TESTIMONY FOR THE Son of Man, And against the Son of Perdition: Wherein is set
forth the FAITH and OBEDIENCE of GODS ELECT, Testified by the Mouth of the
Lord, Angels and Men.

With a true Discovery of a Bundle of Equivocations, Confusions, and
Hypocrisies, in those who call Themselves Preachers of, and to the Light within
all Men; who yet are so far in darkness themselves, that they acknowledge not
the Scriptures and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, so as to be Directed by the one,
to the Obedience of the other.

By Joseph Wright, a Servant of Jesus Christ.

Luke 11. 44. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are as Graves
which appear not, and the men that walk over them, are not aware of them. Heb.
10. 38. Now the just shall live by Faith, etc. Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to
the Testimony, if they speak not according to This Word, it is because there is
NO LIGHT IN THEM. LONDON, Printed for Stephen Dagnal, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Alisbury, and at Leyton, 1661.

To the Beloved FLOCK of JESUS CHRIST, that are in the Faith and Fellowship of
Him, according to his glorious Gospel, in ENGLAND.
And to all them that in every place call upon the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who sits at the right hand of God the Father in the Heavens, out of
every man on Earth; Blessings, Riches of Grace, Mercy and Peace, be multiplied
upon you, from the most high Lord of all, who dwells in that Immortal Light,
which mortal Eyes did never see, nor can see: and from Jesus Christ his Eternal
Son, in truth and love, to the establishing your hearts in the Love of the
Truth, and to the giving you an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified by
Faith, which is in him, to the Glory of the only wise God; to whom be ascribed
Blessings, Glory, Power, Salvation, Might and Praises, in the highest,
throughout all Ages, in the Churches, by his only Son Jesus Christ; even for
ever, and for ever, Amen.

My dear Friends and Brethren,

Iniquity does abound, and the Love of many does wax cold; and indeed wherein
the Mystery of Iniquity does mightily work and prevail, so that if it were
possible the very Elect should be deceived, and beguiled from the simplicity of
the Gospel of their Salvation, by the deceits that are abroad, and the workers
of Wickedness, who labor with all their might to darken the Counsel of God by
words without knowledge, Job 38. 2. Prove. 21. 30. Satan you know has always
endeavored to Counter-work the Dispensation of God, ever laboring to make his
wicked Designs and Devices to be as like the Truth of the Lord as possible,
that thereby he might keep back the Children of men, from giving themselves up
to the Lord Jesus Christ; a notable Example we have of this in Pharaoh and his
Sorcerers, who withstood with Signs wrought by deceit, Moses, who wrought by
the finger of God: And it is foretold to us, that like as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, even so shall the Truth be resisted, by some that would seem
to have as beautiful a face for a while, as Truth it self; so that it will be
hard to distinguish the one from the other, without abundance of the Spirit of
Discerning: But this is Truths Character, it will have the Victory and Triumph,
notwithstanding all the fierce opposition that it meets with, and the higher
men and devils clime to overtop and over-master it, and to exalt themselves
above it, the greater will be their fall, and their condemnation, and the
manifestation of their madness and folly; for it shall be discovered as that of
Jannes and Jambres also was.

it up in this our Nation, to this time; and knowing how taking it is to many,
because it seems to carry along with it a zealous Conversation, whereby many of
you have been apt to think, that there is but one step betwixt it and Truth; I
have therefore very faithfully in this Book set before you the large and wide
distance, that there is between the things herein opposed, and the Truth that
you profess, that you may be warned to hold fast the Profession of your Faith
without wavering, and not be drawn away with the floods of Iniquity, like dead
Fish with the streams.

seek the Lord, depart from evil, be ever following that which is good; For
evil men understand not Judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all
things, Prove. 28. 5. Try things out by the Scriptures before the Lord, and seek
his face by Fasting and Prayer, and be sure you be not drawn to Fasting without
Prayer, for that is dangerous.

Whorish Worship, it would be a sad thing, that for fear of her and her
filthiness, you or any of you, should run into the Son of Perdition's
Practices; O what great need have you to be sober and watch unto Prayer; I
therefore your fellow Companion in the patient waiting for of the coming of
Christ, do earnestly in all bowels of honest affection in Christ Jesus, beseech
you to handle the Spirit, against which I here contend roughly at the door; Is
not the found of its Masters feet behind it? I am pressed to this Work by many
weighty Considerations; you know how nearly I am related to you, that you may
not be ensnared and taken in an evil net, while I by any means may through
grace help and prevent it, is that for which the dispensation of God calls upon
me; I have (though unworthy) been appointed by many of you for a defense of
that Truth of the Gospel which you profess, and have had many a grapple with
these Forerunners of the Man of Sin, as well as with the Emissaries of the
Whore; whereby I have the advantage to see into their deceits, and whose
Servants they are, who say they are Apostles, and are not, but are Liars;
Therefore I am bound to make it known, to the end, that the Mystery of Iniquity
may be discovered, and that the Christ of God may be magnified, his Truth
advanced, his People established and confirmed; and also to prove if any hereby
may be converted, and their Souls saved, that the Truth which is so much
trodden down, as would make ones heart bleed to see it, might be made
honorable.

course to discharge part of that Trust which is upon me, whereby I show to
you, and to every of you, the sad Principles of that Spirit of Antichrist,
which now runs about Preaching up the Law or Light within, as also to and from
it; wherein you may see the sad Consequences and Companions of that Doctrine;
as also the Faith of Gods Elect, laid down and proved by the Scriptures, in
opposition thereunto: In which is discovered, that all Righteousness rested in,
which is not wrought by that God-Man, Christ Jesus, and made ours by Faith, is
no better than Wickedness presumed in: That they which deny the Doctrine of the
Son of God, and that deny his Person to be a distinct Person from all other
Persons; do deny the Father also: That to them which Believe not in him, that
is the only Son of God, Baptism in Water, Prayer, and Laying on of Hands,
Breaking of Bread, and all other Ordinances of the New Testament, must needs be
as Shadows without substances, as Shells without kernels, as Bodies without
souls; for they deny the Father, Son, and Spirit.

Ordinances; the difference lies not so much between them and us now, about who
should Preach, and what Ordinances are to be observed; but what is the Doctrine
that is to be Preached, and what is that that is to be Preached to, and which
is the Christ that is to be Believed in: Now they which do differ in these
Fundamentals, need not waste time about other Points, which otherwise are
necessary to be discussed: I need not give you a repitition here, of all that
is in the following Discourse; my main design is to warn every one of you,
seriously to consider the following matter, and to beware you hearken not to
those pretended Preachers up of the Light, whose Doctrine being examined by the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, is found to be gross Darkness; but if you shall not
be warned, I have as to this done my duty, your blood will lie on your own
heads.

Preach up the Light within, I am sure you would be the Light of the World,
Mat. 5. 14. I have not further here to say to you, but to bespeak your hearts,
to beautify the Truth which you are made partakers of. Consider what I say,
and the good Lord give you a right understanding in all things; remember me in
that intrest which you have at the Throne of Grace: Farewell,

Yours, to serve you in the Service of our Lord Jesus Christ. JOSEPH WRIGHT.

To all those that through Ignorance, are ADVERSARIES to the DOCTRINE of JESUS
CHRIST, and to the Professors thereof: If you have not sinned that Sin unto
death; Peace be unto you, and Peace be to your House, through the Grace of
Jesus Christ the Prince of Peace.
Men and Brethren,
I Cannot pass any of you without a bitter sigh, lamenting your Ignorance, who
do please your selves in reproaching others, not having the knowledge to
discern betwixt one sort of Professors and another, but judge all alike; and if
you get but a Scandal by the end, it shall not be suddenly laid down by you,
nay many of you do wait for our haltings, and if but one do miscarry, you will
be sure to say that they are all such, accusing all the Separated
Congregations, which in this Nation have Separated from the Parish Assemblies,
as Munster Baptists, and Followers of John of Leyden: whose Heresies
notwithstanding we abhor, as also they were abhorred by the Servants of the
Lord of that time, as may be seen in the History of this Iron Age; yea if any
falls Doctrine or Practice has risen up, many of you have laid it at our doors;
as when that notorious, vile and abominable Practice of the Ranters did arise,
O how were we, whose Souls do abhor all incivility, and unchaste actions,
branded with their lacivious ways! and what an Odium has been cast upon our
Meetings, and ways of Administering the holy Ordinances of the most holy and
glorious God, which we have ever desired and labored to observe, in a comely
and decent manner; all which scorn and derision cast upon us, we well hope by
our Conversations in a great part is wiped away; and with the help of divine
Grace, we shall daily labor to keep a Conscience void of offense both toward
God, and toward man, that the Worship which we perform to him, in his Christ
may be approvable, and to you more acceptable.

mean time there has risen up a most Pernicious Stratagem of Satan, whereby to
delude the Children of God and men: The Doctrine and Practice is generally
known, it is a Teaching up the Light within all Men, etc. I need not express my
self in any other terms, although you have another Name for the conformists to
that Notion, which I judge does not so fully include it; and therefore I call
them that are in Unity with that Principle, the Messengers of Antichrist, and
the Spirit is his, and the Doctrine also; a clear description whereof you have
in this Book.

Teaches up the Law or Light within all Men, etc. But the Lord knows it, and
so shall you one day, if you shall not believe it now, That to entertain such a
Doctrine, would be to commit a Rape not only upon our very Consciences, but
also upon our meanest Principles; and it is no small grief to us to bear the
least tittle of their Inventions, neither do we either Preach or Practice any
thing at all as from them: And to take off all your Suspicions, and to resolve
even those things in which you your selves are in the dark, as also to quit our
selves, in preventing your ruin by that deceit, as we in some measure have done
by those Opportunities which we have had; Even so now, I who am very
insufficient to satisfy your curious eyes and ears, do yet in the behalf of
Christ my Lord and Master, his Truth and People, communicate these
Considerations following to your view, which as you stand opposite to that
Spirit against which I contend, I doubt not but you will entertain with
welcome; but where the weight that I bring out of the Sanctuary, to show the
lightness of their Imaginations, does threaten the discovery of your gross
Inventions, and does grate upon your Professions, it is like that I and my Book
to, may be shut out of your hearts and hands; but this I value not, neither do
I care what becomes of my Name, or Repute in the World, so the Cause of Christ
be declared, and his Truth cleared from the filth, which is and has been cast
upon it.

any thing on this side Christ more, than in seeing Sinners Converted unto him,
and rightly settled in Faith and Practice, etc. And I do hereby warn every one
of you to look to it in time, and look into the matter following, as desirous
to see thereby the Estate of your own Souls, as well as the state of the
Controversy between them and us; and where thou art hit and touched in thy
heart and conscience, I pray thee who ever thou art oppose not; I desire
unfeignedly, that those that shall see or hear the matter herein contained,
might feel something (though secretly whispered) of Divine and Everlasting
Concernment, that the good Lord may have the Glory in thy Conversion and
Salvation; is and shall be the earnest and continual request of my Spirit.

JOSEPH WRIGHT.

To all them that Teach up the Light within all men, as that which is
sufficient eternally to save them: If Mercy may be by you enjoyed, it is the
desire of an hearty Well-willer of your Souls, that in the Grace of Christ,
once more tendered unto you, that you may obtain it.


thou have cast upon me: Another reason is, to show to thee what little Union
there is betwixt thee and Truth: Another is, to set before thee, and all men,
those pernicious Principles which thou hold, although thou seem to set
such a fair gloss on them: Another is, truly to state the difference which is
betwixt us, that we may not be disputing about Ordinances, when the difference
is about the substance and foundation of all Generations that shall be saved.
Another is, to show unto all those who would have us to own you for Christians,
and join with you, the reason of our not consenting thereunto. Another is, to
signify unto all, the danger that is in following thee, before they be caught
by thee. Another is, to warn the Churches of Christ that they suck not in thy
Principles, nor so much as bid thee, God speed; seeing thou bring not the
Doctrine of Christ. Another is, to arm them against thee, that thy design upon
them may be blasted. Another is, to set before thee thy way, and the end which
it will bring every man unto that walks in it; the which thy detestable
blasphemies, that Preachest up the Light within all men, are contrary to the
Doctrine and Person of Jesus Christ; making Christ to be only a power in every
man, which is his Justification; And much more of thy erroneous Doctrine I
could rehearse, but it is wearisom, and might, as has been said in the like
case, rather be wondered at, than confuted: But seeing Satan in his Instruments
has transformed himself into an Angel of light, thereby to deceive the hearts
of the simple; for their sakes I must speak something to thee, because thou
bring some texts of Scripture, which thou would persuade people does make
for thee, as some have done, Romans 2. 14, 15. thereby opposing Faith in the Man
Christ Jesus, and his sufferings; and from that Scripture confidently
affirming, that those Gentiles there mentioned knew not the Man Christ Jesus,
which we believe in, nor did believe on him, yet kept the Law, and were thereby
justified before God: And because the Scriptures which thou alledgest to color
thy deceits, does declare unto us a Christ, therefore thou say, that that is
the Christ, to wit, the Work of the Law written in the heart; for although thou
say not, that any can be saved without Christ, yet thou intendest nothing
less, than that any are saved through the purchase of the blood of that
Christ, who is God and Man, apprehended by Faith; for this thou reckonest to be
erroneous, although it be the Foundation of all Generations that shall be saved.

thereof; and if any of thy followers do testify their abhorring of those
things, without secret evasion or mental reservation, I shall be glad; if not,
let them be content (as one said) to be called his Disciples whose discipline
they follow.



Joseph Wright.

A TESTIMONY For the Son of Man, and against the Son of Perdition.
CHAP. I.
Wherein it is laid to the charge of those that Preach up the Light within all
men, That they do deny Jesus Christ; which is proved by their making no mention
of his death for the sins of the world; by their not gathering Men and Women
into fellowship with him by Faith; by their setting up Works for Justification;
and by their neglect of Self-denial: against which is testified the Faith of
Gods Elect, concerning the Person of Christ, his Death and Resurrection, and
Reconciliation thereby, with Faith therein, for Righteousness, Sanctification
and Self-denial.

Preachest up the Light within all men, requiring all People to mind the Light
which is within them; is this, That thou do deny that Christ which dyed at
Jerusalem out of every person of man, but his own, and in so doing denyest
Jesus Christ come in the flesh; and thy spirit is the spirit of Antichrist,
notwithstanding all thy pretended zeal, etc. which I prove against thee as
follows:

dying for the sins of the World; nor that he tasted death for every man, thou
art altogether silent in this Doctrine of Christ's dying for man in the body of
his flesh, and out of all other men, to Redeem man unto God, and to save him
from his sins; which ought to be taught and preached first of all to sinners
and unbelievers, to beget Faith in them, and Repentance unto life, 1 Cor. 15.
3. and 4. But thou do altogether press every Man and Woman to look to the
Light within them, telling them that that will show them all sin and iniquity,
and will lead them out of it, and eternally save them, if they be guided by it.

which teaches that Christ did die for the sins of the world, and freely laid
down his life as a ransom for sinners, or offered himself a Sacrifice to God,
upon that Cross on which he was crucified at Jerusalem, in his own body, and
out of every man else, thereby to reconcile both Jew and Gentile unto God by
his own blood, shed in his own body, Ephesians. 2. 13, 16. Col. 1. 20, 21. which is
such a truth of such concernment, that whosoever preaches it not, does not preach
the Gospel of Christ, nor lay the foundation which is the true and precious
Cornerstone, yea, the foundation of all Generations that shall be saved; For no
other foundation can any man lay, than that which is laid, even Jesus Christ,
and him crucified: the just dying for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God, being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
who his own self bore our sins in his own body on the Tree, that we being dead
to sin, should live unto Righteousness; by whose stripes only we can be
healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

and in his own body, for their sins and iniquities; by which Faith every true
Believer being justified, has Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; by
whom as the Apostle teaches, Romans 5. 1, 2. We have access by Faith into this
Grace, wherein we stand and rejoice in Hope of the glory of God, see Romans 4.
16. Romans 11. 6. 2 Cor. 1. 24. But on the contrary thou gatherest by Works,
never questioning whether thy Proselytes believe in Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem, by whose Death and Resurrection Believers do receive Reconciliation
and Justification; I say, by Works thou gatherest, and not by Faith, warning
all people to look to the Light within them; and they which own this thy
Doctrine, and walk and work according to it, thou ownest, and none but such,
nor take to be such as are either taught or gathered by thee, the which thou
receivest; although as touching the Faith in Christ Jesus, they are as ignoranr
as Heathens, and are absolute Infidels, which I have proved many a time by
Discourse with thy followers; Therefore in that thou gatherest by Works, and
not by Faith, making them Heirs, which are only Workers, and not Believers;
thou make Faith void, and the Promise to them which do believe of none
effect, Romans 4. 14. by which it is evident, that thou gatherest not in the Name
of Christ, nor with Christ; and therefore art no true and right Gatherer, but a
scatterer abroad; thou art not with Christ, but against him, and art led by the
spirit of Antichrist.

Jerusalem, I affirm against thee, that there is no Salvation in any other but
in Jesus Christ, and him crucified for the sins of the world; and that by the
merit of his Death, and by the power of his Resurrection, done and acted out of
every other man, and in his own Person, is Justification and Salvation, to be
obtained through Faith, Romans 5. 10. For there was a necessity that Christ
should suffer, and rise again the third day, for the Justification of all them
that believe in him, Luke 24. from ver. 22. to 48. And they which do not know
this, know nothing at all, as even Caiaphas the high Priest does declare, as it
is written, John 11. 49. etc. And one of them named Caiaphas being high Priest
that same year, said unto them, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is
expedient for us that one man should dye for tho People, and that the whole
Nation perish not: and this he spoke not of himself, bu^ being high Priest that
year, he Prophesie^ that Jesus stould dye for that Nation, an^ not for that
Nation only, but also that h^ should gather together in one, the Children of
God that were scattered abroad. Behold, how ignorant they are that know not
tha^ Jesus Christ ought to suffer death for the People, which else had all
perished, and had all remained scattered, had not he gathered together in one
the Children of God that were scattered abroad; as verse 50, 51, 52. The loyal
high Priest did Prophecy much better, than these pretended Preachers up of the
Light within, etc.

Heb. 9. 15, 22. and 10. 10. So that it is no other offering, but that of Jesus
Christ once offered, through which sinful man by Repentance and by Faith in him
can have Salvation; it is not a Christ offered daily, as the Papists teach; for
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world. But now
according to the Apostles Doctrine, Once in the end of the world has he
appeared, to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and it is appointed for
all men once to die, but after this the Judgment; So Christ was once Offered,
to bear the sins of ma^y; and unto them that look for him shall he appear the
second time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 26, 27, 28. Who his own self
bore our sins in his own Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. even in that very Body
which he had prepared him, Heb. 10. 5. which was born of the Virgin called
Mary, Mat. 1. 18. that mortal visible Woman which was espoused to that
particular man called Joseph, which Child the Wise men came to see, Mat. 2. 11.
who was Circumcised the eight day, Luke 2. 21. that very Child Jesus which
Herod sought to destroy, but was prevented of his purpose by his flight into
Egypt, according as Joseph and his Mother were directed by the Angel; who about
the thirtieth year of his age was Baptized of John the Baptist, in that
external River called Jordan, Mat. 3. 15. upon whom the Spirit of God did
visibly descend; who walked up and down in the Land of Judea, Samaria and
Galilee, in the City of Jerusalem, and in diverse other Cities and Places
thereunto belonging, doing good, working Miracles, healing them which were
outwardly lame, and inwardly oppressed of the Devil; for God was with him, Acts
10. 38, 39, 40. Notwithstanding Judas did betray him with a Kiss, and sold him
for thirty pieces of Silver; whom the Rulers and high Priests did take and
judge, and hanged him upon a Tree without the Gates of the City Jerusalem;
whose side was pierced with a Spear, out of which came blood and water, as it
is written, John 19. 34, 35. And he that saw it bore Record, and his Record is
true, and he knows that he says true, that ye might believe; whom Joseph of
Arimathea begged, and took down from the Cross, and laid him in his own
Sepulcher in a Garden, ver. 38. 42. over whom the Rulers set a Watch;
notwithstanding which God raised him from the dead the third day, and loosed
the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be holden of it,
Acts 2. 24. which to keep from being known, the high Priests gave to the
Watchmen money, to say that his Disciples came by night while they slept and
stole him away, Mat. 27. 66. and 28. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Which very Jesus did
first appear to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven Devils, Mark 16.
9. and next unto his Disciples in the place where he had appointed them to meet
him, who was with them for the space of forty days, speaking to them the
things appertaining to the Kingdom of God, giving Commandments through the Holy
Spirit unto the Apostles whom he had chosen, Acts 1. 1, 2, 3. Yea, this very
man Christ Jesus is he that gave himself for our sins, that he might bring us
to God, Call. 1. 4. 1 Peter 3. 18. that washed the Congregation of the faithful,
Rev. 1. 5. from their sins in his own blood; that made Peace through the blood
of his Cross, and Reconciliation in the Body of his flesh through Death, Col.
1. 20, 21, 22. which death he tasted for every man, Heb. 2. 9. and gave himself
a Ransom for all to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 6. yea, God was in that
one man Christ Jesus, Reconconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, but made him to be sin, who knew no sin, that men that
were sinners, might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.
So that only in this man Christ Jesus is Salvation, neither is there Salvation
in any other, for there is none other Name under heaven given among men whereby
we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. and this is he that whosoever believes in, shall
receive remission of sins, Acts 10. 43. and in whose Name Repentance and
Remission of sin should be Preached among All Nations, Luke 24. 47. But,

That all men should mind the Light which is within them, do deny the Christ
of God which dyed at Jerusalem, because thou have said to me, when I have made
as large a confession of Christ as I now have done, That I am Ignorant of
Christ, etc. Now, if I be charged that I am Ignorant of Christ, when and at
such a time as I have declared and testified of him according to the
Scriptures, it does evidently appear, that thou do not own this Christ which
I here confess; and thou do hereby plainly declare, that he whom thou
acknowledgest to be Christ, is not this Christ; and therefore he must needs be
Antichrist, and thou art led by the spirit of him.

Jerusalem, because thou do not teach persons to believe, that by that very
death of Christ which he suffered truly and visibly at Jerusalem, out of all
other men, and in his own body, is the Reconciliation of the world unto God,
Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 19. and because thou do not teach, that that
Righteousness which was done and fulfilled in that one Body of Christ, and out
of the bodies of all other men, is that which Men and Women should only look
upon as the meritorious cause whereby they are made Righteous before God
through faith, as the instrumental cause thereof; but thou (like the Jews, Romans
10. 3.) being ignorant of Gods Righteousness and going about to establish thine
own Righteousness, have not submitted thy self unto the Righteousness of God.
But I say and testify in the Lord, that all Righteousness whatsoever below or
on this side that Righteousness, which was brought forth and fulfilled in that
one body of the flesh of that one Man Christ Jesus that died at Jerusalem, will
never make Reconciliation to God for one sinner; yea, it will fall short of
doing that Office, and cease for ever of being the Righteousness of Life.
Neither is it as thou teach (that call thy self a Preacher of the Light,
etc.) in the Justification of a sinner before God, viz. by the Works of the
Law, or by following the Light within; for they both will condemn, not
justify: but a poor sinner stands justified before God, freely by his Grace
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare His Righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past through the forbearance of God. See Romans 3. 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. But this Doctrine of Justification by the Grace of God
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, unto, and upon all them that
believe, whose Faith is imputed to them for Righteousness, and whose iniquities
are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; Thou art a stranger unto, which
notwithstanding is the Doctrine of the Apostle Paul, Romans 3. 22. and Romans 4. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Self must be denied, and Self-Righteoushess, which is of the Law; yea, when
men have done all whatsoever they are commanded, they are then to say with
humble hearts, they have done but what was their duty, and that they are
unprofitable servants. I say, to deny our selves, and self-righteousness,
accounting it but dung, that we may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having
our own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith
of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith: this is the way to true
blessedness, as the Apostle teaches, Philip. 3. 8, 9. But this laying low
Self, and only resting upon Christ by Faith thou can not away with;
therefore thou art in Self-exaltation in the highest degree, only thou coverest
this with a fair pretense, by putting pretended Sin-deniall for Self-denial;
and hereby is many a poor Soul miserably deceived by thee: but thus says the
Word of the Lord, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh
be justified in his sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of Sin. And Gal. 3.
10, 11. For a many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it
is written, Cursed is every one that continuetb not in All things that are
written in the Book of the Law to do them. But that no man is justified by the
Law in the sight of God, it is evident; for the Just shall live by Faith.
Behold, says the Prophet, Hab^k. 2. 4. His Soul that is lifted up, is not
upright in him; but the Just shall live by Faith.

a Zeal of God, yet it is not according to Knowledge: for thou say so far
only as the Creature is brought out of the filth of this World, and to leave
sin, so far only is he justified before God; whereas the Scripture says, Romans
4. 5, 6, 7. But to him that Works not, but Believes on him that justifies
the Ungodly, his Faith is counted to him for Righteousness; even as David also
describes the Blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes Righteousness
without Works, saying, Blessed are they whose Iniquities are Forgiven, and
whose Sins, are Covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not Impute
Sin. So that God justifies the Creature while it is in its Sins, in its Blood,
Ezekiel. 16. 6. by the pardon thereof, upon Repentance and Believing the Gospel,
which Believing is Imputed to us for Righteousness, as it is written, Romans 4.
3. Abraham Believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness: And
although Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts
20. 21. be requisite in order to every Sinners Justification; yet is
Justification an Act of God, Romans 8. 33. whereby he freely by his Grace,
through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ, does acquit from guilt of Sin
the Repentant Believer, not Imputing his Sins to him, and accounting his Faith
to him for Righteousness, See Romans 3. 23, 24, 25, 26. Yea, to Believe as a
Sinner, while under the guilt of Sin, and thereby liable to the wrath of God,
Romans 3. 19. Gal. 3. 10. Ephesians. 2. 3. that God has received such absolute
Satisfaction by the Sufferings of Jesus Christ in his own Body upon the Cross,
without the Gate of Jerusalem; That he that Repents and Believes the Gospel,
is wholly acquitted, his debt discharged fully and freely through his Blood;
this is the way to be justified before God: So that the main ground and reason
why we that Believe, should be holy in all manner of Conversation, in this
present evil World, is, because we are not our own, but are bought with a
price, even with the precious Blood of Jesus Christ: Therefore ought we to
Glorify him in our Bodies and in our Spirits, which are his, 1 Cor. 6. 20. And
so ought we to live to him, that dyed for us, and rose again, etc. 2 Cor. 5.
15. That seeing Christ dyed for our sins, we ought not to live in them, but to
die to that which he dyed for; and as he was Crucified for our Iniquities, So
they that are Christ's, do Crucify the Flesh, with the affections and lusts;
lest they join with his Enemies, and provoke his anger against them; and as the
Apostle Peter teaches, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. As obedient Children, not fashioning
your selves according to the former lusts in your Ignorance, but as he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation; Because
it is written, Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy, Levit. 19. 2. But,

Christ's free Reconciliation of Sinners to God by his Death, out of, and
without themselves; and of Gods Justification of the Ungodly, by the Remission
of their Sins upon Repentance and Faith: It appears, that with the
Highpriests, Elders and Scribes of the Law, Acts 4. 5, 6, 10. the Preachers up
of the Light within, do set at naught that precious and tried Stone, which is
the Head of the Corner, and the Foundation of all Generations that shall be
Saved; yea that Rock of Ages upon which the Congregation of the Faithful are
built; which is not the Rock of these Legallists, their Preachings and
Printings being Witnesses; see Deuteronomy. 32. 31. For in as much as the Light
within, is no other than the work of the Law written in the hearts of the
Gentiles, Romans 2. 14, 15. It is evident, that these Preachers, are Preachers of
the Law, not of the Gospel; to which with those Jews and Greeks mentioned, 1
Cor. 1. 23. they are such Adversaries, that the Preaching of Christ Crucified,
is to them both a Stumbling Block and Foolishness, while unto them which are
Called, Christ is the Power of God and the Wisdom of God. Oh how great and
glorious is the Power of God in the work of Redemption, by the Sufferings of
Jesus Christ! Oh the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of
God, which the proud in Spirit know not, as the Prophet David teaches, Psalm.
11 4. The Wicked through the pride of his Countenance, will not seek after God,
God is not in all his thoughts; but as says the same Prophet, Psalm. 69. 32.
The humble shall see this and be glad; and your heart shall live that seek God.

Gal. 3. 10 That as Christ teaches concerning the penetant Publican, Luke 18.
10. thinking themselves not worthy to lift up their eyes to Heaven, do smite
their breasts, saying, God be merciful to us Sinners; while the proud Pharisee
rejoicing in himself, and in his own Righteousness of the Law, (like those that
now Preach up the Light within) exalts himself, saying, God I thank thee, I
am not as other men are, Extortioners Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this
Publican. Oh with what affection does the Repentant Believer receive Jesus
Christ! Oh how precious is the Blood of Sprinkling to him! Heb. 12. 24. Which
the proud Legalist, Pharisee, Papist, and pretended Preacher up of the Light
within, do trample under their feet.

Water is to a thirsty Land, Psalm. 143. 6. or to the panting Heart, Psalm. 42. 1.
which being at the point of death, except it be refreshed by the Water Brooks,
does expire; So is it with the poor Believer, who finding himself beset on
every side, with the guilt and burden of his Sins, which he not able to bear,
flees from, but is still pursued with the guilt thereof, until he meets with
Christ, who sets him free from the guilt, and takes away the burden of his
Sins, gives him assurance of peace with God, through the Satisfaction which he
has made to his Justice, by the Sacrifice of himself for all his sins that are
past; and requiring this late lost Creature now to follow him, he brings him
to his Fathers house, makes him a Son of God by Adoption, and gives him the
holy Spirit, whereby he may both know that God is his Father, and be enabled to
serve him in newness of spirit; promises him that his Grace shall be
sufficient for him, to relieve him in all his Temptations in this world, and
that by his Mediation with God, he will so secure him from the Calumnious
Accusations of Satan, that he sh^^l not be able to lay any thing to his Charge
in the Court of Heaven; and now requiring him to be faithful to the death,
assures him that he will give him the Crown of life. Oh what glorious Grace is
this! O^ h^w is he that was Sentenced to death, and pursued with the
Executioners thereof (meeting with Jesus Christ, and being by him not only
delivered from the power of his Pu^suers, but also entitled to Everlasting
Life) refreshed and comforted! who is able to express the consolation of the
water of Life, John 4. 10. which Jesus Christ gives to refresh the fainting
Spirits of those he meets with, that while they flee from sin, are pursued with
the Law, Sin and Death, and are never able by all the strength they have, to
deliver themselves from the power of those their Enemies, until Jesus Christ
interpose with the might of his power, and relieve them by his grace;
delivering the poor broken in spirit, that are pursued with the guilt power and
wages of Sin, from the Law, Sin and Death, speaking peace to them in the pardon
of their sins, sprinkling his Blood upon their spirits to cleanse them from the
guilt thereof; and giving them the holy Spirit, John 7. 37, 38, 39. to
strengthen them against the Reigning power of Sin, and thereby intituling them
to life Everlasting, and to the deliverance from the wages of Sin, which is
Everlasting Death.

Light within all men, as that which (though it be but the work of the Law,
Romans 2. 15.) is sufficient in the opinion of these followers of the Romish
Synagogue, to lead out of all Sin, and eternally to save; and therefore
contrary to the practice of the Apostles, who direct unto Christ all the weary
and heavy laden with sin; with, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the
Sins of the World, John 1. 29. These Messengers of Satan, lead all such as
follow them from Christ to themselves, setting up themselves under pretense of
the Light within, and rejecting that which is indeed the Light, viz. the Word
of the Prophets, of Christ, and of his Apostles, 2 Pet. 1. 19. which is written
in the Scriptures of Truth, Dan. 10. 21. they set up that which is indeed the
Darkness of this world, the Traditions of men, the Doctrines of the Romish
Harlot, and other Adversaries to the Doctrine of the Gospel, which they deliver
by word of mouth, and disperse in their written Books and Pamphlets.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is showed, That the Doctrine of these that call themselves Preachers
of, and to the Light within all men, is not according to the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, expressed in the Scriptures of Truth, neither concerning the Person of
Christ, nor the Father, Son and Spirit; nor the Light, nor the Ordinances of
Christ, nor the Resurrection of the Dead, nor the Coming of Christ, nor the End
of the World: Also the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, as it relates
to these Particulars, is here manifested.

Light which is within all men; is, That thy Doctrine is not according to the
Doctrine of the Scriptures, neither concerning the Conception of Jesus Christ,
nor the Divine Being of the Father, Son and Spirit, nor the Light, nor the
Ordinances of Christ nor the Resurrection of the Dead, nor the Coming of
Christ, nor the End of the World; and therefore thou art led by the Spirit of
Antichrist.

by virtue of the Holy Spirit, his coming upon, and the Power of the Highest
his overshadowing that visible woman called Mary, that that man Christ Jesus
was conceived of the Holy Spirit, and made of the Woman without her knowing of
man; and that he is the only begotten Son of God, both according to the Spirit
of Holiness, Romans 1. 3, 4. and also as he is a man of flesh and bones; and that
there is none, nor can be any, that is the Son of God in that sense, that that
God-man Christ Jesus, was, and is the Son of God, from and to all Eternity,
according to the Spirit of Holiness; and also in the fullness of time according
to the flesh, Gal. 4. 4. I say, because thou do not own this Person, which I
here speak of, to be the only begotten Son of God, and no other but he in all
the world beside; Therefore thou art deceived, and art a Deceiver; for thou
say not, that the flesh and bones humane, Soul and Spirit of that man, which
was born of Mary the Virgin, in Personal unity with the Divine Nature, the Son
of God according to the Spirit of Holiness, is the Christ; but thou making no
mention of the humane Nature, that which thou call the Christ is the Seed,
Spirit or Light, in that man which was born of Mary; which Seed according to
its measure is also in all men, and is Christ as well as it, according to thy
Doctrine: Now though it ought not to be denied, that the Spirit of Holiness in
that Person which was born of Mary, is the Son of God by eternal Generation;
yet it ought to be acknowledged, that the humane Nature also of that Person
which was born of Mary, is the Son of God by temporal Generation; and yet there
are not two Christ's, but one, for as much as the Spirit of Holiness, and the
humane Nature, is one in Personallity; and the Apostle Paul teaches to this
effect, 1. Tim. 2. 5. For there is (says he) one God, and one Mediator between
God and man, the man Christ Jesus; who is indeed both God and man in one
Person, and so is no other Person in the whole world beside him, see Gal. 3.
20. Mat. 16. 13, 16, 17. So that if the Spirit of Holiness only in that man
which was born of Mary, is the Son of God, and the Christ which dyed; then it
follows, that the Son of God according to the Spirit of Holiness dyed, which is
contrary to the Scripture, 1 Pet. 3. 18. which teaches, that Christ was put to
Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; which at his death he yielded
up, Mat. 27. 50. with the Spirit of his humane Nature, which he commended into
the hands of his Father, Luke 23. 46. And if this be the Opinion of all that
Preach up the Light within, etc. viz. That the Spirit of Holiness in that man
which was born of Mary, is only the Christ, and not the flesh and bones humane,
soul and spirit; then they must hold, either that Christ dyed not, or that the
Godhead dyed, which is Blasphemy against the eternal Being of the Father, Son,
and Spirit, which though three in Person and Office, yet are one Divine and
Eternal Essence, and independent Being, see 1 John 5. 8.

John 2. 22, 23. Who is a liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ; he
is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son; for no man knows the
Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27.
Therefore according to the Apostles Doctrine, Acts 2. 36. Let all the House of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus which they crucified
at Jerusalem, by the Sentence of Pontius Pilate the Governor, both Lord and
Christ: And as the blessed Apostle John teaches, 1 John 4. 1, 2, 3. Let us not
believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are of God, because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world; hereby know ye the Spirit of God,
every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God;
and every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God; and this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that
it should come, and even now already it is in the World. Now as it is manifest,
that to confess Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is rightly to confess his
Person and Office, and rightly to confess his Doctrine; So it is apparent, that
many profess so to do, and yet come far short thereof: There is a vast
difference between the Servants of Christ, and the Subjects of Antichrist: When
the Jews sent Priests and Levites to John, to ask him, who art thou? he
confessed, and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ, John 1. 19, 20.
But on the contrary, Christ himself testifies concerning the Deceivers of the
last times, Mat. 24. 5. saying. Many shall come in my name, saying, I am
Christ, and shall deceive many. What do they less, that being demanded Who is
the Christ, direct not the Inquirer to the true Christ, as John did, with
Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World, John 1. 29.
but contrariwise unto themselves, under pretense of a Light within all men, to
hear their Doctrine of Falsehood, and receive their spirit of Delusion; what do
they less than say, I am Christ, which say, I speak to the Light in thy
Conscience, which shall eternally witness Me: Me, what mean they by this word
Me which they say is eternally to be witnessed? Is there any thing that is
eternally to be witnessed or acknowledged, but the Eternal God, and his
Everlasting Son Jesus Christ, who is according to his Eternal Spirit without
beginning and without end? As for themselves, are they any other than mortal
sinful Creatures, that not only transgress Gods righteous Law, but also despise
the glorious Gospel of his dear Son Jesus Christ, whose Promises they embrace
not, whose Commandments they keep not, whose Threatenings they fear not, and
whose blessed Person they acknowledge not? Do they confess the Person of
Christ? Do they confess him to be come in the Flesh, that only say he is come
into their Flesh, a base Nothingless. John says in his Gospel, Chap. 1. 30.
This is he of whom I said, after me comes a man which is preferred before me.
But how do these Blasphemers prefer Christ before themselves, that distinguish
not his Person from their own, and apply that which belongs to his Person unto
theirs, that reject his Doctrine of Salvation, and set up their own Delusion of
Destruction, that contemning the threefold Office of Christ, King, Priest and
Prophet, in direct opposition to it, exalt and set up an inherent Righteousness
of the Law, which they endeavor to maintain, that all men may attain unto by
following the Light within them, which is no other than the Works of the Law,
as has been showed from Romans 2. 15. And the Apostle teaches, Gal. 2. 21. That
if Righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. So that
according to the Apostles Doctrine, Christ's Priestly Office, whereby he was a
Sacrifice for the Sins of the World, is made void by those that set up a
Righteousness of the Law. And if we consider of what nature a Law-Righteousness
is, which, according to the Apostles Description, Gal. 3. 12. is not of Faith,
but the man that does them shall live in them: Christ in all his Offices, yea,
and in his humane nature also, which is his Coming in the Flesh, is made void
and of none effect; for, if Righteousness be attainable by the Law, or by
following the Light within, which is the work thereof; then as the Death of
Christ is in vain, so is also his Coming in the Flesh, his taking hold of the
Seed of Abraham in the womb of the blessed Virgin, his taking part of Flesh and
Blood, Heb. 2. 14, 15. 16. Being for no other end but that through death he
might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil; and deliver
them who through fear of death, were all their lives time subject to bondage.

he offered himself to God an unspotted Sacrifice to put away Sin, and that
Body which was prepared him for that purpose, Heb. 9. 14, 26. and Heb. 10. 5.
is denied by these Legallists that exhort all men to look only into the Light
within, the work of the Law written in their hearts for their direction unto
Righteousness; so also is the Prophetic Office of Christ made useless by them;
for, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. Acts 3. 22, 23, Moses truly said unto the
Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren
like unto me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto
you; And it shall come to pass, that every Soul which will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People. But do these Seducers hear
him in all things whatsoever he has said? Do they teach men so to do? No, no,
it is far from them: Do they hear him that has said, Mark 7. 21. From within
out of the heart of men, proceed evil Thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications,
Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit, Lasciviousness, an evil
Eye, Blasphemy, Pride, and Foolishness? that say there is such a Light within
all men that will lead them out of all Sin and Iniquity, and eternally save
them if they sink down to it, and are guided by it? Where has Christ the great
Prophet taught as these men of Belial teach? When Christ met him whose eyes he
had opened, John 9. 35. He said unto him, do thou believe on the Son of God?
And when the man answered and said, Who is he Lord that I might believe on him?
Jesus said unto him, thou have both seen him, and it is he that talks with
thee. But how do these pretended Preachers up of the Light direct men unto
Christ, that making no clear description of his Person, do only advise all men
to turn into a so called Light within them, which as the Lord has taught, Mat.
6. 23. is great Darkness? If, says he, the Light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness? And is not great darkness in them, that have no
light? And who those are the Prophet shows, Isa. 8. 20. To the Law, and to the
Testimony (says he) if they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no Light in them. But do these boasters of Light, that walk in
darkness, go to the Law, and to the Testimony of Jesus? Do they hear Him in all
that he has said there? nay, do they hear him in any thing that he has there
spoken? Is their Repentance such as he requires? Do they confess their sins,
and pray for mercy for them? They are heard, it may be, with the proud
Pharisee, to say, God, I thank thee, I am not as other men: but which of them
has been heard to say, God be merciful to me, a Sinner? Do they mourn for
their transgressions, that seldom or never confess them? Do they forsake sin,
that are servants of sin; that not only do despise the Gospel of the Grace of
God, but also Blaspheme his Name, his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in
Heaven? Are these selfexalters captivated into their Curses? Is it through
infirmity of their flesh, and against the law of their spirits, that they
thunder out their Anathema's, like the Popes Bulls against the Worshippers of
God, and the Followers of the Lamb? And as it is evident, that they which do
not believe in Christ, do abide in darkness, John 12. 46. So it is apparent,
that he which hates his Brother is in the same condition, as John teaches in
his first Epist. 2. 9. He (says he) that says he is in the Light, and hates
his Brother, is in Darkness: but contrariwise, he that loves his Brother,
abides in the Light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. But how
can they say, they love their Brethren, that give them occasion to stumble at
the Word, that Pure Word which is laid in Sion for a foundation, at which they
stumble, and thereby give occasion to others to stumble by their example? See
Romans 9. 32. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Can they say, they love those whom they delude, and
being blind themselves, lead others that are blind also into the pit of
destruction? Matthew. 15. 14. unto whom, instead of giving direction and
encouragement, by their Doctrine and Example, to confess Jesus Christ come in
the flesh: they do the direct contrary, neither making confession of the
Person, Office, or Administrations of Christ: not his Person, not his Divine
and Humane Natures, personally united, and personally distinguished from the
persons of all other men; but a Light within all men they extol. Not his
Office of High Priest, to offer the Sacrifice of Himself for the sins of the
World, and to give Peace to all that believe in his Name, by the remission of
their sins: Of a Prophet, to teach: Of a King, to rule and govern. But a Light
within all men, which though it be but the work of the Law, is exalted, and the
only Name under Heaven given among men, whereby they must be saved, is thrown
down: What he is, what he has done, what he has taught, is not regarded; his
Promises are not embraced, his Threatenings are not feared, his Commandments are
not obeyed; yea, the main reason and ground why the holy Ordinances of Baptism
in Water, Prayer, and Laying on of Hands, and Breaking of Bread, etc, is denied
by those that teach all People to be guided by the Light within them, is,
because they contemn Jesus Christ that gave commandment to administer those his
holy Appointments; and despising his Doctrine, they exalt their own Delusion:
His Word they will not hear; his Work they will not do, but have walked after
the Imaginations of their own heart, Jer. 9. 14. teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9.

of the Faith of Jesus Christ, any Confessor of him to be come in the flesh,
did deny the Baptism of a repentant Believer in Water, in the Name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sins: which is an Ordinance of so great authority,
that although there has been some difference among Professors about the manner
of Administration thereof, yet few or none have ever been heard to question the
Ordinance it self, till now of late; and it being appointed for so excellent
uses, as not only to signify the Burial and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, but
also the Fellowship of every true Believer in his Death, which he dyed unto sin
once, Romans 6. 10. that so they may be in his Resurrection also, Romans 6. 5, 6,
7, 8, 9. to live unto God; that sin reigning not in their mortal bodies in this
life, they may in their bodies, souls and spirits reign with Christ in the life
which is to come. It must needs therefore be concluded, that those that deny
this blessed Appointment of Jesus Christ, do also deny him to be come in the
flesh: as also, all benefit that Believers do and shall obtain by the
sufferings of Christ in the body of his flesh through death, Col. 1. 22. and
that are obtainable through his grace, in their conforming themselves to his
will, in submitting to this his Appointment. And forasmuch as the pretended
Preachers up of the Light within, do usually call the Baptism of Believers in
Water, though it be administered in the Name of Jesus Christ, a carnal thing, a
shadow without substance, empty, useless, low, and such a thing as God is gone
out of, etc. Is it not evident that they think as meanly of him that sent his
Servants to Baptize with Water, Joh. 1. 33. Mark 16. 15, 16. Acts 10. 47, 48.
as they do of Baptism in Water? What esteem have they of the Person of Christ,
that have none of his Commandment? Of what value is the Coming of Christ in
the flesh, his Death, Burial, and Resurrection, with those that despise his
Doctrine, and that blessed Appointment of his, which not only sets forth the
Burial and Resurrection of Christ, but also the Virtue and Efficacy thereof
upon Believers, as is abundantly taught in the Scriptures: Therefore, says the
Apostle, Romans 6. 4. We are buried with him by Baptism into death; that like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; even so we also
should walk in newness of life. So likewise, Col. 2. 12. Buried with him by
Baptism into death, wherein also you are risen with him, through the Faith of
the operation of God, who raised him from the dead. And the blessed Apostle
Peter, in his first Epistle, Chap. 3. 21, 22. speaking of the efficacy of
Baptism upon true Believers, teaches us to understand, that it consists not
in the bare putting away of the filth of the flesh, as the Jewish Baptisms did,
Heb. 9. 9, 10. but it being administered in the Name of a greater High Priest,
than he whose descent is from Aaron; the effect is greater than the effect of
those Legal washings, or carnal Ordinances, which the Apostle excellently
expresses in these words, viz. Not the putting away the filth of the flesh,
but the answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead; who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God;
Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him. And the same
Apostle, according to the wisdom given unto him of God, answered those Jews,
that being pricked in their hearts, Act. 2. 37, 38. said unto him, and to the
rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? when he said unto
them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ,
for the Remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit. Is
the conscience of any man good while it remains defiled with the guilt of sin?
Tit. 1. 15. And has the Lord appointed Baptism in Water in his Name (Acts 10.
47, 48.) to signify unto penitent Believers the Remission of their sins? that
being planted together in the likeness of his Death, which is unto Sin, they
might be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6. 5, 14. Whence then
is that spirit that forbids Water for the Baptism of the repentant Believer in
the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of his sins? He that is of God,
says Christ, hears Gods Words. Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are
not of God, Joh. 8. 47. When the Lord had anointed the eyes of the man that was
born blind, Joh. 9. 6, 7. he said unto him, Go wash in the Pool of Siloam,
(which is by interpretation, Sent) he went his way therefore and washed, and
came seeing. O what riches of grace does every true Believer receive of Jesus
Christ in their becoming obedient to his Word! This man had not only his Eyes
opened, which never yet had seen, but he was made one of the Disciples of
Christ, one of the adopted Sons of God. And what greater envy and malice can
Satan and his Instruments express against God and man, than to endeavor to
hinder men from doing that which God has commanded, that so they may not enjoy
that which he has promised. When Sergius Paulus desired to hear the Word of
God of Barnabas and Saul, Elimas the Sorcerer withstood them, seeking to turn
away the Deputy from the Faith. Unto whom Act. 13. 3.
Paul said, O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou child of the Devil,
thou enemy of all Righteousness, Will thou not cease to pervert the right ways
of the Lord? And as this wicked man did endeavor to shut the eyes of the
understanding of the Governor, that he should not see the light of the
knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 4. 5, 6.
So was he justly punished by the hand of the Lord with such blindness, that
he was not able to see the Sun; for a mist and darkness fell on him, and he
went about seeking some to lead him by the hand. A great punishment. But his
sin was great, he sought to turn away a man from the Faith; unto which, as the
Apostle Peter teaches, God Act. 15. 7, 8, 9.
bore witness among the Gentiles, and gave to them the holy Spirit, purifying
their hearts by Faith. And, as Paul teaches, He that believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his Faith is counted to him for Righteousness; he is
one of those blessed men to whom God will not impute sin; who being justified
by Faith, has peace with God through Jesus Christ; access by faith unto Grace,
and rejoices in hope of the glory of God, having Redemption through the blood
Romans 1. 1 2, 3, 4, 6.
of Christ, the Forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his Grace,
Ephesians. 1. 7. And this is that new and living Way which Christ has consecrated
for us through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. For he himself
by walking in that way, wherein he requires every true Believer to follow him,
has consecrated it a way of Salvation; for wherefore was he Baptized but to
consecrate the way of Baptism to all Believers as himself testified, when John
refused to Baptize him, Mat. 3 13, 14, 15. Saying I have need to be Baptized of
thee, and come thou to me; suffer it says he to be so now, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness? Therefore Baptism in Water in the Name
of Jesus Christ, is unto the Repentant Believer, the way of Salvation, because
Christ has walked therein to make it ^o: he was Baptized that knew no sin,
that the Repenting Sinner might be baptized in his Name for the Remission of
Sin: and as the Sinner draws nigh to God by Repentance, Faith, and Baptism; so
Christ draws nigh to the Sinner by his Grace; for as the Sinner comes to be
washed in his body with pur^ water, so he comes to be sprinkled in hi^ heart or
spirit with the blood of Christ, from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10. 22. For
Christ came (says John) by water and blood, no^ by water only, but by water
and blood; an^ it is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is
truth: For there are three tha^ bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the holy Spirit, and these thre^ are one: And there are three that bea^
Record in Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, und these three agree in
one: I^ we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this
is the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son, 1 John 5. 6, 7, 8.
And as the Grace of God is exceeding great in giving to every true Believer
assurance of acceptance with him, by the witness of his own Spirit, Romans 8. 16.
through the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 18. signified in Baptism; so it
must needs be great Impiety in any man to gainsay that holy Commandment which
he has appointed as a means, whereby repenting Believers do draw nigh unto
him, Heb. 10. 22. and as an evidence of his accepting them for his Children,
Gal. 3. 26, 27. the which further to assure to them that ask him, Luke 11. 13.
he gives the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they are enabled to cry, Abba,
Father, Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6.

Jews, Acts 7. 51, 52, 53. who, though they received the Law by the disposition
of Angels, kept it not; and though the Gospel be the Power of God unto
Salvation, unto every one that believes; being that wherein the Righteousness
of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1. 16, 17. yet did they not obey
it, Romans 10. 17. Even so these their Followers, finding the work of the Law
written in their hearts, Romans 2. 15. this they extol and admire, but never did
any of them walk according to it; for, as says the Apostle, Romans 3. 23. All
have sinned and come short of the glory of God; and although there be no way to
take away their sins, but that new and living way of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, which he has consecrated for that purpose, by which he not only
promises Peace and Salvation Everlasting, but gives also the earnest and
assurance thereof unto them that seek it in the way that he has appointed, in
the word of the Gospel; yet will not these stiff-necked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears obey the Gospel, but do always resist the holy Spirit, like
their Fathers; for that they may show their utter enmity and contempt of the
Gospel, and of the precious Promises of Grace declared therein, that they may
deter Believers from seeking the gift of God, the holy Spirit, that they may
hinder it as much as in them lies, not only the Evidence that every Believer
may have of his Adoption or Sonship; but also that assistance of the Spirit of
God whereby he may be enabled to war a good warfare; yea, that they may take
men off from seeking Righteousness by the Gospel, and set up the Law for
Justification; as if their own strength, and the Light within all men, were
sufficient to render the Power of God, whereby Believers are kept through faith
unto Salvation, of no effect; that Principle of the Doctrine of Christ, viz.
Prayer, and Laying of Hands on Baptized Believers, for the obtaining the gift
of the holy Spirit, is by the Preachers up of the Light within, etc. as other
Ordinances of the New Testament, reproached and despised; but Oh how fierce is
their anger! how cruel is their wrath against the People of God, that contemn
and vilify the practice of that duty of Prayer, and laying on of hands, which
is performed for so holy and spiritual an end; as the obtaining the gift of the
holy Spirit, promised of God to those that repent, and are baptized in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, Acts 2. 38. Gal. 3. 14. Luke 11. 13.
given of God to those that did obey him, Act. 5. 31, 32. to witness unto them
the forgiveness of their sins to be the earnest of their Inheritance, the seal
of Salvation, until the Redemption of the purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1. 13,
14. to be such an assistant unto Believers, which they cannot obtain by the
works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 2. and whereby they may
be enabled so to walk, that they shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal.
5. 16. Yea, so exceeding great and precious is the Promise, and so powerful is
the assistance of the Spirit promised, that thereby Believers may be made
partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. their infirmities may be helped in
Prayer, Romans 8. 26. they may have all things brought to their remembrance, be
led into all Truth, and showed the things that are to come, Joh. 16. 13. Joh.
14. 26. which Promise of the Spirit was obtained by Prayer, and Laying on of
hands by the Apostles, in behalf of the Samaritans, Act. 8. 15, 16, 17. by a
certain Disciple in behalf of Saul, Act. 9. 10, 17. by Paul in behalf of the
Ephesians, Acts 19. 6. by certain Prophets and Teachers in the Church at
Antioch in behalf of Barnabas and Saul, to assist them in the work of their
Ministry, Acts 13. 1, 2, 3. by the Apostles in behalf of the seven Deacons, to
fit them for their service, Acts 6. 5, 6. by the Presbytery or company of
Elders in behalf of Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and also by Paul himself, 2 Timothy 1.
6. in order to his obtaining the gift of the holy Spirit to assist him, both as
a Disciple and Minister of Jesus Christ: So that all that believe in Jesus
Christ may safely conclude, that Prayer and laying on of hands, is a Principle
of his Doctrine, which he himself was not far from the practice of upon those
he sent out to Preach among all Nations Repentance and Remission of sins, when
having first said unto them, Behold, I send the Promise of my Father upon you;
and having led them out as far as Bethany, in order to his parting from them,
and ascending up into Heaven, He lift up his hands and blessed them, Luke 24.
49, 50. Yea, so ancient and authentic is the practice of seeking the blessing
from God, by lifting up, and laying on of hands, (for hands are not to be laid
on, except they be first lifted up; and therefore the Prayer of Faith is a main
part of this Ministration) That Jacob when he blessed the Children of Joseph,
He laid his hands upon them, Genesis 47. 14, 16. Moses by the Command of the Lord,
laid his hands upon Joshua in order to his being filled with the Spirit, and
thereby fitted for his Charge of going in and out before the Congregation of
Israel, Numb. 27. 22, 23. Deuteronomy. 34. 9. And the Lord Christ himself when he
blessed those little ones which were brought unto him, He put or laid his hands
upon them, Mark 10. 13, 14, 15. Matthew. 19. 13, 14, 15. Now what man or men can
say, that this is a dead practice, which the Lord of Life and Glory, and his
holy Prophets and Apostles practiced without blasphemy against Jesus Christ,
yea, against God the Father? Can any man revile that practice of Prayer and
laying on of hands, which (as has been showed) was used according to the
direction of Christ, and for no other end, than for the obtaining the Spirit of
Promise, which is the ^arnest of the Inheritance of all Believers, Ephesians. 1.
13, 14. and not thereby deny his Word? How can they say they love him, that
keep not his sayings? He (says Christ) that loves me not, keeps not my
sayings, John 14. 24. Is not the Spirit the Seal of Righteousness by Faith?
After ye believed (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 13.) ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of Promise. This only would I learn of you (says the Apostle to
the Galatians, Gal. 3. 2, 3.) being tempted, to turn from the Righteousness
which is by Faith, to that which is of the Law, Received ye the Spirit by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? Are ye so foolish, having begun
in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh? What other reason can
truly be given why the Preachers up of the Light within all men do revile that
principle of Christ's Doctrine, but this, viz. Because the Righteousness which
they teach, is contrary to that which the holy Spirit seals? therefore they
reproach that practice, whereby Believers obtain the holy Spirit, as a seal of
their Righteousness which is by Faith, as the strength whereby they stand
steadfast in their heavenly Calling, and as the earnest and assurance of their
everlasting Inheritance: Wherefore cry they out, Turn to the Light within, Turn
to the Light within, but because their delight is in the works of the Law, not
in the hearing of Faith? Oh how pleasant is a fleshly Righteousness Romans 2. 15.
Gal. 3 5.
unto men unregenerate! which, because it is wrought by the strength of the
Creature, which, although now since the Fall, is only the strength of corrupt
flesh; yet is it cried up by fleshly and carnal men, that know not what it is
to be born of Water and of the holy Spirit, as the only Righteousness, though
it will leave them under the Curse of the Law, and never give them the blessing
of Abraham, the Promise of the Spirit, which is not to be obtained by the works
of the Law, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, through his grace, Gal. 3. 10. 14.
Romans 4. 4, 15, 16. Romans 11. 6. and in the way that he has appointed in his
Word, wherein this Service of the Prayer of Faith, with the laying on of hands,
is taught as a part of that way, which is the way of life, in which the Law of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus is found, which makes free from the Curse
of the Law, of Sin, and Death, Romans 8. 1, 2. Gal. 3. 10. and although it be
despised and contemned with other Ordinances of the New Testament, by such as,
whilst they boast of Light do walk in Darkness, yet, as a reward of whose
disobedience the mist of darkness is reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2. 17.

viz. the Lords Supper, which he celebrated with his Disciples at his departure
from them, the same night in which he was betrayed, and sanctified as a
standing Ordinance unto his Church, to evidence the breaking of his Body, the
pouring out of his Blood, with the benefit thereof unto all true Believers;
yea, to set forth his Death and bodily absence until his coming again in his
own Body, wherein he suffered upon the Cross: for this Ordinance is by the
pretended Preachers up of the Light within all men, very much reviled, and the
practice thereof, as it is used in the Churches of Christ, not only villified,
but opposed; which whether it be not done to make way for that Popish Idol of
the Mass (because in dispute about this Question, the Bread which is eaten in
the Lords Supper, was denied to be Bread made of Corn, or the Wine that is
drunk, to be the fruit of the Vine, by a Preacher up of the (so called) Light
within) And how near this Denial comes to the Harlots doctrine of
Transubstantiation, the Children of God, through his grace, will well perceive:
Sure I am, the denial of the Ordinances of Christ, manifests contempt both of
the Person and Power of Christ; and whosoever denies this Ordinance in
particular, does thereby deny that which is set forth by it, which is not only,
his Death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. but even his coming in the flesh; For therefore a
Body was prepared him, that his Body might be offered once for all, Heb. 10. 5,
10. He took part of flesh and blood, that through death he might destroy him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil, and deliver them that through
fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. The
Death of Christ being of such precious concernment unto his Church, the Lord
has in his wisdom appointed this holy Feast, which is called His Supper, to
set forth in his bodily absence his Death until his Coming again in his own
body, that so the Church might have him in remembrance, by whom they receive so
great a benefit, (1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26.) as the Remission Act. 1. 11.
of sin, of which the Cup is the New Testament in his Blood, as the Bread is
that which does show forth his Body broken and given for them, an Offering, not
like the Legal Offerings, nor like the Popish Mass, daily offered, which yet
never take away sin; But being once offered, does so take away the sins of
them, that walking in Faith, Hope and Charity, look and wait for his appearing,
that he shall appear the second time without sin unto their salvation, Heb. 9.
26, 28. It must needs therefore be a mischievious design, which is carried on
by those that contemn the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which are of so blessed
concernment to those that believe in him: It is no less than the denying of
him to be come in the flesh, to deny the Ordinances which he has appointed to
set forth what he has done in the body of his flesh; and it is as much as to
deny that ever he shall come again, to deny that Appointment which he has
ordained to be used until his second coming, or to abuse it with the Papists,
turning that into a Sacrifice Propitiatory, which Christ ordained only to
signify the Propitiatory Sacrifice of his own Body; to make that by an humane
invention of Transubstantiation, to be the very Body and Blood of Christ there
present upon their Altar, in the hand of their Priest, which Christ appointed
so signify his Body, as to show his bodily absence, the Bread being present,
his Body being at the right hand of God in the Glory of the Father: This is as
much as to deny his coming bodily; for, if his Body be present, how can his
Body be at the right hand of God? If his Body be come since his Ascension, how
can his Body be still to come? But the truth is, so great an harmony is between
the Preachers up of the Light within all men, and the Doctors of the Romish
Synagogue, that their Doctrine tends to one thing, viz. The denial of Jesus
Christ come in the flesh, of Justification by the imputation of Faith in his
Blood for Righteousness, of Remission of Sins by his Grace; of the right use
and end of his holy Ordinances; yea, to the denial of the virtue of the Death
of Christ, the essicacy of his Resurrection, and the glory of his Coming. I
shall therefore for conclusion of this Chapter, set forth, according to the
Scriptures of Truth, the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the bodies of all men,
by the power of the Resurrection of Christ; the glory of his Coming, and the
End of the World.

Tim. 1. 8, 9. 10. God (says the Apostle) has saved us, and called us with an
holy Calling, not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and
Grace, given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, but is now made
manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ; who has abolished
Death, and brought Life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel: By his
Death he has destroyed him that had the power of Death Heb. 2. 14. By his
Resurrection and Ascension in his own Body, He has led captivity captive; He
conquered the Grave and overcame it by Death; not for himself, who knew no sin,
but for the world of sinners, unto whom Death is due, as the wages of Sin, the
just reward of Iniquity, Romans 6. 23. which Death passed upon all men (excepting
Christ, who sinned not) because that all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. and are in
bondage under Sin and Death, the great enemies of the peace and comfort of
Mankind, for whose deliverance from Sin and Death Christ has dyed, and has
invited the world of sinners to repent, and believe the Gospel for the
Remission of their Sins, and their deliverance from Death, from which he will
in his due time deliver all those that believe in his Name: For he must reign
till he has put all his enemies under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 25. that the saying
that is written may come to pass, Death is swallowed up into Victory,
according to the Word of the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, chapter 13. 14. I will
ransom them from the power of the Grave, I will redeem them from Death: O
Death, I will be thy plagues, O Grave, I will be thy destruction; Repentance
shall be hid from mine eyes. And to this end Jesus Christ did give himself a
Ransom for all, and tasted Death for every man, 1 Timothy 2. 6. Heb. 2. 9. that he
might bring all men out of the Grave: which though it be not yet effected, yet
he has paid the Price, that so at his appearing he may raise all men from
that first death, and deliver from wrath to come all that wait for him,
believing on his Name, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10. 1 Ioh. 3. 23. according as himself has
testified, Ioh. 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, says he; for the hour is coming
in which all that are in the Grave shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation. So that it is
evident, that that of man which goes to the grave shall be raised again, as he
has said, I will ransom them from the power of the grave etc. But if the
bodies of them which are cast into the grave shall not be raised from thence,
how then is there a ransoming of them from the power of the Grave, or a
redeeming them from Death? How is Captivity led captive? or (who how will the
Grave then come to destruction, and not rather be the destroyer? And how will
the Word of the Almighty Creator be fulfilled, and his glorious Power
manifested, who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that therein is, and
keeps Truth for ever, Psalm. 146. 5, 6.

Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44. by the Apostle, concerning the Resurrection of the Dead,
It is sown (says he) in Corruption, It is raised in Incorruption: It is sown
in Dishonor, It is raised in Glory: It is sown in Weakness, It is raised in
Power: It is sown a Natural Body, It is raised a Spiritual Body. By all which,
how evidently is the Resurrection of that which dies, proved? It which is sown,
and it which is raised is one and the same; only the condition wherein it is
raised is more excellent than that wherein it is sown. They that turn Scripture
into Allegories, cannot turn this into any, nor make an Interpretation contrary
to this, without making themselves very absurd: for, if they shall say, It is
the Seed of God which is thus sown, then it seems the Seed of God shall be sown
in one condition, and shall be raised in another, yea, they must hold that the
Seed of God is sown a Natural Body, and raised a Spiritual Body, changing its
Properties, which cannot be; No, no, it is the Corruptible man, the natural
Bodies of Believers, which shall be raised, changed, and fashioned like the
glorious Body of Christ, and as is testified in the Scripture concerning that
Seed which is sown into the Earth, as Wheat or other Grain, That which is sown
is not sown that Body which shall be, for when it is sown, it is sown but bare
Grain, not clothed with any thing, but God gives it a Body as it pleases him,
clothed excellently, yet to every Seed his own Body: And as the Body of Wheat
which is raised and brought forth, does not arise out of other Grain, but does
absolutely and truly arise out of that very Seed, and by the Power of God
grows out of that very Kernel which was sown; even so shall it be in the
Resurrection from the Dead the Natural and Visible Bodies of those that believe
in Christ, although they shall not be raised as they are sown, viz. vile,
corruptible, natural, weak and dishonorable, yet nevertheless they shall be
raised; and though God will give a Body as it pleases him, clothed with
incorruptibility, yet he will give to every Seed his own body, 1 Cor. 15. 38.
and they shall be raised again without all deformity, and clothed upon with
their house which is from Heaven; yea, their vile Bodies shall be made like the
glorious Body of Christ, even a Spiritual Body, which Spiritual Body shall
arise out of that Natural Body which does die, and is laid in the Ground, even
as Grain does arise out of that very Grain which was sown, being the same in
substance when raised, as when sown; only raised in a glorious condition, sown
in a weak and dishonorable; And as the Grain does all arise and leaves not one
jot of it self in the ground, even so there shall not be left one jot of
whatsoever goes to the making up this Body complete, and every way a perfect
man, but it shall be raised wholly and fully as it is written, 1 Cor. 15. 35,
36, 37, 38, 42, 43, 44.

vile Bodies shall be changed, and fashioned like the glorious Body of Christ,
according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself,
Phil. 3. 20, 21. The Apostle does unfold this Mystery, 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52, 53,
54, 55. Behold (says he) I shall show you a Mystery, We shall not all Sleep
but we shall all be Changed in a moment, at the twinkling of an eye, at the
last Trump: for the Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead (viz. in Christ, 1 These.
4. 16, 17. such as lie in the visible Earth) shall be raised incorruptible, and
we (viz. the faithful that are alive and remain in this corrupt mortal estate
unto that time) shall then be changed: for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality; so when this Corruptible
shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal shall have put on Immortality,
then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up
in Victory; O Death, Where is thy Sting? O Grave, Where is thy Victory? The
Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law; but thanks be to God
which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus is the
Resurrection, and Change of all Believers from Death to Life, from Corruptible
to Incorruption, from Mortal to Immortality, by the blessed Apostle both
Vindicated and Unfolded, that every faithful Man and Woman may know, that
although the Wages of sin is Death, yet the Gift of God is eternal Life,
through Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 28. which God will give unto them all at one and
the same time, even at the coming of Christ, that according to the Word of
Truth, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 15. These that remain unto the coming of the Lord may not
prevent them which are asleep in him; but although the Lords Laborers are
called to work in his Vinyard at the several Hours of the Day of his Grace, yet
they all shall have their reward together at the Evening, Matthew. 20. 8. For God
has provided so well for the Faithful of this last Age, that though many in
former Ages have obtained a good Report through Faith, yet shall not they
without these be made perfect, Heb 11. 39, 40.

Light within all men, do boast of Perfection, which they imagine that some of
them do attain unto in this life, yet it is evident by the Scriptures of Truth,
that the Perfection in Glory which is promised to the Faithful, and the
Perfection in Holiness unto which they are exhorted, is not attained unto, but
only in part, until the bodies of those that believe in Christ (the second
Adam) are raised from the Grave, and changed from the corruption whereinto they
are fallen by the offense of the first Adam, Rom 5. 15, For although in this
Life those that believe in Christ, are through the Rich Mercy of God, even when
they were dead in Sins, quickened together with Christ, Ephesians. 2. 5. and so
renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. that with the Mind they
serve the Law of God, Romans 7. 24. Yet alas! this Perfection is but in part:
Paul himself, who had attained to so great a Portion of Grace, that by the Law
of the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, he was made free from the Law of Sin
and Death, Romans 8. 2. and though, together with this Freedom from Guilt, and
liablenesse to Punishment for Sin, he was so set free from the Dominion of Sin,
being not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. that he did delight in
the Law of God after the Inward Man; yet notwithstanding he found another Law
in his Members, which warring against the Law of his Mind, brought him into
Captivity to the Law of Sin in his Members, Romans 7. 22, 23. So that, though he
had hope of Deliverance from this his Enemy, the Flesh which lusts against
the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and for his comfort had obtained the Gift of God, The
Holy Spirit, as a help to him, to war a good warfare, and as the Earnest of his
Inheritance Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. which is to be enjoyed at the Redemption or
Deliverance of the purchased Possession; yet for the present such was his
Condition, that, as himself testifies, Romans 7. 23. So then, says he, With the
Mind I my self serve the Law of God, but with my Flesh the Law of Sin. So that,
although this Renovation of the Spirit of the Mind, by the Assistance of the
Holy Spirit, whereby a Believer knows himself to be a Son of God by Adoption,
and is enabled to cry, Abba, Father, Romans 8. 16. be the earnest of the
Inheritance, a Rising with Christ, through the Faith of the Operation of God,
who raised him from the Dead, to the obtaining Forgiveness of all Trespasses,
Col. 2. 12, 13. yet this is not the Resurrection from the Dead, nor the State
of Perfection, which the Faithful unto death shall obtain, as the same Apostle
testifies, 2 Timothy 4. 7. I have fought a good fight, says he, I have finished
my Course, I have kept the Faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that loves his appearing: For the
obtaining whereof, his great Desire was (while he enjoyed but the earnest of
the Spirit, and was at home in the body, and absent from the Lord) 2 Cor. 5. 4,
5, 6, 7. to be found in Christ, not having his own Righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which
is of God, by Faith; that I may know him, says he, and the Power of his
Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto
his Death, if by any means I may attain unto the Resurrection from the Dead;
not as though I had already attained, either were already Perfect, but I follow
after, if that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3. from the 8th Verse to the end. So that that which truly and
properly is called the Resurrection from the Dead, is the raising of man from
the dead, in every part wherein he is dead, by reason of sin, to be alive
again, and to live in every part wherein he lived before he sinned: For before
man sinned he was alive in Spirit, Soul, and Body, Genesis 2. 7. and so should for
ever have lived, and not have tasted death, nor have seencorruption, or have
returned unto Dust, in his visible body, had he not transgressed the righteous
Law of God: for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. which Law of God, Man at
first was able to have kept, and might, and ought to have kept it; but he broke
it through his wilful disobedience, in hearkening to the Counsel of Satan; and
thereby brought himself and his Posterity to the Penalty therein threatened: In
the day, says God, that Eating thou shall Eat, Dying See Genesis 2. 17. with the
Hebbrew. in the Margent.
thou shall Die. Therefore the Resurrection from the Dead is the Raising of the
whole Man from Death in every part, wherein he is dead by reason of
Transgression, to be alive again, and to live in every part, which was once
alive before Transgression; This Resurrection is yet to come: The renewing of
the Spirit of the mind is but the Earnest, or Assurance thereof, and of
Happiness at that time: It is to come, and not past, as the False Teachers did
affirm, of whom the Apostle does give warning to the Saints, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17,
18. but shun (says he) profane and vain bablings; for they will increase unto
more ungodliness, and their word will eat as does a canker (or gangreen,) of
whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the Truth have erred, saying,
that the Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some, From
whence we may take notice, That these False Teachers did err, in mis-applying
the Resurrection of Man; for they did not deny a Resurrection wholly, but
taking a part for the whole, or putting the Earnest for the Inheritance, said,
It was past already: In like manner those against whom we contend, they do not
say, That there is No Resurrection at all; yet in effect they say as much, for
they say, It is past with them, and they look for no other kind of Resurrection
than what they do now enjoy: But this their Doctrine being no better than vain
bablings, all true Believers are to shun and avoid.

Revel. 20. 6. where the Spirit of God says, Blessed and holy is he that has
part in the First Resurrection, on such the Second Death has no power, etc.
concluding, that the Resurrection is past with those that have attained to
their supposed Degree of Perfection; but alas they are greatly deceived; for
the First Resurrection, here spoken of, is not the Quickening of the Spirit
only, but the raising up and investing the whole bodies, souls, and spirits of
those Holy Ones there mentioned, with Life and Immortality: And that this is
so, appears by the 4th and 5th Verses, where John says, I saw the souls of
them which were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word of God,
and which had not worshipped the Beast, neither his Image, neither had received
his Mark upon their Foreheads, or in their Hands; and they lived and reigned
with Christ a Thousand Years; but the rest of the Dead lived not again until
the thousand years were finished: This is the First Resurrection, etc. Now,
what part of man is it which is capable of being beheaded? Is it not the Body?
Therefore the Bodies lived, though only the Soul is mentioned; and it is usual
in Scripture to mention a part for the whole, as Genesis 46. 27. All the Souls of
the house of Jacob which came into Egypt, were threescore and ten; but who
knows not that their Bodies came also? And were it so, That by the first
Resurrection, here mentioned, is meant the Renovation of the Spirit of man by
rising from sin to newness of Life; yet this is so far from concluding against
the Resurrection of the Body of man, that the Resurrection of the Body of every
true Believer, may rather be concluded from it, as says the Apostle Paul, Romans
8. 11. But if the Spirit of him, says he, that raised up Jesus from the dead;
dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your
Mortal Bodies by his Spirit, that dwells in you: and as the Holy Spirit does
bear witness with the spirit of every true Believer, that he is a Son of God,
so also, that he is an heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ, of a glorious
Inheritance, which is to be enjoyed at the Redemption of the Body: This
Redemption of the body See Romans 8. 16. 17, 23.
is that which all Believers wait with patience for, and hope to enjoy in their
bodies, which now are liable to Sufferings for Christ's sake: and seeing it is
in the last times that the Beast and his Image are set up, which the Saints
refusing to worship, or to receive his Mark, are by his Followers persecuted to
death; as a reward of whose Sufferings the First Resurrection shall be given to
them, and to all other Believers that are asleep in Jesus: therefore it will
not be accomplished till the Lord himself descend from Heaven with a shout,
with the voice of the Arch Angel, and with the Trump of God, and then the Dead
in Christ shall rise first, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16. and this (says the Spirit) is the
First Resurrection, Revel. 2. 5. as is also testified, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22, 23.
For since by Man came Death, by Man came also the Resurrection of the Dead:
For, as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; but every
man in his own order, Christ the First Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's
at his coming: Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all Rule, all
Authority and Power; for he must reign till he have put all his Enemies under
his feet; the last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death, as it is written,
Rev. 20. 12, 13. And I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God; and the
Books were opened, and another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and
the Dead were judged out of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their Works. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and
Death and Hell, or the Grave, delivered up the Dead which were in them; and
they were judged, every man according to their works. So that we see clearly,
that both the First and Second Resurerction, is the raising of whole Man from
death, or from the grave; contrary to the conceit of such as suppose the
renewing of the spirit of the Mind, which is but a part of man, to be the first
Resurrection of man; the Dying to Sin, and Rising again to Righteousness,
being so far from being the Resurrection of whole Man from the Dead, that it is
but the Earnest of the Inheritance of the Righteous, as for the Wicked they
have no part in it, though they shall have in the Resurrection; for they, as
Christ has taught, shall come forth of the grave unto the Resurrection of
Damnation, John 5. 28, 29. Neither is it in the dying to sin, and rising again
to Righteousness, as it is in the Death of man, and his Rising again, for Man
dies, and rises again; but when sin dies, sin ought never to rise again: God
forbid that any Believer should plead for a resurrection of sin.

of the Resurrection of the dead, or the affirming, that it is past already, is
a Doctrine false in it self; so are the Consequences thereof most dreadful and
destructive to all true piety, yea of such a fretting and gangreen-like nature,
that in those that are infected therewith, it devours member after member, till
the whole body of the Faith be overthrown, and the Professors thereof divested
of the Knowledge of God, and reduced to Gentilisme again; and not only so, for
even among the Gentiles were some Principles of Morality; but this is not
content to stay here, but increases to more ungodliness, till it arrive at
that profane desire, Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die: a Conception
so corrupt, that (as Scollars do affirm, that are acquainted with the Sentences
of the Heathen Poets) the Verse of Menander might serve to rebuke it, which the
Apostle Paul sticks not to mention, for that purpose, saying, Be not deceived,
Evil Communication corrupts Good Manners, 1 Cor. 15. 32, 33. And were those
that vent those loose Principles, followers of them in practice (as the Ranters
their Predecessors were) we should soon see these as unclean in their lives as
they; and such as cannot now so easily discern the deceitfulness of their
Doctrine, because of the covering which they put upon it, were it uncovered,
and reduced to Practice, it would be abhorred by some that are now seduced by
it: But if we examine all Doctrines that are brought unto us, apart from the
Lives of those that bring them, as we ought to do: For since Satan is
transformed into an Angel of light, it is no great thing if his Ministers be
transformed, as the Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 14, 15. we shall
find, that that Doctrine which denies the Resurrection of the bodies of
Believers, and of all that are dead in Adam, from the grave, does make void the
hope of Israel, the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Scriptures of Truth, and
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ himself.

If in this Life only we have Hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable,
1 Cor. 15. 19. For such are, and have been the Tribulations of the Children of
God in this Life, that if they had not hope of Happiness in a life that is to
come, after the death, and at the Resurrection of the Body, they were the most
miserable of all men; for the Punishment of the first Offense lies upon the
Godly, as well as upon the Sinner; Labor and Sorrow, both of Man and Woman;
Sickness and Death is the portion of Good and Bad: In the sweat of their
faces, the righteous as well as the wicked, do eat their bread, until they
return unto the dust, from whence, if they shall not be raised, they are in a
worse condition than the wicked; for oftentimes the most sincere Believers do
taste the deepest of misery in this life, whereas the ungodly are in prosperity*
There are no bands in their death, b^^ their strength is firm, they are not in
trouble like other men, neither are they plagued like other men; therefore
Pride compasses them about as a chain, and violence covers them as a
garment; their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart can wish,
Psalm. 73. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. This is the prosperous estate of the wicked in this
life, wherein the Godly man is plunged all the day long, and chastened every
morning, Psalm. 73. 14. Poor Lazarus, in this life received evil things, when
the Rich man received his good things; but in the other Life, indeed, we see a
vast difference between them; Lazarus is comforted, but the Rich man is
tormented, Luke 16. 25. Which torment is to be understood to be upon the body
of the Rich man, from his desire that Lazarus might be sent to dip his finger
in water, to cool his tongue, a part of his body: and therefore we are to
understand the fullness of happiness in the one, and misery in the other, to
be after the Resurrection of the body from the dead; by the denial whereof the
comfortable hope, and strong consolation which every true Believer has in this
life, and even in death, when they commend their Spirits with Stephen, Acts 7.
59. into the hands of Jesus Christ, is made void, and of no effect: For,
wherefore have Believers the earnest of the Spirit by the Holy Ghost, speaking
peace to their spirits, but that they might also enjoy the full Inheritance?
Why are they sanctified in their spirits, 1 Pet. 1. 2. Heb. 12. 23. But to
assure them, that the very God of Peace will also sanctify them wholly, and
their whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body shall be preserved blameless unto the
coming of Jesus Christ 1 These. 5. 23. And why is it said, that the Faithful
when they dye, do fall asleep in Jesus, that they dye in the Lord, that they
rest from their labors, and their works do follow them, Revel. 14. 13. But
that it might be understood, that they shall rise again from the dead, in their
bodies, as Jesus dyed and rose again in his body, and is therein become the
first fruits of them that sleep, 1 These. 4. 14, 16. And as the spirits of all
wicked men that die in unbelief are with the Devil and his Angels, in chains of
darkness, reserved unto the Judgment of the great day, 1 Pet. 8. 19. 2 Pet. 2.
4. wherein they shall in spirit, soul, and body be tormented in the Lake of
fire, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. Revel. 20. 14. So contrariwise, are the spirits of all
Just men, who fight the good fight, and finish their course in the Faith of
Luke 13. 28. Mark 9. 43. 44. Mar. 16. 26.
Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 4. 7. reserved in Paradise unto the Day of the Lord, when
the Blessed of the Father shall receive the Kingdom, and shall in spirit,
soul, and body enjoy eternal Life, Luk^ 23. 43. Matthew. 25. 46. and everlasting
Blessedness with Christ Jesus, who is now glorified in that Body which suffered
death, rose from the dead, and ascended into Heaven, John 20. 27. Luke 24. 38,
39. to the 53. as all Believers also in due time shall be: And whereas it is
declared in Scripture, that Christ has led captivity captive; that he has
redeemed those that believe, from the Curse of the Law; that he has abolished
Death, and brought life and Immortality to light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.
10. All this (though it be the sure and steadfast hope of every True Believer,
Heb. 5. 18, 19, 20.) is made void and of no effect, by those that deny the
Resurection of the Bodies, or flesh of men; for, as the flesh of Christ wherein
he wus put to death, 1 Pet. 3. 18. saw no corruption, but was quickened again
by the Spirit the third day, Act. 2. 24, 31. So the flesh of those that believe
in Christ, though it does see corruption, as David's flesh is said to do, Acts
13. 36. shall be raised again, incorruptible, 1 Cor* 15. 52. and therefore God
is declared, to be the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
Exodus 3. 15. Mat. 22. 31, 32. because the Bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
which are dead, shall live again, and shall therefore be raised up from death;
because God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, as Christ has
taught. But False Teachers, in their denying the Resurrection of the Bodies of
the dead, do deny that God is the God of the Living; a most sad consequence,
and blasphemous Opinion.

The denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Faitfull from the dead,
does not only deny the Resurrection of men that have sinned, but also of Christ
himself, who knew no Sin; it makes the Preaching of the Gospel vain, and the
Faith of them that confess it; it renders the Apostles of Christ false
witnesses of God, because they have testified of God, that he raised up Christ,
whom he raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not: It concludes, that
those that Christ has set free from sin, are still under the guilt thereof,
that they that are fallen asleep in Chrst, are perished; and that the hope of
Believers is only in this life; and therefore they of all men are most
miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. O fearful Doctrine! What a
bitter Root is this which brings forth such Fruit, so destructive to the health
and comfort of all Believers, so contrary to that food wherewith the Spirits of
the Faithful have in old time been nourished, and to the Hope, wherewith they
have in all their Tribulations been supported? Oh, says Job (in his great
extremity, when his Brethren, Friends, Servants, his own Wife, and Young
Children despised him) that my words were now written, that they were printed
in a book, that they were graven with an iron pen, and lead, in the Rock for
ever; For I know (says he) that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the Earth; and though after my skin worms destroy this
body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another, though my Reins be consumed within me. Thus
was he supported by the hope of the Resurrection of the dead, in the midst of
his great Afflictions and Tribulations, Job 19. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. The like
Experience had Paul, for the hope of Israel says he, I am bound with his
chain, Acts 28. 20. I am judged (says he) for the Hope of the Promise, made of
God unto the Fathers, unto which Promise, our Twelve Tribes, instantly serving
God day and night, hope to come; for which Hopes sake, King Agrippa, (says he)
I am accused of the Jews: Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you,
that God should raise the dead? Act. 26. 6, 7, 8. So likewise when he was
brought before FELIX, This I confess unto thee (says he) that after that way
which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all
things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and have Hope toward
God, which they themselves also allow, that there shall he a Resurrection of
the Dead, both of the Just, and Unjust; and herein do I exercise my self, to
have a Conscience void of Offense, both toward God, and toward men: O what
comfortable and sure hope has every true Believer by the communion of the
Spirit of God, that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, how are their spirits
quickened and renewed after the Image of him that created them, Ephesians. 2. 5. Col.
3. 10. who will also, in due time quicken their mortal Bodies also by his
Spirit that dwells in them, Romans 8. 11. And inasmuch as God intends to raise
the Bodies of his Saints again from the dead, therefore precious in his sight
is their death, Psalm. 116. 15. They who while they lived in the Body dyed unto
Sin, their Bodies, after they are dead, shall be raised again to Life, and
shall no more be subject to Death, or Sorrow, or crying, for God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, neither shall there be unto them any more pain,
Revel. 21. 4. Death shall be swallowed up into Victory, and the Lord God will
wipe away tears from off their faces, and the rebuke of his people shall he
take away from off all the earth, for the Lord has spoke it, Isa. 25. 8. Then
shall be the restoring of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of all
his Holy Prophets, since the World began, Acts 3. 21. Then will he make all
things new: and unto those which have not loved their lives unto the death, for
the sake of Jesus Christ, with all that have believed on his Name; God will be
a Father, and they shall be his Children, and shall inherit all things; for
these Sayings are true and faithful, says the Lord, Revel. 21. 5, 7. Thus all
may see, That the denial of the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Dead, does
make void the Hope of the Israel of God. There is also that other pernicious
quality in it, It emboldeneth the Sinner to God, on in his Disobedience against
God, and his Holy will, revealed in his Testament, the Scriptures of Truth,
suggesting unto the Workers of Wickedness, That after Death they shall be hid
in the Grave, from coming forth from thence to judgment: Therefore the Doctors
of Antichrist do deny Jesus Christ, which dyed at Jerusalem, they deny both the
Father and the Son, they deny the Resurrection of Christ, they hate and despise
his Ordinances, oppose and revile his People. they sin and transgress without
stay, until they dye in Unbelief, thinking that there shall be no Resurrection
of their Bodies out of the Earth, but that the Grave shall be a hiding place,
to shelter them from the Judgment of the Great Day: But thus says the Truth,
There is no Darkness nor Shadow of Death, where the workers of Iniquity may
hide themselves, Job 34. 22.

viz. The coming of Christ to judgment, and the end of the World. Yet, lest a
positive denial of these Glorious Truths should discover from what Spirit that
Denial does proceed, he has taught his Ministers to hide their Design, and to
make as if they opposed not the things themselves, but only some such manner of
accomplishment of them, as is not promised; They call all such carnal, as look
and wait for the coming of Christ from Heaven out of them; they pronounce Woes
upon such as say, That Christ is not yet come to judgment, and that the World
is not yet ended: But why is it, but because they look for no such thing, nor
have they assurance of Peace in that day: They boast that Christ is come to
them, neither look they for any other coming: That the World is ended with
them, neither look they for any other end: That the Judgment is past with them,
neither look they for any other Judgment. But why is all this, but because they
do deny that which is indeed the coming of Christ in glory, the everlasting
inheritance of the Saints, the judgment of Christ upon his Enemies, and the end
of the World; when the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also, and the Works that are
therein shall be burnt up; For, as testifies the Apostle, The Heavens and the
Earth which are now by the same Word of God are kept in store, reserved unto
fire, against the Day of Judgment, and perdition of ungodly See 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
men, 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10. Who sees not, except those whose eyes the God of this
World has blinded, that they that now call themselves Preachers of, and to the
Light within all men, are the Scoffers that the Apostle Peter said should come
in the last times, walking after their own Lusts, and saying, Where is the
Promise of his coming, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. yea, the great Prophet, the Lord Jesus
Christ has foretold of these Seducers and Deceivers, as other the Lords
Prophets also have done, saying, There shall arise False Christ's, and False
Prophets, which shall show great signs, and wonders, to deceive, if it be
possible, the very Elect: But that the Chosen of God may be preserved from the
Deceits of this great Antichrist, Christ has foretold with what Lies the Truth
of his coming should by Satan and his Instruments be opposed; and has also so
described the manner of his coming, that all that believe on his Name, may know
assuredly, as the True Christ from the False, so his true coming from a
pretended coming, which the False Christ's, and False Prophets shall avouch for
the True Christ, and his True coming, with these words, Behold he is in the
Desert, behold, he is in the secret Chamber, see here, see there, Matthew. 24.
23, 24, 25, 26. all which the Lord warns his Disciples neither to go after,
follow, or believe; and withal gives such a Description of the manner of his
coming, as is altogether inconsistent with the false Christ's, and false
Prophets Description; which intimates, That Christ's coming, (which his Saints
know shall be glorious, and therefore public) shall be, and is so private,
weak, and dishonorable, that some shall not know that he is come till they
show where he is, with their Behold he is in the Desert, behold he is in the
Secret Chamber, see here, or see there: for says Christ, As the Lightening
that lighteneth out of the one part under Heaven; shines to the other part
under Heaven, so also shall the Son of man be in his day, Luke 17. 23. or
according to Matthew, as the lightening comes out of the East, and shines
even unto the West, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be, Matt. 24.
26, 27. In which words four things are laid down, to vindicate the great and
glorious coming of Christ.

1. That he will absolutely come as does the Lightening: Who can deny the
coming of the Lightening? It is as absolute and certain, that Christ will come,
though some do both deny and oppose it; but Christ will come certainly and
absolutely, as is testified by Christ himself, and his Apostles, in the
Scriptures: Immediately (says he) after the Tribulation of those days shall
the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars
shall fall from Heaven, and the Powers of the Heaven shall be shaken; and then
shall appear the sign of the Son of man in Heaven, and then shall all the
Tribes of the Earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of Heaven with Power, and great glory, Mat. 24. 29, 30. For the Lord
himself, says Paul, shall descend from Heaven with ashout, with the voice of
the Arch Angel, and with the Trump of God, etc. 1 These. 4. 15, 16. For yet a
little while and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10. 37.
He, says John, that testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly,
Amen, even so come Lord Jesus, Revel. 22. 20. Thus it is evident that Christ
will certainly come, But

2. He will come suddenly, as the Lightening comes; as the Lightening comes
suddenly, and unexpectedly, so also will Christ, especially to those that
oppose and deny his coming, as the Scripture witnesses; But of that Day and
Hour, says Christ, knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father
only; but as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man
be; For in the days that were before the flood, they were eating, and
drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into
the Ark, and knew not, until the Flood came, and took them all away; so shall
also the coming of the Son of Man be, Mat. 24. 36, 37, 38, 39. Likewise also as
it was in the Days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded; but the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it
rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all; even thus shall
it be in the day when the Son of Man is revealed, Luke 17. 28, 29, 30. For the
Day of the Lord says Paul, so comes as a Thief in the night; for when they
shall say Peace and safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as
travail upon a Woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2, 3.
Behold says Christ, I come as a Thief, Blessed is he that watches and keeps
his Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, Rev. 16. 15. Thus
will the coming of Christ be sudden, even to them that wait for his coming,
but unto the Wicked his coming will be unexpected.

Yet 3dly. He will come visibly, as the Lightening which lighteneth out of the
one part under Heaven, and shines unto the other part under Heaven, etc. For
as the Lightening is seen with the bodily eyes, so shall Jesus Christ be seen
in the Day of his coming, Then (says Christ) shall they see the Son of Man
coming in the Clouds, with great power and glory, Mark 13. 26. And they shall
look upon him whom they have pierced, and shall mourn for him as one mourns
for his only Son, etc. Zech. 12. 10. Behold, says John, he comes with clouds,
and every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him, and all the
kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; even so, Amen: But unto them,
says the Apostle, that look for him, shall he appear the second Rev. 17.
time, without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9. 28. Thus will the coming of Christ
be visible.

But 4. At the time of his coming he will show himself to all, generally and
universally, as the Lightening does: the Lightening shows not it self first
unto one, and then unto another, but at one and the same time it so comes that
it may be seen of all, from one part under Heaven, even unto the other: So at
the coming of Christ, he will show himself to all generally, and universally;
men shall not need to say, Lo here, lo there, for Christ shall be seen of all
together, as is testified in the Scriptures of Truth: Then, says Christ, shall
appear the sign of the Son of Man in Heaven; and then shall all the Tribes of
the earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven, with power and great glory, Matthew. 24. 30. Behold, says Enoch, the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to execute Judgment upon all, and
to convince all that are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Jude 14. 15. It is, says Paul, a righteous thing with God
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory
of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be
admired in all them that believe, etc. 2 These. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. So in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, speaking of those that in time past obtained a good
report through Faith, the Apostle, says, They received not the Promise, God
having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect, Hebr. 11. 39, 40. And thus is the Coming of Christ vindicated.

that will not that Christ should reign over them, though they perish for their
disobedience, yet will they persist in it, adding unto their sin of denying the
coming of Christ to judgment, the denial of the end of the World: Whereby it
does appear, that their conversation is not in Heaven, but on the earth; they
look not at the things that are eternal, but at those that are temporal;
contrary to the practice of the Faithful in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. 18. yea,
so fully are their minds bent unto the present things, and so absolutely do
they fulfill what Peter did foretell, that to justify their Conceit, That all
things do and shall continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation,
even as Satan brought Scripture, thereby to carry on his temptation against
Christ, so these his Servants do allege that Scripture, Eccl. 1. 4. One
Generation passes away, and another comes, but the Earth abides for ever; to
justify that which was never the intent of it, viz. That the Earth shall never
be dissolved; and so furious are they, that when they have been interrupted in
their Discourse by a Servant of the Lord, they have pronounced Woes upon him,
as one that puts the Day of the Lord far from him; when it is apparent that it
is themselves that put the day of the Lord, wherein the Heavens, the Earth, and
the Works that are therein shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11. far from them:
For it has been said by one of them, That that might never be, and this was
not spoken in a Corner, but in a great Meeting of those which call themselves
Preachers up of the Light within, etc. but alas, what reason have they to
interpret that Scripture, Eccles. 1. 4. The Earth abides for ever; so as to
infer from it, that the Earth shall not be dissolved, seeing the terms ever and
everlasting have their period: sometimes in the Scripture the Levitical
Priesthood is called an everlasting Priesthood, yet who sees not that it is
long since ended; the Covenant of Circumcision in the flesh, Genesis 17. 13. was
an everlasting Covenant, yet to engage Believers See Gal. 3, 4, 5. Gal. 6. 21,
13. Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3. Col. 2. 10, 11.
now to the observation thereof, is not according to the Gospel freedom, but
the Legal servitude, from which every True Believer is set free by Christ. So
although it be said, The Earth abides for ever, yet it is not to be
understood, that it shall never be dissolved, seeing the Lord has said, Heb.
12. 26, 27. Yet once more, I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven: and
this word, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that are
shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. So also Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. And thou Lord in the beginning have
laid the foundation of the earth, and the Heavens are the works of thy hands;
They shall perish, but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as does a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed;
but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail: So also Isaiah the Prophet
testifies, saying, And all the Host of Heaven shall be dissolved, and the
Heavens shall be rolled together as a scrole, and all their Host shall fall
down as the leaf falls from the vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree,
Isa. 34. 4. And as concerning See Rev. 6. 13, 14.
Propagation, men and women shall cease from begetting and bringing forth
children, for so says Christ Jesus our Lord, Luke 20. 34. the Children of this
world, says he, marry and are given in marriage, but they which shall be
accounted worthy to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the dead
neither marry nor are given in marriage, neither can they die any more, for
they are equal to the Angel, and are the children of God, being the children of
the Resurrection, Luke 20. 36. Therefore they grossly mis-interpret that
Scripture, Eccles. 1. 4. that interpret it so as to infer from it, that the
earth shall not be dissolved, and that there shall always be (even to
eternity) a begetting and bringing forth of Children, and continuance of the
Earth, and the things that are therein, for this is not the meaning of it,
neither is there any Scripture of Truth that teaches any such thing: But that
which is the intent and meaning of this Scripture, is this, taking it with the
two former Verses, viz. Vanity of vanity, says the Preacher, all is vanity.
What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the Sun, etc.
Now, if it be demanded, How does it appear that all is vanity? it is answered
in this 4th Verse, One Generation passes away, and another Generation comes,
but the Earth abides for ever; That is to say, Man's life is brittle, and
fading, he has here no continual abode, nor long continuance, but as is
declared, Job 14. 1, 2. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days, and full
of trouble: He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down, he flees also as a
shadow, and continues not. But it is not so with the earth, for the Earth
abides for ever; that is, so long as all Generations shall come and go; it
removes not as man does, but abides all the time of one Generations passing
away, and another Generations coming: So that, that which is here meant by this
Term, ever, is a long time, or such a time as God has appointed unto all the
Generations of men. And as by the Terms Ever and Everlasting, concerning
Circumcision, and the Levitical Priesthood, is meant, A long time, the time of
many Generations, or such a time as God has hidden from men, according to the
signification of the Hebrew root; so also it ought to be understood here, for
God has revealed to us in his Word of what continuance man, as he is a mortal
creature is, of his time, it is not much above threescore or fourscore years;
but the Earth abides for time hidden from us, for a long time, for many
Generations. We know how long it shall be, within a little time, ere one
Generation passes away, and another comes; But how long it shall be ere the
Heavens and Earth shall pass away, though we know that they shall pass away,
yet the time when they shall pass away is hidden from us; and the Father has
put this in his own power, it is not for us to know these times and seasons,
Acts 1. 7. So that, Man having a very little time, and short continuance, and
the Earth a long time, a time not known to us; therefore says the Preacher,
What profit has a man of all his Labors which he takes under the Sun? one
Generation passes away, they leave that which they have wrought by their sore
labor behind them, another Generation comes, and takes possession of that
which the former gathered together; so that all is vanity, and Man's temporal
enjoyments more subject to change than the Earth, which abides a long time, a
time hidden from us, the time of many Generations. It is not with Man as it is
with the earth, for the earth holds its own, it yet keeps its being; if we
take from it, it will have it again, as the Wise Man teaches, All the Rivers,
says he, run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full: into the Place from whence
the Rivers come, thither they return again. But it is not so with man, who
lies down, and rises not, till the Heavens be no more, they shall not awake,
nor be raised out of their sleep, Job. 14. 12.

short, yet the day of the Lord will come, wherein the Heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up; and although the Adversaries
of Christ are as willingly ignorant of the Worlds Creation and preservation, as
of its dissolution; though they do as little remember the Judgment of God upon
the old world, as they fear his Judgment upon the World that now is; Yet as by
the Word of God the Heavens were of old, so by the same Word are they reserved
unto Fire: as by the Word of God the Earth had its Creation, so by its word
shall it have its dissolution; as by the Word of God the Flood was brought upon
the World of impenitent Sinners, that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, be cast into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels: For all Nations shall appear before See 2 Pe. 3. 5, 6, 7. 2 These. 1. 7,
8, 9. Mat. 25. 41.
the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his
body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10.
The Righteous then shall receive Rest, the wicked Tribulation, and Anguish,
indignation and Wrath shall be upon every soul of man that does evil; of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile, 2 These. 1. 7. Romans 2. 7, 8, 9. and in that
day those that now contemn Christ his Truth, and the Prosessors thereof, that
live and dye in unbelief, though they are great and mighty in the World now,
yet then shall they call to the Mountains and Rocks, saying, Fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb, for the great Day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand? Rev. 6. 16, 17. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, as says the Prophet,
be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice
with trembling; Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish from the way;
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him, Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. O that all men would now consider, and be
wise in the Day wherein the Grace of God is tendered unto them, in the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, that they may know what to do when God rises up, and what to
answer when he visits, Job 31. 14. and take heed all ye that make Profession
of Jesus Christ, Watch and pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to
escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of
man, Luke 21. 36. for then shall be that coming of Christ, that end of the
World, and that eternal judgment both of the living and of the dead, which
never yet has been accomplished; notwithstanding the vain confidence of those
that call themselves Preachers of and to the Light within, etc. That suppose
that these things are past with them, whose Doctrine having been showed to be
disagreeable to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, concerning the Person of
Christ, and the Father, Son and Spirit, and the Light, and the Ordinances of
Christ, and the Resurrection of the dead, the coming of Christ, and the end of
the world: It is time now to conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. III.
That the so called Preachers of and to the Light within, etc. Preach not to
the Creature man, but to a supposed Seed, or uncreated substance in Man, which
they call Christ, and the eternal witness; That the Creature man is the Subject
to whom Salvation is to be tendered, being in a lost condition by sin; and for
whose deliverance Christ dyed; That the Spirits in Prison, are the Spirits of
those men and women which were disobedient in the days of Noah; That Christ is
a distinct person from all other persons, of his Divine and Humane Natures;
That those comforts which are admininistred to the Disciples of Christ, he
accepts it as done to himself; how believers are said to partake of the Divine
Nature of Christ; and that not a power only in man, but the whole man, Spirit,
Soul and Body, shall enjoy eternal happiness, as the Humane Nature of Christ,
now does; That the Creature man, together with the Devils, are the subjects of
the Wrath of God; And that the perfection spoken of in the Scriptures, is that
which the Creature man shall enjoy; Of the deceits of those that call upon all
men, to look into the Light within, while they Communicate their Doctrine and
unclean spirit to them of their resemblance, to birds in their Bel-candle, and
net; the reason why they cry down Gospel Ordinances; and how they Communicate
that unclean spirito why they deny Baptism in Water, and plead for Spirit
Baptism; why they require waiting in silence; of their touching or taking by
the hand, and the effect thereof; of their visits; and of their so much
preaching and Printing; that the Light within does not effect those things
which they ascribe to it, but the said things are effected by an unclean Spirit
of their silent Meetings; that several of their followers have confessed
themselves possessed with the Devil; and of the sad pranks he played in one
that thought himself perfect.

Preach not to the Creature man, but a supposed seed, or uncreated substance in
man; is clearly discovered by their writings, wherein they have these words,
viz. A Salutation to the Seed of God; and by these and such like expressions,
viz. I speak to the Light in your Conscience, which shall eternally witness,
etc. Now if the Light in the Conscience shall eternally witness, then that
Light, must needs be understood to be eternal; for nothing can be an eternal
witness, but an eternal thing; but God only is eternal, that is without
beginning and without end; man is a Creature that has a beginning, though he
shall have no end, but shall for ever be in tribulation, or in rest, as a
reward of disobedience, or as the effect of the Grace of God, and his Gift
thereby to him that believes and obeys the Gospel; Therefore no part of man
is God, or of the uncreated or eternal substance; and they in preaching to an
eternal thing preaches not to man, that had a beginning, and has lost his
first Righteousness; but which I fear to speak, even to God; for when I have at
their public Meetings, thus questioned the speaker, What is it which thou
speak and Preachest too; the Teacher has cried out in great have, calling
all the persons that heard him speak to witness for him, that he spoke to the
Light in their Conscience, to the Seed of God, etc. Whereupon I have asked him,
What is that Light in the Conscience? What is that Seed of God in its self? I
have then been answered, that it is Christ, as if Christ were not a person
distinct from all other persons, but only a certain Spirit or Power in all
persons; and that his Death and Resurrection is accomplished, only in a
Mystical, not in a proper sense; and having a great affection to vindicate this
Mystical Allegation, and to turn the minds of their Hearers from the plain
Truth of the Gospel, they Allege a Scripture or two, and infer from them that
which never was intended by the Spirit of God in them; from that Scripture, 1
Pet. 3. 18, 19. Where the Apostle says, Christ has once suffered for sins,
etc. being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit; by which he
went and Preached to the Spirits in Prison; they do infer, that the spirits
here spoken of is Christ, that is imprisoned in man, kept under and held down
in the Creature; and Christ as they say being quickened in them, they go and
Preach to the Spirits, which is Christ imprisoned in others, which they
endeavor to help, raise up and set at liberty; and for further proof of this
imagination, they allege, Mat. 25. 36. Where Christ says, I was sick and in
Prison, and ye visited me, etc.

Seed of God, to the uncreated or eternal witness, or substance which they call
Christ imprisoned, and not to the creature man; it is evident, that it is
fearful blasphemy, for it supposes, that that which they call Christ, has
done iniquity, else why do they say repent, repent, with many exhortations to
depart from sin, when they speak to that within, which in their sense is
Christ; so that they Reprove Christ, Exhort Christ, Counsel Christ; yea they
say, they speak to that of God in the Conscience, which shall eternally
witness, etc. so that they teach God, Reprove God, Counsel God: Oh horrible
Blasphemy, who will not fear to utter it, how contrary is this to the Doctrine
of the Blessed Apostle Paul? Romans 11. 34. WHO, says he, has instructed the
Lord, or WHO has BEEN HIS COUNSELOR? Or who has given to him, and it shall
be recompensed unto him again? for of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, to whom be Glory for ever, Amen. See Isay 30. 13, 14. He that has an
ear let him hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously; For this their
Doctrine supposes, that that which they call Christ, is saved by their
Preaching and Teaching, from a fallen condition; which when in their conceit
they have raised, they salute in their writings, which they have Entitled, A
Salutation to the Seed of God, which they suppose is in every man, and this
they say is Christ, in a fallen slain or imprisoned condition, till raised up
by their endeavors; so that Christ is not distinguished by them as a distinct
person from all other men, nor his death to be declared, to be accomplished in
his own person, but in every man, according to their delution, every man has
Christ in him, sometimes slain and sometimes raised, his death is not once but
often accomplished, and he is slain for himself, and raised for himself, if
raised at all; Oh how contrary is this Doctrine to the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, which teach, that Christ has ONCE suffered for sins the just for
the unjust, being put to death in the flesh, but quickend in the spirit, 1 Pet.
3. 18. But now ONCE (says the Apostle) in the end of the World, has he
appeared to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself; he was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he appear the
second time without sin to Salvation, Heb. 9. 26, 28. Neither let them think to
excuse the matter, by alleging that the Name Christ, is sometimes given the
Church, which is men and women, united to him by Faith, according to the
Gospel; for when it is so given, it is to be taken mystically, believers being
understood to be the Body of Christ, and Christ to be the head of that Body;
this mystical sense destroys not the proper sense, for Christ as a distinct
person from all other persons, is described by the Apostle Paul, Romans 1. 3, 4.
to be made of the Seed of David, according to the flesh; and declared to be the
Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the
Resurrection from the dead; in which flesh he suffered upon the Cross, being
put to death; and the third day rose again by the Power of the Spirit of
Holiness; he was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification, Romans 4. 25. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on
the Tree, that we being dead to sins, should live to Righteousness; by whose
stripes, ye were healed, as the Apostle teaches, 1 Pet. 2. 24.

Creature without Christ, without God, etc. be not to be Preached unto; and if
Salvation by Faith in Christ be not tendered to the Creature distinct from the
Creator; then is there no tender of Salvation, nor any thing to be saved; for
there is not one Scripture which speaks of any thing else which Salvation is
to be tendered unto, but man for whom Christ dyed, as it is written, Heb. 2. 16.
For verily he takes not hold of Angels, but of the Seed of Abraham he takes
hold, according to the Greek; that is, he did not take into unity of person the
Nature of Angels, but he took into personal unity the Seed of Abraham; that is,
the nature of man was taken into personality with his Divine nature; that
through death he might destroy him that had the Power of death, that is the
Devil; and deliver them that through fear of death, were all their life time
subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. It was the Creature man, that was in
bondage by sin, and in fear of death, that hid himself and was afraid, Genesis 3.
10. and had been as water spilt upon the ground, if God had not devised means
that his banished be not exciled from him, 2 Samuel 14. 14. It was that sinning
Creature man, that should have been banished for ever, had not God devised
means to redeem the man Adam and his posterity; For God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, that whosoever believes in
him, should not perish but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Gods love was
indeed to the lost, but no part of the eternal and uncreated substance was
lost, but man was lost, the Creature had been cut off for ever, for that first
sin of Adam, by whom sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. But God so loved
that Creature Man, as to give his only begotten Son for his redemption; for God
sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved, John 3. 16, 17. which life and salvation is to be
held forth to the Creature, which has sinned, to the race of mankind, for they
have all sinned and come short of the Glory of God; and these that have sinned,
are upon their repentance, and believing the Gospel Justified freely by the
Grace of God, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ; for God
justifies the ungodly, Romans 3. 23, 24. Romans 4. 5. We have seen and do
testify, says the Apostle John, That the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the World; Not to be a Savior of his eternal substance, but to be a
Savior to the world, 1 John 4. 14. I am the Living Bread, says Christ, which
came down from Heaven; if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever,
and the Bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the Life of
the World, which world had for ever perished for the iniquities thereof, had not
Christ Jesus given himself freely to death, that he might bring them to God,
which were without God, and without Christ, being strangers from the Covenant
of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. So that
as the same Apostle teaches, they which were sometimes alienated, and enemies
in their Minds or Spirits by wicked works; Yet now has he reconciled in the
Body of his flesh through death, to present them holy, and unblameable, and
unreproveable in the sight of God; if they continue in the Faith grounded and
settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel preached unto all;
and whereof Paul was a Minister, Col. 1. 22, 23. For as he also says, There is
one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. The
like is testified by the Angel of God, as it is written by Luke in his Gospel,
And Lo the Angel of the Lord (says he) came upon them, and the Glory of the
Lord shone round about them, viz. the Shepherds, and they were sore afraid; And
the Angel said unto them, Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy, which shall be to all people; not to a supposed Seed, or uncreated,
or eternal substance in man, but unto man, even unto all people; for unto you,
says he, is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ,
the Lord; and this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the Babe wrapped in
swaddling clothes, lying in a Manger; not lying within you, but lying in a
Manger, which was not within them; and suddenly there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
Highest, on earth Peace, good will toward men, Luke 2. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
This is indeed the Gospel of glad-tidings, a Savior for sinners, for poor
sinful man; yea and so says all the Prophets, as many as have spoken, have
likewise declared these things, viz. That God did send his Son to die for man,
to bear our sins, and that God raised up his Son Jesus, and sent him to bless
the Creature man, in turning every one of us from our Iniquities; it could not
be to turn himself from his Iniquities, for he had none: He did no sin, neither
was guile found in his Mouth; yet it pleased the Lord to put him to Grief for
us, and to lay upon him the Iniquities of us all, See Acts 3. 26. Isa. 53. 6.
yea, he was wounded for our Transgressions; He was bruised for our Iniquities;
the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his Stripes are we healed:
So that it is evident, That that Doctrine which is not directed to Man, but to
a supposed Seed, or uncreated Substance in man, is not the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which tendereth Salvation to the Creature, but a blasphemous Riddle,
which tends to the nourishing of Evil Thoughts, viz. That the Eternal Witness,
or Substance, stands in need of a Teacher, and of a Resurrection, out of a
fallen or imprisoned Condition; or to make Man exalt himself into the Place of
God, by imagining that something within him, as a part of his Person, is as
Eternal as the Spirit of Holiness in Christ; or else it tends to make the
Creature man, consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body, utterly to despair of
Salvation.

man, considered as Man; but to a supposed Seed, or eternal Substance in Man: I
say, and testify in the Lord, That these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 3. 19. Matthew. 25.
36. teach nothing in the least to justify such a Practice; but that which is
here held forth by the Spirit of God, in the first Scripture, is this; viz.
That by that Spirit which raised the Flesh of Jesus Christ from the Dead, he
had Preached by the Ministry of Noah, to the Spirits of men which are now in
prison; not that he preached to the Spirits when they were in Prison, nor that
these Spirits are of the eternal and uncreated substance; but the spirits in
prison, are the spirits of those men and women, which Christ according to the
Spirit of Holiness did by his servant Noah, who was assisted therewith, preach
unto, before they were in Prison; that is to say, In the days of Noah, when
they were disobedient to the long suffering of God, while the Ark was a
preparing; So that you cannot say, the Seed of God was that which was preached
to, except you will say, the Seed of God was disobedient, or that they were in
Prison when they were Preached unto, for then they could neither have been
obedient nor disobedient, for in Prison, they are as a reward of their
disobedience, which they acted when they were at Liberty, and are kept in
Prison for the said disobedience, unto the great Judgment Day; So that the
Spirits were not in Prison when they were Preached to, but disobedient they
were at that time, when once the long Suffering of God, waited in the days of
Noah, while the Ark was a Preparing, in which few, that is, eight Souls were
saved by Water at that time; when once the longsuffering of God waited while
the Ark was a Preparing; Then did Christ by the same Spirit, by which his own
Body of Flesh, in which he was put to death, was raised again from the dead,
Preach to them that were then Disobedient, whose spirits are now in Prison, and
so shall remain, till the great Day of Judgment, when they in Spirit, Soul and
Body, shall be punished with everlasting fire, as a reward of their
disobedience, in refusing the Spirit of Holiness, by which God did strive with
the old World, an hundred and twenty Years, Genesis 3. 6. So great was the
Patience and long-suffering of God; So unwilling was he that any of them should
perish, but rather that all of them should have repented, Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3.
9. which when they utterly refused to do, he brought the flood of Waters upon
that ungodly World, those that would not be turned by the strivings of Gods
Spirit, but refused that Grace, which was so earnestly and affectionately
tendered unto them, as unworthy of any further offers of Grace, were destroyed
by the flood of Waters, which overthrew their Carcasses, and as the just Wages
of their impenitency and unbelief, their spirits are now reserved in Prison,
unto the judgment of the great Day of God Almighty; when they, with all other
wicked men, that live and die in impenitency and unbelief, in spirit soul and
body, shall bear the punishment of their disobedience; And then also, the
Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation, for
which cause, they are now reserved as in Prison, in everlasting Chains, under
darkness, Jude verse. 6. shall be cast into the Lake of Fire burning with
Brimstone, where they and those accursed men and women, that have been seduced
by him, shall be tormented for ever; where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched. Thus it is evident, that the spirits in Prison, spoken of in
the Scripture abovesaid, are not to be understood of the Spirit of Holiness in
Christ, but indeed of the Unclean and Rebellious spirits of Men and Women, who
refuse the Grace of God, when it is tendered unto them, in the day of his
forebearance and long-suffering.

Mat. 25. 36. to justify thy Opinion and Practice of Preaching, not to man,
but to a supposed seed in every man, which thou call, Christ imprisoned in
man, is also exceeding false, and that which tends to the turning of the minds
of men, from the Person of Christ, by whose Death and Resurrection accomplished
in his own Body, he has wrought the Redemption of the Bodies of all others
that believe in him; to an imaginary spirit, ^r supposed eternal substance in
every man, as if not a person distinct from all other persons, but a spirit or
power in all persons were the Christ; and as if the death of Christ were not
accomplished in his own Body really, but in the bodies of all men, only
mystioally: But this is the Testimony of Truth, Christ Jesus, the Lord, is a
distinct Person from all persons beside himself, and such a person as there is
none like him, for He is the Son of God, according to the Spirit of Holiness,
Romans 1. 4. and also the Son of David according to the Flesh; so that he is
truly and properly the Son of God before all Worlds, and also in the fullness
of time, being made of a Woman, Gal. 4. 4. It was only that Person that is the
Son of Mary the Virgin, never man was Son of a Virgin but He, it is He only
that was conceived in his Mothers Womb, by the Operation of the Holy Spirit,
not one man in the whole World was ever so conceived besides himself; so that
He and He only, is perfect God, and perfect man in Nature and Substance, no
man else in the whole Creation is so; it is He that has two distinct Natures
in one entire person, no Person else has the like in him; and in him only,
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily, Col. 2. 9. in no man besides
him, dwells the Godhead in any measure, bodily: Now although all men in
respect of their Substance, and Christ, in respect of one of his Natures or
Substances, that is to say, His Flesh and Blood are of one Substance, Heb. 2.
14. yet it does not at all follow from hence, that all men are Christ, for they
are all distinct persons from him, they are many persons, He is one Person,
Mat. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16. Oneness in nature, does not make oneness in person;
a man and his wife are one in Nature, yet they are two distinct persons; and
although all men in respect of their substance of Spirit, Soul and Body, and
Christ in respect of his Humane Nature are one; yet in respect of his Godhead
they are not one, for He only is the Son of God, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, and was so from all eternity, Rev. 1. 8. Phil. 2. 6. Heb. 9. 14. the
spirit of man, though it be the most excellent part of man, yet it is but a
Created Substance; the Spirit of Holiness in Christ is, an uncreated
Substance, a being without beginning and without end; So that although Christ
was in all things made like unto his Brethren, sin excepted, yet as he is the
Son of God, according to the Spirit of Holiness, he is not like his Brethren,
that have beginning of days, and end of life; but like his Father of the same
uncreated Substance, and of the same eternity, even without beginning and
without end; and as Christ did in our Nature suffer, yet not in ours, but in
his own Person; so he is pleased to account that which is done to his
Disciples, as done to himself, because it is done to one of his Natures, though
not to his person, but to the Persons of his Disciples, who are not therefore
Christ; for the Disciples are not that person that is the Christ, neither have
they as they are persons, those two Natures that Christ has, neither are they
that one Person that Christ is, neither are they in a mystical sense called
Christ, but as being in Covenant and in Communion with that one Person which is
the Christ, who is the Son of God, according to the Spirit of Holiness, and the
Son of David also, according to the flesh, which no man besides him is: from
all which the sense of the Scripture, Mat. 25. 36. is clear, viz. That man
having one of the Natures of Christ, viz. Flesh and Blood, and being in
Covenant with him by becoming his Disciples, that good or that evil which is
done unto them, Christ declares it as done unto himself, not that it was done
to his Person, as the Question of the Righteous, verse. 37. and the Answer of
the King, verse. 40. do evidently manifest; whereby the folly of those that
wrest this Scripture, to prove that Christ Preaches to the Spirits, when they
are in Prison, or that those Spirits are Christ, that the Christ is only a
Power or Spirit in every man, and not a distinct Person from all men beside
himself; or that Christ has only one Nature, and not two dictinct Natures in
one Person; or that the Humane Nature which dyed, was not Christ according to
the Flesh, which also was quickened again by Christ, according to the Spirit of
Holiness, Romans 1. 4. or that these two Natures, Spirit of Holiness and Flesh,
Son of God, and Son of Man, in one Person; is not the true Christ, distinct
from all other Persons of men, though they be the Disciples of Christ: I say,
the folly and blasphemy of those that wrest this Scripture, to defend those
vain conceits, or to gainsay those Glorious Truths which are discovered, laid
open and made manifest; for Christ in his affirmations, I was an hungered, and
ye fed me; Naked, and ye clothed me; Sick, and ye visited me; in Prison, and
ye came unto me, and the like; did not affirm these things to be administered to
the eternal Substance, but to the whole created man, Spirit, Soul and Body,
especially to the sensitive Soul which stands in need of Food, Mat. 6. 25.
and to the Body, which being naked, has need of clothing; as also the Spirit
of man, which being in trouble, has need of comfort; But it cannot be said,
that the Power, Spirit or eternal Substance in man, distinct from the Spirit,
Soul and Body of man, is hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick, or in
prison; neither did Christ affirm these comforts to be administered to his own
Person, consisting of these Divine and Humane Natures, which as the Spirit of
Holiness, was ever free from such infirmities, so also the Humane Nature of
his Person, has been free from hunger, cold and nakedness, ever since his
Resurrection from the dead; so that the true meaning of our Savior is this,
viz. That forasmuch as the Humane Nature of Christ, is one in substance with
the Nature of mankind, and because the Disciples of Christ, are in Covenant
with Christ, their Head and Lord; therefore that which is done to them in
Feeding, Clothing, Harboring, etc. the Lord takes it as done unto himself,
because it is done to one of his Natures, though not to his Person, and because
it is done to the Persons of his Disciples, which are in Covenant with him, as
the 40. verse makes it evident: And the King shall answer and say unto them,
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of
these, my Brethren, ye have done it unto me: Thus this Scripture also is
vindicated, and those false inferences, which false teachers have endeavored
to draw from it, refelled.

Soul or Spirit, is Christ the Light of the World, the eternal and uncreated
substance, being lifted up with high conceit of themselves, supposing that the
Godhead dwells in them bodily, and being unwilling to be divested of that
imaginary deity, and to be accounted mere Creatures; it is likely that they
will object whatsoever may be objected against that Doctrine, which declares
Jesus Christ, to be a distinct Person from all other persons, having such a
manner of unity with God the Father, that no person has in the whole world
beside himself; and it is more then probable, that they will allege these and
such like sentences of Scripture, viz. Christ in you the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.
27. My little Children, of whom I travel in birth again, till Christ be formed
in you, Gal. 4. 19. That was the true Light, which lights every man which
comes into the World, and the Light shines in darkness, etc. John 1. 5. And
the inference which they will make from these and such like Scriptures,
questionless will be to this purpose, viz. That the eternal and uncreated
substance or witness, ^^ in every man that comes into the World, in the same
manner as it is in him that was born of the Virgin, and is so manifested in
those that call themselves Preachers and followers of the Light within, etc.
But in answer to their Allegations and Objections of this kind, the Scripture
teaches, that all mankind are of the same substance with Christ, according to
one of his Natures, but not according to the other; according to the Created,
but not according to the Uncreated substance: Forasmuch, says the Apostle, As
the children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself likewise took
part of the same, Heb. 2. 14. The Flesh, Soul and Spirit of all men, and the
Flesh, Soul and Humane Spirit of Christ is of one Substance; there is indeed a
Personal and an Accidental difference, but not a Substantial: the Persons of
men are many, but the Person of Christ is one; the condition wherein the World
of men and women are, is unclean, by reason of sin, but the condition wherein
the Humane Nature of Christ's Person is, is Pure and Holy, by reason of his
Righteousness; he took part of the same Substance of Adam, but no part of his
Pollution: we are unclean, because we are Propogated in unclean Lust, the just
reward of sinful desire, Genesis 3. 16. Psalm. 51. 5. but he is Pure and Holy,
because he was conceived of the Holy Spirit; we are unclean, because we have
sinned in transgressing the Law of God, but he is Pure and Holy, because he
has kept it: the Humane Nature of Christ, was made in the same condition that
Adam was before he sinned, but we are become in the same condition that Adam
was after he had sinned; and as the Substance of Adams Flesh, Soul and Spirit,
was the same after he had sinned as before, but not the condition; so the
Substance of Christ's Flesh, Soul and Humane Spirit (not of the Spirit of
Holiness) is the same with Adams, now since Adam sinned, but the condition,
the same with Adams before he sinned; for though the eternal word took hold of
the Seed of Abraham, or took into Personal Unity, the Substance of Adam, after
Adam had sinned; yet the Estate or Condition wherein that substance was made,
was as Pure and Holy, as Just and Righteous, as Adam was before he sinned; for
as Adam before he transgressed, was a Son of God by Creation, Luke 3. 38. So
the Humane Nature of Christ, is the Son of God by Creation; God made or built
the Body of Christ, of the Seed of the Woman, as he did the Body of Adam, of
the dust of the ground, see Genesis 2. 7. Gal. 4. 4. Heb. 10. 5. Christ's being the
Son of David, does respect the substance of which his Body was made, not the
formation of that substance; for in that respect, he is also the Son of God,
Luke 1. 35. It is indeed a Glorious Personality, that the Humane Nature of
Christ has, because it does not subsist of it self, but in the Godhead, but
the substance of it, is the same with all mankind, who subsists not as he does,
viz. by Personal Unity with the Godhead; and as Adam before he had
transgressed, had Sovereignty over the Creatures, and the Paradise of God for
his Habitation, wherein was the Tree of Life, whereof he might have eaten
before he transgressed, and so have lived for ever in the enjoyment of God, and
of that image or likeness of God, wherein he was made, had he kept that Law,
and eaten of that Tree of Life which was given him for that purpose; see Genesis
3. 22. Rev. 22. 2, 3. So the Humane Nature of Christ's Person, by keeping that
Law which Adam transgressed, has right to all that Adam lost; for he being
made under the Law which he also fulfilled, Gal. 4. 4. Mat. 5. 17, 18. in him
the Image of God is seen expressly, Heb. 1. 3. and all things are put in
subjection under his feet, Heb. 2. 7, 8. see Psalm. 8. And as the first Adam
being tempted, by his yiedling to the temptation, was soon overcome of the
Devil, and led Captive at his will; So Christ the second Adam, by resisting the
Devil, when he was tempted by him forty days in the Wilderness, overcame
Satan and put him to flight, see Mat. 4. verse. 1. to 12. And therefore as the
demerit of the first Adams transgression was so great, that all that are
derived from him by Natural Generation, are defiled by it; so the demerit of
the second Adams obedience is so great, that all that ever come to be derived
from him by Spiritual Regeneration, are sanctified by it; So that as it was a
blessed estate and condition, that the Person of the first Adam, and all that
were in him, lost by sin; so it is a blessed estate and condition, that the
Humane Nature of Christ, the second Adam, has gained by his obedience, for the
same Nature, in the Persons of all those that ever come to be in Covenant with
him, or to be regenerate or born again of Water, and of the Holy Spirit, and so
to be grafted into him by Faith, John 3. 5. 6. Romans 11. 19. 20.

of the state and condition wherein the first Adam was made, and wherein he
continued until he transgressed the Law of God, shall find that it was a very
happy and blessed estate and condition; for he was made in the Image of God, in
Righteousness and true holiness was he created, see Eccles. 7. 29. Genesis 1.
26. Ephesians. 4. 24. with dominion over the Creatures, the Fish of the Sea, the
Foul of the Air, and over everly living thing that moves upon the earth, was
he invested, Genesis 1. 28, 29. In the Paradise of God was he placed, of all the
Trees of the Garden, excepting only one, was he allowed to eat, and amongst
those which he was allowed to feed upon, and even in the midst of the Garden
was the Tree of Life, whereof if he had eaten before he transgressed, he had no
doubt continued for ever in that blessed estate and condition of Righteousness
and true Holiness, wherein he was made, Genesis 3. 23, 24. But he soon lost that
blessed estate and condition, and by sin, made himself and his posterity
exceeding wretched and miserable, for of a Son of God, he became a son of
Satan, a child of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. he defaced the Image of God, and got unto
himself the Image of Satan, for he took the Devil for his Father, by following
his counsel; for his reward, the man Adam by transgression, became like the
Devil, that is, to have the knowledge and experience both of good and evil;
Behold, says the Lord God, the man is become like him, (For it is observed,
that the Hebrew word may and ought so to be rendered, for man became like the
Devil by sin) from us, viz. the Devil, to know, that is to experience good and
evil, Genesis 3. 22. For God is Pure and Holy, the Devil is impure and unholy; God
cannot behold the evil of sin with approbation, the Devil cannot behold good
with approbation, see Heb. 1. 13. therefore says Christ to the Jews, Ye are of
your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him: when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, for he is a liar,
and the father of it, John 8. 44. So that man by sin being in condition become
like the Devil, for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. that so the substance of Adam
might be redeemed out of that lost condition whereinto it was fallen by
transgression, and be so secured in happiness for the future, that it should
not fall again from it; that this might be effected, it was necessary that the
eternal Word, the second Person of the Trinity, should take the substance of
Adam into personality with himself, that those two Substances, the eternal
Word, and the Substance of Adam might be one in Personality, that so the
obedience of Life, and suffering of Death, of the Substance of Adam in the
Person of Christ, might be of such infinite worth and value with God, that for
the merit of it, he might set free the same Substance of Adam in all other
persons also, from that bondage and misery whereunto they are fallen by the
transgression of Adam, and of themselves; for the Substance of Adam, in the
Person of Christ, fulfilling the Law, and then also that Substance being made a
curse, and suffering the Sentence of the Law, due to the World of sinners, not
to Christ that sinned not; the world of sinners are put into a capacity to be
delivered, according to the condition of the New Covenant, from that wrath and
Curss unto which they are fallen, by the transgression of the old and first
Covenant, which fallen condition is called in Scripture, the old man, or Adam,
which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. The body of
sin, Romans 6. 6. The members which are upon the earth, Col. 3. 5. The Law of sin
in the Members, Romans 7. 23. The Flesh, the carnal mind, Romans 8. 7, 8. and such
like, all which do set forth that miserable estate and condition, into which
the Substance of Adam is fallen by sin: on the contrary, that condition which
the Substance of Adam had before he sinned, and to which it is restored in the
Person of Christ, is called in Scripture, the new man, which after God is
created in Righteousness and True Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22. The Law of the
Spirit, Romans 8. 2. The Spiritual Mind, Romans 8. 6. The new man, which is renewed
in knowledge, after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3. 10. and such
like. Now the eternal Word, taking hold of the Substance of Adam, and uniting
it unto personality with the uncreated substance; and the created substance
keeping the condition of the first Covenant, that is to say, exact unsinning
obedience; that substance of Adam in the Person of Christ, is as Pure and Holy,
as Just and Righteous, as it was in Adam before he sinned; but that the same
Substance of Adam, in all other persons also might be redeemed from that
miserable estate, viz. guilt of sin, power and dominion of sin, and from the
punishment justly due unto the world of sinners; that substance of Adam in the
Person of Christ that knew no sin, underwent the Sentence and Curse of the Law;
that so the same substance in the persons of others, might be set free, not by
their performing the condition of the first Covenant; for it is impossible that
they that have sinned, should be justified by that Covenant, which requires
exact unsinning obedience, but by their performing the condition of the second
Covenant, which is, Repentance, Faith and Gospel-obedience, which those that
have sinned, may through the assistance of Gods Spirit perform; upon condition
of which, Repentance, Faith and Gospel-Obedience, the Lord gives unto them,
both pardon of their sins past, and also such help and assistance by his
Spirit, that those that thus enter into Covenant with him, may be enabled to
walk more agreeable to the rule of the spiritual and holy Law of God, Romans 7.
12, 14. than any man or woman out of Covenant with him, by all their own
strength and endeavors, now since the fall of Adam, can possibly do; yea,
Jesus Christ does so assist those that are in Covenant with him, that with
their minds they may be enabled to serve the Law of God, though through the
warring of the flesh against the Law of their mind, they are sometimes
captivated to the Law of sin in their members; See Romans 7. 22 23, 24, 25. Now
so far forth as persons come to be in Covenant with Christ, and are enabled by
him to walk according to his direction; so far forth are they said to have
Christ formed in them, that is to say, to be brought into a blessed estate and
condition of freedom from the guilt of sin; of freedom from the power and
dominion of sin, of assurance of redemption from the first death, and of
deliverance from the second death; and so by Christ, to be entitled unto
eternal Life; so that if the created substance of Adam in the Person of Christ,
though by the power of his uncreated substance, does set free the same created
substance in the persons of others, from that miserable estate and condition,
into which that substance is fallen by sin and transgression, and also entitle
that substance unto eternal life; It may well be said of all those that are
brought into such an estate and condition by Christ, that Christ is formed in
them, though they be not of the same substance with Christ, in respect of his
uncreated, but only in respect of his created substance; and that those
objections propounded, and such like, are fully answered.

Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. To this it is answered, that
although it be so, yet the manner of Believers partaking of the Divine Nature,
is different from that manner of unity, of the Divine and Humane Natures in the
Person of Christ, in several respects.

First, In the Humane Nature of Christ, dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, Col. 2. 9. But in Believers, the Godhead does not dwell bodily.

Secondly, The Body of Christ who was born of Mary, was not Conceived, that is,
formed or fashioned in his Mothers Womb, but by and of the Holy Spirit, the
second Person in the Trinity: But the bodies of those that are Believers, were
not conceived in their Mothers Wombs by any such operation of the Holy Spirit;
God forbid we should once presume to think so.

For Thirdly, The Virgin Mary conceived the Body of Christ, of her Seed or
Substance by the operation of the Holy Spirit, the second Person in the
Trinity, without her knowing of man, Luke 1. 34. 35. But the Bodies of those
men and women that are Believers and Saints by calling, were conceived of their
Mothers, not without their knowing of man, and without any such operation of
the Holy Spirit.

Fourthly, The Humane Nature of Christ's Person, never subsisted of it self, but
always was in Personal Unity with the Godhead, and subsisted by it, so that in
him the Godhead dwelt bodily; but it is not so with others Persons, though they
are Believers, and though their Substance be the same with the Humane Nature of
Christ; yet it does not subsist as the Humane Nature of Christ's Person does;
for all Persons, excepting Christ, do subsist without the Personal Unity of the
Godhead; but the Humane Nature of Christ's Person, did never subsist without the
Personal Unity of the Godhead.

Therefore, Fifthly, That we may understand how Believers do partake of the
Divine Nature, it is needful to consider, what that Divine Nature is, that
Believers are said to partake of, and after what manner they do partake of it:
The Divine Nature then of which participation is promised unto believers, is
their attaining unto an eminent resemblance of that blessed estate and
condition, wherein the Humane Nature of the Person of Christ, now is since his
Resurrection from the dead, and ascension to his Father, as the Apostle Paul
teaches, Romans 8. 29. For says he, Whom God did foreknow, he also did
predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
firstborn among many Brethren; for as Believers have born the Image of the
earthly, so shall they also bear the Image of the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 49. That
as the Humane Nature of Christ, could not be held of death, because it was in
Personal Unity with the Divine Nature; So those that are in Covenant with
Christ, shall not be held of the first, neither shall they enter into the
second death; not because they are personally united unto the Divine Nature or
Godhead, as the Humane Nature of Christ's Person is, but because they, as all
mankind are, of one substance with the Humane Nature of Christ; Therefore all
shall be brought out of the Grave, and such as are also in Covenant with him,
whose Humane Nature is personally united unto the Godhead, shall not enter into
the second death; for as the Godhead of Christ did quicken that Humane Nature,
which is in Personal Unity with it; so will the same Godhead, (see Acts 10. 43.
Acts 13. 38. Ephesians. 2. 5. Rev. 3. 14. etc.) through that Humane Nature, quicken
also the same Humane Nature in those that are not in Personal Unity with it;
for the Humane Nature of Christ is so filled with the Divine Nature, that of
his fullness, all those that are in Covenant with him, do receive, and Grace
for Grace, John 1. 16. It is wonderful to consider what victory the Humane
Nature of Christ's Person has obtained, with what dignity he is invested, and
what gifts he has to bestow upon all his Brethren, now since his ascension to
his Father: He, says the Apostle, has led Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4. 8.
has abolished death, and has brought Life and Immortality to light, through
the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. He is Crowned with Glory and Honor, Heb. 2. 9. He is
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. All Power in Heaven and Earth is
given unto Him, Mat. 28. 18. even that Jesus which was Crucified, is now both
Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. He that descended into the lower parts of the
Earth, is the same also that ascended far above all Heavens; that He might fill
all things: And He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in
the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. The Divine Nature filled the Humane Nature in the Person of
Christ, that He might pour out of his fullness, to the same Humane Nature in the
persons of others; the Humane Nature of Christ's Person did so perticipate of
the Divine Nature, that his Conception, Birth, Life, Sufferings and Death, was
Pure and Holy, and therefore of infinite worth in the sight of God the Father;
that so they whose Conception, Birth and Life is polluted and unclean, and
whose death is the wages of their sins, might be set free from sin and from
death, and entitled unto eternal Life; for in the flesh of Christ, sin was so
condemned, Romans 8. 3. that neither unto the guilt of sin, dominion of sin, nor
unto any punishment due for any sin done by him, was he liable; it was to set
free the persons of others from the Guilt, Dominion and Punishment due to them
for their sins, that he underwent the punishment; he that knew no sin, being
made a curse, that so they which have sinned, might inherit a blessing, Gal. 3.
13. 14. which blessing, or rather blessedness, Psalm 1. 1. all those that are
in Covenant with Christ, and in that Covenant are faithful unto death, Rev. 2.
10. do receive of him, who through his Divine Power, does give unto them a
likeness of estate and condition, unto his own now glorified Humane Nature;
that so they also truly may be said, to partake of the Divine Nature. See 2
Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4.

Therefore, Sixthly and Lastly, Believers partaking of the Divine Nature, as it
is in a different manner from the Union of the Divine and Humane Natures of the
Person of Christ; so in this life, it is but a part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. With the
mind, says the Apostle, I my self serve the Law of God, but with my flesh, the
law of sin, Romans 7. 25. The Renovation the Apostle exhorts to, is in the spirit
of the mind, Ephesians. 4. 23. The perfection the Apostle declares the Saints now
to be come to, is to the Spirits of Just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. which
is but the earnest of that inheritance Believers shall obtain, the first fruits
of the Spirit; Believers though they enjoy this, do wait for the Adoption, to
wit, the Redemption of their Bodies. See Romans 8. 23, 24, 25.

Heb. 5. 8, 9.
does consist, is now perfectly glorified, his Body being raised from the
Grave, and ascended up into Heaven, Luke 24. 51. So shall the Spirits, Souls
and Bodies of all true Believers, after the Resurrection of their Bodies from
their Graves, or change from mortal to immortality, be perfectly glorified: See
1 Cor. 13. 10. And when they come to this estate and condition, then they come
to the full enjoyment of the promised Inheritance, to which they are of God
predestined; that is to say, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he
might be the first born among many Brethren, Romans 8. 29. And this is that the
Apostle prays for, in behalf of the Church of the Thessalonians; And the very
God of Peace (says he) Sanctify you wholly, and I pray God your whole Spirit,
Soul and Body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 These. 5. 23. Then Believers shall have their complete participation of the
Divine Nature, when they, having overcome and kept the Works of Christ unto the
end, are by him brought into likeness of estate and condition with his own now
glorified Humane Nature; for when the day of Christ's appearing shall dawn, then
shall the Day Star, the Glory of his Humane Nature arise in the Hearts of all
that love him, 2 Pet. 1. 19. For as Jesus Christ is that bright Morning Star,
Rev. 22. 16. so he promised to give it unto them that hold fast till he come,
Rev. 2. 28. And then he whose Humane Nature has received of the Father, (Rev.
2. 27.) Power, Glory and Honor, (John 17. 1, 2. John 8. 54.) will give unto
his Brethren a likeness of Glory unto that, to which his own Humane Nature is
now advanced; which being once dead, is now alive again, and lives for
evermore; and is now fully able to open the doors of death, and to set at
liberty the Prisoners of Corruption and Mortality, as he himself testifies;
saying, I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen; and have the keys of Hell and of Death, Rev. 1. 18. Although the second
Adam be of the same Substance with the first; Yet oh how excellent is the
estate and condition of the second Adam, now since his Resurrection from the So
is the Greek, says the Learned.
dead! The last Adam, says the Apostle, was made into a quickening Spirit, It
is raised a spiritual Body, says he, 1 Cor, 15. 44, 45. And, as the first Adam
being fallen, those that bear his Image, bear the Image of the earthly, that
is, Sin, Corruption and Mortality; so the second Adam being raised, those that
shall bear his Image, shall bear the Image of the Heavenly; that is,
Righteousness, Incorruptibility and Immortality, 1 Cor. 15. 49. 55, 56, 57.
For the first Adam having by sin defaced the Image of God, wherein he was
created; the second Adam repaired it again, and by fulfilling the Law under
which he was made, has so condemned sin in the flesh, that having suffered
death for the World of sinners, and being also risen again from the dead, his
own Humane Nature, Spirit, Soul and Body; and also the Spirits, Souls and
Bodies of all that believe on his Name, shall for ever enjoy Life, Spirituality
and Incorruptibility; And when the Church shall come to this estate and
condition, then shall she resemble her Head, Christ Jesus, who having first
given himself for it, to Sanctify and to cleanse it, will then give himself
unto it, and thereby make it like Glorious with his own Glorified Humane
Nature: See Ephesians 5. 25, 26, 27. Rev. 19. 7, 8, 9.

Christ has once suffered for sins, the Just for the Unjust, that He might
bring us to God; who being put to death in, or concerning the flesh, was
quickened again by the Spirit of Holiness; that is to say, the Godhead of
Christ, did quicken the manhead of his Person, that so the Manhead in the
Person of Christ, might by the Power of his Godhead, quicken the same Manhead
in the persons of others; For now even the Manhead of Christ, has (though
still the same Substance as the first Adam, yet) the quality and condition of a
quickening Spirit; for that manhead which being always in Personal Unity with
the Godhead, and now also raised by it from the dead, and exalted to the Glory
of the Father, has such Power through the Godhead, with which it is in
Personal Unity, that he can give a likeness of Glory to the Manhead, which is
not Personally united to the Godhead; for He has received of the Father such
Power over all flesh, that He should give eternal Life to as many as are by the
Father given unto Him, John 17, 1, 2. For the Father gives those that believe
in Jesus Christ, unto Christ, that they may receive of his Fullness, Ephesians. 1.
3, 4. John 1. 16. Ephesians. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. And Christ gives unto them, with
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Spirit, the Hope of eternal Life, to
support them in all their Tribulations, which they endure for his Names sake;
and at the last he will give them eternal Life, and the Glorious enjoyment of
blessedness unspeakable, Romans 14. 17, 18. Col. 1. 5. 2 These. 1. 4, 5, 6. Yea,
Christ as man in the Substance of Adam, in the Created Substance, has taken
hold of eternal Life, that the Creature, man, may be assured of enjoying the
same, by virtue of a title derived from him, as he himself testifies, John 6.
27. saying, Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you; for
him has God the Father Sealed: for since by man came death, by man came also
the Resurrection from the dead, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 21. And God has
given good assurance, both of the Resurrection, and of the Eternal Life, which
is promised unto them that believe, in that the Man Christ Jesus in the
Substance of Adam is risen from the dead, and entered into Life and Glory
everlasting, Acts 17. 31. The Resurrection of Jesus Christ, is that sure sign
of the Prophet Jonah; for the Substance of Adam being raised from the dead in
the Person of Christ, it gives assurance of a resurrection to the same
Substance in the Persons of others; and seeing Jesus Christ does promise to
them that believe the Gospel, not only the Resurrection from the Grave, but
also eternal Life, the Creature, man, has good assurance of enjoying
happiness by following his Counsel; because the created Substance in Christ's
Person has taken possession thereof; for as the Apostle teaches, Romans 11. 16,
17. The Branches must necessarily be Holy, where the Root is Holy, and the Lump
where the first fruit; So that if men and women will be content to break off
their sins by repentance, that by Faith, through grace they may be grafted into
Christ, they may be well assured to partake of the Root and Fatness of him
their Olive Tree, that is to say, enjoy a likeness of Life and Immortality with
the Humane nature of Christ, which will be communicated to them from the Divine
Nature of Christ, by, or through his Humane Nature, as he himself has
promised, Rev. 3. 21. saying, To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with
me in my Throne, even as I also overcame and am set down with my Father in his
Throne: This is the comfort of Believers in all their Tribulations for the Name
of Christ, and for the testimony whereof, the blessed Marryt Saint Stephen
dyed, who beholding in Heaven the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right
hand of God, was so filled with consolation and assurance, that he said to them
which did so fiercely persecute him; Behold, I see the Heaven opened, and the
Son of Man standing on the right hand of God; and in this confidence he called
upon God, saying, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, and Lord, lay not this sin to
their charge, Acts 7. 55, 56. The Glorification of the Created Substance in the
Person of Christ, was that which comforted Stephen, when his enemies cried out,
stopped their ears, ran upon him with one accord, cast him out of the City, and
stoned him to death as a Blasphemer; for he saw the assurance of his own
glorification, in seeing the Son of Man in Glory; though Satan was pleading by
his instruments against him on earth, yet while Jesus Christ in the Created and
no^ Glorified Substance, was pleading for him in Heaven, he was not discouraged
at death it self, but was so well assured of his own happiness, and so well
instructed in Christian exercise, that calling upon the Lord Jesus, to receive
his own Spirit; he prayed unto him also to forgive the sins of those that
murdered him; Oh how great is the consolation of the Faithful in Christ Jesus,
upon the account of the Glory to which the Humane Nature in his Person is now
advanced; full well may they withstand all the Powers of darkness, and say with
the Apostle, Romans 8. 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed, ye
rather, that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. See 1 Pet. 3. 21, 22. Heb. 1. 3. Heb. 12. 2.
Believers having such an Advocate and High Priest of their Profession, who is
first made like unto his Brethren, touched with all their infirmities, sin
only excepted, and now also made higher than the Heavens, that Humane Nature,
by Personal conjunction with the Divine Nature, and by what it has received
from it, being become so Spiritual, that it may be truly said, the las^ Adam,
That is, the Created Substance in Christ's Person, is now made into a quickening
Spirit; so that it may well be concluded, that as the Father raises up the
dead, and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom he will: for as the
Father has Life in Himself, so has he given to the Son, to have Life in
himself, and has given him Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is
the Son of Man, John 5. 21, 26, 27. And he having suffered, by being Tempted,
and Crucified, and being now also made perfect, that is to say, having broke
the Head of the Serpent, overcome all his enemies, and being in the Humane
Nature of his own Person exalted above them; he is able to relieve all his
Disciples in all their temptations, yea, to save them to the uttermost, that
come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them: And so
they that See Heb. 2. 14, 15, 17, 18. and Heb. 7. 25
now suffer with Christ, shall in due time partake of his Divine Nature, that
they shall be in like estate and condition with his now Glorified Humane
Nature, and reign with him in Glory Everlasting, 2 Timothy 2. 11, 12. Thus it is
evident* that as the Created Substance in Christ's Person, is now invested with
Glory, so the same Substance in those that believe in him, shall in due time be
advanced to it, as those that believe not in him, shall be kept far from it.

etc. sometimes are denounced, as they say, against sin; and withal, do
remember what it is that is the Subject of their blessing, viz. not the
Creature Man, but a supposed Seed or uncreated Substance in man; then is it not
easy to conclude also, what is the subject of their curse, viz. not the
Creature Man, consisting of Spirit, Soul and Body, but some other thing, a
contrary Seed? and its likely they will say, it is the Devil; but let them call
it what they will, this is evident, that it tends much to the imboldening man
to God, on in his Sin and Rebellion against God, and the Gospel of his Grace,
to suggest unto him, that the Devil only is the Subject of the Wrath of God;
There cannot be a Doctrine more advantageous to Satan, and to the advancement
of his Kingdom, then such a Doctrine, which persuades, that the Devil only
shall bear the blame, and suffer the punishment for all the sins that man does
commit: Oh how gredidily will a man that is so persuaded, commit all manner of
wickedness; but it is not good for any man to trust to the lies of the old
Serpent, nor to the falsehood of any of his instruments, for the Word of Christ
is directly contrary to the word of Antichrist; for the Scriptures of Truth do
declare, that the Creature Man, which obeys not the Gospel, but lives and
dies in unbelief, shall, as being a cursed seed, be cast into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8. 12. Those eyes that have
been the windows of vain desire, and have not looked up to Heaven, to behold
the work of God, that so they might consider the operation of his hands, (Psalm.
28. 5.) and turn and repent, and believe the Gospel, shall weep and wail,
because of anguish and pain, and that without remedy: It is not only the Devil
that shall bear the punishment of sin; but unto those men and women that enter
not into Covenant with Christ, that so they may obtain from him the remission
of their sins, he will say at the last day, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Such
indeed is the punishment prepared for the Devil and his Angels, and for the
Beast and the false Prophet, with those workers of iniquity that live and die
in their worship and service, That they shall be cast into the lake of fire,
burning with Brimstone, where they shall be tormented day and night for ever,
Rev. 19. 20. Rev. 20. 10. So that as the Angels which kept not their first
estate, but left their own habitation, are justly reserved, unto the judgment
of the great day, Jude verse 6. So also the Creature man, shall either lie
under the curse and wrath of God, as the just reward of his sin and
disobedience to the Gospel, in his not believing in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God, Christ Jesus, that so his sins might be remitted, and his
Person saved in that great day of Judgment, Mark 9. 44. Acts 3. 19, 20, 21. or
else the Creature man shall enjoy from God, through Jesus Christ, by Faith in
his Name, the unspeakable blessedness of Peace, Adoption, Salvation, Eternal
Life, and everlasting Glory with the Father and the Son; For as the wicked
shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17.
even so shall the Righteous enter into Life eternal, and Joy unutterable, Mat.
25. 46. Mark 16. 16. Dan. 12. 2, 3. This is the Doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; that which is the contrary Doctrine, is the doctrine of Devils, the
consequence whereof leads men and women unto all manner of wickedness; For if
no blessedness shall be to the Spirits, Souls and Bodies of them that walk in
the Fear, Faith and Love of God, nor no tribulation nor anguish, no indignation
nor wrath, to the Spirits, Souls and Bodi^s of them that walk in the vanity of
their minds, committing iniquity with greediness, desiring reproof, and casting
the Rich and Gracious tender of Gods unspeakable Love in Christ Jesus, which he
so earnestly tendreth unto them, behind their backs; then what wickedness may
not man run into? With how much eagerness will all such as are so persuaded,
persist in all impiety? How impossible will it be unto them, while they retain
such a delusion, to be turned from sin, and converted to God? but that Doctrine
which strengthens the hands of evil doers, and weakeneth the hands,
discourageth the Hearts, and makes the Knees of those that are running in the
Paths of everlasting Peace, to become feeble, neither is nor can be of God, but
is from Satan the old Serpent, and from his Vicegerent Antichrist, the Beast
and false Prophet, who with all his Subjects, Worshippers and Admirers, even
all those men and women that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the Presence of the Lord,
and from the Glory of his Power; when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, because the Testimony of
the Grace of God was of them believed, in the day of his long suffering and
forbearance, 2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10. Romans 2. 4.

Creature Man, with all the helps he can lay hold on, either is, can or ought
to be perfect; for when I have asked them about this thing, and have said unto
one of them, What is that thing in it self, which thou say is perfect? Is it
thee, such a man, thy Body of Flesh, the Created Substance and Being, which is
called by such a name, etc. it has been answered, No, I speak not of the
Creature, or the Body of Flesh its being perfect: I mean that measure of
Christ, as it raises up it self in me, it is perfect, it is that which does not
sin, it is that which is born of God, it is that which I witness to, according
to my measure, it is perfect: Now who sees not plainly, that thy Contention
about Perfection is vain; for who doubts of the Perfection of the uncreated
Substance, or of the Perfection of the Person of Christ* his Divine Nature is
Perfect the Humane Nature of his Person is Perfect; the Person of Christ did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22. And is there not a
vast difference between the perfection of the Person of Christ, which is
perfect by a perfection, without ever having done one act of evil, or thought
one sinful thought, or spoken one guileful word; and the perfection of the
Persons of other men who have sinned, in Thought, Word and Deed? Is it not
therefore vain, to speak to a man of perfection, and not to intend the
perfection of man? And is it not as vain, to make no distinction between the
Person of Christ, and the persons of other men? or between the Communion of the
Holy Spirit, the third Person in the Trinity with Believers, and the Union of
the Spirit of Holiness, or Divine Nature, the second Person in the Trinity,
with the Body of Christ, or his Humane Nature? or between the operation of the
Holy Spirit, upon the World of Sinners, in convincing them of Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment, John 16. 8. and the Gift of the Holy Spirit unto
Believers, whereby they are assured of their Adoption, led into all Truth,
assisted in Holy Duties, supported in Tribulation, and invested with hope of
Glorification? Romans 8. 16. John 16. 13. Romans 8. 26. 1 Cor. 14. 15. Romans 5. 5.
If therefore when thou speak to man of perfection, thou meanest the
perfection of the Divine Nature of Christ, a Measure of God, as thou call
it; does not every Believer, acknowledge the perfection of the Divine Nature?
Who is so profane, as not to conclude, that God is perfect? And who so
Blasphemous but thy self, being led by the Spirit of Antichrist, as to presume
once to think, that any part of man, Spirit, Soul or Body, is of the Divine,
Eternal and uncreated Substance? and such must needs be the meaning of those
that Preach to man of perfection, and intend no other perfection, than the
perfection of God, or of the Person of Christ.

Spirit, Soul and Body, shall at the coming of Christ in Glory, be made
perfect; and as the Spirit of man by pardon of sin, Luke 1. 77. is now made
perfect, (Heb. 12. 23.) in part, so shall the whole man also eternally enjoy
perfection, as the Apostle teaches, When that which is perfect is come, then
that which is in part shall be done away; for now we see through a glass
darkly, but then, face to face: Now, says he, I know in part, but then shall I
know even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12. for then, at the coming of
Christ Jesus the Lord, shall the Spirits, souls and Bodies of all Believers be
preserved blameless, 1 These. 5. 23. and being sanctified by Christ, Ephesians. 5.
26. shall be found without fault before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 5. For when
the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, then shall
their sins be blotted out, Acts 3. 16. both sin, and punishment for sin, shall
then be taken away, that so they may be made perfect in Glory and Happiness
everlasting, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. And forasmuch as the Perfection of God,
and of the Divine Nature of Christ, is a perfection of a different Nature from
the perfection of man, God being perfect in his Nature, Christ having never
acted sin; man being imperfect in his Nature, by reason of sin which he has
committed; if thou that call thy self a Preacher of the Light within, etc.
when thou exhortest to perfection, intendest man in thy exhortation; then thou
that exhortest another, should teach thy self to be obedient to that which
the Scriptures teach man to observe, in order to his obtaining perfection; that
is to say, to turn from thy dead works, thy Legal Righteousness, acknowledging
thy self a sinner; say with the Publican, with a contrite Spirit, God be
merciful to me a sinner; believe the Gospel of the remission of sins; and being
cut to the heart with grief for sin committed, Repent, and be Baptized in
Water, in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of thy sins; See Acts 2.
38. Acts 10. 47. Mat. 3. 6. and so walking, as Christ reaches in the
Scriptures, thou may attain unto the perfection that he has promised; but
if when thou exhortest to perfection, thou intendest God, or the Divine Nature
of Christ, in thy exhortation, or the Person of Christ, then thou blasphemest
against God, and against Christ; supposing him to stand in need of an
exhortation to perfection, whose Nature is Pure and Perfect; or, that the
Person of Christ has sometimes been imperfect, whose Divine Nature is perfect,
being of the same Substance with his Fathers, and whose Humane Nature is
perfect, being conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, by the operation of the
Holy Spirit; in which Nature he kept the Law of God, and fulfilled every jot
and tittle of it; he suffered death for our sins, and rose again for the
Justification of all them that believe in him; and such perfection was and is
in him, that by one offering, he has perfected for ever, them that are
Sanctified; wherefore the Holy Spirit also is a Witness to us, saying, I will
put my Laws in their Hearts, and in their Minds will I write them, and their
sins, and their iniquities will I remember no more; Thus he whose Divine Nature
is perfect, and whose Humane Nature also has perfectly kept the Law of God,
and fulfilled all Righteousness, will give unto those, whose Nature is
imperfect, and who have transgressed the Law of God, upon their Repentance and
Conversion, such a perfection through his Grace, as whereby their sins shall
not be remembered, and whereby their Persons shall be glorified for ever and
ever.

from thee which art without them, they should receive that instruction, which
thou call, the Light within them; And to discover thee in this thing, as
plainly as possible I can, I will make use of a Comparison, unto which thou art
as like in thy actings, as to any thing I can find to compare thee withal; for
thou in thy endeavors to gain poor Souls to thy ways, and to become followers
of thy steps, art like unto certain Birders which we have in our Land, that do
go about in the dark night, with a Bell, Candle, and Net, to catch Birds of the
Air, who in this work of theirs, do first of all sound their Bell, which being
of a considerable bigness and sound, it does so amaze and astonish the poor
Birds, that they wholly lose their senses at that time, and cannot tell how to
make use either of Feet or Wing, to avoid the danger that is before them; the
Birder then with his Candle discovering where the amazed Birds do sit, he casts
his Net over them, and having taken them, leads them captive by force whither
he will, and does with them according to his pleasure: Even so thou by thy
Preachings and Printings, do make a great sound and noise to deceive the
Hearts, and to amaze the Spirits of the simple; for thou speak of great
things, yet art but like a sounding Brass, and tinkling Symbal; thou call
upon all to wait in silence, to stand still, to cease from all outward and
Scripture-Teaching, and from Scripture Ordinances, as from Baptism, Laying on
of Hands, and breaking of Bread, etc. from Preaching, Praying and Hearing the
Word, calling them Carnal, Lifeless and empty Ordinances, etc. not only
persuading men and women to leave all outward Means, and Ordinances of the New
Testament, written in the Scriptures, by which they would have the use of their
feet, having them shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; but also
teaching them, that to believe in a Christ out of themselves, is Carnal and
Life-less also; and that their Savior is within them, upon whom they must wait
in silence; even thus thou teach them that follow thee, wholly against
believing in the true Christ, who died in his own Body, that by that one
Sacrifice of himself, out of every other man, he might reconcile the world of
Mankind to himself, without themselves, or any Righteousness done by them;
the believing whereof, is the poor Creatures Wing, whereby to flee unto Christ,
and to rest upon him for Justification by Faith through his Grace; and so to
escape out of the hands of such cruel Birders, and from wrath to come: So that
all thy great sound and noise of Preaching and Printing, in which thou cryest
out so bitterly and vehemently against all those means which are appointed of
God unto Salvation, laboring with all thy might, to bring men and women out of
conceit with them, telling them they are deceived in them, and exhorting them
to Mind the Light which is within them, and that will lead them out of all sin
and iniquity, and eternally save them: Even all this thou do, that thou
may drive on thy design, to put poor Creatures into amazement and
astonishment, to make them to doubt of the truth of all Gods Teachings,
Exhortations and Ordinances whatsoever; to neglect all Duties which God has
commanded, in order to their Salvation, and to sit in silence, and wait in
astonishment, to be delivered from those fears which thou have put them into:
All which is but to delude the senses of poor Creatures, by thy sound and
noise, that so thou may bring them into a bewildered condition, to be even
done withal what thou please, that have so dashed, dazzled, and confounded
their apprehensions and senses.

an evil Spirit, which thou call thy discerning eye, boasting of the great
discovery which thou have made into, and through all men, discerning by it, as
by a Candle, what is in them; and when thou do thus discover by that spirit,
by which thou art led, and as by a Candle see where the poor Bird does sit,
which by thy sound is astonished, confounded and silenced, then thou hastest to
it with all speed, to cast thy Net over it, which is to communicate thy unclean
spirit unto it; which spirit is not the light in every man, but the darkness
in thee and thy followers; neither is it in those that are silenced, confounded
by thee, till it comes from thee, and enters into them at that time, which is
to them remarkable, the time of their visitation, as they call it; but it is a
woeful visitation, for it does not come with a still soft voice, like the Spirit
of God, nor in the cool of the day, but with earthquakes, and rending the
Rocks, as they call it, putting the poor Creature into such a woeful condition,
that it is like one caught in a Net indeed, and must now be dealt withal, at
the mercy of the Fowler, which is very cruel; for oh, what quakings and
shakings, tremblings and fearings? what pulling and dragging is at that time?
just as though the very heart must be pulled out, all the bowels torn in
pieces, and one limb rent from another; of which I have seen the example with
mine eyes, and when the unclean spirit has pronounced such woes, terrors and
judgments; and has held the creature under them, as long as he thinks fit,
which by them is called Hell, and is all the Hell they fear; then the said
Spirit speaks Peace to them, but not by the Blood of Christ shed for their
sins in his own body, and out of themselves; but he tells them, that he has
done away their sins and iniquities as a thick cloud, and carried them away
into the Land of forgetfulness; not that Christ the Scapegoat, as a distinct
Person from all other men, has done it: and then this spirit requires that
Creature to arise, and tell what God has done for its soul; yea, sometimes
this Spirit speaks with a vocal voice, in the bottom of the Bellies of them
that are possessed therewith, saying to them, as the Lord said to Abraham, Genesis
12. 11. (for Satan endeavors to imitate God, as much as he can) Get thee out
of thy Fathers house, and from thy kindred, unto a Land that I will show thee,
and I will reward thee double; other whiles he commands the Creature to go to
such a place, to such a man, with a message from the Lord: for now this Spirit
has the dominion over the poor Creature, hurrying it up and down with Motions,
Revelations and Commands, making it do what he likes; for his power is
unresistable, having gotten such hold that go now they must, they cannot stay,
nor avoid it; speak now they must, and cannot help it; for if they avoid the
doing of any thing which he requires, then are they sure to feel he is a Lord
indeed, by the Terror, Wrath and Judgment, which he will bring them into; his
Commands being given out upon pain of damnation, upon the neglect of obedience
to them; So that he is not obeyed out of a principle of Love, but of Fear and
Terror, and such Terror too as makes them sometimes to quake and tremble; and
so unclean are his commands, that he requires some of them men and women, to
strip off all their clothes, and as naked as they were born, to stand sometimes
upon a Market Cross in the time of Market, and sometimes at the Grave, while
the dead is burying, in their naked bodies, and there to tell the People they
are for a sign of their destruction; though it cannot be reasonably supposed
that God did require his Prophet so to divest himself of all garments
whatsoever, when by some such like sign he required him to declare the
destruction of the People: but such is the uncleanness and cruelty of this
spirit which possesses these poor creatures, almost choking them with his fits
and conflicts, making them roar and foam at the mouth, with such a terrible and
hideous kind of crying, as might very much amaze any one that shall see them,
as I my self have done: therefore I say they do not intend what they declare,
viz. That men and women should be guided by the Light that is in every one of
them, before some of these Teachers have by some means or other conversed with
them, that so instruction and an unclean spirit, might be from them
communicated unto those, upon whom they call to mind the Light within: Ah how
many poor souls have their feet caught in this snare! how many are taken in
this evil net, and thereby led to destroy all their good beginnings wherein
they began to serve the true God, running into gross wickedness and Satanical
delusions, posting from mountain to hill, forgetting their resting place,
turning from the true Christ; and the worship of God, and going a whoring after
this spirit of error and their own inventions!

man should be guided by that Light which they have in them, before they meet
with thee, or thy Doctrine; but that they should receive instruction, and a
spirit from thee to be their director and assister. First, because that when
thou do affirm, that the Apostles of Jesus Christ were sent out to Baptize
with the Spirit, this thou speak to oppose those that stand to maintain that
they were commanded to Baptize with Water, in the Name of Jesus Christ for
remission of sins, and by Prayer, and laying on of hands, to seek unto God,
that he would give his Spirit, as he has promised, Luke 11. 9, 13. Therefore
thou call Baptism in water, carnal; Prayer and laying on of hands, carnal;
because not the Administrator of Prayer and laying on of hands, but God does
give Christ to shed forth or baptize with the holy Spirit, See Acts 5. 32. Acts
2. 33. Mat. 3. 11. Now if I must believe that what thou speak of the
Apostles of Christ, those that are thy messengers can perform, then
consequently they can Baptize with a spirit, and give a spirit to them, which
do receive their counsel, or else they are not lawful Preachers by thy own
confession; so that thou intendest to Communicate a Teacher from without,
whatsoever thou declarest of the sufficiency of the Light within. For,

Secondly, Thou intendest not that men and women should be guided by the Light
which is within them, before they receive instruction and a spirit from thee
which art without them; because thy Teachers do declare to men and women, that
if they will but wait in silence, be still and quiet, cease from outward and
Scripture-teaching, Forms, and carnal Ordinances, that they shall receive
virtue, life and strength from them, though they never see their faces any
more; by which it appears plainly, that thou intendest to give a spirit to such
as adhere to thy Doctrine, for otherwise these thy promises of Virtue, Life,
and Strength to be received from thee, are vain, and thou not faithful that
make them. But,

Thirdly, Thou never intendest that men and women should be guided by the Light
which is within them, before they receive instruction from thee, and that thou
give them a spirit, because that when thou take hold of the hand of men and
women, or layest thy hands on their foreheads, or on their shoulders, great
trouble comes upon their spirits within them; yea, when thou have taken hold of
the w^ists of the hands of some, while they have been opposing thee, they have
been taken with such a trembling, that they could not speak, nor hold still,
nor get away from thee; by which it is apparent, that thy intent is to
communicate a spirit.

Fourthly, Thy intent is not that men and women should be guided by the Light
which is within them, before they receive instruction and a spirit from thee,
etc. because as soon as ever thou apprehendest that any man or woman is
inclinable to thy Principles, thou art constantly visiting them, until thou
have brought them over to thy ways; once in thirteen days at the least, thou will be praying with them after thy fashion, until they be brought out of that
laborynth into which thou have brought them, and such a stir there is about
this work, and so vainly have some of you been affected with it, that ye have
sent to the Bel-man of a City, to cry it up, and down, that all that would be
free to come, might come and see this imaginary Resurrection, or rather
Communication of your unclean spirit; by which thou do plainly declare, that
the Light in every man will not do the business, but a spirit must be
communicated, for what else is it that thou so earnestly endeavourest to raise
up? What else is it that thou take so much delight in, when thou feel it?
as has been said by some of you, Arise within man: About what else are thy
groans spent? what else do thou visit? with what else do thou, as thou
say suffer, but with that spirit which thou have given? which till he has
taken full possession of the Creature, that so he may become as much the Child
of perdition as thy self, thou art in a troubled condition.

Fifthly, That thou do not intend that by the Light which is in every one,
before they receive instruction from thee, they should be guided, appears by
thy running up and down to spread thy Doctrine, and by thy Printing such a
multitude of Books; all which is done to teach and instruct men in thy way, and
to direct them how to walk according to thy desire: thou cryest down Preaching,
and yet usest it; thou cryest down the Letter, and Scriptures of Truth; and yet
make use of Letter, and writest many Books, thereby to disperse thy false
Doctrine; and even like the Pharisees, ye reject the Commandment of God, that
ye may keep your own Traditions, Mark 7. 9. ye lay aside Gods Word, and set up
your own word; Gods holy Scriptures ye reject, your own unholy writings ye
exalt, under pretense of setting up the Light, which ye say is within every
man, ye set up the darkness which is within your selves, and from you
communicated to such as you can persuade to hear your words, or read your
Books, thus thy pretentions and intentions are like Samsons Foxes, Judge. 15. 4,
5. not united by the heads, yet so tied together by the Tayls, as between them,
they carry fire to burn up standing corn, shocks of corn, Vineyards, and
Olives; thou call thy Doctrine fire, and say thou art baptized with the
spirit and fire: I do believe thou art baptized with a spirit and fire indeed,
which may seem to burn up weeds, but it is sent against the good Corn, the best
Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, is burnt up in such as receive thy Doctrine,
by the fire of that unclean spirit with which thou art baptized.

Sixthly, Thou do not intend that the Light which is within every man should
only be his director, because that Light which is in every man does not lead
thee and thy followers to do those things ye do; for if it be a Light which is
within every man, by which only thou art carried on in thy way, why then does
it not speak the same things in every one as it does in thee? why does it not
make every one quake and tremble as well as thee, if every one have it? why is
it silent in so many? why does it not throw every one down upon the ground,
swell their bellies, roar in them, and speak with a vocal voice as well as in
thee, and thy followers? If you say, it is* because the Light is in prison in
those in whom it is not so active as it is in thee: It is answered, that by
that reason it should be the more active, if it be sensible of its bondage; and
if unsensible how then can it be sufficient to perform those things which thou
ascribest to it: What is it dead or senceless? does it not feel that hard and
sore oppression under which it lies, or is it asleep, and must be awaked? if
so, it is much unlike to make a man a new Creature, to lead him out of all sin
and iniquity, and eternally to save him; For how should that deliver a man out
of Prison, that is so unsensible of its own bondage? That must needs be in a
small capacity to help another, that is not sensible of its own wants; neither
can thou say it does in all and every one, what it does in thee; for I my
self, and many others, can and do testify the contrary; if thou say, it is by
reason of our long sinning: it is answered, that you in whom the Light (as you
call it) is so prevalent, have been long sinners and are so still; and if you
are guided by no other thing than that Light which is in every man, why does it
not do in all the same that it does in you? why does it not make all little
Children to quake and tremble in their mothers laps, as that spirit which you
call the Light within, has caused some little Children to do, where some of
you have been present?

again as if no such thing had been; and so by the said spirits going out of
one into another, those things are performed which you ascribe to the Light
within all men, and as it has been said by some of your selves, Life goes to
Life, Life goes to Life; So it is manifest that by the assistance of that
spirit that comes from one, and goes to another, and not by the Light within
all men, are you enabled to do those things ye do; and that hollow, humming,
sighing and speaking, is not from the Light within all men, nor from the Light
within your selves, but from the spirit of darkness, which you have received,
and are his instruments to help others to receive. For,

Secondly, Your silent meetings of Meditation or muttering, is the direct
practice of such as have familiar spirits, as the Prophet teaches, Isai. 8.
19. For the word translated Mutter, signifies a silent Meditation, or
muttering, as they that understand the Hebrew word do observe; To what end
therefore are your silent Meetings of Meditations or Mutterings, but for the
Communicating your unclean spirit; for never did any of the Churches of Christ
or servants of the living God, hold Meetings of silence to meet and speak not
one word to one another, is such a practice of which there is not any example
in the Word of God, but even the contrary is found there; for it is written,
They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and
heard it etc. Mal. 3. 16. So that it is certain, that the Practice of silent
Meetings is contrary to the Practice of the People of God in all ages;
Therefore the Scripture, Isai. 8. 19. is worth thy further consideration, as it
is there written, When they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto Wizards that peep, and that mutter; Should not a
People seek unto their God, for the living to the dead? Now the Spirit of God
upon this account, gives warning and instruction in the very next words, verse.
20. saying, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them: Now let them show, if they
are able, that either the Law or Testimony of Christ speaks any thing to the
Justification of their doings, their silent Meetings of Meditations or
Mutterings, their slighting the Word of God, the Scriptures of Truth, and
setting up their own Traditions under the name of the Light within? for what
ever they boast of Light, Light, here is an obsolute sentence upon them, that
there is no light in them. Oh that all that hear might fear, and not persist
with them to their own destruction! When men and Satan enter into Covenant,
when men hold Meetings to carry on his design, to publish his Doctrine, to
communicate his Spirit; Oh my Soul, come not thou into their secrets, unto
their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united, Genesis 49. 6. for they reject with
the Pharisees and Papists, the Counsel of God, and set up their own unwritten
Traditions; they are gone a side after Satan, whose Doctrine they publish, and
whose unclean spirit, they hold assemblies in silence to communicate.

But Thirdly, It is further manifest, even by the confession of some of your
own Prophets and Proselytes, who are and have been owned by you, as in your
Ministry, and of your way, that an evil spirit is by you communicated; as for
instance, There came a spirit into one of you, as he was going to reprove
another, which did roar and make such a terrible noise in his belly, that one
might have heard it near a furlong from him, the which he himself did confess
to be the Devil; Another, (and one that is as a brand plucked out of the fire,)
did testify before many witnesses, that when he did join with those that
preach up the Light within, a spirit came into him, which did make him quake
and tremble so exceedingly, that he thought it would have tore him in pieces,
which the Spectators were so afraid to behold, that they called in several
other persons to help hold him in his Bed, which they had much ado to perform,
the Bed on which he lay, did shake so exceedingly; which violence, was the
motion of the evil spirit, with which his own Spirit did not consent: Another,
who is now bodily destroyed, did confess a little before her death, that there
did a spirit speak in the bottom of her Belly, with a vocal voice, to the
hearing of the outward ear, and bad her go and leave her Kindred, and House,
and all therein, and Preach where it would have her, and it would reward her
threefold, etc. The said party within a very little time after, was found dead
in a Furrow of Water: And thus a dear Friend of mine was deluded, and by your
means destroyed, which I cannot forget, while I remember my self.

been a great Preacher of and to the so called Light within, and such a one
that was concluded both by himself and others, to have attaired to the state of
Perfection, for several years past; the said party being at a great Meeting, of
those that are called Preachers and followers of the Light within, etc. When
they, with such others as came to hear, and himself also expected, that he
should have been the Teacher of the rest, to have showed them the way to the
state of perfection; yet so it was, that a spirit entered into him, as he sat
behind the Table, which did cause his Feet to fasten to the frame of the Table,
whereon he had set them, and did cause his knees to clap together, and there to
stay, and his arms to lock together, and so to abide, it did cause his mouth to
shut, his eyes to fix; and thus did he sit bound hand and foot, and could not
move any member of his body, being in such a maze in his own spirit, that he
knew not what to do, the beholders also admired that it should be thus with
him; but his lord and master having taken possession of him, will now do his
work before he leave him; for first of all, he set all his sins that ever he
had done in all his life before him, at which he admired, having concluded
before, that he was perfect; but they appeared before him, as if they had been
written in Capital Letters; then the Devil laid them all to his charge, and
did judge him for them, made him to mourn and grieve, and made the tears come
from his eyes, though against his will and consent; and when he had condemned
and punished him as he saw meet; then he took all his sins from before him, and
said unto him, I have blotted out thy transgressions as a thick cloud; and so
he let him loose from all his bonds, so that he had the use of his members
again; and now the Devil commanded him to tell to all the people, what God had
done for his soul, the which the man was unwilling to do, because as he
concluded, he had been perfect for so long a time; therefore now to tell out
such things, he would not do it, plainly seeing that either he had been deluded
thither to, or else this spirit was a deluding spirit, for he had formerly
fallen down, quaked and trembled, and had been judged a matter of ten times a
day; but notwithstanding the Devil being in possession would be the chief
commander, and did make him speak, although he opposed it with all his might;
but first he did so run up and down his Belly and Throat, that his motion was
plainly to be seen of the beholders; then did he make his Tongue and Mouth to
speak against his Will and Consent, and caused him to utter words, which by
nothing that he could do, was he able to resist; but he being resol^ed to
resist it if possible, thrust his hand into his mouth to stop his mouth from
speaking, and so intended to strangle the words; which the Devil perceiving, by
force he pulled his hand away from his mouth, and made them both to stretch
straight out, and so to remain for a matter of two or three hours, all which
time he made him to speak, to the admiration of the Hearers, what things were
done for his soul by the same spirit; all which he himself did not consent
unto. Yea such was the operation of the wicked one upon others also, that
several of them that heard, fell down in the house quaking and trembling
exceedingly; and when this spirit had done speaking in this party, it left him,
and though he was before so exceedi^g full of it, yet now he was so empty
again, as if all this had not been; but the wicked one as he had done by him,
so he did the like by several that day, as was manifestly seen in that Meeting,
and has been confessed by the party himself, who concluded, that it was the
Devil which made him do those things he then did.

All which being considered, let any indifferent man judge, whether I have not
just cause to conclude, that those that say to others, Look to the Light
within, etc. do not intend that by any light which is within them, but by that
Doctrine and Spirit which is communicated unto them, they should be guided,
directed and assisted; Therefore as says the Prophet, How do you say, we are
Wise, and the Law of the Lord is in us? Lo, the false Pen of the Scribes
works for falsehood: the Pen of the Scribes is in vain, the Wise men are
ashamed, they are dismayed and taken; Lo, they have rejected the word of the
Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? see Jer. 8. 8, 9. with the marginal Note.

CHAP. IV.
Of the fine proofs, by which the Preachers up of the so called Light within,
do endeavor to justify their Way and Practice; that they are not more humble
in outward and Bodily Humility, than some others that are Adversaries to the
Truth with themselves; and that they have not inward and Spiritual Humility;
that they are not in Unity with the Truth in Christ Jesus, nor with one another
in their own way; that they discern not all Secrets, nor destroy the false
Church State of the Idolatrous Romish Harlot; neither are their sufferings for
the Truths-sake, nor so great, as of some other Adversaries thereunto: These
their fine Proofs are also supposed, and yet proved insufficient to do the
service, for which they are brought.

called Light within, do endeavor to justify thy Way and Practice, which
are in number five;

First, Thy Humility. Secondly, Thy Unity. Thirdly, Thy destroying the Whore.
Fourthly, Thy discovering all Secrets. Fifthly, Thy Sufferings.
In these pretended Proofs, thou do much rejoice, like Goliath in his Armor,
and in his own strength; but in the Name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, that now
sits at the Right Hand of God, in the Glory of the Father, I believe I shall be
enabled to take from he thy Armor wherein thou trustest, and with thine own
Sword to destroy thee; and herein I shall deal with thee two ways:

First, By way of Exception.

And Secondly, By way of Confession.

In both whereof, it will appear that thy confidence is vain, that thy strength
is that of the Flesh, not of the Spirit; thou opposest thy self against the
Lord of Hosts, whose Armies thou have defied, 1 Samuel 17. 45. and the Conclusion
will be, thine own Destruction and Perdition, except thou repent Exception to
the first Proof.
speedily.

First, I do absolutely deny, that you whose Teachings are from, and to, the so
called Light within, etc. are more Humble and free from pride, than all others,
or than some that are Adversaries to the Truth with your selves; for let us
consider Pride in its two parts;

First, That which is outward in the Bodily Habit.

Secondly, That which is more secret in the heart; and it will appear, that you
are not more humble, but rather more proud, than several other opposers of the
Gospel; for there are some orders of Romish Friars, who are, notwithstanding
great Adversaries to the Truth, that excel thee in seeming Humility, and
neglecting the Body; some of them who have been possessed of hundreds by the
year, have given it all away, retaining not one penny to relieve their wants,
and spend all their days in Pilgrimages, barefoot and bare*leg'd, with no
better clothing, than Hair-cloath or Sackcloth; or diet, than what comes to
hand by any that will take pity of them; to which hardships they voluntarily
expose themselves, and will not accept of a better condition: So that if
denying Bodily Habit, if Humility of show in the greatest measure, be thy Proof
to justify thy Way and Practice, those Adversaries of the Gospel, and the
Professors thereof, the Romish Friars, (except you will say, that they are of
your Society, and carried on by the Light within, to do those things they do)
even they will be justified rather than thee; for their Humility of show, and
neglect of the Body far excels thine. Again that Hermit at Icknam near London,
a great Adversary to the Truth of the Gospel, as was showed apparently in two
public Disputes; yet for Humiltty in show, in neglecting the Body, he far
excels the Preachers up of the so called Light within; for he rejected his
Trade, cast off his Garments, put himself into a Canvas Frock, with a Plat of
Rushes about his Head, no Shoes of Leather, his Legs bare, his Meat sometimes
tops of Weeds boiled; other whiles, he lies down and eats Grass like a Beast,
or else makes himself Puddings of Bran, or Feeds upon raw Grain, with Water
only to Drink, his Lodging sometimes under a Hedge, or in an out-house, upon a
wad of Sraw, denying to lay the Old Man, as he calls it, upon a better Bed; and
although his Doctrine is somewhat consonant to thine, yet is he denied with
Execrations, by the followers of the so called Light within, while he excels
them in outward show of Humility: So that if this kind of Humility be thy
Proof, this Hermit and his followers, as great opposers of the Truth as they
be, are justified, and the Preachers up of the so called Light within,
condemned; who are seen in their Silver Plate Buttons, and that in superfluity,
their Trades, Diet, and Garments, much as other men's, but the Hair of their
Heads like Women's, which is so contrary to Nature, and the Scripture, 1 Cor.
11. 14. that they are more like the Locusts that come out of the bottomless
Pit, Rev. 9. 8. then such as are led by the Light of Christ; It is therefore
evident, that you are not in outward and bodily Habit, more Humble and Free
from Pride than all others.

But secondly; for inward and more secret Pride of Heart, thou that Preachest
up the so called Light within, must be silent, for the Pride of thy Heart is
perceived in thy countenance, and by thy Actions; for thou neither fear God
who created the Heavens and the Earth, the Sea, and the Fountains of Water,
Rev. 14. 7. nor Jesus Christ the Savior of the World, who sits at his right
Hand, in the Glory of the Father; nor do thou reverence man, as he has
commanded. For the first of these, such is thy pride, that thou fear not the
Judgments of God, thou regardest not his Commandments, thou despisest his
Promises; That great Day of God Almighty, when Jesus Christ shall come in
flaming Fire, taking vengenance on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel, (2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.) thou in thy Pride do contemn; Thou hardnest thy
self in thy wickedness, supposing that thou art passed through this Judgment
already, the Holy Commandment, the Precepts of Jesus Christ, expressed in the
Record which God has given of him, in the Scriptures of Truth, thou art so
proud, that thou do not regard, but call them in contempt, Shells without
Kernels, Shadows without Substance, Empty, Carnal, Lifeless, and what not? And
the like esteem thou have, of the exceeding great and precious Promises of Life
and Immortality, of the Raising and Changing our Vile Bodies, and Fashioning
them like the Glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3. 20, 21. of bringing to pass
that which is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory: So great is thy Pride,
and so gross thy Blindness; for as Humility is accompanied with Knowledge, so
is Pride with Ignorance; that thou rejectest that great Promise of the
Resurrection, and the Life of the whole man, Spirit, Soul and Body, and set
up an imaginary Resurrection and Life, in the stead thereof, wherein not the
whole Man, but a part only is raised, nor that part, neither in Truth, but
only in Imagination.

And that thou d^^ not reverence man, it is apparent, for (...) ^^ere thou
come, that Preachest up the so called Light within; thou acknowledgest not
any Superior, hardly will thou give the term of Father to him that begot thy
Body? Thou will not so much as put off thy Hat to any man, but say, That it
is Honoring men, and all Honor ought to be given to God; Yet notwithstanding,
although thou say, It is Honor, and God ought to have all Honor; and that
is thy pretended Reason, why thou will not give it to men, yet thou give it
not to God neither; for I have seen thee Preach and Pray too, after thy
fashion, with thy Hat on thy Head; thus thy self-contradiction is manifest:
Thou will not salute, nor bow thy body to any man, nor give to men Titles of
Honor; and for thy justification herein, thou do allege some particular
examples, and make them General Rules, wholly neglecting Faith and
Gospel-Obedience, though generally Commanded and Practiced by the Saints, and
Servants of God, whereby the Pride of thy Heart does appear, in that it closes
with what it can find for its lifting up; but is too high to submit to any
thing, whereby it should manifest Humility of Spirit, Faith and Obedience;
Humane Courtesy and Honor, is too low for thee, that is Carnal in thy account,
but it was not so with good men of God in former times, of which for brevity
sake, I will only give some instances; see Romans 12. 10. Phil. 2. 3. 1 Pet. 2.
17. Ephesians. 6. 2, 9. Col. 3. 20, 22. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. He is proud, that
consents not to the Doctrine of the Scriptures; see also Genesis 23. 6, 7, 11, 12.
Genesis 16. 8, 9. Genesis 33. 3, 8, 13, 14. Gen, 41. 43. Acts 26. 25. Mat. 5. 44, 46,
47. 2 Samuel 13. 25. 2 Samuel 14. 22. Romans 16. 4. Which Scriptures do teach, that
Humility which thou that Preachest up the so called Light within, do deny;
thou art not therefore more Humble, but more Proud rather than others, and
these sentences of Scripture do fitly describe thee, viz. Prove. 30. 11, 12.
There is a Generation that curses their Father, and does not bless their
Mother; Whose mouth is fuller of Cursing and Bitterness, then thine? There is
a Generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness: Who boasts more of self-purity, and who more in Rebellion,
Unbelief and Opposition to Gods Truth? There is a Generation, Oh how lofty are
their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up; And who carries a higher look
than thee? Every one is but Filth and Froth that opposes thy way; What an eye
of scorn and disdain have thou? by which it is evident, that thou art not more
humble, but rather more proud than others.

Thy Unity; the which also I do absolutely deny: for, what Exception to the
second Proof.
Unity have thou, except in iniquity? but Unity in the Truth thou have not, for
thou do not hold the Head Christ Jesus, from which all the Body, by Joints
and Bands, having Nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
Increase of God, Col. 2. 19. It is evident that they which hold not the Head
Christ Jesus, by a Lively Faith, that are not united to him by those Joints and
Bands, in which there is Nourishment ministered, and whereby they are knit
together, so as to increase with the Increase of God; they are not in Unity,
but in Confusion; they that are not united unto Jesus Christ by Faith, that
have not access by him, into that grace wherein they stand, and rejoice in hope
of the Glory of God; those are not in Unity either with God, or one with
another, in the Truth as it is in Jesus; And what Fellowship is available,
where Fellowship with God in Christ is wanting? And what fellowship have such
with God, that deny his only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, that deny his Person,
that contemn his Ordinances, that trample his Word under their Feet, as do the
Preachers up of the so called Light within?

But Secondly, Neither are you in Unity among your selves, but one Preaches
one thing, and another Printeth the contrary; and this is done by such as are
eminent amongst you; as for instance, One absolutely affirms, that the Bread
and Wine, spoken of in the Scriptures, and appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ,
to be Eaten and Drunk in remembrance of him, is not Temporal, Visible, or
External Bread and Wine, of the same substance with that which men feed upon,
but that it is Spiritual, Invisible and Eternal; But is not this Popery?
Another of great esteem amongst you, says in Print, That that Bread and Wine,
is common Bread and Wine, yea such as may be eaten, not only by Believers at
the Lords Supper, but even at an unbelievers Feast, or by Believers and
unbelievers together. Now it may be observed by the way, that this conclusion
undenyably follows the latter Assertion, That so often as an unbeliever eats
and drinks his temporal food, so often he eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords Body, if the latter Doctrine be true; and if
the former be true, then some persons may eat and drink damnation to
themselves, in eating and drinking Spiritual, Invisible, and Eternal food,
because they may possibly eat it, and drink unworthily, as says the Apostle,
He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords Body, 1 Cor. 11. 27, 29. Thus are ye divided
from the Truth, and one from another. Again some of you hold, that the Bread
and Wine, which Christ appointed to be received in Remembrance of him, until
he come, is in this sense to be understood, viz. Until he come into you, and
now he being come into you, therefore this Ordinance is ata^n end with you. But
as this Doctrine is contrary to his, that supposes the Bread and Wine, to be
spiritual only and invisible (and if it be only spiritual and eternal, why
should the spiritual presence of Christ put an end to it) as also to his that
takes it to be the common food of unbelievers (which Believers also make use
of, notwithstanding the spiritual presence of Christ with them) so is it also
to the Doctrine of the Apostles, with whom Christ was spiritually present, when
they by breaking of Bread did show forth the Lords death, (as all Believers
ought) until his Personal coming again according to his Promises; And Lo, says
he, I am with you always, even to the end of the World, Mat. 28. 20. I go,
says he, to prepare a place for you, and I will come again, and receive you to
my Self, that where I am there ye may be also. It is without doubt that Christ
was Spiritually present with his Disciples after his Ascension, when they did
Celebrate this his holy Supper; which Spiritual presence of his, if that had
put an end to it, we should not have found the Practice of it, so long after
his Ascension; See Acts 20. 7. Neither had Paul given that direction about it,
which he did, as it is written, 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. Thus are the
Preachers up of thee so called Light within, divided in their Doctrine; for set
any two of these opinions together, and behold what confusion there is? Says
one, the Bread and Wine is Spiritual, Invisible, and Eternal; says the other,
it is the common visible and temporal food which believers and unbelievers do
feed upon; spiritual says the one, carnal says the other; eternal says the
one, Temporal says the other; Invisible says the one, visible says the
other; and as you are doctrinally divided, so is there personal opposition of
one against another; one public Teacher alleth another Dog, and yet both owned
to be Teachers up of thee so called Light within; yea, there has been so great
opposition of one of you against anorher, that ye have fell out, and disowned
each other; shall I then say ye are in unity? no, but in confusion rather, as
says the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah; The wicked are like the troubled Sea when
it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt: there is no peace to the
wicked, says my God, Isai. 57. 21.

thy destroying the Whore; the which also I do deny: for Exception to the third
proof.
wherein have thou been instrumental in this Service? Were the Popes Nuntio's,
Legates, or his Emissaries the Jesuits, banished this Nation by the Preachers
up of thee so called Light within? Mention the Country in which the Popes
indulgencies and Pardons, have been stopped by thy Preachings, or other
endeavors? Give us to know, when; and where thou have brought a Nation from
the worshipping of Cross, and Crucifix? when did thou cause them to be pulled
down? When did thou discover any Jesuitical design, when was Bell; Book and
Candle, Monastries, and Abbeys, Popish Hierarchy, and Ceremonies Demolished by
thee? When wast thou a giver of Liberty to tender Consciences? Alas, it is very
evident that thou that Preachest up to, and from thee so called Light within,
art no destroyer of the Harlot, or false Church State, except it be by bringing
them from that, to a worse condition. But,

Secondly, Will thou yet say thou destroyest the Whore, because thou have run
up and down railing against, and cursing the Ministry of this Nation, and
giving them reviling Language? Alas, who knows not that it is not reviling
Language that convinces gainsayers; no it is so far from performing that
Service, that it rather confirms them; neither is it because thou perswadest
People toleave that kind of Worship, and follow thy Doctrine; for there is no
destruction of the Whore, where there is not a right conversion from her false
Church State; but all thy doings in destroying the Whore, is as if one should
persuade a Woman that defiles her Marriage bed, that she shall be condemned for
that sin if she repent not, which is true, but afterward teaches her to
murder her husband, which is to turn her out of one wickedness into another as
bad, or worse; and if thou will needs be a destroyer of the Whore more than any
other, it is by deluding her more than any other; for others preach that she
might repent and obey the Gospel of that God, and Jesus Christ, which is the
Creator of Heaven and Earth, and the Redeemer of mankind: thou call upon
her to repent, but withal thou teach her to reject the Word of God, and to
observe the Precepts of men; to disobey the Gospel of Christ, and to obey that
which is no Gospel, Gal. 1. 6, 7. To reject Christ himself, which is God, and
man, in one Person, and to set up a Power in every man, which thou call the
Light, as the true Christ. Thus thou endeavourest to destroy her by making her
two fold more the Child of Hell then she is. Let all persons therefore beware
of thy evil net, that so they may not perish everlastingly by hearkening to thy
Counsel.

discerning all Exception to the fourth Proof.
secrets; but this also I do absolutely deny: for there is one secret which
thou do not discern, it is the mystery of Christ, his taking away the sins of
the World, in his own Body, once offered upon the Cross, having slain the
enmity thereby; See John 1. 29. Ephesians. 2. 16. And that by that one offering, once
offered in his own Body on the Cross, is the alone Reconciliation of the World,
the Justification, and perfection of them that do believe on his Name, Heb. 10.
14. There is another secret also which is beyond thy discerning, it is God
manifest in the flesh, which without controversy, as says the Apostle, is the
great mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh (he says not in
every ones body of flesh) he was Justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
Preached to the Gentiles, believed on in the World; received up into Glory.
This mystery thou art a stranger to and ignorant off, while thou spendest thy
time in doting about questions, and strife of words, thou and you, whereof
comes envy and strife, railings, evil surmisings, and perverse disputings, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.

But, Although thou can discern who thou have deceived by that spirit of
Antichrist, with which thou art guided, that so thou may spread thy net over
them, and take them in thy snare; yet that spirit of which thou boastest so
much, does much misguide he sometimes, both in sending thee with messages, and
in directing thee to censure such as please thee not; yea, when thou have
called to the Light within to bear witness, it has witnessed against thee; So
that sometimes thou art deceived with dissemblers, which others that have ever
disowned thy way, have seen and born witness against, whose appearance amongst
thy followers, has been such, that many of them have declared, That if ever
God was in a man, he was in that man; notwithstanding of the very same party,
at the very same time, it has been said by thy opposers, That if ever the
Devil was in a man, he was then in that very man; of which I have now all thy
party, that ever knew him, to consent to what was then said; from whence it is
plain, that thou have not such a discerning, as to see into all secrets, for in
this thou wast deceived; So that while thou think thou see into all
others, thou thy self art discerned of others, thy deceitful dealing is seen by
a better light, than that which thou see withal; the pride of thy heart, as
says the Prophet, has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the Clifts of the
Rocks, whose habitation is on high, that says in thy heart, Who shall bring me
down to the ground? though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and though thou
set thy Nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee down, says the Lord,
Obadiah 3. 4. See Mat. 11. 23.

Thy Sufferings; But this also I do absolutely deny, to be a Proof Exception to
the fifth Proof.
of the uprighteousness of thy way. For first, neither have thy Sufferings been
so great as theirs, who are followers of the Lamb of God, Christ Jesus, no nor
comparable to the Sufferings of some that are adversaries to him, as ye also
are. But it is not Sufferings only that makes a Martyr, but the cause for which
the Sufferings are; therefore either prove that thou acknowledgest the Truth of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and suffer for it, or else leave off thy
boasting in thy Sufferings, which are not so great as the Sufferings of other
Adversary of the Gospel; for those Romish Priests, and Jesuits, as great
Adversaries of the Truth as they be, yet for Sufferings, they far exceed the
Preachers up, of thee so called Light within; except you will say, that you and
they are all guided by one spirit, diverse of whom have been put to death by the
halter, and fire; but as the Apostle teaches, Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not Charity; it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3. But,

Secondly, thou suffer many times as an evil doer, and as a busy body in
other men's matters, 1 Pet. 4. 15. Not at all for the sake of Jesus Christ that
died at Jerusalem, and in Love to him, and to his Truth, but because thou
know it advances thy Notion, People being apt often times to close with the
Opinions of those which are Sufferers, without examining the Tenants which they
hold. Yet,

Thirdly, Notwithstanding thy boasting of Sufferings, there is a spirit in
thee, that waits but for an opportunity to make others feel the weight of its
little finger, which will be heavier, than the Loins of other Persecuters: I
know one that has felt some of thy justles and thrusts, that has been
threatened to be thrust out of doors by head and shoulders, though he came not
into the house, without leave of those who call themselves Preachers up of the
Light within, who poured out against him their Arrows, even bitter words, Psalm.
64. 3. Curses, Plagues, and Judgments, having no better Weapons to defend
their cause withal; and what can be concluded from hence, but that seeing you
are so free to pronounce Sentence, you will be as free to execute Punishment,
when soever you shall obtain Power to enable you to do it; Is it not from the
abundance of the heart, that the mouth speaks? Mat. 12. 34. Do not fierce
words go before blows? If we consult with the Apostle, we shall find, that of
them whose mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness, it is said, their feet are
swift to shed Blood, Romans 3. 14. 15. Thus thy pretended Proofs being answered
by way of exception, my next work is, to deal with thee by way of Concession*
in putting the case that all this which thou say were so, and that thou went
beyond all others, in every one of these five Particulars; yet notwithstanding,
thy Way and Practice is a manifest falsehood, as shall be made evident in that
which follows.

A Concession and Answer to the first Proof.
Romish Friars, or the Hermit before spoken of; Art thou ere the more in the
Truth? for that it is apparent, that both They and Thee, notwithstanding this
Humility in show, are great Adversaries to the Truth of the Gospel and that we
may know that this show of Humility, in neglect of the Body, is no sufficient
Proof for this purpose; the Scriptures of Truth, do warn us of a sort of false
Worshipers, who worship Angels, and walk after the Commandments of men, being
vainly puffed up in their fleshly Minds, who hold not the Head Christ Jesus, by
subjecting to his Ordinances, yet are subject to the Ordinances of men; touch
not, taste not, handle not, which things, says the Apostle, indeed have a show
of Wisdom, in Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting of the Body, not in any
Honor to the satisfying of the Flesh, Col. 2. 18, 19, 21, 22, 23. Oh what a
Glorious show of Wisdom is there in Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting
of the Body! but alas, what benefit is in all this, for when this comes to be
tried, it is found to be but the Wisdom of this World, which is Earthly,
Sensual and Devilish, James 3. 15. And is not the Worship of those that call
themselves followers of the Light within, the Worship of Angels? that is, of
Devils, while they disobey that which God has showed them in the Scriptures of
Truth, and intrude into such things which are not to be found there; Where is
there such a thing to be found in all the Record, that God has given of his
Son, that all men ought not to look into, and be guided by the Scriptures of
Truth; but that all men ought to look into, and be guided by the so called
Light, which is within them? Oh the vanity of that fleshly and puffed up Mind,
that has been the Author of this Intrusion and Doctrine of Devils; so directly
contrary to the Doctrine of the Holy Prophets, Apostles, and of Christ Himself,
the greatest of them all, who requires us to hearken to the Word of the Lord,
expressed in the Law and in the Testimony, to take heed unto the most sure Word
of the Prophets, 2 Pet. 1. 19. to searth the Scriptures, which are able to make
us wise unto Salvation, through Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Therefore although thou art outwardly more humble than any other, that is no
confirmation that thou art in the Truth, but in the Falsehood rather, while thy
Doctrine is so directly contrary to the Word of Truth. And thus thy pretended
proof of thy Humility lies dead, and will not do the service for which it is
brought.

A Concession and Answer to the second Proof.
Unity, and all others are in Differences; yet this does not prove, that
therefore thou art in the Truth; for first, although the Devil endeavors to
break the Peace of the Saints, by sowing Discord among the Brethren, because he
knows that their Unity will be the ruin of his Kingdom; and although sometimes
through his Temptations, many turn aside from the Truth; yet notwithstanding
the Lord owns the rest as his People, that stand fast in it; to those few Names
in Sardis, which did not defile their Garments, it is promised, That they shall
walk with the Lord in White, Rev. 3. 4. notwithstanding the polluted estate of
the rest; Although there was Divisions among the Disciples of Christ, yet they
were his Disciples; and the Lord uses means to unite them to the Truth, that
are turning aside after Error, before he utterly rejects them; and when he
does punish the Transgressors, he spares the Obedient, as is to be seen in the
case of the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. chapter 2. and 3. So that although
Divisions may appear among the Professors of the Faith of Christ, it is not
safe from thence to conclude, that none of those Professors are in the Truth;
Shall we condemn all Professors, because some walk contrary to their
Profession? Shall we condemn all the Angels of God, because some of them did
not keep their first estate, but left their own Habitations? Jude verse. 6. Thus
it is clear, that Divisions amongst Brethren, do not warrant an Universal
Sentence upon them. But,

Secondly, Unity is no absolute estimony of Verity; for the Prophets of Ahab
spoke with one consent, there was no Division amongst them; although they were
four hundred, they all agreed together, to bid Ahab go up and prosper, though
it proved his destruction, 1 Kings 22. 6, 11, 12, 13. one Micaiah that differed
from them, all his words was true, being the Words of the Lord, and their words
was false, being the inspiration of Satan. If ye then the Preachers up of the
so called Light within, are in Unity, your Unity arising from a lying spirit,
which is in all your mouths, we can conclude your condition to be no better
then Ahabs, and his Prophets, and as the Lord permitted that lying spirit, to
be in the mouths of all Ahabs Prophets, to entice him, because he had so
exceedingly sinned against the Lord, by rejecting his Counsel, to go up and
fall at Ramoth Gilead; even so has the Lord sent, or permitted a lying spirit
to be in all your mouths, that you may entice all them that do reject the
Counsel of God, which is written in the new Testament, to go on and fall, and
be snared, taken and destroyed, as it is written, 2 These. 2. 11. 12. For this
cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie,
that they all might be damned, who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness: It is therefore apparent, that unity is not a sure proof of
verity. Those that are said to have one mind, Revel. 18. 13. to what end is it,
but to give their Power and strength to the Beast? etc. Those that Christ
invited to his Marriage Supper, Luke 14. 18. They all with one consent began to
make excuse. This Argument therefore being but a Popish Fig-leaf, is utterly
invalid. But,

the Whore, more then any other of her opposers, and that by persuading her
children to leave her A Concession and Answer to the third Proof.
and to follow after thee: yet notwithstanding, thou art not therefore in the
Truth; for many of the Adversaries of the Whore, are enemies to the Gospel of
Christ; though the great City be divided into three parts, yet it is great
Babel still, Revel. 16. 19. and though the ten Horns do hate the Whore, make
her desolate, and naked, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, yet do they
agree, and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled, Rev. 17. 16, 17. Thou therefore that would have the name of
destroying the Whore, art so far from obeying the Truth, that thou have the
nature of the Beast, the great Antichrist, whose followers and admirers are the
world, whose worship is not performed to the living God that made the Heavens
and the Earth, but to the Dragon, from whom the said Beast has his Power, his
Seat and his great Anthority; thy blasphemies are great already, thou beginnest
to have a stout Look, thy followers do admire thee, saying, in effect, Who is
able to make War with thee? thou blasphemest against God, his Name, his
Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven, Revel. 13. 6. A God above, and a God
out of thee, thou say, is Carnal, his Name, by which his People through
Faith therein have Salvation, is blasphemed, in thy denying the appointments of
Christ in the New Testament, those Worshippers of God, who worship the Father
in Spirit and in Truth, are by thee despised and contemned; the followers of
Jesus Christ that love him, though now they see him not, and believing in him,
do rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8. yet are
they the object of thy scorn and derision: Thy pretended opposition therefore
to the Whore, will not prove thee other than a Limb at least of that Beast,
which the World in worshipping, does worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, and
Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and Wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor
walk. See Revel. 13. 4, 12. Revel. 9. 20. Thus this proof also is made void,
and of no effect.

A Concession and Answer to the fourth proof.
and through all men, as thou say, yet art thou not therefore in the Truth;
for those that have the use of Divinations, that have the familiarity of evil
spirits, do sometimes discover very secret and hidden things; yet the Devil is
the father of such Revelations; And art thou therefore Justified, because thou
sometimes do very strange things, and revealest very great secrets? No not
all, except the power by which thou do them, were the Power of God, and not
of Satan; and except the end for which thou do them, were the Glory of God,
and not of Satan: It is not therefore thy going into a house, the doors being
shut, and out again, none knowing how, as one of the Preachers up of thee so
called Light within, has done; nor thy appearing in the field to one walking
alone, and then vanishing away again, that will justify thee to be in the
Truth, except this were done by the Power, and for the Glory of God; neither is
it the declaring to a man, all that he had done that day before he came into
thy company, and much of that he had done at other times also, as one of the
Preachers up of thee so called Light within, did to one that came to visit him
in prison; that can prove this Deceiver to be a servant of the Lord; for the
servants of the Lord are not always to be found by such tokens; for it is
written of one that had the knowledge of all secrets, who yet was so far from
being a servant of the Lord, that he was appointed for destruction, at that
very time when he had so great knowledge; of whom it is said, Be hold thou art
wiser then Daniel, there is no secret that they can hide from thee; and yet
because his heart was lifted up, by reason of his wisdom and riches, therefore
the Lord pronounces destruction upon him; and though he said, I sit in the
Seat of God, yet God said, Thou art a man, and not God, though thou set thy
heart as the heart of God; And will thou yet say before him that slays thee,
I am God? but thou shall be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slays
thee. See Ezekiel. 28. 2. 9. How far short the Preachers up of the so called Light
within, come of this pride of heart, let their sayings witness; for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mat. 12. 34. For they say, they must
judge all men, they see into, and through all men, they have the Godhead in
them, even as Christ has, and the like: But though thou set thy heart as the
heart of God, yet will he destroy thee, and bring thee down to the Pit; And
will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God? but thou shall be a
man, and no God, in the hand of him that slays thee. Thus it is apparent,
that they which suppose they know all secrets, and because of their wisdom do
lift up their hearts in pride, contemning God and his Truth, will at last be so
far infatuated, that they shall not know how to save themselves from
destruction, and perpetual woe: and misery Therefore it is a very false
conclusion, to conclude, that because thou know others secrets, therefore
thy way is the way of Truth; for it is evident, that the discerning of secrets
is so far from being a proof, that the discerners thereof, are servants of God,
and obeyers of his Truth, that there by they are sometimes proved to be slaves
of Satan, and followers of his delusions. But,

Sufferings more then any other, yet notwithstanding, thou art not therefore in
the Truth; A Concession and Answer to the fifth Proof.
For as has been said, it is not the Sufferings, but the Cause that makes a
Martyr; What if a man do give his body to be burned, it profits nothing,
except it be done with charity, 1 Cor. 13. 3. But when in love to God, and to
his Truth, a man suffers for the Truth, this is available; but this is not
thy case: Let none of you, says the Apostle, suffer as a Murderer, or as a
Thief, or as an evil-doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters; yet if any
man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on
this behalf, 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. But never did any of the Preachers up of the so
called Light within, suffer as a Christian; never did they suffer for Christ,
whose Person and Doctrine they deny; And were it so, that Sufferings did
always demonstrate the Sufferer to be in the Truth, it would not only
justify evil doers; but also Truth it self, which is always one and the same,
would thereby become mutable and variable. But what need I spend time to
confute so vain a Notion as this, for in very deed, they that do suffer but a
reproachful word for the Truths sake, that Suffering is more acceptable with
God, than the suffering of death for error; therefore to conclude this
Chapter, it is manifest, that those thy main grounds, viz. Thy Humility, Thy
Unity, Thy destroying the Whore, Thy discerning Secrets, and Thy Sufferings,
are utterly insufficient, though supposed to prove, that the Preachers up of
the so called Light within, are in the Truth; yea, by that way which thou have
taken to justify thine own way, and to disparage the Faith and Obedience of
the People of God, thine own falsehood, rottenness and deceit is discovered; So
that into the pit which thou have dug for others, thou art fallen thy self;
the snare which ye have spread for others, has caught your selves by the heels.

CHAP. V.
That the Preachers up of the so called Light within, do deny the Doctrine of
the Scriptures, to be the Word of God; that although Christ is truly called the
Word of God, yet the Doctrine of the Scriptures, is truly so to be called and
accounted; That it is very dangerous to add to, or take from the Scriptures;
That those that contemn the Doctrine of the Scriptures of Truth, do despise
Jesus Christ, and God the Father: The reason why such as despise the
Scriptures, find no more virtue in them; Eight Considerations to prove the
Doctrine of the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and an infalliable Teacher;
Two other grounds to prove the former conclusion; the first taken from the
Light which is in the Scriptures, the latter from the powerful operation of the
Doctrine thereof upon the hearts of Believers.

Light within, were able to justify their way and Practice by the Scriptures,
it is likely they would endeavor so to do; but being unable thereby to carry
on their design, they endeavor by such like Arguments as are used by the
Popish Synagogue, to justify themselves as we have heard; and that they may
proceed with the greater security, they deny the Doctrine of the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, commonly called the Bible, to be the Word of God:
for the discovery therefore of their wickedness herein, and for the
vindicating the Blessed Doctrine of Salvation contained in the Scriptures, that
which here follows is intended to conclude this work.

For first, That thou that preachest up the so called Light within, etc. do
deny the Doctrine which is contained in that Book, called the Bible, to be the
Word of God, appears by thy reproachful language concerning it; yea, in words
at length, ye do familliarly deny it to be the Word of God, one of you laying
that Bible upon the ground, and setting his feet upon it, said, If this be the
Word of God, why does it not stir and speak? Thus ye delight to abuse the
Scriptures, and because ye can so do, therefore ye conclude, they are not the
Word of God; and being lifted up with Pride, and filled with Rage against the
Word of God, expressed in the Scriptures of Truth, ye call all such Carnal as
give them that Title, giving this reason for your so doing, viz. Because the
Scripture says Christ is the Word of God; and therefore ye conclude the
Scripture is not the Word of God, etc. And to color over your deceit, ye
allege a sentence of Scripture, and presently declare a falsehood, saying, The
Word of God is quick and Powerful, which is true, but the Scripture is a dead
Letter, which is false; thus ye fume out disdain against the Scriptures, and
against those that acknowledge them to be the Word of God, and a word of Power
to them which do believe. But,

Secondly, That I may make thy ignorance, with thy enmity unto the Scriptures
manifest, I shall undertake, by Divine assistance, to prove them to be the Word
of God, and an infallible Teacher to them which do believe: for although the
Scripture does say; that Christ is the Word of God; yet it does also affirm
that his Commandment, contained in the Scriptures, is the Word of God; and as I
did never deny the former, since I was instructed in the Doctrine of the
Scriptures; so I do affirm that whosoever does own the Scriptures to be the
Word of God; does not deny that Christ is the Word of God, neither can such a
thing be laid to their charge, without doing great injury to them; but I say,
as it is true, that Christ is the Word of God, as the Scripture says, Revel.
19. 13. So it is as true, that the Scripture is the Word of God, as Christ
says, Mark 7. 13.

you and thou, may as well be able (if they be not wilfully or maliciously
blind) to make an acknowledgement of the Word of God, as it is given forth in
the Scriptures, and the Word of God as it is Essentially in Christ. Are the
Precepts, Promises and Threatenings, which are a main part of the Scriptures,
and were the Word of God before they were written in the Scriptures, I say, are
they the less the Word of God, because they are written in the Scriptures? Is
not the Truth expressed in the Scriptures, eternal and uncorruptible, because
the Ink, and Paper, is subject to alteration? Shall we think so of the Truth
therein expressed? God forbid, And what less then an Almighty hand, has
preserved that Book, viz. the Bible, unto this present hour, notwithstanding
all the rage and fury of the Devll, and his instruments against it? who now
being unable to suppress it by force, have devised this deceitful Doctrine,
viz. To teach all men to hearken to the Light within them, thereby to turn away
their minds from the Doctrine of the Scriptures.

Concerning therefore the Purity and Eternity of the Doctrine of Salvation
expressed in the Scriptures, the Scripture does give ample Testimony in many
places. The Words of the Lord, says David, are pure words, as silver tried in
a Furnace of earth, purified seven times, Psalm. 12. 6. Every Word of God, says
Solomon, is Pure, he is a shield to them that put their trust in him, Prove. 3.
5. The entrance of thy words says David, gives Light, it gives understanding
to the simple, Psalm. 119. 130. Heaven and Earth, says Christ, shall pass
away, but my Words shall not pass away, Mat. 24. 35. Whosoever therefore,
says he, shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son of man
be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father with the holy Angels,
Mark 8. 38. Therefore said Peter unto the Lord, when Jesus said unto the
Twelve, Will ye also go away? Lord, says he, to whom shall we go? Thou have
the Words of Eternal Life, and we believe, and are sure, that thou art that
Christ the Son of the living God, John 6. 67, 68, 69.

Thus is the Purity and Eternity of the Truth expressed in the Scriptures,
vindicated; yea, it will be found to be so unchangeable, that those that now
despise it, shall lie under the punishment therein threatened to the contemners
thereof for ever, and ever; as those that embrace the precious promises, obey
the holy Commandments, and fear the dreadful Threatenings declared in the
Scriptures, shall enjoy in spirit, soul and body, the blessedness of Life
Eternal; and although now the proud contemners of God, and of his Word, that
dare tread the Bible under their feet, in scorn of the Doctrine expressed
therein, are called Happy, and those workers of wickedness, are set up in the
minds of many; yet the time will come; when God will make up his Jewels, and
spare them, as a man spares his own son that serves him; and then will there
be a discerning between the Righteous and the Wicked; between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not. See Mal. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

the only begotten Son of God, both from all Eternity, according to his Divine
Nature, and also in the fullness of time, according to his Humane Nature; So no
other Doctrine whatsoever, is the Word of God, so as the Doctrine of the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament is the Word of God; for God wrote the
words of the Covenant, and gave the Record of his Son, whose Doctrine and
Miracles are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of
God; and that believing ye might have Life through his Name, John 20. 30. Which
Doctrine of the Scriptures, our Savior Jesus Christ (who as God and man in one
Person, is called the Word of God) declared to be the Word of God, when he
reproved the Scribes and Pharisees, for their making void the Commandment of
God, that they might keep their own Traditions; making, says he, the Word of
God of no effect, etc. In which sentence it is very evident, that our Savior
Jesus Christ called the Commandment of God, expressed in the Scriptures, The
Word of God. See Mark 7. And to this agrees the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.
17. For we are not as many, which corrupt or deal deceitfully with the Word of
God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we in
Christ. That Word of God, which they did not corrupt, was the Doctrine which
they delivered from God to the People concerning Jesus Christ, and Salvation by
him, which they delivered both by word of mouth, and by writing.

And as it is observed, that the Hebrew word which is translated Commandments,
does signify Words, as Exodus 34. 28. He wrote upon the Tables, the Words of
the Covenant, the ten Words or Commandments; which, withal other Commandments
of the old Covenant, is called the Word or Doctrine of God; So also the Words
of Christ written in the Scriptures of the new Covenant, is truly called the
Word or Doctrine of God; though Moses and other Prophets spoke and wrote it,
yet the Word or Doctrine, is the Word or Doctrine of God; for these holy men of
God, spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit, 2 Pet. 1. 21. So although
Peter, Paul, and the rest of those holy Penmen of the Scriptures of the new
Covenant, did speak and write the Doctrine therein contained; yet the Doctrine,
is the Word or Commandment of God, as the Apostle teaches, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Not
that we are sufficient to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves, but
our sufficiency is of God, who also has made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, or Covenant; the Doctrine whereof they delivered, not in the words
which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Spirit teaches, comparing
spiritual things, with spiritual, 1 Cor. 2. 13.

that add to, or take from the Scriptures, Prove. 30. 6. Revel. 22. 18, 19. For
whosoever does speak a word against the Scriptures, speaks against him, whose
Will is therein expressed; yea, whosoever speaks disdainfully and
reproachfully of the Seriptures, speaks so against God himself; for was it
ever known, that the Word, Law, or Commandment of a King, was contemned, and
evil spoken of, but the KIng who gave that Law, Word or Commandment, was also
thereby dishonored, and his Name or Power despised? Is a Kings Honor bound up
in his Laws? and is not the Honor of the great God concerned in his Laws? will
earthly Kings punish the contemners of their Commands, as far as their Power
dorh extend? and will not the King Eternal, whose Power is universal?

But as the Adversaries of Jesus Christ dealt with him in the Days of his
Humiliation, even so do his Enemies deal by his Word in these days; and surely
those that in the Personal absence of Christ, do vent their rage against the
Scriptures, would show the same indignation against Christ himself, were he
personally present, if it were in their power so to do; those that tread the
Scriptures under their feet, would trample upon the Person of Christ, were he
in their way, opposing their designs, as the Scriptures are; and like as the
Scribes and Pharisees did conclude that Jesus Christ was not the Son of God,
because they could so abuse him, and found no virtue in him; so do these
Adversaries of Christ, the Preachers up of the so called Light within, conclude
against the Scriptures, their being the Word of God, because they can abuse
them, and find no virtue in them: And as Christ did then suffer his Person to
be abused by wicked hands, Acts 2. 23. So he now suffers his Word to be
despised; which notwithstanding, he will one day Vindicate, to the utter
Confusion of the Enemies thereof; he gave his Back to the smiters, and his
Cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, and hid not his Face from shame and
spitting; he was mocked, crowned with Thorns, Scourged, nailed to the Cross,
Crucified and slain; and what Power or virtue did his Persecuters feel in him
while they did any of these things to him? did they not in effect say, in these
men's words, This a Christ, a Savior, this the Word of God, this quick and
powerful; he cannot save himself, how then should he save others? If thou be
the Christ, come down from the Cross, said they, and we will believe thee. To
like purpose these blasphemers of God, and of his Truth, when they have cast
the Scriptures on the ground, have said, Rise up, if thou be the Word of God.
Oh the wonderful patience and forbearance of God! Oh the wretchedness and
perverseness of man! God sent his Son to save men, men Crucified him; he sent
his Word to instruct men, men despise it, and tread it under their feet; they
can now call the Scriptures, lifeless, and say, they have no virtue in them;
what might not they have said, that nailed Christ to the Cross? It is recorded,
that a woman did but touch the hem of his Garments, and virtue came out of him;
but they that Crucified him, might have said, that they had both touched and
felt him, and yet found no virtue come out of him.

No marvel therefore, that the Scriptures seems to be lifeless, and a dead
Letter, to such whose Faith is dead; to them it is no wonder, that the
Scriptures do not enlighen them, that go about to destroy them; or in Christ
himself, while they were kiling him, they found little excellency; And why were
some refreshed, even by the touching of Christ's Garment, and others that
^ouched his Body, felt no benefit? Was it not because, the one came to him with
a Hand of Faith, and Love, owning him ^o be the Son of God; and the other came
with wicked hands, to crucify and slay him, because they denied him to be the
Christ? And wherefore is it, that some find wonderful comfort in the
Scriptures, and are thereby made wise unto Salvation? Is it not, because they
come with humble and believing Hearts to them? But they must needs be a dead
Letter to such whose Faith and Affections is quite dead to them.

infallible Teacher of the Doctrine of Salvation.

First, Because there is no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man in this
world, that can name a Work of Righteousness, which as an Act, Deed or Duty of
Righ^eousnesse, ought to be observed by the Sons of men, which the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament do not make mention of, fairly discover and fully
comprehend; Therefore the Scripture is an Infallible Teacher of the Doctrine of
Salvation.

2. Because there is no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man in this world,
that can name a work of wickedness, which as an Act or Deed of wickedness,
ought not to be done by any of the Sons of men, which the Scriptures do not
most severely forbid, upon pain of the greatest Punishments to be inflicted on
them that persist therein; Therefore the Scripture is an infallible Teacher,
etc.

3. Because there is no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man in this World,
that can declare any Promise, either of Peace or Happiness, which as a Promise
from the True God, ought to be embraced by the Son^ of men, which the
Scriptures of the Old and new Testament do not make mention of, and very fairly
and fully declare; Therefore the Scriptures are an infallible Teacher, etc.

4. Because there is no man, nor Spirit, or Light within any Man in this world,
that can declare any Punishment which God will inflict upon sinners for their
disobedience, which the Scripture speaks not of, and very fully declares;
Therefore the Scriptures are an infallible Teacher, etc.

5. Because no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man, etc. can prove any act
or deed which the Scripture calls an act of Righteousness, to be an act or deed
of Wickedness; Therefore the Scripture is an infallible Teacher, etc.

6. Because no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man, can prove any act or
deed, which the Scriptures call an act of Wickedness, to be an act or deed of
Righteousness; Therefore the Scripture is an infallible Teacher, etc.

7. Because no Man nor Spirit, or Light within any man, etc. can prove any
Promise which is made in Scripture to be false, or that it shall not be made
good, according to the condition thereof, to those to whom it is made;
Therefore the Scripture is an infallible Teacher, etc.

8. Because no Man, nor Spirit, or Light within any man, etc. can prove that
any of the Threatenings expressed in the Scriptures against the workers of
iniquity, are either unreasonable or false, or that they are not according to
the mind of God, or shall not come to pass; Therefore the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, are an infallible Teacher, etc.

The Word of God therefore expressed in the Scriptures of Truth, concerning his
Commandments, his Promises, his threatings, is very far in Authority and
clearness beyond any Spirit, or Light, in any mortal man in the world;
therefore I conclude they are above all men's books, words, or Doctrine, an
infallible Teacher, and such as are able to make wise unto Salvation, through
faith in Christ Jesus; being given by inspiration of God, and are profitable
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, in Righteousness,
that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. Search the Scriptures therefore, says the Lord Jesus
Christ, for they are they which testify of me, Joh. 5. 39. To the Law, and to
the Testimony, says the Prophet, if they speak not according to this Word, it
is because there is no Light in them, Isai. 10. 20.

Doctrine of the Scriptures is further manifested, and so conclude. The first
of which is taken from, Ephesians. 5 13. Whatsoever, says the Apostle, does make
manifest, is Light, now the Scriptures does make manifest, the mystery which
was kept secret since the world began; which according to the Commandment of
the everlasting God, is, by the Doctrine of the Apostles, made known to all
Nations, for the obedience of faith; therefore according to Paul's Doctrine, the
Scripture is Light, for by it is the way of Salvation manifest. See Romans 16.
25, 26. Rom, 15, 4, 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2.

The Apostle Peter also teaches the same Doctrine; for after he had declared,
what they which were with Christ in the Mount had seen, and heard, he tells us,
that we have a more sure word of prophecy, or of the Prophets, whereunto ye do
well, says he, that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts; that is, as
has been already showed, until the Resurrection of the dead, and coming of
Christ from heaven, with his mighty Angels, etc.

Now we know, that a shining Light in a dark place, is of great use; of such
concernment is the Doctrine of the Scriptures, as the Prophet Teaches, The
Commandment of the Lord is pure, says the Prophet, Enlightening the eyes,
Psalm. 19. 8, 9. Thy word is a Lamp unto my feet, says he, and a light unto my
paths; Oh! of what blessed concernment are the Scriptures of Truth, to direct
in the way of the Lord, unto which sure word of Prophecy, or of the Prophets
and Apostles of Jesus Christ, we shall do well, if we take heed, as unto a
Light that shines in a dark place; remembering this first, that no Prophecy of
the Scripture, is of any private interpretation; for the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the holy Spirit; They are not therefore of private or particular
interpretation, as though they did concern one time, or the men only which
spoke them; But they are of a general interpretation, and do concern, as they
are Prophesies, and declare the Doctrine of Salvation, all times, and People,
as says the Prophet; This shall be written for the generation to come, and the
People which shall be created, shall praise the Lord, Ps. 102. 18. Bow down
thine ear, says Solomon, and hear the words of the Wise, they shall be fitted
in thy lips, that thy trust may be in the Lord; have not I written to thee
excellent things, that I might make thee to know the certainty of the words of
Truth, that thou might answer the words of Truth, to them that send unto
thee: See Pro. 22. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Therefore did Peter write both his Epistles, viz. to stir up the pure minds of
the believers, by way of remembrance, that those that had obtained pure minds,
might be mindful of the words spoken before by the holy Prophets, and of the
Commandments of the Apostles of the Lord and Savior; Knowing this first, says
he, that there shall come in the last days, scoffers, viz. such as will taunt
and scoff at the Scriptures, at the Doctrine written therein, and at such as
believe and practice it; Which scoffers do walk after their own lusts, and not
after the words of the holy Prophets, and the Commandment of the Apostles of
Christ: Oh! how much is this fulfilled in these days, by which we know it is
the last times, 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3. Let Believers therefore take heed and beware
of false Teachers; let them believe and embrace the Doctrine of the Scriptures
of Truth, Dan. 10. 21. which teach us, that we should believe that Jesus is
Christ the Son of God, and that believing we might have Life through his Name,
1 John 20. 31. Let them therefore give themselves to the reading, or hearing
the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and as every man has received the gift,
whether of Prophecy, Ministering, Teaching, or Exhortation, Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
So ought they to minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the
manifold Graces of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

powerful opperation of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, upon the hearts of such
as believe, which experience the good things of God can witness, viz. that upon
reading, hearing, and meditating in the Scriptures of Truth, God has sweetly
refreshed their spirits with riches of Grace, spiritual Comforts and Heavenly
consolations, and made the Scriptures of Truth, a word of Power, by which he
has powerfully wrought both to convince and convert them, to turn them from
darkness to light, from the Kingdom of Satan, to the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
Acts 26. 18. Yea, it is an evident Argument, that they which are strangers to
what I here say, let their Profession be what it will, Truth was never yet
espoused to their Souls, never did any man of God say that the Scripture is a
dead Letter, a Carnal thing, to feed the Carnal mind; Oh the Darkness that is
in some that boast of Light! who can call the holy Scriptures a dead Letter, a
Carnal thing to feed the Carnal mind, and yet themselves do fill the Nation
with Books and Writings; what may one think of this, but that they do either
condemn the thing which themselves allow, or else they have found out a way to
make their Letters and Books to become Spiritual, and to cause all other, even
the Sacred Scriptures to become Carnal, which though written or Printed, as
theirs, yet not from the same inspiration, for the Doctrine of the Scriptures
was written by the Inspiration of God? But how can there Doctrine be from the
same inspiration, which is against the Doctrine of the Scriptures?

How much therefore is it to be lamented, that the Scriptures of Truth should
be so villified and reproached, and that any should be so deluded as wholly to
neglect the reading of them, and let them lie in the corners of their houses,
without all regard of them? alas, it was not so with Professors in the Marian
days, when one Book of it was at five pounds value, and for the least Epistle,
a man would give a load of hay, and carry it up to London into the Bargain; but
now we having plenty, men dare abuse it, and tread it under their feet, and
because it does not cry out with a vocal voice, and reprove, in and by it self
alone; therefore they conclude it is worth nothing, and yet can highly esteem
of their own Books, although they can do as little.

But now consider, take the best grain that can be procured, lay it in a dry
place where it cannot grow, and will it become fruitful? not at all; But sown
in the field, and it will bring forth abundantly: Even so, lay thy Bible in a
corner of thy house, without regard of the Doctrine therein contained, and it
will be no ways profitable to thee; but lay up the Doctrine thereof in thy
heart, where it should be, and it will become a fruitful Word to thee; for it
is not likely, that the Doctrine of the Scriptures should do thee any good, or
that thou should feel any virtue in it, while thou endeavourest to shut it
out of thy heart, but let the sayings of the Scriptures, when and where they
reprove for sin, and exhort to amendment of life, let the Judgments therein
written against the workers of Iniquity, and the Promises of Grace, which God
has there recorded for the comfort of them, that by Faith lay hold on Jesus
Christ; come close to thy heart, and pray, that God may make those Promises
thine, and yield up thy self to the holy directions therein contained, and then
thou will find that there is virtue in the Scriptures; Oh! there is a Divine
flame in them, if they be but taken to the heart, that will warm and quicken
the dead and benumbed affections; Did not the Words of Christ make his
Disciples hearts to burn within them, while he talked with them, and while he
opened to them the Scriptures I Luke 24. 32. Oh! therefore give diligence to
obey what is written in the Scriptures of Truth; for if you that are contrary
minded, shall not consider and leave your Inventions, and the Traditions of
men, which you have embraced, your sin lies at your own doors, and your blood
upon your own heads; for what a sad thing is it, that men should quote
Scriptures, like Satan, to justify their Doctrine of deceit, which they
deliver, and yet notwithstanding esteem the Scriptures of no value? That men
should wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Cry down
the Word of God, and set up the Word of man, and Satan; yea, they can reprove
some for reading the Scriptures; and yet if one have been at their Meetings,
and while they are teaching up the so called Light within, be reading one of
their Books, giving little or no heed to what is spoken, yet he is not
reproved; By which it is evident, that they know, that the design which they
drive on, is not in the Scriptures of Truth, but in their own Books; and
therefore it is of like acceptance with them to read their Books, as to hear
their Preaching. Let all believers therefore pray, that they may be delivered
from them, which Preach up the so called Light within, who deny the Doctrine of
the Scriptures of Truth, expressed in the Bible, to be the Word of God, and set
up their own sayings, for a rule of direction, which yet has no Testimony from
God, or from his Word.

Sacra Scriptura est liber vitae, origo aeterna; Cujus incorporalis Essentia;
Cujus cognitio vita; Cujus Scriptura indelebilis; Cujus inspectus
desiderabilis; Cujus Doctrina facilis; Cujus Scientia dulcis; Cujus profunditas
inscrutabilis; Cujus verba innumerabilia, and vnum tantum Verbum omnia. Hug. de
art. Noe.

Thus Englished.

The Sacred Scripture, is the Book of Life, Whose Original is Eternal; Whose
Essence is incorporeal; Whose Knowledge is Life; Whose writings is indeliable;
Whose inspect is desirable; Whose Doctrine is easy; Whose knowledge is sweet;
Whose depth is unsearchable; Whose words are innumerable, and only one Word
All.

THE END.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to all the Churches, Page 3. line 17. read truth is. In the
Epistle to the Reader, p. 3. l. 5. r. the so called Light, l. 21. r. which in
all men as the only means of Salvation. In the Epistle to all those that teach
up the Light within, p. 2. l. 27. r. so called Light within, p. 4. l. 14. r. so
called Light within, p 5. l. 18. f. lies, r. liar. Of the Book, p. 1. l. 6. r.
the so called Light, l. 21. r. the so called Law or Light, p. 2. l. 11. r.
make, p. 3. l. 11. r. preaches, p. 6. l. 13. f. Loya^, r. Legal, l. 19. f.
so that it, r so it, l. last r. as, p. 27. l. 25. f. abase, r. alas, p. 28. l.
12. f. works, r. work, p. 29. l. 10. f. lives, r. life. p. 42. l. 11. dele it,
l 20. r. and to render, p. 47. l. 28. d. yet, p. 50. l. 23. f. so r. to. p. 57.
l. 1. f. I shall show, r. I show, l. 3. f. at, r. in, p. 70. l. 3. f. plunged,
r. plagued, p. 75. l. 11. r. have always, margent, r. Acts 24. 16. p. 7^. l.
7. f. spoke, r. spoken, l. 23. f. god, r go, p. 88 l. 2. r. Angels, p ^1. l.
15. f its, r his, l. 17. after world, r. of the ungodly, so by his word shall
the world, p. 141. l 12. f. god, r. go, p. 144. l. 2* f. desiring, r.
despising, p. 167. l. 23. f. he, r. she, p. 168. l. 1. f. he, r* she, l. 3 f.
him, r. her, l. 4 f. him, r. her, l. 5. f. he, r. she, f. him, r. ^er, l. 8. f.
him, r. her, f. his, r. her, l. 10. f. he, r. she, l. 22 f. his, r. ^er, p.
173. in the Contents, l. 1. f. fine, r. five, l. 16 f. fine, r. five* p. 174.
l. 15. f. he, r. thee, p. 185. l. 8, 9. f. alleth, r. calls, p. 205. l. 21.
f. that Bible, r. the Bible.


