EARLY DEVOTION.
Father I have Sinned He yt Humbles himself shall be exalted Luke 14:^^
Remember thy Creat^r in ye day^ of thy Youth.

Printed for Ra Simpson Bookseller.



AN Earnest Admonition to ALL, But especially to Young Persons: To turn to GOD
by Speedy Repentance and Reformation.

Being the Substance of SIX SERMONS, Delivered in the Chapel at Popler.

To which is added, An Account of the Rise and Progress of the Religious
Societies of Young Men; and of the Societies for Reformation, lately erected in
the Cities of LONDON and WESTMINSTER, with a Copy of their Orders, vindicated
from the common Objections.

AND Sundry Directions relating to the Religious Conferences of these
Societies; with Devotions suited to them; and Prayers for the use of Private
Families, and for Seamen.

By Josiah Woodward, Minister of Popler.

Prlnted for the Author, and sold by Ra Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul*s
Churchyard, 1697.

TO THE Religious Societies of Youngmen In and about the CITIES of London and
Westminster, Particularly to that at POPLER.
IT is in Hope, My dear Brethen, of making some Addition to your Pious
Fraternities, (and thereby to the invisible Church of God) that I have (at your
Request) published this compassionate Call to sinful Prodigals; who, by leaving
the House and Government of their Heavenly Father, have parted with all true
Honor, Peace and Happiness; and can never return to these, but by their
effectual Return to their God and their Duty Which gives us such an undeniable
Reason for the Necessity of the Conversion of ^ Sinner in order to his
Happiness, that none who will seriously consider it, ca^ withstand the
convincing Power of it.

For, who can once think, That men man fight against God, and come off with
Victory and Triumph? Or, that such as love nothing so much as Sin and Pollution
can inherit the undefiled Kingdom ^^ our Lord Jesus Christ? Or, that such who
serve the Devil, and bear his likenes^ upon Earth, will be as happy as the
Regenerate Children of God in the other World? The least Application of mi^^
will show us the impossibility of these things and consequently, that all
wicked Peop^^ must speedily repent and amend their Live^ or perish for ever.

But yet indeed, It is a very sad Truth of which we have too many gross
Examples; That habituated Sinners may at la^^ arrive at such a desperate Pitch
of Insensibleness, as to be blind to all the Convictive Methods of the Gospel,
and dead t^ all the mighty Persuasives of it.

I have therefore chiefly directed this Evangelical Call to Young Persons, who
are not yet so fatally inured to sin; hopeing that their Ears are not thus
judicially closed against the proclaimed Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And truly as to this, It is matter of abundant Praise to God, that he has
opened the Ears and Hearts of many of You to receive divine Instruction; and
this, to such effectual Purpose, that it is enough to affect a very dull Soul
to behold the Vigor and Stedfastness of your Zeal for God, and your humble and
holy Deportment in his Sight.

What suitable Praise can we offer to God (the Giver of all Good) when we
behold Youth punishing Lust, and giving Examples of Piety to Age? Delighting in
the Praises of God, as their chief Joy; and celebrating the Exercises of our
Holy Religion with such Relish and Delight, as gives a seasonable Demonstration
to this Epicurean Age, That there are vaster Pleasures to be reapt from the
blessed Entertainments of Religion, than from all the possible indulgence of
sensual Van^ties.

I would therefore entreat all Young People (who are naturally Lovers of
Pleasure) to make this Experiment, namely To frequent your Societies, and joy^
their hearts with a suitable warmth t^ yours, in the Worship, Love and Praises
of God for a competent time. An^ then let them tell us, whether one day in the
House (and with the Household o^ God) be not better than a thousand in the
Tents of Wickedness? An^ whether any Company be really so desirable as that
which tends to advance o^^ spiritual and everlasting Happiness?

In this they will have an inconceivabl^ advantage over such who engage them
selves in wicked Company. For, these meet to their mutual Condemnation, and to
the confusion of each others Faces; to fuel each others Lusts a while, and t^
be Firebrands to each others Consciences for ever. And therefore, except they
are perfectly hardened, they who meet toge^^er for sinful Ends must needs leave
^^ch others Company with sorrowful ^earts; wishing they never had seen ^ met
each other; regretting the Guilt with which they have loaded each others
^onsciences; foreseeing with horror ^e light of that Day which will discover
^^l the Works of Darkness; in which ^e Partners in sin must appear together ^
all their Nastiness before the Judg^ent Seat of Christ to give an Account ^r
what they have jointly done in ^^e Flesh.

But pious Society begins and ends ^^ite otherwise. Such meet to advance ^^e
Glory of God, and the Grace and ^eace of each others Souls. And there^^re they
part (as I have sometime seen ^^) with joyful Reflections on what they ^^ve
been transacting together; and ^itle a blessed Hope of meeting each other ^ith
Joy before God, and of being for ^ver with him.

Enlivened by this Hope, your Zeal ^ay well take wing, and soar to a very ^^fty
Eminency. But then lest it should evaporate, or (like an Enthusia^^ Phantom)
become unsteady and move travagantly: You happily take care your excellent
Rules, to poize your Z^^ by a ponderous Humility, and the ste^^ Love of Unity
and Order. For make a truly Christian Reformati^^ without a Sect; and whilst
you hate ^ separate from sin, you love and pity ^ Sinner: And whilst your
affections ^ in the greatest warm^h, you keep to the Form of Doctrine and
Devotion which you have been educated; and your utmost to revive the primitive
P^^ty and Power of the Christian Religi^^ in the most ancient Methods.

In these and other particulars, ^ show a Zeal steered by Knowledge ^ balanced
by Humility; which is a g^ Argument that it is a Fruit of the Spi^^^ of God;
and is the best Ground I ^^ where find, to hope that God will not le^^ us
utterly. Only be exceeding care^ to walk worthy of this your special P^^fession
of Religion; always remembri^^ of what concernment all religious Acti^^ ^^e,
wherein God is the Object, Consci^^ce the Register, and Eternity the Con^^uence.

It may be expected from You, that ye ^^uld do more than others. And, O! ^^y it
ever be seen, that you are to others ^^emplary in all Humility, Purity and
^^tegrity of Heart and Life.

Then will you lay a good Foundation ^ Stability and Increase in your Holy
^^rposes; and you will engage the Pray^^ of all the Lovers of God and Religion
^ your behalf. And may it please the ^od of all Grace to enliven and advance
^ur Orthodox Zeal for his Glory to ^^ch a conspicuous Brightness, as may ^eatly
glorify his Name on Earth, ^^d retrieve the Honor of our Holy ^eligion, and
increase the numbers of ^^e true Worshippers of God; till at ^^st, all these
lesser Luminaries of the church below shall be united in that ^ and
Constellation of the Church above; where Holiness will never be ^^vied,
reproached, or molested; and ^ill never need to be excited, cherished or
advanced by humane Assista^^^ For, there it will be the very Nat^^ Bliss, and
Glory of perfected So^^ ^o love, serve, and praise God.

Into this blessed Society of t^^ Firstborn, may it please God (in ^^ time) to
introduce every one of Y^^ and every one that bears the Name ^^ Christ, in
particular.

Your Affectionate Assistan^^ in the things of our Common Salvation J. W.

An earnest Admonition to Young PERSONS:
From LVKE vx. xviii. ^ will Arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him;
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son.
THESE are the Prodigal's serious Thoughts and Purposes, when he came to
himself. And ^^at we may consider them the ^^tter, let us look back a little on
the Follies and Extravagances ^^ his past Life: in which these Ci^cumstances
tend to our Edifica^^on.

IN the first place, He was in the prime of his Youth; that bloo^ing season of
humane life from which the after fruits may ve^^ much be guest at. We read in
t^^ twelfth verse, That the young ^ Son said to his Father; Father, gi^^ me the
Portion of goods that fall^^ to me. He would feign be his o^^ man now; free
from the Restrai^^ and Councils of his Father's ^^vernment. And thus the wild
a^^ wilful Youth, led by his yout^ lusts and vanity, ran on to the ^^ry brink
of Ruin.

1st. Ob. WE may here observe, Th^^ the time of youth is a very dang^^ous and
critical Season; and needs ^^ most of any to be kept strictly ^^ ^^der good
Tutorage, and to have the benefit of good Examples. In youth, many lusts and
passions are strong, and the Judgment and Understanding is weak: and therefore
it greatly needs to be guided by wise and experienced Governors. It Is a great
error in Education (and I fear it has proved fatal to many) to think, that when
young people arrive to the age of 15 or 16 years, they are then fit to be left
to their own Conduct, and need little over sight. Quite otherwise, now is the
most dangerous season of all their life. One opportunity of committing such
gross sin as they are now capable of, may undo them for ever.

THIS is the time in which the Tempers and Manners of people are to be formed
aright; and are the most easy to take those impressions, which are the most
^^^ficult to be altered in their adva^ced Age. They are now setti^^ out for
Heaven or for Hell, a^ which way so ever they take, the youthful warmth and
spirit is li^^ to carry them on fiercely in ^^ And therefore happy are they w^^
fall into good hands, and so enj^^ a sober and pious Education, they have grace
and wisdom make a good use of it; the wa^ of which had like to have rui^^ the
vain youth in the Text. He h^^ a very good Father, and was ^^der a very pious
government, b^ he grew weary of it, and wo^^^ have his own will: And therefo^^
he resolves to stay no longer, when he could not do what he pleased and to this
end, He took his jo^^ney into a far Country, Verse ^^ that is, To a place
remote from ^is Father's Inspection, where he ^ould have none to check or ^urb
him in his Revelling and Riot. We may here note further:

2 d. Obs. That if a young Person ^ven to any vice or lust, once gets ^to such
a place where no body ^proves or checks him for his Sin, is a thousand to one
but he is un^^ne. It was a part of the con^^ssion of a young man lately
exe^ated at Tyburn for Robbery; ^^own to many of us (for he li^ed sometime in
our Neighbour^ood), that he had lived in seve^^l sober Families, but he left
them, because he could not there follow ^s Lusts. And when once he got ^ose
from these restraints, how ^on did he come to ruin?

CONSIDER this, You that ^^e Parents; and be careful to pro^^de pious places
for your Children, when you send them o^^ into the World. Places in which it
shall be difficult for them to com^ at the vices to which youth i^ prone: And
where they may have religious instruction, and good e^^ Examples, and may
happily escap^ the pollutions of a loose and prefligate age.

AND this is more especially ^^ be regarded in the solemn (an^ almost
indissolvable) contract ^^ Marriage: where the intimacy an^ affection that is
due, will make i^ almost natural to imitate either the good or evil manners of
the de^^ Associate, who is to be looked o^ as the other part of ones self. The
indeed the evil dispositions of the One are more like to prevail ove^ the
better Temper of the Other than the contrary, through the tendency of our
depraved Nature to that which is ill. As, if a dead ^ody be chained to a
living; the ^ead will sooner kill the living, ^han the living quicken the dead.
Which serves to show the unhap^y state of such who have any tinc^ure of
Religion, when they are ^natcht to a Person of a contrary ^umour and practice.
It Is the fast^ing of the living to the dead, which should make every one very
cautious and circumspect ^n that great Affair of humane Life: in which, to be
rash and unadvised, is to run hoodwinkt upon a Precipice, and to make Court to
Misery and Sorrow.

THESE Cautions are at this time the more seasonable and important, considering
the dismal debaucheries that abound both in Youth and Age.

AND therefore, Let me advise, yea require, you that a^^ Young, to be advised
and directe^ by your Parents and sober Friend^ Your Parents have had the
Experience of many years before yo^ had any Being; and they have brought you up
with great Pain^ Cost, Care, and Sorrow; expect^ting to reap comfort from you
a^ last: And they cannot want good will to advise their own Offspring to that
which they think most for their advantage. Wherefore remember the Council of
Divine Wisdom by the mouth of Solomon^ Prove. 1. 8. My Son, hear the Instruction
of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother.

HAD the Prodigal taken this course, he had done well. For* the first wrong
step which he took, was, when he departed from his Father: hereby depriving
himself of the advantages of his Fathers ^^ber admonitions and example, and
forfeiting the blessing of God ^xprest in the first Commandment ^ith Promise.
Take heed, Young People, that you leave not sober and serious Society for the
contra^y: If you habituate your selves ^o ill Company, you run on the mouth of
a Cannon. The Lepro^y of Sin is often spread by Famili^r Conversation. And such
as converse with people that are sick of the Plague, will be in danger of dying
of the same distemper.

WELL, The Prodigal will be gone from the Government of his pious Father; and
now, what will become of him? Truly, it is easy to guess, what a young
Hot-Pate, left to his own will, will betake himself to. He first falls into ill
Company, and then to Drinking and Riotous living. And this adding new flames to
the natural Heat of youthful blood, in the next place; he keeps Company with
Harlots. And thus he falls into a deep and narrow Pit, as Solomon calls it,
Pro. 23. 27. out of which few escape.

IT was a very unhappy Circumstance of this Prodigal's condition, that he had
an Estate given him by his Father, Verse 12. He divided unto them his Living.
This young Man had not for certain been so lewd, if he had not been so
plentifully provided with means to accommodate his Lusts. So that we may here
make a third Note:

3 d. Obs. THAT a plentiful Estate in the Possession of a Wild Youth, does most
directly tend to his destruction. It Is like a Sword in the hand of a mad Man,
with which he will very probably do himself a mischief. There is not a more
dangerous and deplorable condition upon Earth, than for a Person that is
eagerly bent toward any vice, to have favorable Circumstances to accomplish
it without any Check of Conscience, or Rebuke of providence. He seems to be
abandoned of God to his own Will, and given up to his affected Vices: and he
has no kind Rub or Cross in his way to stop his Career in the ways of Death.

IN this Respect the Prodigal's wealth was his Snare: But we may be sure, his
Prodigality will soon make him poor enough. And, indeed, the next news we have
of him, is, That he had spent All, and was surrounded with Famine and Distress:
And that he had betaken himself to one of the most abject employments in the
World, even the feeding of Swine, and yet could not by this get Bread to pu^
into his mouth, no nor so much as a belly-full of Husks on which the Swine did
eat. We may therefore note further;

4th. Obs. THAT beastly lust^ will soon bring men to extream^ misery in both
worlds. Solomon^ Observation has been fully veristed by many miserable
Examples; namely, that by means of a whorish Woman a Man is brought to a Morsel
of Bread, Pro. 6. 26. It brings many a plentiful Estate to a poor starving
Fragment; and reduces many a Family of Note to such extreme penury, that they
are clothed with Rags.

THUS it was with our Prodigal Youth, his case was miserably al^ered since he
left his Father's House. He is now sorely hunger-^^itten, and almost starved
for want ^oth of Food and Raiment: He ^as a severe Fast after his former
Surfeits, and has now many Marks of the Lashes of his own Folly before his
Eyes; and this does him more Good than all his Prosperity had done: For, now he
begins to consider what Plenty he once enjoyed under his Father's Roof. He
remembers that his Father's dutiful Servants fared better than his wild Son;
and having hope, that his Father would yet show him some Favor upon his Return
and Submission to him, he takes up the Resolution of the Text, I will arise and
go to my Father: As if it were said, I will arise out of this nasty and needy
Condition, into which my Extravagancy has brought me. I am resolved to throw my
self in a Penitent a^^ Humble manner at my Father feet: And I will say unto him
Father, I have sinned against Heven and before Thee; I am a gre^^ Sinner
against God and Man. ^ have been a very undutiful Chil^ to my heavenly and
earthly F^ther, and am not worthy to b^ looked on as a Child by either o^ them.
I am a vile unthankfu^ Wretch, a Swine rather than a^ Man, a Rebel rather than
a Son.

THIS was the Purport of his humble Confession; and thus humbling himself, he
was Exalted: For his Father's Eye was upon him so soon as ever he looked
home-ward, and the Son's heart relenting, the Father's bowels are melted within
him. And whereas the Son comes onward drooping, the Father runs cheerfully, and
even prevents the Language of Words in ^is Son's mouth, reading his Re^entance
in his very Looks: Where^pon, he falls on his Neck and kisses Him, giving him
Assurance of his Welcome, by the most Affectio^ate and Rapturous Embraces. And
upon this we may make a fifth Remark: Namely,

5th. Obs. THAT God, through his mediating Son, accepts even those into his Mercy
and Favor, who are by outward Misery brought to an effectual Return to him.
The Prodigal's outward Want and Penury awakens his Conscience, (through
sanctifying Grace) and excites spiritual Sorrow, which brings him to a sincere
Conversion to God; and so he obtains Favor in his Sight.

FOR we must consider this Parable, as a lively Representation of a Sinners
Apostasy from God and the Vows of his Baptism, to a vain and wicked Life.
Licentious Minds think themselves crampt and confined by the Commandments of
God; and tha^ they are kept with severity from those things which are agreeabl^
to their sensual Appetites: An^ therefore they tread down those Fences of
Religion which should keep them within the Bounds o^ true Happiness, forsaking
God the only Fountain of Bliss. And the^ being misled by sinful Lusts an^ the
invisible Enemy of Souls* they wander about in the c^urse of a thousand Follies
and Extravagancies, till they are surrounded with Misery and Perplexity: Yet,
if then they are awakened by their Afflictions and Distress, and effectually
turn to God in time, he will have mercy upon them, and there will be Joy in
Heaven at their Conversion.

And for as much as we find no good thing done by the Prodigal, before he came
to his holy Reso^ution expressed in the words of the Text, Let us make one Remark
^ore: To wit,

6th. Obs. THAT we have ^one of us made one true Step in Religion, till we are
come to a ^revailing Resolution for God and and his Kingdom, in opposition ^o
all the allurements of Sin and this present World. When once man's wicked and
stubborn Will is changed by the Grace of God, the Man ^s converted, and begins
a new course of Life: Then it is that we ^ruely set our Face toward Heaven,
which we before either forgot or despised; and then we can no longer rest on
those Beds of slo^^ and sensuality, on which we ^^ drowsily snoared before: but
w^ arise, and go to our Father.

NOW, this should put us on the most serious and frequent Con^^deration of
those Motives, which are proposed to us in the Gospe^ to incline our Wills to
embrac^ the Government and Grace ^^ our Lord Jesus Christ; such a^ The infinite
Danger and Deme^^ of Sin, The abundant Mercies ^^ God, The Grace and Merits ^^
our Lord Jesus Christ, The Spir^tual Assistances of the Holy Ghost and. The
eternal Rewards and Punishments of the world to come* And in order to make
these Motives effectual, we must pray t^ God for that new Heart which h^ has
promised, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27* We must beg, with David, That God would incline our
Hearts to ^s Testimonies, and not suffer our ^ffections to run after
Covetous^ess or any other Lust, Psa. 119. ^6.

AND whereas this Parable is ^^ put, that of the two Sons which ^^e Father had,
only one was a ^rodigal, the other very Dutiful: Yea, and the Prodigal at last
be^ame reformed. Let us here in ^he last place make a mournful Re^ark,
concerning the multitudes of obstinate Sinners in these times: To wit,

7th. Obs. THAT it is matter of great Sorrow, and what presages ill to us, That
so few profane Persons come to the pious Resolution of the Text. Alas! we have
many Prodigals, but few Penitents. It is a sad Thought, and unanswerable to
right Reason, (to which all men are Pretenders that the greatest part of the
world yea, (which is most our shame the most of those which are calle^
Christians lie contented in the Prodigal state of a dissolute and profane
life. How many are there wh^ know no other Pleasure or Tro^ble, but what
affects their externa^ Senses! and like our Prodigal, they spend their time in
feeding of Swin^ (their beastly Lusts;) themselves being in truth, the more
abominable Swine of the two. They have no mind to the things of God; yea, they
have a perverse Dislike to his holy Nature and Government, and are Enemies to
that which is Good

THEY have a most Gracious and Blessed King to their Father, and might inherit
a Glorious and Eternal Kingdom, would they but arise by a real Conversion, and
go ^enitently to God, and serve Him ^ruly for the future: But they ^oath the
very thoughts of this, and do all they can to discredit every thing that
borders on Religi^n; and in effect, reverse the words of the Text; and say, I
will lie ^own again in my sinful Pollutions, and will not betake my self ^o the
ways of Holiness and eter^al Life.

O poor degenerate Children of Men! How are ye fallen from your primitive
Excellency! Is this the Creature that was made after the Image of God? Can such
as were made to enjoy an infinite All-pure ^ountain of Goodness, be conten^ed
with a broken Cistern of puddle water? Can the Reason of Man (as corrupt as it
is) once imagine that it is better wallowing in the mire with Swine, than
c^^versing with Angels; yea, w^^ God himself? In this wretch^^ choice, Men are
more to be proached than Devils. Infer^^ Spirits are fallen from their Glori^
Station, but have no Helper to ^^ up again: But the kind Father fallen Men,
stretches forth his H^^ all the Day long to them, to inv^^ and assist them to
come unto H^ that they may have Life; but ^^ Men will not Arise and Go to the
Father.

SURELY, if the Holy Ang^^ above, may be supposed to be intently concerned for
the Salva^^on of men, as those fallen Ang^^ beneath, are for their Destruction
With what Indignation must the needs consider the sinful Follies of the
Children of Disobedie^^ Those Blessed Angels at once p^^ceive the happiness of
serving God, and the poison of those vices which ^icked Men Idolize: And the
^race of God tends to bring Men ^^ this true savor of things, by which, when
the Lovers of Sin ^ome once to be enlightened and ^urified, they then awake as
one ^ut of a deluding Dream; they ^ondemn and renounce their Follies, and arise
and go to their Father.

Let us here then Consider three things in the words before us:

1. THE Prodigal's Resolution -- I will Arise, and Go to my Father.

2. HIS Humiliation -- And will say unto him; Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and before Thee; and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

3. THE Considerations which led him to this penitent Conversion: Which were,

1. THE Misery and Wretchness of his Condition, whilst wandered (after his own
vain ^^sires and Imaginations) at dista^^ from his Father's House, be rest his
Father's wise Conduct, and de^^tute of his Blessing.

2. THE Necessity of changi^^ his course of Life. He saw, th^^ was nothing but
Scarcity, Mise^ and Death, in the ways that he h^^ foolishly betaken himself
to; a^^ therefore he resolves to Arise ^^ Go to his Father: Considering f^^ther,

3. THE Bowels and Mercy his Father. He perceives his Condition to be wretched,
but ^^ Hopes that it is not desperate. ^^ confided, that his Father, who w^
once so very kind and indulge^^ to him, would be so again, wh^^ he should
approve himself as d^^^^l to him as he was before: And ^ succeeded accordingly.

O! That our Good God, the Fa^^er of us all by Creation, would ^ecome our
Father also by Regene^^tion! That he would (for his be^otten Son's sake) give
us such ^nfeigned Repentance for past Sin, and such ingenuous Resolutions of
^uty for the future, that we may ^^^ repeat the words of the Text in serious
and affected Manner this ^^y: Especially such of us as have ^^therto been
Strangers to the Pow^^ of God's Grace, and to that in^^rd Purity of Heart,
which is ^^ential to our Divine Religion. It ^ time for such who have hitherto
^alkt loosely, without the awful ^ar of God, and without a just ^re to Please
and Honor him in ^ their ways; to look about them ^^rth with, and to begin to
Work out their Salvation with Fear ^^ Trembling: Even before the G^^ God rises
out of the Seat of a ^^ther, to ascend the Tribunal ^^ Judge.

LET us now (even from ^^ very instant) come to a pere^tory Point, from which
we res^^ by the Grace of God, nev^^ part: Namely, that we will heartily and
steadily for Reli^^ for the pure Life and Hope ^^ Christian, in opposition to
all ^^ Lusts and Allurements of a C^^ Life. We are sure that this ^^ sent Life
is drawing to an ^^ And that this is our seeds-time an eternal Harvest of Bliss
or ^^guish. And that Such as sow t^ Flesh, will of the Flesh reap Co^^^tion,
that is, Destruction: And ^^ Such as sow to the Spirit, will ^^ Spirit reap
eternal Life, Gal. ^^

It Is time therefore to stop our Course in sin, and to considet whi^her it is
carrying us: And since we cannot bear even the Thoughts of ^welling with
Everlasting Burnings; ^e must seriously set our Selves ^^ do our utmost to
avoid them: We must betake our Selves (not ^eignedly or faintly, but) in good
^arnest, and with all the V^gour that humane Nature, assisted by ^he Grace of
God, is able to act ^^ the Ways of God prescribed in ^he Gospel: Let us
therefore begin ^ith the Prodigal in the Text; ^amely,

I. IN his efficatious Resolution ^^ repent, and reform, and return ^^ God. --
I will Arise, I will Go ^^ my Father. I will no longer lie ^reaming of
Happiness in nasty ^usts, and in a deluding World, which will one Day perish
and come to naught. No, I will ^^stantly Arise out of my presum^tuous Dreams,
and this car^^ state; and will go right humb^^ to my heavenly Father; and
^^^ling down upon my bended Kne^^ before his Mercy-Seat, I will from the bottom
of my Heart be w^^ my corrupt Nature and si^^ Life, and will beg his Grace ^^
Spirit, to serve him truly all ^^ Days of my future Life; trust^^ in the Mercy
of his Covenant a^^ Promises through my Savior Je^^^ Christ; hoping that
(through Mediation and Merits) mercy w^ yet be vouchsafed to me a vile
P^^fligate, who am not worthy ^^ be called a Creature of God, m^^ less his
Child.

THUS, when an enlighte^^ Mind sees the Baseness, the F^^ and the Danger of
Sin, it soon ^^ ^ies the sad News of this ill State ^o the Will and Affections:
And ^he Will of Man having a natural Abhorrency of apparent Evil, it ^oon takes
the Alarm, and begins ^o set up Resolutions of new and ^etter Courses. For so
it is said ^f the Prodigal, that when he came ^o himself, or to have a right
Judg^ent of his sad Condition, he forth^ith resolved to Arise and Go to his
Father. The same Spirit of Sancti^^cation, who gave convincing ^ight to his
Understanding, did ^lso incline his Will to follow the Dictates of the
enlightened Mind, and empowered him to act accor^ingly: So that he effectually
resol^ed for God, and actually turned ^o him, so soon as he really came ^o his
right Mind.

SIRS, who ever there is among You, that is carried away with any sinful Lust
or Passion, and li^^ in any way of Profaneness a^^ Irreligion; I hear mind you
o^ Truth, which perhaps you will ^^ believe now, but I am sure y^^ will loudly
confess it sooner or l^^ter: Namely, That whilst you th^^ live in sin, you are
not in your rig^^ Mind. As the Idolatrous Jews a^^ said by the Prophet to be
mad upon their Idols, Jer. 50. 38. for as much as their Sin clouded their
Reason to that degree, that they praye^ to a senseless Log or Stone th^^ was
more shiftless than themselves So the vicious Person is mad upon his Lusts, and
sees not the Shame^ Vexation, and Misery, which necessarily attends him in that
unhappy Course of life. As Solomon Youth confesses at the last (after long
insensibleness, through the deceitfulness of Sin) Pro. 23. la^^ They have
stricken me, shall thou ^^y, and I was not sick: They have ^aten me, and I felt
it not. Even ^ mad Men wound themselves, ^^d are insensible of the Hurt they ^^
to their own Flesh.

KNOW therefore, All ye Lo^ers of Sin, that this your inordi^^te Affection to
it, is perfect Ha^^ed to your own Souls. Your ^hirst after forbidden Objects is
^ thirst after Poison: And when ^^er ye indulge it, ye act as madly ^ he that
crams his mouth with ^^^rning Coals, or that pours ^reams of scalding
Brimstone own his Throat. It Is a perfect ^hrensy to indulge unsober Lusts. ^^
this, Men dig their own Graves ^^ this World, and their own Hell ^^ the other.
By sinning against ^od, we resist our own Happiness; ^e lose the Prospect of
future Glory; we court Shame; we tre^^ the Paths of Death; and prepa^^ Fuel
for the eternal Flames.

Come then to sober Though^ my Brother, in due time pull ^^ that gross Veil
wherewith Sat^^ blinds thine Eyes: Look upwar^ toward thy Father's House, a^^
consider the happiness for whi^^ thou wast made, and is yet te^dred to thee.
And if this awa^^ thee not, Look down into the d^^ Cells of damned despairing
Sou^ Hear, how they lament their se^ destroying folly in contemni^^ the grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ and their selling their Birth rig^^ for a few carnal
morsells. O ^^ware my Brother, that thou fall^^ not into that place of Torm^^
through Unbelief and incorrigiblen^^ It Is cheaper Learning by the ^^ Examples of
others Misery, th^^ our own. Wherefore take up in ^ime, and resolve (by the
Grace of God) to live a new Life. You ^ee, how properly our public Ser^ice
begins with the Prodigals Reso^ution in the Text; I will Arise and Go to my
Father, etc.

BUT it may be said, That it would seem presumptuous to speak after the manner
of the Text. What ^erson, that has any sense of his own Corruptions, can with
any modesty say, I will leave this Sin, ^r perform this duty? I am resolved to
become Religious, or to cease to be Vicious.

I Answer: That rash and presumptuous Resolutions of Refermation will never
hold long; and therefore we must always have respect to the Grace and Blessing
of the Holy Ghost, in all our spiritual Resolutions and Undertakings. And the
gracious promises of this Divi^^ Assistant must never abate our e^deavours, but
always quicken a^^ excite them. For so the case ^^ stated by the Holy Spirit
himse^^ Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your ow^ Salvation with Fear and Tremblin^
And to stop all Objections of o^^ own Disability to do this, it is a^ded; For
it is God who works in ^^ both to will, and to do, of his go^^ Pleasure. So
that, since God plea^eth to assist our Wills in their Dete^minations for
Holiness, we man and ought to Resolve for it: An^ since he pleases to give
Grace ^^ Accomplish those Resolutions i^ Newness of Life, we must strive an^
Labor to the Uttermost to effect it Confiding in the promised Succors of
preventing, assisting, an^ renewing Grace. Our good God through his Son will
hear the Prayers of such as seek to him in ^^ncerity. It is a very disparaging
^ct of Unbelief to Question that which He has promised Six times together,
Math. 7. 7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given You; Seek, and ^e shall find; Knock,
and it shall be ^pen'd unto You: For, every one that ^sketh receives; And he
that seeks ^ndeth; And to him that knocks, ^t shall be opened. He has also
^romised, that he will pour out his ^oly Spirit (that is, freely and
plen^ifully give spiritual Assistance) to ^uch as set themselves to do his
will, Prove. 1. 23. Turn You at ^y Reproof: behold, I will pour out ^y Spirit
unto You, Yea, he will grant this, as willingly and as compassionately as ever
any Father or Mother in the world gave a piece of bread to their own Child who
cried upon them for hunger. For so runs that condescending Promi^^ of of our
Lord, Luke 11. 11, 1^ 13. If a Son shall ask bread of a^ of You that is a
Father, will he gi^^ him a stone? Or, If he ask a Fi^^ will he for a Fish give
him a Serpent^ Or if he shall ask an Egg, will he off^^ him a Scorpion? If ye
then being ev^^ know how to give good Gifts unto yo^ Children, how much more
shall yo^ Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him? Here ^^
even an Appeal to humane Natu^^ it self, (as depraved as it is) whther the
bowels of Parents will n^^ painfully yearn over a poor hung^^ Child that cries
to them for Brea^ And the Inference is strong an^ undeniable; Namely, That the
i^finite Mercies of God are inco^ceivably greater than the scan^^ compassions
of corrupt men. L^^ us therefore arise and be doing, a^^ the Lord will be with
the good, Chron. 22. 16. The diligent will be ^ccour'd when the slothful will
be ^^rsaken.

AND here, we must also take ^otice, That pious Resolutions in ^e general, will
not do our busi^ess; But we must consider the ^articular ways and means,
where^y we offend God; and make par^^cular efforts against each of them. ^e may
not think to break the bun^le of our Corruptions all at once, ^ut must take the
Branches apart, and break them twig by twig, till ^he whole be destroyed. For,
though ^here be a deadly wound given to ^he whole Body of Sin, in the de^ermining
act of Conversion; yet ^his blow must be followed by hear^y strokes of
Mortification, and Self-denial; and the lively exercises of Faith and Prayer.
Sanctification is a progressive work; and we ^^ required to abound in it more
a^ more, 1 These. 4. 1. For we mu^^ never think that we have d^^ working, till
the Devil has do^ tempting, and till the world a^^ the Flesh have done warring
again the Spirit.

NOW, The Prodigal's Resol^tion before us consisted of t^^ Parts.

1. HE Resolves to leave ^^ old Wanderings and Misdeme^nours, and the Ways that
led ^ them.

2. HE Resolves to turn ^^ God, and to observe his Comman^ments.

I. HE Resolves to leave his o^^ Wanderings and Misdeameanour^ and the ways
that led to them. will Arise, says he, from these pe^niscious Vanities: I have
slept ^^ them too long already. The Sun advanced, my time is far spent, ^^d I
have not yet set forth in the ^ays of Life. I have trifled and ^ayed away the
Morning o^ my ^ge. I have wasted my Youth, ^^d Stength, and Wealth, in lewd
^ouses and loose Company. Oh! will Arise out of this hateful and ^retched sort
of Life. It Is a Mer^^ that I am yet on this side ^e Grave: That God has shown
^e my Sin, before I am dam^^d for it. Alas! how sottishly ^^ve I lived! in what
vain dreams ^^ve I wasted my time! but now, ^^ce God has graciously a wakened
^e, I will Arise. I will not lay ^own my Head to sleep again on ^^at bed of
carnal Presumption, which the Devil makes as soft as ^e can for deluded Souls.
Should take one Nap more thereon, it may be just with God that I ne^^ awake but
in a Bed of unquenc^ble Flames, from which Di^^ (who scarce ever before looked
H^^ven^^ wards) lifted up his Eyes behold the Happiness he had l^^ Wherefore,
by the help of G^^ I will certainly, I will speedily, will effectually arise
from this st^^ of Sin, and seek the Face of ^^ God.

HERE he must be understood leave three Things: 1. His form sinful Company; 2.
His form Lusts; 3. His former way of L^^

1. He Resolves to leave his ^^mer sinful Company: That is, to any Partnership
with them their Vanity and Debaucher For so the Holy Ghost advi^^ Ephesians. 5. 11.
And have no Fell^^ship with the unfruitful Works Darkness; but rather reprove
the Christan must not be the Fellow ill Society, but the Physician of it. We
must break Fellowship ^ith these, or we cannot walk ^ith God. Can they that
walk ^wards Heaven, keep Company ^^d Pace with them that walk to^ards Hell? Or,
Can they that ^ould get to the Top of a Hill, ^yn Company with them that ^n
downwards, and will tumble own all they can with them to the bottom?

I speak not of civil Conversation, or of Intercourse by way of Trade ^^d
Commerce, but of our cho^^n and delightful Company. As ^^ which the Holy
Psalmist says, ^epart from me ye Evildoers, for will keep the Commandment of
my ^od, Psa. 119. 115. It Is the same ^esolution with this in the Text: ^^ will
no more comply with your Humors, ye seed of Evil-Do^nor be any further a
Partaker your Sins. Cease your en^nar^^ Invitations, and forbear your ^^sed
Assignations; I am not the m^ I was, and will no more do a^ have done. And
therefore I da^ not put my self into such Comp^ny, wherein I must sacrifice ^^
Peace of my Conscience, and ^^ Favor of my God.

WE never find, That the P^digal went back to his Harlots a^ profligate
Companions, after his R^turn to his Father's House. N^ he keeps wisely to the
Society his Father's Household, wh^^ good Examples tended to confi^ his holy
Resolutions, and refo^med Conversation. Sober and R^ligious Company is like a
Guard Holy Angels about any Person, ^^ keep him in God's ways; The must first
get out of such Compa^^ before they can be very viti^^. It is the Remark of the
in^^'d wise Man, Pro. 13. 20. That that walks with wise Men shall wise, but a
Companion of Fools ^ll be destroyed. The wise Man ^^e, is the good and virtuous
man, ^o will be apt to instill good In^^ctions into the Person he con^^ses
with, and to communicate ^^^ething of his own warmth in ^^^ritual things to
others, through ^e Grace of God, who has pro^^sed to make it effectual, where
^s on both sides piously underta^^^. What a divine Blessing then good and holy
Company! How ^^ we duly value it! Since the ^od Companion is often like God's
^gel to Lot, sent to lead us by the and out of a State, upon which ^e flaming
wrath of God is descen^ng.

I therefore take this opport^^ty, to recommend to you all; more especially to
such as Young, that excellent Method Religious Society; which has late years
been happily set on ^^ by some of our Divines, and m^ happily increases by the
bless^^ of God. Their Method is so H^ so humble, so full of Charity ^^
primitive Purity; and is ca^^ on (as far I can perceive) w^ such Life and
Savor of H^ things; and is so opposite to ^^ Scarlet Sins of the times, Tha^
hope it is seed sown by Almig^^^ God for a blessed Reformation, ^^ a most happy
Prelude to it. ^^ther it all ye can, ye that h^ any Zeal for God, or Love of ^^
holy Religion; Despise it not a Blessing is in it.

IT is the avowed Purpose these Societies, to do all they do to ^e Glory of
God, and to think so ^wly of themselves, that the Re^oaches of the scornful
World can ^arcely set them lower than ^y their Rules) they place them^ves. And
in Subordination to ^e Glory of the Great God, they and their utmost Strength
to re^ve languishing Religion: and to ^duce the Honor of it by the ^ictest
holiness of Life, and to ^nfirm this by frequent and fer^nt Prayer, and by the
most so^mn and affectionate Celebration ^^ the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup^r,
which they also reduce to the ^rimitive Frequency, as the due love of God our
Savior must ^eeds do. They are full of Alms^eeds, and of holy Discourse; and
^^^ually encourage each other ^ayly to Meekness, Humility, and Contempt of the
world, those ^tiquated Graces which have ^^ been despised by a crooked ^
haughty Generation, though they indeed the Ornament of our R^gion, and of great
Price in ^ sight of God. It is they say on^ the greatest Delights and Div^sions
they have, to sing Psal^ which they always perform w^ the strictest Reverence
of S^ and Body: And before they there pray to God, or praise Name, they use to
read so affecting Preface, to excite at o^ the highest Veneration of the i^nite
Majesty of God, and the l^^liest Humiliation before him.

WHAT I speak is from ^^ own Observation, and upon ^^ strictest Judgment I can
make their real Bent and Design: which, though some of them ^^ probably be
unsincere (since one of ^ur Saviors chosen Twelve proved Traitor, and some of
the very An^els above kept not their first Stati^n:) Yet as to the Temper and
Be^aviour of many of them; I think ^ am so far from giving them any ^dvantage
by what is said; That ^ am sensible, I have not done them right. For the Life,
the ^igor and Affections of real Pie^y have an intrinsic Beauty and
Excellence, which it is not in the Power of Words to represent.

AND, notwithstanding the ^urmises of some; I think it very manifest, That
neither the Church nor the State will have reason to be jealous of these
Societies; ^or their Rules tend directly to support and advance both; And ^hey
are protest Enemies to Schism and Sedition; Though at the same time, they profess
themselves ^vers of all good men, tho, di^ting from them in Opinions w^^ touch
not the Essence of Religi^ looking on Christian Charity, ^^dour, and Mildness,
as com^^ Debts to all that lead a g^ Life,

SHALL I need now to ^^ many words to recommend the holy Purposes to You? Is it
no^ valuable Privilege to enjoy ^^ Society? And will not the L^^ of God and of
your ownsolus, ^^ your Desire of the Propagatio^ Religion, and the welfare of
^^ Nation, engage you to encour^ it? Especially since pious Ex^^ples do
recommend Religion such a lively and attractive M^^ner, and do so fit it for
our Pr^tice (instilling it by degrees, ^^ that, with Pleasure and Life) T^^
g^od Company has much the Advan^^ge even of good Books in refor^ing a vain
Conversation.

AND how well-pleasing this is the sight of God: See Mal. 3. 16, ^7. Then they
that feared the Lord ^ake often one to an other: And the lord harkened and
heard it; and a ^^ok of Remembrance was written be^^e Him, for them that feared
the lord, and that thought on his Name. and they shall be mine, says the Lord
Hosts, in that day when I make up ^ Jewels, and I will spare them as a ^^n
spares his own Son that serves ^^m. You see, God hearkens at the ^oor, and
will register every good lord which drops from your Lips. ^ea, not a serious
Thought shall ^cape his Book of Record. And such all be honored by a
signalizing ^^ovidence of God in the day in ^^ich He makes up his Jewels. What
day is this? Why, it is the Da^ in which he is departing from an^ place. Then
People take care ^ their Jewels, to carry them wi^^ them: and it is probable
that the expression had Respect to the M^gremus h^^^ mentioned by Joseph^ The
Departure of God from ^^ Jewish state.

AH! my Brethren (with tre^bling I speak it) methinks I ^ the dawning of this
day of G^^ Departure from us, even from All his methods to reclaim us ha^ been
sadly frustrated. We are Ju^^ment-proof; and we have tur^^ Gods gracious
dealings into wa^tonness. What can be done furth^^ for our Trial by the God of
^ the Earth? what method of pr^cedure have we not already frustr^ted? and after
all, How prodig^ous are our sins! and (to the ^^ of Reason) How hopeless our
Re^ormation! In these dark Cir^umstances, I advise every parti^ular Soul to
secure his Peace with God, that he may be provi^ed of a sure Refuge in the day
of ^vil; For it shall be well with them that fear the Lord, Eccl. 8. 12.

BE so just therefore to your ^wn Interests in both worlds, as ^^ take up this
first part of the Pro^igal's Resolution, viz. To leave ^nsnaring Company:
Partake not ^f their sins, lest ye share in their ^lagues. As you dread their
Pu^ishment, a void all Partnership in their Pollutions.

(2.) He Resolves to set himself against his former Lusts. He seri^usly
endeavors, through the holy spirit, to crucify the Flesh with its effections and
Lusts, Gal. 5. 24. ^niquity shall not dwell with allowance in his heart. He
labou^ to subdue the Love of Sin, by the prevailing Love of God, and h^^ ways.
The Prodigal must now pa^ under an other Name. He no^ loves his Father too well
to affro^ him, or to depart from him. A^^ though the Love of goodness be not y^
perfected in him, yet he will tru^ labor by daily mortification, a^ progress
in holiness, to carry it ^^ toward perfection.

REMEMBER, Christians, that ever you would walk worthy that Holy Name ye bear,
You m^ duly exercise and carry on t^ spiritual work of mortification You must
through the spirit mortify t^ deeds of the flesh (inward and o^^ward) that ye may
live, Romans 8. 1* Even that ye may live to the Glor^ of God on earth, and be
meet ^^ inherit his undefiled Kingdom. ^ must be our labor as long as we ^ive,
to hate Sin more perfectly, and to love God more entirely. And this is
Christian sanctification; ^he blessed work of the Spirit of God on the
degenerate Souls of men; who here sits as a Refiner, continual^y purging out
our Dross, and making us more pure Vessels of Honor, more and more fit for our
Maker's Use. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. 8.
And indeed they only can see him with Delight. As, the glory of the ^un's
brightness is painful and in^olerable to a sore Eye, though nothing is more
pleasant to the sound Eye than to behold the shining of he Sun: so, to the
unsanctify'd Soul, ^he presence and Praises of God are ^ot only undesireable
but bur^hensome; whereas, to the graci^us Soul God is their exceeding joy, Psa.
42. 4. His Courts are amia^^ Psalm. 84. 1. His Commands delight^^ 1 Jo. 5. 3.
And in his presence is ^^ness of joy, and at his right hand ^^ pleasures for
ever-more, Psalm. 16.

LOOK to this inward pur^cation of your Souls, All ye the would have your
Righteousness ^^ceed the superficial Righteousness the Scribes and Pharisees;
lest w^^ them and all other fruitless p^^fessors, ye be shut out of the
Ki^^dome of Heaven, Math. 5. 20. T^ fear of falling short at last, and b^ing
found light when weighed the balance of the last Judgme^^ will make every
sincere Christi^^ very careful and circumspect in ^ things, and even curious in
Or^^ring his conversation aright. He wi^^ attend upon every ordinance ^^ God
with a zealous concern: H^ will pray without ceasing; He wi^^ watch without
sleeping as do others; He will fight against Lust and Passion with hearty
blows, and perse^ere in the same with all long-^uffering. He would in every
action so approve himself to God, that Christ may say of him in every part of
his Life, behold a Nathanael, an Israelite indeed; a Christian without
dissimulation; a Professor of Religion without Guile.

THUS the Prodigal (and every sincere Convert) looks to the integrity of his
heart, in opposition to ^mpurity, vanity, and every deceitful Lust.

(3.) He resolves to quit his former corrupt Conversation. He will no more
revel and riot as he had done. He will beware of wine and wantonness, and all
those Paths of Death, in which he had like to have perished. He will no more
walk (as other Sensualists do) in the Vani^^ of their minds, having their
Vnd^^standing darkened: being alienat^ from the Life of God, through the
ig^^rance that is in them, because of t^^ blindness of their heart: Who (bei^^
hurried by exorbitant Lusts) gi^^ themselves over unto Lasciviousness, ^ work
all Uncleanness with Greedine^^ But on the contrary; He puts ^^ as to his
former Conversation, the ^^ man, which is corrupt according its deceitful
Lusts. And (bei^^ renewed by the Holy Spirit ^^ God) He puts on the new Man,
whi^^ after God is created in Righteousne^^ and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 18, 1^
etc. He casts off the works of Dar^ness, and puts on the Armor ^^ Light; and
walks honestly as in the Day, not in chambering and wanto^ness, not in rioting
and drunkennes^ not in strife and envy: But he p^^ on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and makes no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill ^he Lusts thereof, Romans
13. 12, 13.

IN few words: A true Convert is influenced by that power^ul Principle of Faith
working by Love to God and his Holy Will, and aims at the Glory of God in ^ll
he does, in hope of enjoying ^he glorious Presence of God for ever. Thus, He
who lived like ^ Swine before, lives like an Angel ^ow. He has his Conversation
in Heaven; his Heart is truly there; and his Soul and Body will soon be ^here
also.

HE seems to take possession even now of the prepared Mansions above, in that
his Affections are there already. His hope has cast ^ts Anchor even within that
Veil. And surely he cannot but have Treasure there where his Heart is so much.

THIS, This, my Brethren, that Prize of our High Calling. O^ Let us press hard
after it. He^ is nothing below worthy of o^ precious Hours, or the Concern ^
our immortal Souls. We find ^ much noisy Discord, and nasty D^bauchery in this
present evil wor^ that a Dove like Soul cannot ^^ where to set his Foot, or
rest it se^ in entire Peace and Quietude. A^ indeed, it is not fit that we
shou^ have perfect Rest below, lest ^ should forget the promised Rest ^ bove;
and be ready to take ^ Lot on this side Jordan, as part ^ the Israelites did,
being enamou^ with the Commodiousness of t^^ Place.

LET us therefore Arise and ^ to our Father; in whose House the^ are many
Mansions of perfect Bli^^ Let us make the same Use of ^ our present Wants and
Afflictions, that the Prodigal did; Namely, to ^asten our Journey Heaven-wards.
We must of necessity part with all things which will separate us from God. And
if we now sincerely arise from sinful Pollutions, and ^o to our Heavenly Father
by Faith, Love, and dutiful Observance here ^elow; He will er'e long call us to
come up into his nearer Presence, ^o see him as he is; and to be with ^im where
he is; yea, to Triumph with Him, and to be happy in Him ^or Ever.

HERE then arises an impor^ant Question? Namely, How we may get to our Father?
and what ^re the sure Paths which lead to ^is Presence? I hope you are all
willing to go to God; and that ^ou resolve to live no longer (as Prodigal's) in
Filthiness and Superfluity of Naughtiness: but to li^ (as obedient Children) in
stri^ Love and Duty to your God a^^ Savior. But perhaps some o^^ whose
Understanding is not y^ clearly enlightened in the ways God, may say as Philip,
Jo. 14. Show us the Father, and it suffice us. Or as Thomas, Verse 5. H^ can we
know the Way? No man ha^ seen God at any time. Whit^ then must we direct our
Ste^ that we may go directly and su^ly to him?

I answer. Follow the Prodi^ in the second Part of his Resol^on as well as the
former, and t^ will lead You to the favoura^ Presence of God, as it did him.

WE have already considered ^ things which the Prodigal resolv^ against: Let us
now mind the which he positively resolved, for Namely,

HE resolved to apply himself to spiritual things, and to use all appointed
means to please God. He will no longer be a Contemner of God's Ordinances, nor
a Mocker of his Servants. But will Wait at the Doors of Wisdom, and account it
the greatest Honor in the world to be a Fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and to
be one of the House hold of God. He now prays with earnest Fervor, like a true
Son of Jacob: He hears with dutiful attention, like one whose heart God has
Opened: And praises God with exalted Affections, like a Fellow*Psalmist of Holy
Angels: He diligently searches the Holy Scripture to find every part of his
Duty: and when ever he opens these blessed Oracles of God, he says in his
Heart, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears. He watches against his own
Corruptions, and the Snares of Satan, and the Entangl^ments of the world: and
he Gir^ on the whole Armor of God, that ^^ may be able to stand against them
and come off a Conqueror.

BUT more particularly: T^^ Steps which the Prodigal took i^ his Return to his
Father's House (as expressed or implied in the Tex^ were principally these:

1. HE deliberately Conside^ and weighs the Terms upon which his Father would
accept him, an^ heartily consents to them.

2. HE deeply Regrets and R^pents of his past Offenses against his Father.

3. HE betakes himself effectually to serve his Father in Newness of Life.

AND if we abstract these things from the Allegory of the Pa rabble, and
consider them in the ^ractical Doctrine which our bles^ed Savior teaches us in
them, we shall find in these particulars the ^umm of the Gospel Covenant, and
^y Consequence our direct way ^o Peace with God.

I. FIRST then, The Prodigal ^eliberately considers and weighs ^he terms upon
which his Father ^ould receive him into Favor; and he heartily consents to
them. He knew full well, that he must ^ive an other sort of a life than he ^ad
done, if he meant to be one of ^is Father's beloved Children; and ^he fully
resolves so to do; relying and trusting in his Fathers goodness to pardon what
was past, upon his penitent Return to him, and dutiful Behavior toward him
for the future.

NOW these are some of the essential Acts of a vigorous and ^fectual Faith.
For, when the S^ner comes (through the Grace of G^ to such an efficatious Sense
of ^ Sinfulness, Misery, and Cursedne^^ of his Condition, and to such an
^fecting belief of the Suitablene^^ Sufficiency, and Willingness of ^ Lord
Jesus Christ to supply all ^ Wants, and of his being ordai^ by God the Father
to these ble^^ purposes for the Sanctification a^ eternal Salvation of Sinners;
a^ when he considers that all that ^ saved by Christ must be enligh^ned,
renewed, and governed, by ^ Gospel through the Holy Spir^^ and upon the serious
Considerati^^ of all this, consents sincerely ^ the whole of it, and will
adve^ture all upon this bottom; T^^ is that dedicating, covenantin^ and
transforming Faith which ^^ Title to the Promises of the Gospel. and by such
Acts as these the Soul ^akes it is first true steps to leave a ^^te of Sin and
Wrath; and to ob^^in the Mercy and Favor of God. ^ith is the Mother-Grace, the
^^ring of those noble Actions which abound in the regenerate ^^rvants of God,
who by this sub^e the World, crucify the Flesh, ^nquish the Legions of the
invi^^^le Powers of Darkness, and do ^^ch mighty things as are recor^ed in the
Eleventh Chapter of ^^e Epistle to the Hebrews; which ^ a little Chronicle of
the Wonders ^ne by a Mighty Faith.

WHEN this Principle had ^owerfully influenced the Prodi^^ls Heart, as well as
convin'd his ^^dgment, with what Ease, yea, ^ith what Joy did he break the
^hains of Youthful Lusts and Customary Sins. Faith working Love makes a new
Creature. ^ with one Look he beholds the ^^luding Devil leading him into ^
Dungeon of eternal Misery; ^ with an other, he beholds the ^ther of Mercies
kindly calling to ^ and opening his Arms to rec^^ him. With one Thought he
^^ders the needy and nasty condi^ into which his Sin had cast h^^ and with an
other, he confid^^ the Happyness of the meanest i^ Father's House. And now he
co^^ (through the grace of God) to ^ determining Point, even to reso^ for Heaven;
for Heaven, I say^ opposition to all the ways and ^^tertainments of Sin. And
he^^ upon

II. HE deeply regrets and ^^feignedly repents of his past Off^ces against his
good Father. Ev^^gelical Faith produces an ingenuous ^elting of the Heart for
sinning against infinite Goodness and Love; ^ith an Aversion as well as Fear to
^ffend again, let the bribe to it be ^ever so great; and this is true
Re^entance.

METHINKS I see, with what a ^ejected and ashamed countenance ^e Prodigal
returns home: With that sorrow of heart does he con^^der his undutiful carriage
toward ^s good Father, and those hateful ^^travagances which he had run to
since he left him. Let us con^^der his confession, and we shall ^ave an
affecting Account of his ^rrow.

1. He acknowledges his Sin. -- Father, I have sinned.

2. He aggravates it in all its ^eightning Circumstances. Against Heaven and
before thee, or, in thy ^^ght

3. He is sensible of the desert his Sin. I am no more worthy to called thy
Son: Make me as one of hired servants. The meanest pl^^ in thy House, is better
than all Advancements of ungodlyness.

First, HE acknowledges and ^ments his Sin from his very he^ His words are very
mournful ^ melting: Father, I have sinned. ^ sin, my sin troubles me sorely
sticks me to the very heart to th^^ how indulgent my good Father ^ been to me,
and what a stubb^^ and untractable wretch I have b^ toward him. I have been as
a Be^ before him. So that he hangs do^ his ashamed face, and smites up his
guilty Breast, saying, God be m^^ciful to me a sinner.

O! When once the sinner co^^ to this; when he sees his o^ wretchedness,
desolation, and d^^^^r by reason of his sin, and groans ^rth his inutterable
sense of its eight; there is then a happy al^ation begun, and he is in the
di^ct way to spiritual peace and e^nal Rest. For, the promise of di^ne Rest is
made by our Savior to ^ch as are weary and heavy laden, ^^th. 11. 28. And we
shall one ^y bless God with rapturous joy ^^t ever he made us Sorrowful after
^s godly sort; For, this works re^^tance never to be repented of; ^a, ever to
be rejoiced in.

Secondly, He aggravates his Sin, all its heightening Circumstan^^. Alas! I
have sinned against ^eaven and before Thee.

(1.) He is sorry for the impie^^ of his sin against God: As if he ^^d said,
Ah! I am full of Sorrow ^^d Confusion, for my great and any Sins against my
Good God, the God of my Life, the God my Vows, the God of my Mer^^ and the God
of my Salvation. ^^ that ever I should be such a wret^ to blaspheme the Great
God w^ the breath which he gave me: ^ abuse his Wine and good Creatu^ in
revelling and drunkeness: make the Members which he g^ me, the Members of a
Harlot; ^^verting the very end, for wh^ God my Creator made me; ^ honoring his
Name, thwar^^ his Will, and despising his Jus^^ and Mercy. This is the first ^^
chiefest Aggravation of Sin, wh^ chiefly affects the Conscience. T^ Sin is
lamented, as Sin; as committed against Heaven. The ^^brew word (...) (Heavens)
is amongst the Jews an usual Name God, as Dan. 4. 26. where it w^ told
Nebuchadnezzar, that his Ki^^ ^^ should be sure unto him, after ^t he knew that
the HEAVENS ^^ Rule. And so in the new Testa^nt, Mat. 21. 25. The Baptism John,
whence was it! Of Heaven, ^ of Men? So that the Penitent ^ncipally laments his
Sin, as Sin; it was committed against the ^thority, Goodness, and Perfecti^s of
God.

(2.) A true Penitent will also ^^ent, and to his power recom^^ce any injury
that he has done men. He will confess his Fault, ^eech Forgiveness, and make
ail ^ssible Restitution to any Person ^om he has wronged. So the ^odigal;
Father, I have wickedly ^ended and grieved You: I have ^ned before thee; My
wicked ^^e has fetch many a tear from ^ur Eyes, and many a sigh from ^ur Heart.
I wasted your Goods, I left your Company, I disgarded your Advice: For which, I
solemnly arraign and codemn my self before you this da^ and will no more do so
wickedly

Thirdly, He was sensible of Desert of his Sin. -- And am more worthy to be
called thy ^ Here is more implied, than is ^^ken: For it implies the shame, L^^
and Rejection opposite to Son-sh^^ As if he had said, I have deser^^ to be
disowned and discarded you, my good Father; as I ha^ also deserved to have my
Na^ blotted out of the Book of Li^ to be abandoned by the God Mercy, and to be
for ever ^^ up in the Dungeon of Darkn^^ with Unbelievers and Obstin^ Enemies
of God.

Thus will a Penitent aggrav^^ his Sin in the day of his Humilia^ ^^: which is
a true step to obtain ^ercy, for he that humbles him^f shall be exalted, Luke
14. 11. ^ thou dealest sharply with thy self, says Tertullian) God will deal
^ildly with thee. But if thou excu^^t thy self when thou art Guilty, ^d will
accuse thee. And there^re another of the Fathers advi^^ Sinners to Load
themselves ^^th self-accusations as the ready ^^y to alleviate the Burden of
^^, Ambros. These lowly Princi^es made those Holy Men of old, walk humbly with
their God, e^n to a degree of Humility which ^azed the Age they lived in, as
^uch as it reproaches this.

WE may also further take notice ^ncerning the Prodigals humili^on and solemn
Address to his Fa^er, that he framed it in his Mind fore he came to utter it
with his Lips in his Father's presence. ^ first said within himself, I will to
my Father, and say thus and the and then he went and spoke acc^^dingly. This
may mind us to ^^ meditate, before we pray to ^ Great God: as the Wiseman
^vises, Eccles. 5. 2. Be not rash ^ thy mouth, and let not thine hear^ hasty to
utter any thing before ^ Remember the infinite distance ^twixt the Almighty
Eternal ^^ and a poor, finite, polluted C^ture. He is in Heaven, and tho^ on
Earth, therefore let thy word^ few. It Is ill trifling and toying w^ such a
tremendous thing as Pra^ to the Lord of Heaven and Ea^ for things of eternal
moment true Convert will pray seriou^ and sensibly too; in the spirit, ^ with
understanding also. And crown all, in the last place:

3. HE betakes himself in good earnest to serve his Father in Newness of Life.
We never read that the Prodigal played the Runnagate again after his
Restoration to his Father's Favor, but he continued soberly in his Father's
Family, and observed the pious Orders of his House. Thus a real Convert will
firmly and supremely love that God whom before he dishonored, and embrace
those Laws, which before he despised, and venerate that Piety which before he
blasphemed; desiring by patient Continuance in well-doing to inherit the
Promises.

THUS have we in our Meditations accompanied the Penitent Prodigal in all the
steps of his Return to God. And that we may in Heart and Deed imitate his
Repentance and Reformation, I come now to recommend to you the three principal
Motives which i^clined him to it. And truly the will appear very forcible to
eve^ sensible mind; Namely,

1. THE deplorableness his present Condition. 2. THE necessity of an a^teration
of it. 3. THE likelihood of h^^ succeeding in it, upon his earne^^ Endeavors.
I. IN the first place, He considered the deplorableness of h^^ present
Condition. He was nast^ as the very Swine he kept, an^ much more hungry and
empt^ than they. The Hogs had a Ma^ster that would provide for them but he had
no friend near him none that would bestow the Charity of a few Husks upon the
poo^ perishing man. He had brough^ himself to the most abject, sordid, and
comfortless Condition upon Earth; and to continue in these Circumstances was
the way to pe^ish inevitably.

O Sirs! This is yours and my Case, if we are departed from the ^iving God
through our evil heart of Unbelief. The Swines wallowing ^n the mire is a
Scripture-Emblem of the Sinners spiritual pollution. And the Famine and
Nakedness which befell the Prodigal in his wild ^amble, foreshews the Misery and
Wretchedness to which a carnal Life leads men. For if they live after the Flesh
they must die; they die to all spiritual good now, and therefore will be
separated from ^ll felicitating Good for ever.

AH! what nasty work is every Worker of iniquity engaged in? To what brutal
Lusts and Passions is he enslaved! What an ill Mast^^ does he serve! What a
pitiful, d^ generate, and unreasonable Li^ does he live! and Ah! What wretched
and desperate death do^ he die? and above all, what dreadful, painful, unpitied
Ete^nity must he undergo?

O Sinner, I beseech thee even b^ the Mercies of God which the despisest, that
thou would ^^ thy immortal Sous that right, ^ to stop thy furious Course in
s^^ and consider wisely what swee^ness there is in a Life of Faith a^ Holiness!
What blessedness in ob^dience to the King of Heaven What Joy there is in peace
wit^ God! What Honor in Communion with the Lord of the whole world What
Satisfaction, Hope, and Divinity there is in a pious Life! an^ what Blessedness
and Glory ther^ at the end of it. And withal, ^nsider how near we are to an
^ernity of Bliss or Torment, and ^w unalterable our Condition ^ill be in the
other World, when ^^ce it is entered upon. He that ^ath the Power of thinking,
let ^^m think on these things.

HOW long shall it be ere we ^ome to the determining Resoluti^n for eternal
Happiness? We cannot endure the thoughts of dwell^^g with everlasting Burnings:
We cannot deny but we have immor^al Souls, which must quickly re^eive an
irrevocable Sentence from ^he mouth of God, according to ^he manner of our life
here. And we daily see our selves decaying and drawing on toward the invisible
state; and yet how late is it ^ere most of us set our selves seriously to do
the will of God, and many thousands never come at ^ to this point. Ah! Why will
a^ wise Person live (says one) so ^ no wise Person dares die? Why ^ we do that
with delight, whi^^ tends to bitter Sorrow? Why ^ we not lay out our time a^^
strength chiefly in the Conce^^ of the eternal Life to come? Si^^ this World is
but our Passage, w^^ do our Affections stick here? Ho^ can we live in quiet,
when t^^ prospect of a future state is ^ cloudy? Or, how can we wit^ Reason and
Self-Love do suc^ things now, as will be our Conf^sion and Torment in the
Etern^^ State?

TO what purpose have we lived all those years which God ha^ given us, if we
have not yet effectually considered, for what purpose God sent us into the
world and in what our happiness consists? it wisdom for us to be always
^roviding for a world in which we ^ust stay so little a while; and ^ake no
provision for a world which has no end? Have we yet ^o hope in Christ? No
saving in ^erest in him? No Communion ^ith God? No Fellowship of the spirit? No
Sense of God's Love? This is indeed a very dark and ^ismal state, the Shades of
eternal ^eath are in it; I pray you hasten ^ut of it. No person can make ^oo
much have where his Life is in ^mminent Danger. And to quick^n you to this,
Consider the Pro^igal's second Motive; Namely,

II. THE absolute necessity of changing his Condition. And this could be no
otherwise done (he was sure) but by untreading the steps of his Prodigal Life.
And therefore, he goes back to his ^^ther with speed; for he saw the if he
continued at this distan^ from him, he should perish by h^^ger and nakedness
and the want ^ all things. Though some sins lo^ fair and alluring to a carnal Ey^
especially when varnisht by the ^lusions of the Devil, yet there nothing in it
but Darkness, De^sion, and Destruction. Like the Apples of Sodom which some
ha^^ made mention of, which are ^^ (they say) to the Eye, but ha^^ nothing but
dust within them. T^ Prodigal found this true by sad E^perience; and methinks
we sho^ never forget his Cry, Verse ^ I perish with Hunger. My so^ is starved
for want of the t^^ meat which nourishes to eter^^^ Life.

MY Brethren, Our Father House is the Church of God: His Family is the
Congregation of the faithful: His Son's Body and Blood received by faith are
the true viands which nourish to everlasting Life. If we are destitute of
these, we are infinitely miserable. For, if so, God is our Enemy; His word is
our Condemnation; His Son will pronounce sentence against us; and it will be
but a little while, and we shall be cut off from our outward Christian
Privileges ^ike unprofitable Branches, and be cast into the Lake which burns
with Fire and Brimstone for ever.

IS this a condition fit to belived ^n? Can we content our selves in the
neighborhood of such Curses, and under the burden of such Guilt? Pray, tell
me; is it not worth our while to labor earnestly for so short a time as this
life lasts, to shun the eternal Doom and Torments of Devils? Has the Prince o^
this world so perfectly blinded you^ Eyes, that you are not scared at the
approaches of Death and the Judgment to come, though you perceiv^ that your peace
is not made wit^ God, and that you are not par^^kers of that inward holiness
with out which none can see His face wi^^ comfort?

MEN, Women, Children, consider I pray you in time; that if ^^ are not
regenerated by the holy spirit of God, and do not become s^^cerely holy in all
manner of conve^sation: If we dare indulge any c^^nal appetite, or neglect
God's O^dinances, or live in the contem^^ of any part of God's will: T^^ Curses
of God's book belong to ^ in both worlds, and we man (for ought any body can
assure^ ^o the contrary) make our Bed in Hell before the light of the next ^ay
shines upon us.

SINCE there is therefore such ^bsolute necessity of becoming sin^ere Converts
to God in time: Let ^one of us settle again on the Lees ^f a carnal state, but
let us in time arise and go to our Father, for he is gracious and merciful and
ready to forgive. This leads us to consider the third motive which inclined the
Prodigal to return, viz.

III. THE Likelihood of his succeeding in it, upon his sincere Endeavors. He
confided in the goodness of his Father, and trusted that he would not reject
but cherish these first kindlings of Love toward him. He considered, with what
tenderness his Father had brought him up; and with what unwillingness he parted
with him; and with what bounty he gave hi^ a Portion of his Goods. And he
co^cludes (with reason) that his bo^els were not perfectly hardened against him
yet: or however th^^ though he might justly loath hi^ when a Prodigal, yet that
he wou^^ love him when a Penitent. And ^ proved according to his expecta^^on,
yea much better than he co^^^ have hoped. For, so soon as ev^^ his Father could
get sight of hi^ and beheld that his Son's face w^^ toward him, even whilst he
w^^ yet at distance, his Father ran ^ meet him. The good old Man seem to forget
his Years, he ran like ^ nimble youth, (such Spirits had h^^ Joy infused): And
though he foun^ his Son all in rags, besmeare^ with dung, and stinking with the
stench of Swine; yet the Father'^ Love digests all these loathsom^
circumstances, and before the Son ^ould confess his fault, the Father ^alls on
his neck and vouchsafes to ^mbrace that lump of filth and ^eggary. His Father
reads his Son's ^epentance in his looks, and this ^lessed Grace blots out a
multitude ^f sins. The Father does not so ^uch as upbraid him with what he ^ad
been, for Joy of what he now was. For he looked upon him as ^aised from the very
dead. His sins ^ad been so enormous, and he had ^o long abandoned himself to
them, that his Father had despaired of his Conversion, and gave him over for
^ost. But he now beholds his Son become another Man, and now the best Clothes
and the best Cheer in the House are called for, to entertain ^im: And all the
neighborhood ^^ings with the Music and Mirth of the House; and the burden of
their Joyful Songs was this, M^ Son was dead and is alive again, ^^ was lost
and is found.

MY Brethren, this is the tru^ Character of Gods mercy to retur^ing sinners;
drawn to the life i^ this Parable by the Son of hi^ Bosom, who could best set
for^^ his love to us. Let this then incli^^ us all to return to God with spee^
and sincerity: and what ever o^ sins have been, let them not ove^whelm us into
despair, though the must humble us to Repentance.

LET me here leave this R^^ with you, which I pray you to ^^member and
practice, when ^^ Lips shall be closed and will be and more able to give you
instruction Namely, That you do not suffer yo^ sins, how horrid so ever, to
drive y^^ from God, but to him. For when t^^ Devil has brought you into t^^
Snare of sin, his next Plea is, That ^ou can never get out of it: That ^ou
cannot have the face to go to ^od, or to seek his mercy in this ^^ious condition
into which Sin ^as brought you: And if he can ^evail with the Sinner to sit
still in ^s Sin and never look out for a ^medy, he has his End. But be^are, I
beseech you, of this wile of ^e Devil; And say with the Pro^gal, I will arise,
and ask pardon ^ my Father: he has laid help upon ^e that is mighty to save,
Isa. 63. 1. ^^d through him he will abundantly ^^rdon, Isa. 55. 7. The Lord Je^^s
Christ is able to save to the ut^^rmost those that come to God by ^^m, Heb. 7.
21. And will in no ^^se cast out such as come unto him, ^. 6. 37.

EVSEBIVS has recorded a meorable passage of St. John the Evangelist concerning
a Young M^^ of a great capacity and a promis^^ Countenance; in order to wh^^
Education this Holy Apostle h^^ given a particular charge to ^^ Bishop of the
place where ^^ young Man lived. But notwithstanding all the care that was tak^^
he proved a very dissolute and w^ Man; and after the practice many sorts of
wickedness, desp^ring of the mercy of God, he ^ came the Captain of a band of
R^^bers, wholly bent to Rapin, Mut^^ and Cruelty. Of which when ^ John was
informed, he rode to ^^ place where he used to rob, a^ being taken by some of
them, ^^sired to be carried to their Capta^^ But no sooner did this great
Robb^^ behold the awful face of St. John, ^^ he was stricken with shame, a^
fled way. Upon which, the go^ Apostle ran after him, crying, My ^^, my Son! why
flyest thou from thy ^ther, unarmed, and old? O my ^^, tender my case; be not
afraid; ^re is yet hope of Salvation for thee. ^ill undertake for thee, with
Christ. ^ill die for thee, if need be, as Christ ^ed for us, I will hazard my
Soul for ^ine. Trust to me, Christ sent me. ^he Robber hearing this, first
stood ^^l, casting his Eyes on the Earth: ^^d then fell into a trembling, and ^
last wept so bitterly that he ^^emed to baptize himself in his ^n Tears. And
here the humi^^tion of the Thief and the embra^^s of the Apostle, seemed to be
^other Prodigal returning to his ^^ther, and received with Joy. ^^r he was
hereby brought to Re^^ntance and Newness of Life. ^useb. lib. 3. ap. 20.

LET us then be assured from the abundant Promises of G^ and the Examples of
his mercy Sinners, (of which, his forb^^rance toward every one of us i^ near
instance to convince us) t^ God will show mercy to the w^^ of Sinners that have
hearts repent, and forsake their S^^ Come now and let us reason togeth^^ says
the Lord, Isa. 1. 18. Th^^ your Sins were as Scarlet, they ^^ be as Wool; though
they were as Cr^^son, they shall be as white as S^^ The change of your Heart a^
Life by the Grace of God ^^ make a blessed Alteration in y^^ present State and
future Expec^^tions.

TRULY, Sirs! there is day so beneficial, so happy, blessed to us, as that of
our ^^ feigned Conversion to God. ^^ then the face of our Heavenly ^^ ^^er is
turned toward us, His ^^ms are encircled about us, and ^s Bosom opened to us.
Then we ^ay look up toward Heaven with ^^mfort, and think of Eternity ^th
Delight: We may meet Death ^th an unshaken peace; and lay ^^ our Bodies (as we
put off our ^^ Clothes) in hope of receiving ^em in a better frame in the
Re^^rection.

THUS have we considered the ^odigal's Resolution of returning his Father; with
his Humilia^^ before him; and the Motives ^^ich excited him to both. Let now
more particularly apply all ^s to our selves.

1st. Use. AND here the first ^e that we are concerned to ^^ke, will be to
bring our selves ^ an impartial Self-Examinaiion in the presence of God;
whether we are in the Prodigal-Es^^ of distance and disaffection to G^ or in a
penitent and conver^ one? How stands the case ^^ us? Are we of the invisible
Ch^^ of God, or of the Synagogu^ Satan? All we like Sheep have ^ astray, every
one in his own ^ says the Prophet, Isa. 53. 6. ^ are we risen from the Follies
^ Wanderings of our vain Con^^sation, or are we not?

THIS is a point which dese^^ our most speedy and most se^^ Consideration:
What! Know not your own selves, says the ^postle, How that Jesus Christ i^ you,
except ye be Reprobates? 2 ^^ 13. 5. If this work of sin^ Conversion of the
heart be not effected, what a mockery is our profession of Religion! ^ how
unsavory are all our P^^^^s and other vain Performances ^^ the nostrils of
God! The whole ^urport of the first Chapter of ^saiah, is to chide and rebuke
the ^^ifling and unsincere Medlers with ^eligion. To what purpose do ^^ey take
Gods Book into their and, or his Covenant into their ^outh, who hate to be
reformed?

SINCE it is therefore a matter ^f such Consequence; Let us (without any manner
of Misrepresenta^^on) bring our selves directly and ^mpartially to this one
Question; ^amely,

Quest. HAVE we affectionate^y and unfeignedly made, And do ^e (to our utmost
Power through Grace) faithfully keep, the Vows ^f the Christian Covenant? Have
^e such an abiding sense of the ^nfinite evil of Sin, and the im^ense
Excellency of God and his ways, that we have solemnly a^ resolutely devoted our
selves ^ God through his Son Jesus Christ, ^^cording to the terms of the C^venant
of Grace? And is ^^bent of our Heart, and the Course our life indeed agreeable
to the holy purpose? Do you serve G^^ or Mammon? Do you live a^^ the Flesh or
after the Spirit? ^^ Faith or by Sense? Do you rese^ble the Prince of Light, or
^^ Prince of Darkness? And to whi^^ of these are you subject? Who ^^ your
heart, and whom do y^^ serve? What Interest do you ^^ with in the choices and
course your Life? either that of God Jesus Christ, or the interests of the
World, and the will of the Fle^^ and the Devil? Does your Desi^^ and Resolution
to please God, ^^verbear all contrary Desires an^ ^^clinations? And is the
Favor ^f God, the chief happiness you purpose to your self? And in Order to
this, is the Holy Gospel your ^hosen Rule of Life?

SINCE many Questions are ^^t to puzzle weak Minds and ^rupulous Consciences, I
have ^^re chosen to referr you to one very plain one, which is the foundati^n
of the Christian Religion and ^^e Christian Hope. I pray you, ^^ove your selves
by it without ^eceit, the delusion will be your ^wn, if you deal otherwise.

AND if you find your Case ^ood, and your Heart and ways ^uely Christian: be
sure to offer ^ God (through, the Blessed Media^r) the Praises due to his Name ^n
this Account. O happy You! ^ you can appeal to God in the ^ords of the elder
Son, Verse 29, Lo! These many years have I ser^^ thee, neither transgressed I
at ^ time thy Commandment? Not b^ known and wilful Transgressi^ or by no such
Sin, not truly ^^pented of. If so, the Father's ^^swer to those words may be
ap^^ed to you, Verse 31. Son, thou ^^ ever with me, and all that I ^^ is thine.
We have a promise full as this, Rev. 21. 7. He th^^ ^vercometh shall inherit
all thi^^ and I will be his God, and he shall my Son. This is blessed bey^^
expression; an Inheritance wh^ exceeds all Estimation.

BUT if on the contrary, Y^ Self-Examination shows you y^ wanderings from God,
and y^ distance from his gracious p^^sence. I then beseech you w^ all the
earnestness I am able speak, yea, I charge you in Name of God that you hasten
your return to him; for why? O! why? will you die in your Sin, and perish for
ever?

DO you indeed consider your mortality and immortality? Have you ever thoroughly
considered, how dreadful it is to die in a Prodigal State? at a wide distance
from your Father's House? And under his heavy displeasure? Without hope of
Heaven, or any further mercy from the sole Fountain of it? With Terrors
without, and Agonies within? With an Almighty Enemy above, and immortal Enemies
beneath? Crushed by a multitude of intolerable sufferings, without any manner of
support, or hope of mitigation?

SURELY the merry contented Sinner never yet thought so far as this: He is so
dazzled by the present Gaity of Sin, and so hoodwinkt by the Prince of darkness
that he discerns not the dark cloud which gather about him, and the horrible
Tempest which is falling upon him. But there is one Tex^ of Scripture, which
one would think should awaken and undeceive every Sinner, that is not perfectly
dead to all that is spiritu^^ It is that tremendous Question p^^ to sinful men
by the Holy Gho^^ Romans 9. 22. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and make
his power known, endured with much long suffering the Vessels of wrath fitte^
for Destruction? O dreadful! The righteous God will give an Example of his
Almighty Power in the Punishment of the damned. It shall be seen by Angels and
Men, how miserable the Omnipotent God i^ able to make condemned men Who knows
the Power of his Anger? says the Psalmist, Psalm. 90. 11. It exceeds
comprehension, yet must be endured by guilty persons to all Eternity. As the
man is, such is his strength. Judge. 8. 21. A Giant can give a more smarting and
a more deadly Blow than a Child. O then, who can bear the weight of Almighty
Power put forth to the utmost in direful Vengeance? and that for ever? O dismal
Sufferings! Which no Revolutions of Ages, or Millions of Years can so much as
lessen! For still those miserable Souls are no nearer to an end of their
sufferings than at the beginning of them.

TELL me, all ye that live unrighteously, unsoberly, and ungodly! Are ye
willing to die thus? Can ye dwell with everlasting burnings? Can your Hand be
strong, or can your Heart endure, in that D^^ in which the God of Judgment
sha^^ deal with you after your deservings* I know, ye cannot. O then! Take
better Courses in time, that ye may come to a more blessed end.

AND yet, lest I should not have sufficiently rouzed the Lethargick Sinner; and
because ^ know, that such as see their natural Face in a Glass, and are
terrified with it for the time, are apt to go away and forget what manner of
me^ they are, and how near and terrible their dangers are; and because the
invisible Enemies of goodness will be busy in their endeavors to steal away
the Seed sown; I make this request to every Captive of Sin and Satan, that they
would retire, and give the following Questions serious Consideration: by which
I desire you to ex^ostulate and reason the Case with our own Souls,

1st. Quest. LOVE thou the God of thy Mercies and Bliss so ^^ttle, as to part
with his Favor ^or such trifles as Sin affords? For ^ little Drink which thou
need ^ot, and which can only please ^hee whilst it is running down thy
Throat? Or, for a few moments of filthiness, like Esau, who for one carnal
Morsel sold his Birthright? Or, for a few Sums of Money, which thou must leave
quickly, or they thee; and which bring disquiet to thy mind, and cannot profit
thee in the day of wrath? Or, for a few ill words, which bring neither Profit
nor Pleasure here, yet pull down infinite Torments in the eternal State? What a
reproach is it to a reasonable Creature to act so madly and disingenuously?

2 d. Quest. IS the Authority ^ the Great God so contemptib^^ that his Command
will not st^^ thee? Do you despise the Governor of the World, who is able ^
destroy both the Soul and Body ete^nally?

3 d. Quest. CAN any thing be^ Secret to God? or will the hidden sins of men be
long secret to the world? Does not God fill all plac^ with his Presence? Does
not hi^ knowledge enter where the Ligh^ cannot? And has he not appointe^ a day,
when every secret Sin sha^^ be laid open?

4. Quest. HAS not any Sou^ greater Peace in the mortificatio^ of inordinate
Lusts and Passions, than in their rage and fury? Is there not greater
Sweetness, Honor, and Hope, in the Liberty of those whom the Spirit of God
frees from the Tyranny of Sin; ^han in the Slavery, Toiles, and ^exations of
such as are the Slaves ^f beastly Appetites and Passions?

5th. Quest. DOES not Christi^n Self-denial produce great inward Comfort? And
does not the Conquest of a Temptation bring ^s the Joy and Glory of a Noble
Triumph? And does not spiritual Joy vastly exceed carnal Mirth?

6th. Quest. HAS not sinful Indulgence sad twitches of Conscience, a painful
regret of mind, and dismal fore-boadings of an after-reckoning? Threatening
them, as (they say) Caesar's Ghost did Brutus, to meat them hereafter to their
Terror.

7th. Quest. IS it a light matter to contradict the End ^or which we were made,
and to pervert our faculties, and abuse the mercies of God? Will a just God
bear thi^ long?

8th. Quest. IS it not Self-enmity to despise the Lord Jesus Christ the
gracious Savior of men? An^ to trample on his blood, greive hi^ Spirit, and
neglect that great Salvation which he has purchased so dear a rate?

9th. Quest. WHAT if th^^ should be forsaken of God, and g^ven up to the
blindness, hardne^^ and perverseness of thine own Co^ruption? Would not your
C^^ then be as wretched even as th^^ of Devils themselves?

10th. Quest. HOW many Mercies of God are past! How many present! And what
offers are mad^ of an Eternity of mercy to come* And shall all these lose their
end* Will not these Rivers of oil mel^ and soften your hard heart?

11th. Quest. HOW if you should be taken out of this world this day, by some
violent distemper, or some ^nseen Accident? How could you ^ppear before God? Or
render an Account of all the passages of your Life? Or bear the doom of the
^ast Sentence!

12th. Quest. DID you ever look ^ack on any Sin committed, and not with it
undone? Does not Sor^ow succeed the shameful Acts of wickedness, as soon as
ever the Vio^ence and Rashness of it is over? And why then, will you again ^ake
work for Sorrow and Re^entance?

13th. Quest. IS it not the greatest Honor that man can have, to con^erse with
God? The greatest sa^isfaction, to have Peace with ^im? And the greatest
happiness, ^o be his Favorite?

14th. Quest. Is not our depart^^ from God the Cause of our Sorows, and the
very Essence of o^^ Misery? Would not Hell it self lo^^ its Name if the
gracious present of God where there? And upon the whole:

15th. Quest. HAVE we any ^^terest or Concern upon Earth great and important;
as to rep^^ of our sins, and return to our G^^ and to glorify his Name upon
E^^ and do the work he has given ^^ do?

CONSIDER these things ^^ly and show your selves men. ^^ as Reason and
Self-preservat^^^ (influenced by Faith) will d^^ you in this Case. Grudge not
pray you) to spend a little time secure a glorious Eternity.

AND let me here subjoyn ^^ Saviors words, (though spoken ^n other Account) what
thon do, do quickly. The shortness and uncertainty of our mortal Life will
not bear the Lingerings and Loiterings of a tedious Suspense. Many a Soul has
been snatched away into its eternal Condition, whilst it has been entertaining
it self with uncertain Thoughts of preparing for it.

INDEED nothing frustrates the Design of Religion more, than the putting off
the Holy Purposes of it from day to day: Because this administers something of
Rest to a deluded Soul, and at the same time prepares a Net for its
Destruction. And Alas! How many thousands have perished in this fatal Snare!
It Is very probable, that of the many Millions now in Hell, there are but few but
had in their Life time, some thoughts of repenting hereafter. But when God
says, Now is the accepted time* Now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor 6. 2. It is
a very absurd and hateful Presumption for a poor dependent Mortal to say, Not
Now, b^^ hereafter. By men's delays, the^ harden their hearts; they ma^^ the
Bonds of customary sins stronger; they provoke God to give^ them up to their
Lusts and Delusions; and though they will every day need more Grace than other in
order to their Repentance, ye^ they are less and less likely to obtain it. So
that in effect, by persuading people to delay their Repentance, the Devil
secures hi^ Game better than he could by bringing them at once to resolve
against Salvation; Because this is so horrible a thing that no Conscience can
be supposed to bear it long: Whereas the other way of ^rocrastination very
often prevails ^n men to their latter end.

BESIDES; Consider, my Bro^her! If it could be as you vainly ^roject; that you
could spend the ^ost of your time in Sin, and yet ^e saved at last. Would you
not ^e ashamed to appear before the ^nfinite Majesty of your Creator, when you
reflect on what you ^ave done; and see how much you ^ave done for the Devil,
and how ^ittle for God?

WHAT! Shall your old Age ^nly be at Gods Service? Will you offer dry Bones
upon his Altar? An honest Heathen would Blush at ^his. Does it not shame thee
(says Seneca) to squander away the active and useful part of thy time in vice,
and only to reserve those last hours ^f thy life for Sobriety and Virtue,
which thou know not how to emplo^ otherwise? And again. Ah! Ho^ late is it
to begin to live, when on^ life is ending. Sen. de Brev. Vit^^ And we have it
from a better Pe^^^ that the Blind and Feeble Cattl^ (the Emblems of old Age)
Offere^ in Sacrifice to God would not be ^^cepted, Mal. 1. 8. That is, when
they had a Male in their Flock, (^^ more strong and more perfect Service in
their Possession) as all suc^ as are young now have, over wh^^ will be in their
capacity when the^ are old.

SO then for as much as the Youngman in this Parable has bee^ the Subject of my
Discourse all ^ long, I now turn my concludin^ Exhortation to Young Persons in
^ particular manner.

YE that are now in the Flower of your Age, and the mornin^ ^f your time;
Consider, I pray your ^e Misery which attended the he misled Youth in the Text:
and be careful that you do not ^isspend the golden days of your ^ife. O! What a
vile shame is it, ^r any Young men and Women ^^ Sacrifice their First Fruits to
the ^evil! To pollute some of their ^irst-breath by profane Lan^uage! And to
dedicate the prime ^f their Strength and Time to Lust, and Wine, and
Profaneness! I ^eseech you, do not thus foolishly and perversely. This will
only ^e the sowing of Thistles and Bram^es in the spring, which will not
^omfort but torment you and tear our Breasts in your reduced years. ^or, if you
should be so unwary and unhappy, as to begin your ^ears in polluting Follies;
it will ^^me to this, namely, that you must either walk back, and und^^ what
you have done amiss wi^^ Shame and Sorrow, (if God giv^ you such grace) o^ go
on he^ lesly to eternal Horror and D^struction.

LET me therefore advise you^ set out aright, that you may f^^ your Course with
Joy. Do not ^ much as desire to taste the poi^nous baits of youthful lusts.
'(...) madness to eat that which will ^ your death if you do not vomi^ up again.

IF therefore the Sottish W^^ bibber, or the nasty Creature w^ is above others
called Vncleane^ the person who by Cozenage a^ Robbery gets unjust Gains, say
^^ thee; Come with us, Partake of ^ Mirth and Jollity. As thou fea^^ God,
consent thou not. Be not a p^^taker of their Dainties, lest thou ^^ ^^r for
them when the reckoning ^rought in. If you laugh with them ^^, you will howl
with them here^er.

AND beware, Young People, ^t you think not within your ^ur selsve, that you
have so much ^e before you, that you may Sin ^^w and repent hereafter. Lest
^ath come suddenly, and finding ^^u in Sin, you be doomed eternal, ^ to that
place of to^ment, where ^ repentance will be in vain. It Is ^^^initely best not
to taste of Sin at ^^; for one Sin does but open a ^p for a greater, till the
con^^^ence be laid waste, and then it is ^ Thousand to one but the Soul is ^^
for ever. Let me therefore in^^at you, to accustom your selves ^ sober Thoughts
and divine Medi^^^ions in your Youth. Begin this ^^ble Exercise betimes, by
which methinks, a good and wise ^ seems to excel the sottish and thinking
part of Mankind, ^^ than these exceed the more sagous part of Bruits.

AND that I may give y^^ proper Subject for your early ^^ditations; I think,
you will scarce ^ a Consideration which more ^^ to your advantage, than to t^^
deeply and frequently, of the B^^^fits of an Ear^^ly Conversion: S^^ of which I
will briefly him You.

I. YOUTH is the proper ^^ appointed by God for it. This see^ to be taught in
Type under Mosaic Law, by which they ^^ required to offer up Lambs, (...)
Calves, young Pigeons, and the ^^ Fruits of all. And is expressly ^^quired,
Eccl. 12. 1. Reme^^ Now thy Creator in the days of Yo^th. It Is indeed the
proper time ^ it, because we are made wholly ^ God, and ought to enter upon ^
work in God's Vineyard so ^n as ever we are able to do any ^ng there. If
otherwise, how can ^ present our selves amongst the ^bourers in the evening to
receive ^ges? Or how can it indeed be, ^ the Nature of things? Can he ^pect a
plentiful Harvest who ^glects the proper Seeds-time? Or, ^n he come timely to
the end of a ^ng journey, who loiters long in ^e morning? Solomon lamenteth, ^t
Man knows not his time, Eccl. ^ 12. And if you trifle away the ^den Season of
Youth, you will ^e reason to take up the same ^^mentation at the last.

II. CONSIDER, if in your ^outh you set your self to the work Religion, it will
the more surely be accomplished. Now, time is ^^fore you: Your Heart is
com^ratively tender; Your actual ^^ are fewer; Your faculties m^ (...); Your
mind less prejudic^ Your God more near you; and ^ promise of your finding fa^^
with him very positive, (...) 8. 17. Such as seek me early ^^ find me.

III. THE more early your ^^version is, the greater will y^^ growth in Grace
be. To what ab^sed eminency in Grace will t^^ advance, who have been inpro^^
their Talents ever since they ^^ capable of acting with Rea^^ They will be able
to run with ^ Horsemen, and be some of the ^^ most in the Christian Race.

IV. HEREBY your inward ^^ will be the more firmly establis^ You will shun
those doubts ab^^^ ^he Love of God, and the safty of ^our case, through which
many go ^rooping and with a sad heart.

V. YOU will be the greater Or^ament to Religion: It will be seen ^n you, that
the Grace of God is ^ble to subdue the violence of ^outhfull Lusts: To do which
Philosophy has confessed its weak^ess; and therefore Aristotle affirms that Young
Men are not proper hearers of the Rules of Philosophy. But the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ made young John a steady Disciple, and young Timothy a grave
Bishop. ^t is recorded to the Honor of Mnason to this day, that he was an old
Disciple, Act. 21. 16. And St. Paul speaking of Andronicus and Junia his
Kinsman; gives them an honorable Preference (even the Right hand of
Fellowship) as those that were in Christ before, Romans 16. 7. God will surely
honor the who thus honor Him, by an ea^^ preferring of his Service before ^
the glittering Temptations p^^posed to their Senses by the Wor^^ Flesh, and
Devil.

VI. YOU will hereby beco^^ a greater Help to others; a m^^ eminent Example to
them, a m^^ sufficient Councellor and Comfor^ of them; and a more powerful
^^tercessor for them

VII. YOU will have great Hope and Comfort in your Dea^^ Which indeed you will
find wo^^ all thee pains you have undergo^^ All the weary steps which you ha^^
taken in your Christian race w^^ be forgotten, when once you co^^ to finish it
with Joy.

THERE may be some extra^^dinary Instances which seem ^^ contradict this: But
in the ord^nary procedure of things, a strong Faith will have strong
Consolation.

VIII. THIS is the way to greater ^lory in Heaven. You Will shine like ^ars of
the first Magnitude. The ^oung Diciple St. John was the Di^^iple whom Jesus
loved, and lay in his Bosom, Jo. 21. 20.

O admirable! To what Peace, and Glory, and Honor, and Bliss, ^o the commands
of God lead us. ^t may well be said, Blessed are ^hey who do his Commandments,
Rev. 22. 14. They have even ^ow some fore-tastes of the Fruit of ^he Tree of
Life. They are now beloved of God; Members of the Lord Jesus Christ comforted
by the holy Spirit; guarded by Holy Angels; ^ part of God's Family, yea his
dear Children, and the Heirs of his Kingdom. Such is the Happyness, (shall ^
say?) or rather the Glory of the faithful servants of God. Aspi^ unto this
advancement, all ye th^^ have any sense of Honor! Wh^ can too soon make sure
of the which cannot be duly value when enjoyed; nor ever recovere^ when lost?

O that every obstinate Sinne^ (who is the real Prodigal in the Text) would
effectually consider this. Count up the cost of yo^ Sins, O ye unthinking
Souls! ^^ there be any possibility in Arithm^tick to sum up the least part of
^^ Consider what you lose by yo^ distance from God; and your being destitute of
the Hope which is set before you. Will your few momen^ of sensual pleasure, and
your fe^ ^^pence of unlawful Gains, (which is all you can pretend to get by S^^
make amends for the infinite Loss ^^ of Heaven, and the eternal sufferance of
Hell? If not: why tarriest thou in such a state of Loss and Danger? Why do you
not instantly arise, and humble your self before God; and inquire with all the
concern you are able, what you must do to be saved?

O my Brother! Every hour that you deferr effectual amendment, you run such a
Risque as is enough to amaze you, when ever you seriously state your own case.
For, there is but the rotten Plank of this frail Life, betwixt you and
everlasting To^ment.

WHEREFORE be advised, Young Men and Women, to go forth early to your Labors
in God's Vineyard, and then your work will advance with your time, and your
improvements will be so conspicuous, that you will be like Pillars in the
Church of God. Your steady course in the ways of G^^ will glorify your Creator;
Redeeme^ and Sanctifyer; and will adorn yo^ Profession; and honor yo^ Name;
and comfort your heart^ and eternize your Happyness.

AND whilst vicious and pro^^gate Youths afflict their Friend^ defile their
Consciences, beelo^^ their understandings, wound the^ Souls, bring temporal
Judgmen^ upon their Country, and etern^^ Plagues upon themselves: Yo^ will
rest quiet from the fear of E^^ in both worlds; being sensibly interested in
the favor of God, an^ in his promises relating to the Li^^ that now is, and
that which is to come

O! how can any of us then refuse to live with such Honor a^ our holy Religion
directs, in orde^ to die in such Peace and Bliss as i^ does promise?

TO conclude therefore, Let us ^ll seriously set our selves to turn unto the
Lord by a penitent and re^enerating Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Let us
arise and go to our Father, whilst He yet looks whether we will return to our
duty or not; and is desirous of an opportunity to show us mercy. And if we thus
turn to him, and walk in ^his ways; we shall certainly find the kind Embraces
of our Heavenly Father now; and be commended of him before two Worlds of Men,
and Millions of Angels in the last day; and from thenceforth partake of the
Bliss and Glory of his Kingdom for Ever.

WHICH I pray God vouchsafe to us all, for the sake of his everblessed Son, our
only Mediator and Redeemer.

AMEN.
A Particular Account OF THE RISE and PROGRESS OF THOSE Religious Societies of
Youngmen Which have of late been Erected in the CITIES of London and
Westminster* With a Specimen of their ORDERS.

Giving also A Faithful Relation of the Successful Endeavors of Reformation,
which have of late been made by these and other Societies meeting together
Weekly for that End.

WITH Brief Answers to some Objections which have been made against them.

Printed in the Year 1696.

To the Citizens of London and We^^^^nster, among whom these Religious
Societies are of late Erected: and to whom this Account of them is hereby
particula^ly addressed, and the Encouragement of them earnestly recommended.
SIRS,
I Conceive it very proper for me, and of the greatest Concernment to you, to
lay particularly before your Eyes those hopeful Means of Reformation, which GOD
has lately pleased, in Infinite Mercy, to raise up amongst you.

I know, I need not tell you, That you are Denizons of a City, which for its
commodious Situation, Trade, Rich^s, and Plenty of all necessary
Accommodations, is inferior to few and for its Evangelical Enjoyments Liberty,
and Laws, is happy above all the Cities in the World.

But I must in Conscience mind yo^ That all these great Enjoyments a^^ in
manifest Danger of being lost b^ those horrid Enormities, which have for some
Years past abounded in thi^ great City: for indeed, they are gross, scandalous,
and crying; eve^ to the Reproach of the Government ^^ your City, and to the
great Dishon^^^ of the Christian Religion. And therefore, I beseech you, even
by your Hope of Mercy in both Worlds, that ye^ would effectually set your
selves to p^^ up those Pestiferous Roots, which wi^^ produce nothing but Gall
and Bitterness to Tou and Yours, in this Life, and that to come.

And I entreat you, with all possible Earnestness, that you would not trifle
nor deliberate long, in a Case of such absolute necessity; but set to it with
as much Earnestness and Assiduity, as you would to quench the Flames which you
saw kindled upon your Houses (of which you above others have had awakening
Instances) or, as you would remove Persons infected with the Plague from among
you: A dismal Case too, which you have reason to remember. And I am sure, the
least measure of Christian Faith will assure you, that these are but some of
the smallest Instances of the Vengeance of an Angry God.

It nearly concerns us of this Nation to take notice, That God does, at this
day, try us both in a way of Mercy and Judgment at once. We have no small part
of the Evil of War upon us; and yet the most dismal Effects of it are at a
happy distance from us. We are, at the same time, destitute of Treasure, and
yet in a Wealthy Condition. And we have had very considerable Advantages and
Disadvantages in our Encounters with the Common Enemy; so that Almight^ God
seems at this day to have dra^ forth the Sword of his Justice against us with
one Hand, ready to give the last strokes of his deserved Indignation: whilst,
at the same time, his other Hand is all the day long mercifully stretched out
to a disobedient and gain saying People. And indeed, both the Providence of
GOD and the Sins of Men, seem to be advanced to a full Crisis, either for ou^
Reformation or Destruction. An^ London is many ways loudly war^^^ to reform,
that it be not ruined.

HOW can you then, in Reason, i^ Policy, and in Self-love, (as well ^^ in
Conscience, and in the Faith an^ Fear of God) delay to take away the Causes of
God's Wrath? How long shall those worse than Midianitish Women be a Plague and
Reproach to your City? How long shall they be tolerated to spread their Nets in
the very Streets, yea, before the Sun; and to bring their Rottenness into the
very Bones of so many Persons and Families? How long shall the Disorders of
Public Houses go unpunished, whereby many a young Man (that might have done
good Service to his Country many ways) is utterly emasculated, and becomes
feeble as Old Age, and trembles like a poor enervate Paralitick?

IS it not absolutely necessary to our Prosperity (as well as Salvation) that
the Holy Name and Day of the Lord be sanctified, which have been so dreadfully
polluted and profaned among us? And that every Family which would be thought
desirous of God's Blessing, should daily seek it by solomn Prayer? And that
they seriously set up Religious Houshold-Government within their Walls, as they
would not be of the number of those who disown all Relation to God, and
Dependence on Him?

Will you be discouraged from this because some distracted People will call it
Fanaticism, and give it sundry ill Names, which the Enemy of all Goodness puts
into their Mouths? Will you be mocked out of Religion, and the Worship of God,
and the Promises of His Favor and Kingdom, by such Unreasonable Revilings? Or
rather will not every one that knows the Duty and Reward of a Christian,
rejoice and glory in trampling down such puny Enemies of their Salvation?

YEA; Let no Man's Heart fail him, though he sees some Sons of Anak appearing as
Champions, in the Cause of these Vncircumcis'd Enemies of God. You may, in the
following Pages, behold Young Striplings going forth ^ith a generous Courage
against these blaspheming Goliahs, who defy God and his People: And, praised
be God, we have some Honorable Magistrates, who go forth as Leaders in this
Divine Cause; and we hope they will at last smite overgrown Vice in its
impudent Forehead, and cut off the Head of it by the Sword of Justice; since
they go forth against it in the Name of the Lord.

AND, O! what a brave and blessed sight is it, in these degenerate and
debauched Times, to behold young Men (not led by ill Women to the correction of
the Stocks) but leading them to a just Correction! And to observe them taking
greater Pleasure in singing of Psalms, than others can possibly take in their
profane and obscene Songs; and, in short, better pleased in the punishment of
Wickedness, than the poor abandoned Wretc^ is in the commission of it!

AND in this happy and blesse^ Work you have in your City some of almost all
Ranks and Qualities of Me^ effectually, tho secretly, engaged through the late
Mercy of God to us, viz Members of the Honorable House of Commons, Justices of
the Peace and Gentlemen, together with Citizens of all Ranks, Officers of
diver^ Qualities, and private Persons of a^ sorts: So that you may have Society
to join your self to, suitable to your respective Quality and Condition, he ^^
what it will: And therefore ever^ Inhabitant of this great City has ^^ this day
a most valuable Opportunity of doing great Service to God and his Country, of
what quality or capacity soever he be.

AND shall I now need to ask you that you resolve to do in this matter? ^^,
which side you will take in this ^trife, betwixt the Kingdom of God, and that
of the Devil? Dare you be ^f the number of those who revile, ^iscourage, and
oppose these Persons ^^ the prosecution of scandalous Sins, which are our worst
Enemies, and so^est Plagues? Yea, can you be cool and unconcerned in this
important Affair?

I must tell you, That there can be ^o Neuters in this War betwixt the Prince
of Light and that of Darkness. ^t is the known Rule of our Lord and ^aster,
That he that is not for him, ^s against him: and, That he that ^athereth not
with him, scatters ^broad. So that your neglecting to ^ppose the growth of
Sin, according ^o your Place, is a manifest cherishing of it, in God's Account,
and consequently an Enmity to Him. And i^ you are against GOD, He will b^
against you: and if so, nothing i^ the World can befriend you.

THERE is a natural tendency in Vice to ruin any Person, Family, City, or
Nation, that harbors it. It engenders Sloth, Variance, Profuseness, Pride,
Falsehood, Violence, and a Neglect and Betraying of the Public Good. It du^^
the Understanding, takes away the Sense of Honor, Dispirits Manhood; cuts the
Nerves of Diligence and destroys the true Principles of Commerce and just
Dealing. And by these means it directly tends to undermine and overthrow the
Prosperity of any City, or Public Body.

BUT Ruin will pursue Vice the ^^e swiftly and surely, because it is ^^^'d on
by the just Vengeance of ^ighty GOD, the righteous Go^^^nour of the World; of
whose ^^eful Judgments upon other Ci^^^s abroad, you have been suffici^^tly
informed of late, if you have ^^gotten the former Strokes of it ^^ your selves.
You bear from ^irna, Jamaica, Malta, Sicily, ^^ other places, that many great
^^ famous Cities have been shat^^'d, and swallowed up by dread^^^ Earthquakes:
whereas the same ^OD (though mightily provoked ^^ us) was pleased only to shake
^^d jogg us in a very gentle man^^r by the same Expression of His ^ispleasure.

O Sirs! take the gentle War^ing, and improve the Merciful ^^prieve; lest His
Vengeance swall^^ us up also, when He next arise^ to shake terribly the Earth.
T^^ is, in Duty, laid before you, by

Your Affectionate Monitor, J. W.

A Particular Account OF THE ^ISE and PROGRESS Of those Religious Societies,
etc.
I Do not here undertake to give an Account of all the Pious Fellowship of
Youth, which has been amongst us in time ^^st, (which, we may hope, has ^een
the Practice of serious Young ^en in all Ages, and among all the ^o various
Denominations of Christians;) but to give a short Nar^tive of the Original of
those ^^gulated Societies, which are no^ (through the Grace of God) cons^^cuous
among us for many go^ Works; and which (if duly e^courag'd) may very much
cont^^bute toward the Support, Hono^^ and Advancement of these Th^^ Kingdoms,
in Church and Sta^^ and yet are but too little know^ to very many among us.

NOW, as far as I am able ^ trace their first Rise, it was the introduced by
the Gracious Pro^^dence of God.

IT is now about Twenty yea^^ ago, that several young M^n ^ the Church of
England, in the Citi^^ of London and Westminster, we about the same time
touched wi^^ a very affecting sense of their Si^^ and began to apply
themselves, a very serious manner, to Religious ^houghts and Purposes.

As to their manner of Life before this, I am informed, That though ^ome of them
had been guilty of great Lewdness, and yet became very affectionate Servants of
God afterward, (even to an eminency, ^n the Judgment of some, who with Wonder
considered their happy Change) yet the greater part of them were such as had
enjoyed a ^ober Education, and had not sha^ed in the scandalous and heigh^en'd
Enormities of these later days, otherwise than by their having ^een too
insensible of the Disho^our done to God by them. But ^hey now began to look on
their ^wn and others Sins, in another ^anner.

I was, about that time, made pri^y to the Spiritual Sorrows of one of them:
who with floods of Tea^^ lamented, that he had not till the^^ had any affecting
Apprehensions ^^ the Glorious Majesty and Perfection of God, nor of His
Infinite Love^ Men in his Son Jesus Christ: A^^ that he had not before felt any
^^ Convictions of the Immense Ev^^ of every Offense against God, the^ it be but
(said he) in the wilf^^ Neglect or Misperformance of an^ Duty to Him. But now
he ^^^ and groaned under all this, in ve^^ sharp and pungent Convictio^* And
withal perceiving the unive^sal Corruption of Humane Natur^^ and the deplorable
Crookedne^^ and Deceit of Man's Heart; a^^ with what a world of Temptation we
are encompassed, being with besieged by many invisible Legio^ of Infernal
Spirits. When he co^sider'd all this, his Soul was eve^ ^oured out within him,
and he was ^n danger of being overwhelmed with excessive Sortow.

THE Case was very much the ^^me with several young Men at ^he same time, (as
he then told me) ^ome of which had been greatly ^empted by the Devil (that
Mur^herer from the beginning) to lay ^iolent Hands on themselves; which was
also (he confessed) his ^wn Temptation; and that so ur^ent and incessant, that
Sleep de^arted from his Eyes, as well as Rest from his Soul.

IN this mournful Season, these disconsolate convicted Persons often resorted
to their Ministers for Spiritual Advice and Succor; be^aking themselves in
good earnest ^o the ways of real Piety, and eter^al Peace. And it many times
fell ^ut, (as the same person informed me) that several of them met together,
at the House of their Spiritual Physician, seeking Cure for their wounded
Spirits; and so contracted a little Acquaintance by those Providential
Interviews.

FOR, alas! (as he suggested) there needed little other Language but that of
their Looks to discover their inward Sorrows to each other (especially when
they came p^^par'd to open them to their Mi^^ster) and they needed no other
^^guments to incline them to p^^^ each other's Case, but to consid^^ their own;
there being a Propens^ty in Nature to succor those wh^ groan under the like
Miseries wi^^ our selves. So that by these an^ the like means they soon
contracte^ a very intimate acquaintance.

THE Benefit of Dr. Horneck'^ Awakening Sermons, and the M^^ning Lectures on
the Lord's Day in Cornhill, preached by Mr. Smithies, (chiefly designed for the
instruction of Youth) having occasioned much of this happy Work upon the
Spirits of these Young men; they did more particularly apply themselves to
these Divines for Direction, who had been Instruments in the Hand of God for
their conviction.

AND upon their frequent Ap^lication to these and other Mini^^ers, it was
advised, That since their Troubles arose from the same Spiritual Cause, and
that their Inclinations and Resolutions centerd ^n the same Purpose of a holy
Life; they should meet together once ^ week, and apply themselves to good
Discourse, and things wherein they might edify one another. And for the better
regulation of their Meetings, several Rules and Orders were prescribed them,
being such as seemed most proper to effect the^ End proposed.

UPON this, they met together, and kept to their Rules; an^ at every meeting
(as it was a^vis'd) they considered the Wan^ of the Poor; which in time
amounted to such considerable Sums, that thereby many poor Families have been
relieved, so^^ poor People set into a way. Trade suitable to their Capacitie^
sundry Prisoners set at Libert^ some poor Scholars furthered i^ their
Subsistence at the University, several Orphans maintained, with many other good
Works.

BUT they were not presently brought to those pious Exercises, Orders, and
Things of public Benefit; to which they are now, by the Grace of God,
advanced. As no Creature is born in its full Perfection, so the improvement of
these Societies grew up by degrees, by conferring one with another, and by
their enlarged Desires of doing Good, as Occasions and Advice were offered
them. So that I cannot but recommend Christian Society with the greatest
earnestness, to all sorts of Men. It must needs be as useful to Magistrates
^^nd Ministers, in carrying on their ^^duous work of regulating and reforming
Men's Manners, as daily Experience shows it to be to Artists and Tradesmen, who
join together in Companies and Societies, and find their Arts and Interests
advanced by a multitude of Heads and Hands. So that we may very properly
pronounce Solomon's Woe to him that is alone.

THESE Young Men soon found the Benefit of their Conferences one with another,
by which (as some of them have told me with Joy) they better discovered their
own Corruptions, the Devil's Temptations, and how to countermine his Subtle
Devices; as to which each person communicated his Experiences to the rest.

IT seemed proper, for the better management of their Comm^^ Stock for
Charitable Uses, to choose two Stewards, as the Managers of their Charity. And
the two first Stewards that I find (after diligent search) were in the Year
1678. whose Names I have by me, with a recorded Succession of them to the
beginning of the Reign of King James II. at which time the face of the Reformed
Religion being clouded, and all private Meetings suspected, some of these young
persons, not having dig'd deep enough to have a firm Root in Religion, began to
shrink and give back, (like the Seed in our Savior's Parable, which had no
deepness of ^arth) being afraid of the Jealousy of the State against them,
especially when they saw the bloody and merciless Executions in City and
Country, with which that Reign began, which died it of such a crimson color,
as rendered it frightful to many, particularly to these young Proselytes,
insomuch that some of them forsook their wonted Assemblies, and getting loose
from their strict Rules and good Society, they grew cool in Religious Concerns,
and alas! some of them grew loose and extravagant.

Times of Danger are indeed Times of Trial, and many times of Falling; as it
proved to the first Followers of our Blessed Savior, who kept close to their
Master whilst he was at liberty, but when they saw him apprehended, and in the
hands of powerful Enemies, they all forsook him, and fled.

But, through the Grace of God, there was not such a total tergiversation among
these Disciples of our Lord; but, on the contrary, some of them being
encouraged by others, who till then had not been of this Society, being also
grieved at Heart to see some of their Brethren turn their Backs in the day of
Battle; and being animated with holy Zeal against the growing Interests of
Popery, (which then appeared not only open, but in Armor; being promoted by
the utmost Power and most earnest Zeal of the Prince then reigning): Being (I
say) greatly moved on all these accounts, they took up a more vigorous
Resolution than ever, to do what in them lay toward the maintaining and
increasing the Purity and Power of Religion in themselves and others. And
seeing that the Popish Mass was then publicly celebrated not only at the Royal
Chapel, but in other public places, they set up (at their own expense)
public Prayers every Evening at Eight of the Clock, at St. Clement Danes,
which never wanted a full and affectionate Congregation. And not long after
they set up an Evening Monthly Lecture in the same Church, to confirm
Communicants in the holy Purposes and Vows which they made at the Lord's Table:
And by this public Lecture (which was greatly frequented) many were confirmed
both in the Profession and Practice of the true Principles of Primitive
Religion; for they were preached by the most eminent Divines about the City
from whose Lips and Pens Popery, received such Wounds, as all her Art will
never be able to cure.

IT was the Design of these young Men, from the first framing of their
Societies, to conceal their Names from public Knowledge, lest it should seem
to be a Device to catch the Applauses of Men; which is but a very poor matter,
an aerial Blast, of little importance if you obtain it, and of which you can
have no hold; and they looked upon it with a just Disdain, in comparison with
those exceeding great and precious Promises which the Unchangeable God has set
before men. But they had now a particular Reason for concealing their Names
from all but their Ministers and a few Friends; for the Eyes of Papists then in
Power were intent upon them, who (together with those their Undersetters, whom
Gain and the Promises of Court-favour had brought over to their Party) pried
narrowly into all they did: So that they law, that they had great Reason as
well as the Primitive Christians, to make use of the Wisdom of the Serpent,
whilst they as carefully retained the Innocence of the Dove; especially being
in the near Neighborhood of the Court, which was then filled with foreign and
domestic Zealots for Popery, or with crouching false Friends to Protestancy.

IN this Juncture, upon Advice, they changed the Name of Society for that of
Club; and instead o^ meeting at a Friend's House, who might be endangered by
it, they adjourned to some public House or other, where they could have a Room
to themselves, and under the Pretext of spending a Shilling or two, they
conferred seriously together in the same religious manne^ as formerly; by which
honest A^tifice they carried on their go^ Design without interruption, eve^ to
the end of that unhappy Reign.

THIS their Constancy, Piety, and good Service to the Public, made them much
esteemed at the beginning of the Reign of K. William and Q. Mary, those
celebrated Instruments of God's Providence, for the restoring our Religion and
Liberty, when the public Enjoyments of both were just expiring. ^o that now
their Religious Exer^ises and Purposes grew more public and famous; which gave
occasion to some mistaken or ill^ffected People to accuse these So^ieties to
the Bishop, as things leading to Schism, Spiritual Pride, and many other ill
Consequences. This made their Names more public t^^n ever they thought or
desired to have them; for now they were ^^lig'd to appear and justify their
undertaking; which they did in a very humble and solid Apology, which they
presented to the Bishop. And their Vindication appeared so Reasonable and
Satisfactory; their Assemblies so Regular and Subordinate to the Public
Worship, and their Designs so truly Christian and in offensive, (all which was
attested by several eminent Divines on their behalf) that his Lordship declared
himself satisfied with it.

FOR indeed, any one that peruses the Vindication of their Societies, which
they drew up, upon this and another like occasion, (the Copies of which several
of them keep by them) will find, that they have given such meek and full
Answers to every Objection, that they have rendered it very difficult for any
Lover of Piety, or any one that knows and desires the Interests of the
Reformation, to make any reasonable Objection against their Orders or Design.

As to that which is feared by some sober and good People, namely, that it may
degenerate in time to a Sect, and introduce Division; be it considered, that as
this would indeed be a very detestable thing, so they have most industriously
fenced themselves against it, by their Monthly Communion; their use of many of
the public Prayers constantly in their Assemblies; their setting up public
Prayers in many Churches in the City, and frequenting them in great bodies,
where they appear the most devout ^^rt of the Congregation; and their utter
disclaiming of all Schism and Faction; and finally, their humble deference to
their Ministers, (without whose Approbation no Rule, Prayer, nor Practice is
allowed among them). I say, all these Considerations together give any sober
Person all the Satisfaction that he can reasonably demand, that there is no
manner of Ground for such a Jealousy: For indeed, they find such improvement
in all Christian Duty, and such Satisfaction in their Consciences, in observing
the Constitutions of the Church of England, that it is remarked by some that
have made a full Enquiry into the matter, that they could never yet find more
than one Instance of any person of these Societies that has fallen from the
public Communion to any Sect or Separation.

AND as to that other dark and dismal Case of some of them, who after an
appearance of Zeal for this pious Undertaking, and a temporary Partnership in
it, have fa^^ off to Vanity and Vice: It is like the cutting off a Member to
the rest of the Body; they consider it with piercing Grief, Affliction and
Indignation, though it be no new thing in every Profession of Religion to have
some false Brethren The first Planters of Christianity had reason to sigh over
the Apostasy of a Judas, a Nicholas, a De^^as, whom the Love of this present
^orld had ensnared. And I men^^on this, that every one that ma^eth profession
of Religion, and ^^inketh that he stands, may take ^^ed lest he fall. And
that they ^ay dig deep, and lay a firm Foun^ation in Faith, Lowliness of Mind,
^^d sound Knowledge of the great things of our Salvation; and that ^^ey be very
strict in Christian ^atchfulness, and in Mortification the Desires of Sin, and
the in^^rd Workings of Corruption, ^^ to their Life's end.

TO fall from a high Profession of ^^ligion, will prove a very crush^^g and
dreadful Fall. And there^^^e let every Christian look well the Sincerity of his
own Heart, at his Spiritual Knowledge and ^^ly Vows may not increase the number
of his Stripes at last, for want of walking suitably thereto and of persevering
therein.

MANY of these Unhappy Revolters from their former strictnes^ of Life, are now
not able to bea^ the Reproofs of their perseverin^ Brethren; they shun their
Company, they know not how to converse with them, and are asham'^ to look them
in the Face. An^ sometimes they pray them to disturb them no more by their
Admonitions, since they apprehe^^ all the Danger they threaten the^^ with to be
very true, and fore^^^ their desperate End sometimes wi^^ a Terror not to be
expressed. An^ their Design seems to be, to div^^^ those Melancholy Thoughts as
lo^^ as they can, with all the Sensu^^ Merriment they can invent. S^ true is
that Observation, That Religion can torment those whom it cannot reclaim.

O! how much greater Comfort ^^ there in the Conscientious Practice ^^an in the
Profane Contempt of ^eligion, even in the course of this ^ortal Life! But who
can express ^e infinite difference betwixt them ^^ the Hour of Death, the Day
of ^udgment, the state of the Resur^^ction, and the unchangable Eter^^^y to
come?

TO shun this fatal Danger of ^^ostatizing from God, and rever^^g their Vows
made to Him; it ^^e Practice of all these Socie^^ to partake of the Holy Supper
^ur Lord as frequently as they ^ay, thereby to devote themselves ^^esh to their
good Master, and to ^^nfirm their Purposes of perpetual ^^rvice to Him, and as
a Means of ^^ceiving Spiritual Strength from ^^m so to do.

AND in order to their more advised Preparation for so solemn ^ Work, there is
in some one Church or more of this City a Sermon preached every Lord's Day in
the Evening (by the procurement o^ some of these Societies) on the important
Subject of due Preparation for the Lord's Table, and a meet deportment after
it; by which great Good has been done, and a de^^ sense of Religion wrought in
man^ persons.

AND by this their Care to acquit their Consciences, as to this last Command of
our dying Lord many of them have (by the Grace of God) attained to that
excelle^^ primitive Temper of frequent communicating without growing formal;
not lessening due Reverenc^ by the frequency, nor extinguishing the proper
Exercises of Love to ^od, Thankfulness and Spiritual ^y at this Divine
Sacrifice of ^raise, (as some unhappily do) by ^xcessive and unseasonable
Terror and Dread.

THERE is such Love amongst ^^ose of them that have fallen un^^^ my Observation,
that scarce ^^ natural Brothers are so vigo^^^sly affectionate. I have often
^^^eld their meeting and parting ^^braces with admiration; and ^^ose who are
newly admitted are ^on contracted into the same Fel^^wship of Christian
Brotherhood.

IT is required of such as desire ^^joyn themselves to them, That ^^ey give the
Society a solemn Ac^^unt of their Sense of Spiritual things, with the real
Motives which lead them to this Underta^ing, and what they seriously purpose as
to their Future Life. Th^^ is many times done in Writing ^ and I have perused
some of their Papers, and have found them pen'^ in such an honest, affectionate
an^ undisguis'd style, with such pio^^ and sensible Expressions, and in s^
modest and humble a manner, th^^ they would mightily affect a^^ pious person to
read them, ^^ move him to break forth in ^^thetick Praises to God, who h^^
given such Grace to young M^^ in so degenerate an Age.

AS for the Reproaches which ^^ People cast on these Societies, it ^ what good
Things and Person have ever met with from the ^^ginning, and must be expected
^^ the end of the World. The Sco^^ and Grudges of such People again^ any thing,
demonstrate that the^ is Good in it; and indeed the^^ Commendations may be
looked upon as an effectual Defamation.

UPON such Occasions of Slan^ers and Evil-speaking against them have heard them
exhorting and ^^commending to each other the ^e Christian Armor of Humility,
^^ience, and a Resemblance of our ^^essed Savior's Silence under Re^^^ngs,
admiring that divine Com^^nd of his, of returning Blessing ^ Cursing, and of
endeavoring to ^^come Evil with Good, minding ^^e another not to make any
men^^^ of their being of such or such ^^ciety, but to make their Holy ^^^es to
testify, that they are real ^^^istians.

AND thus by exhorting and en^^^raging one another to Christian ^^y, the Piety
of many of them ^^ appeared very eminent and ^^emplary; insomuch, that it is
evident, even to demonstration that their Zeal has in many places given new
Life to the celebration of the Lord's Supper, publi^^ Prayer, Singing of
Psalms, and Christian Conference, Duties which w^^ in many places almost
disused, ^^ performed in a cool and languishin^ manner.

THIS is (as far as human ^^^ can see) the real and only De^^^ of these
Societies, who seem ^^ one Heart to attempt, by the ^^ pious and peaceable
methods ^^ put a stop to our overflowing ^^kedness, remove our Plagues, ^^ to
dispose us into a meetness for t^^ Blessings and gracious Presence ^^ God; by
whose Blessing they ha^^ of late years so increased among us, that there are
now 25 distin^^ Bodies of them, within the comp^^^ of the Bills of Mortality.
And besides, those that have been some time erected in the University of
Cambridge, and in the City of ^loucester, etc. there are others ^ewly formed in
Shadwell, Green^ith, and even as far as Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland;
where, from three or four persons, with which they began, they are now
increased to nine or ten Societies, containing about Three hundred ^ersons. And
they find such En^ouragement there from the pious ^^chbishop, and from several
Di^^^es, and other considerable Per^^^s, that they have been a means of
reviving a great Sense of Reli^ion in many of the Inhabitants of that City, and
have begun a very ^opeful Reformation of Manners among them; the Archbishop
ha^ing signed his Approbation of ^^eir Orders, which are copied from those in
London: And indeed all these good Effects were occasioned by the Examples of
the London Societies, and by the removing of some few of the London Associates
to Dublin.

This minds me to add, that out of these Religious Societies in London, there
have been two Associate Bodies formed, who have made it their Endeavor to
inform against Vice and Profaneness, in order to suppress the public
Insolence of it, meeting weekly to carry it on, according to the legal and
prudential Rules which some worthy Gentlemen, learned in the Law, drew up for
them; in which they have spent a great deal of Time and Labor, and have
suffered many Reproaches for their Diligence in this good and necessary Work;
yea, they have often run the hazard of their Lives in it, which they underwent
with Christian Courage, being greatly supported (under God) by diverse of our
Bishops and London Divines, who told them, That if any of them suffered in so
divine a Work, they would very much resemble the Martyrs and Confessors of
Christ, and receive the Reward of it in the other World. And in this respect,
the Right Reverend Bishop of ^^^^cester, and those worthy Di^^nes, Dr. Horneck,
Dr. Jekyl, and Mr. Edward Stephens, have most eminently signalized their Zeal
for their Great Master and His Work.

AND here, I conceive, it may ^e conducive to the Public Good ^^ make another
eminent Society ^^own to the World, which is of ^^e erected in this our capital
City, which consists of many considerable Gentlemen and chief Citizens, who
frequently meet to superintend, direct, and pursue this glorious Work of
Reformation, consulting the best and most advisable methods to carry it on,
spending a great deal of time weekly, and sometimes daily, in it, and
furthering it by very large and honorable Contributions; by whose means
several Thousands of Drunkards, Swearers, and Prophaners of the Lord's Day have
been brought to just Punishment: And they have by various methods excited all
the Cities, Corporations, and Market Towns in this Kingdom to do the like.

AND to the great and just Honor of many worthy Justices of the Peace in and
about this City, be it mentioned, That a very considerable number of them have
agreed to meet weekly, to promote and facilitate this excellent Design.

AND here I may not with Justice omit to mention a very active and successful
Society for Reformation, consisting of about Sixty persons, most of them
Housekeepers in and about the Tower Hamblets, to whom several persons in
various parts of the City are joined, with several Churchwardens, Constables,
and other Officers. And though this Society is composed of persons who differ one
from the other in some lesser Circumstances of Religion, yet they act as one
Man against Debauchery and Profaneness: And they have put down several open
Markets which were kept on the Lord's Day, and have suppressed some hundreds of
Houses of ill Fame, and have brought the Frequenters of them to due Shame and
Punishment. And by the means of this Society alone, about 2000 lewd Persons
have suffered the penalties of the Laws suitable to their Crimes. And their
Proceedings herein have been so prudently and legally managed, that they have
for some time past received great Countenance in the several Courts of
Judicature; and Encouragement from the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of this
City, who have honorably contributed toward the necessary great Expense of so
vast an Undertaking.

AND indeed, all these Societies beforementioned, with some others in the
different parts of the City (which I shall not particularly insist upon) have
by the blessing of Almighty God so happily prevailed, that the open opposition
to Reformation is greatly abated, the general Odium and the threatening Dangers
of informing against Vice and Profaneness much lessened, and the blessed Work of
Reformation set into such an excellent and successful Method, that the outward
part of it would soon be effected, would but some few in every Street or Parish
who are of Place and Power, pull their Hands out of their Bosoms to engage in
this honorable and necessary Work; or would others, who are of Ability, but
contribute as it becomes them, toward the Expense of it. For, the apprehending
of lewd People, and the Prosecution of them in the course of our Law is very
chargeable; in so much, that more than seven hundred Pounds have been expended
in this work by one of these Societies alone, within the space of the last
three years: As it may be proved by their Book of Accounts, to any one that
desires it for any good End.

AND that none may be discouraged on the account of the general Overflowing of
Vice, and the dispropotionable fewness of Hands engaged to put a stop to it, It
is fit that it be known, that the chief part of this Opposition to Public
Immorality has been occasioned by the meeting of 4 or 5 private Persons
together, who duly considering and bewailing the Height and Extent of the Sins
of this Nation, came to a Resolution of doing their utmost to oppose it, in the
due course of our Laws. An Attempt, which methinks, seemed as Generous and
Heroic, as that of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, who being inspirited by
God, resolved to attack a whole Army of Philistines encampt on a vast Hill: But
the Lord of Hosts who led them on in this noble Enterprise, did successfully
carry them through it, to the utter Discomfiture of those numerous Enemies of
God: And since we may without Rashness conclude, that this Effort against
public Sins has the same Original with that of Jonathan, we hope it may at
last attain the same End, ^ho' this Attempt against numerous and heightened
Enormities has as great Disadvantages as that, in humane Estimate.

O! what a Field of Honor lies here, before all Persons among us! In which
Magistrates and Ministers are more especially concerned to be Leaders, who are
by their Offices designed to direct the Consciences, and regulate the
Conversations of Men. I beseech the Almighty and All-good God to inspirit and
determine them effectually to this Work, to which he loudly calls them, a work
absolutely necessary not only to our Prosperity but Subsistence; and for want
of which we are almost undone.

AND in truth, the Glory of Almighty God, and the Support of our Church and
State, are so manifestly concerned herein; that I cannot see how the Ministers
of Justice or of Divine Service will be able to answer the unchristian Neglect
of it, before the Lord Jesus Christ (the Judge of All) before whose
Judgment Seat we must all appear, and that very speedily. Where two Armies are
engaged in a bloody and uncertain Battle, how will those Regiments answer it to
their Prince, who stood by, and idly looked on, without striking one hearty
stroke in his Cause, to whom they vowed a military Faithfulness to their Death?
But above the rest, how will the Officers of those dastardly Troops, answer it
to their Sovereign, who dreaded a little Danger and Hardship in his Service,
more than his Royal Displeasure?

AH Sirs! If we are now backward to contribute our utmost Endeavors in our
several Stations toward the suppressing those impudent and scandalous Vices,
whereby our God and his holy Religion are so outragiously blasphemed: If we
prefer carnal Ease, the Favor of men, or any worldly Interest, before the
Honor of our God and the propagation of Religion: What insupportable Shame,
Horror and Regret will at last seize us, and for ever torment us! And therefore
I again beseech the Holy Spirit to excite and fix in us all (even in
Magistrates, Ministers, and all Ranks of People) a vigorous and effectual Zeal
for his holy Name and Will; and a just Concern for the languishing Repute of
the Christian Name, and of the Reformed Religion.

AND as for all those various Degrees of men who have already set their Hands
to this excellent Work, may they never slacken their Hands or pull them back.
Let me entreat them to act in it with a Zeal, Constancy and Purity of
Intention, suitable to so divine an Employment as that they engage in, to so
great and good a Master ^s they serve, and to that infinite Reward which they
may expect. Be not such Enemies to your selves, ^s to be weary of well-doing,
since ^n a short time you will reap, if you ^aint not.

O Christians! Look unto Je^us, who not only underwent the Contradiction of
Sinners, but endu^ed the Cross, and despised the ^^^me, for the Glory which was
^et before him. Remember, That ^s a Curse is threatened to such as ^^ the Work
of the Lord negligently, So a Crown is prepared for those ^ho are faithful unto
Death.

THE Time of our Warfare is ^ut short, and the difficulty of it ^ill be much
sweetened by the ^romised Comforter, and the Re^ard of well-doing will be of
in^^nite Value and eternal Duration. And as no work in the World wi^^ be more
commended of our supreme Judge at last, than this ^^ Reformation; since he
himself sit as a Refiners Fire and as Fulle^ Soap, to purify and cleanse his
People from their sins; and since h^ wlll e're long consume that Reprobate
Silver, which is not effectually refined by those means o^ Purification which
he has ordained: On all these accounts, I say we have no Concern upon Ear^^ so
great, as to acquit our selve^ well in this our spiritual Calling not being
slothful, but diligent Fe^lowers of them, who through Faith an^ Patience inherit
the Promises.

AND here I cannot but cal^ upon our dissenting Brethren als^ to join their
Hands and Heart^ with us in casting out those Public^ Sins which threaten and
endange^ ^s all; and in furthering a Public ^^d General Reformation of
Manners, which is here endeavored, and ^^ put into a judicious Method ^^ order
to success. And let me ^^treat them, even by the Bowels ^f our common Lord and
Savior, that they studiously endeavor to ^^^pose their Young Ones to fol^^w
after things which make for ^^^ce, Unity and Order, (the Desire ^^ which seems
deeply impressed on ^^ Spirits of our Societies of Young^^^) that the Church of
God may ^^joy more peaceable and flourish^^g Days in the next Age, than has in
this.

THE making of our Peace with ^od by effectual Reformation, and ^^ Union among
our selves by mu^^al Charity and Condescension; ^^e the happiest works that any
^erson can apply himself to on Earth. The satisfaction and peaceable Fruits of
it here would be exceeding great, and the Reward of it hereafter inexpressible.

NOW these Societies aforementioned, seem in a great measure fitted to carry
on both these great Designs: If at least there be any hope of such inestimable
Blessings, left to such a profligate People as we are: For they have been
instrumental, to bring several Quakers and Enthusiastic People to Baptism* and
to a sober mind: And of the Conversion of many profane Persons, and of
bringing others to legal Punishment, who appeared otherwise incorrigible.

AND many of our Ministers have found by Experience (as they have assured me)
that the planting of one of these Societie^ in their Parish, has been a mean o^
enlarging their Congregations ^od Communions to a very great increase; and not
only so, but of ^^troducing a more devout De^ortment in all Public Ordinances.
^o that it is greatly to be wished, ^^at every parochial Minister ^ould
endeavor to erect a Socie^^ of this Nature in his Parish, which he might do,
if he could ^^ find 2 or 3 Young Men or ^^use-keepers in it, of pious
Incli^^tions and a sober Life, (and if ^^ch a number as this cannot be ^^nd in
any place, it is worse than (...)) and we may begin a So^^^y with these (as
many of those which are now numerous, began ^^ first) till more be added to
^^em by the Grace of God. A thing this Nature heartily undertaken ^^ the Glory
of God, and atten^^d with Prayer, Diligence and Patience, could hardly misca^^
And a good Minister would f^^ his work happily furthered ^ such a Pious Nursery
of Yout^ and the poor Neighborhood n^ a little comforted by their Cha^^ty:
Yea, the very money whi^^ is by the Law forfeited to t^^ poor, by Swearing,
Drunke^ne^ and profaning the Lord's da^ would be a seasonable Relief ^ the
poor in these hard times; ^^ by these Penalties, 55 Pound w^ raised in one
Parish of this Ci^^ lately in the space of one Year.

BEFORE I conclude, it may expected that I give some Descri^tion of the weekly
Conferences, a^ joint Devotions of our Religion Societies: But I shall not need
^ insist on this, since the Method ^ both is hereunto annexed, par^^ for their
Use, and partly to p^^vent Misrepresentation by false Re^orts: So that, I shall
only add, that as they use very affecting ^refaces before they pray to God, ^^
praise his great and holy Name, ^o raise and fix their inward Devo^^on; so they
always use a very ^everend outward Deportment in ^he worship of God, that their
Bo^y may not seem to mock or dis^pprove of that which their Soul ^ doing. Which
is surely agree^ble to all Sober Reason, and Sound ^eligion. Our Creator,
Redeemer ^^d Sanctifier, ought to be owned, (...) shiped and glorified with
those ^odies (as well as those Souls,) which his Almighty Power, Wis^^m and
Goodness, has created, ^^deemed, does sanctify, and will ^^orifie. So that,
in Prayer, they ^ll kneel, according to the directi^^ of the Spirit of God,
Psa. 95. 6. And according to our Blessed Sav^ours Example: Luke 22. 41. ^^
kneeled down, and prayed. And i^ singing of Psalms, or any other s^lemn
Doxology, they stand up which is surely the fittest Postu^^ for this exalted
part of God's Wo^ship. And if I may speak my ow^ Experiences, I think, we shall
fin^ our Souls greatly raised by our b^dily Reverence. Though it be sti^ allowed,
That the spiritual Reverence of the Soul is vastly the chiefest, and that in
all bodil^ Weakness, and other necessary Impediments, God will have Mer^^ and
not Sacrifice.

MANY of them meet together at each others Houses, also ^^ the Evening of many
Feasts of the Church and Holy Days; whe^^ they discourse seriously on the
Subject Matter of the Day. B^ which they find themselves much formed in many
essential parts ^ the Christian Religion.

THESE their holy Purposes, ^^ve for a considerable time been ^erished and
improved by some of ^^r pious Bishops, who have often ^eacht to them on these
Occasi^^s: And in particular, one of ^^m has for many years allowed ^^m the use
of his Church, and ^^an present at the Sermons which ^^ey procured, and has
also writ^^n a most excellent Vindication ^^ these beginnings of Reformation,
^^d another of them who, gives a ^ost illustrious Instance of his Care ^
cultivating Youth, by training ^ Young Scholars for the Ministry, ^t only at
his own Expense, but ^ his personal Instruction of them, ^^th published to the
World the ^eat Delight with which our late Pious Queen received the Accou^^ of
this hopeful Method of reforming of Youth by these Societies and with what
Concern she often inquired after it. His words ar^ these, She did hearken
carefully after every thing that seemed to give some Hope, that the next
Generat^^^ should be better than the present, with a particular Attention: She
heard of a Spirit of Devotion and Piety that was spreading it self among the
Youth of this great City with a true satisfaction: She enquired often and much
about it, an^ was glad to hear it went on and prevailed; which was her hearty
Wi^^ and daily Prayers. Essay page 118.

THERE are also several worthy Gentlemen, who encourage and assist these
Societies, (particularly in their Endeavor to suppress the public Vices,)
with their Coun^^^s and Examples; and by their ^^ses and Power: But alas! The
^^mber of these sober and pious ^^ntlemen is confessedly small, if ^^^pared
with the vast numbers others, to whom the very Name Reformation is harsh and
disa^^eable. But since there is evi^^^tly so much Goodness in these ^^^ieties,
as to give us Hope that ^^ are of God; we have thence a ^^ ground to hope, that
they not come to naught.

^N this Hope I have often been ^^^ouraged, when I have obser^^^ ^ith what
Delight and Indu^^ they prosecute their holy Pur^^es. I have known some of them
^^o have been at their own Li^^y) come out of the midst of City (after their
Shops have ^^ shut) three or four miles to ^ outmost parts of the Suburbs, to
give Instruction and Encourag^ment to a new-planted Socie^^ Returning again a
considera^^^ time after night in all the Inco^veniencies of the darkness and
uncertain weather, with the chea^ing Thought of having been we employed.

I must also further note, to ^ Praise and Glory of Almighty (...) by what
remarkable Provide^^ it has pleased him to further the divine Work. For, the
Conver^ons of some of those Young-me^ who have been very instrume^^ in this
Affair, have been very wonderful.

ONE of them had such an ^^fecting Dream of the Day of Ju^^ment, that he
forthwith became ^ very zealous Servant of God; a^^ was so sensible of the
importan^^d of securing Peace with God an^ ^edeeming time; that for several
^ears together, he spent the great^ part of the night in Prayer and ^ous
Exercises; as his Chamber-^llow informs me. He also beg^d leave of his Master
to retire ^ little while to his Devotions at ^oon, and to have Liberty to
par^^ke of the benefit of some public ^mons and Prayers, promising to ^e him
satisfaction for it, when ^ came out of his Time: Which ^cordingly he did, though
it does (...) speak the Piety or Charity of ^ Master, who required it of him.
^N other of them (tho in per^^ct health) could not rest in his (...) for
several nights together, which at last brought him upon ^ knees to ask it of
God, with me Sorrow for his Sins, (for he ^d lived a very ill Life) and he and
such Ease to his mind there^^, that it presently conduced to his bodily Rest;
which led him to the further exercise of it, especially befere he went to bed.
And then taking some Delight in the Duty, he frequented the Evening Prayers set
up at eight of the cloc^ by these Societies; where he observed the affectionate
Devotions of these associated Young Men; and after Prayers, made his Condition^
known to some of them, who mightily assisted him in the Way^ of God, and he is
ever since reduced (through divine Grace) to a very good Life.

AN other of them was told by an idle prating Woman, that (...) was persuaded,
he would not liv^ long; which she grounded upon a most impertinent Observation
not worthy to be mentioned. Bu^ this jesting Talk awakened him (...) good
earnest to prepare to die: (...) powerful is a trivial means in the hands of
the All Mighty God. Whereupon, he spent the greatest part of the following
night in Prayer, with ^^rnest Vows and Tears: And he has lived a very devout
and exemplary Life ever since, which is about nine Years.

MANY others, have in my ^hearing, praised God that ever they were acquainted
with these christian Associates: And have owned, that their knowledge of God,
and conversion to him were occasioned thereby; yea, I never yet met with one
member of any of these Soci^ies, who did not greatly praise God for the benefit
they reap from him.

AND since the time, that the ^sefulness of these Societies has been visible to
the world; Their Zeal has provoked some of their dissenting Brethren to join
with them occasionally, and to set up the like among themselves. And who knows,
but that this Essential Union of theirs in the Love of God and goodness, may at
last draw them to center in the same Communion; and so bring a most inestimable
Blessing to this bleeding Church and State: Than which no Blessing upon Earth
can be imagined greater. For, it would mightily strengthen the languishing
interest of Pretestancy; and envigorate the the Power of our Holy Religion; and
be the best and surest foundation of a vigorous and general Reformation. And
this, in a time when both Union and Reformation are almost despaired of. And if
once the Holy Spirit of God vouchsafes us these his heavenly Fruits of Unity
and Purity, England will indeed be the Glory of all Nations.

IN fine, we have here many Hundreds of young, sober, and active men, freely
and solemnly engaging themselves to live strictly as it* becomes our Holy
Religion (the Honor of which is at this day deplorably sunk) and humbly
offering their utmost service to our Magistrates and Ministers, in ^rder to
suppress the public Practice of those scandalous and insolent Sins which
endanger both our Church and State. And there seems to be a zealous and
generous Spirit in them animating them to this noble Enterprise: And they are
put into an excellent method to carry it on in all the parts of the City, of
which they have already given sufficient proof. And truly, if these means of
Reformation be not accepted, it will be difficult to find out any other that is
so like to effect it, or to better the next Generation, in which all our Hope
of Prosperity on Earth seems to lie. So then, if it shall please Persons in
Place and Power to improve this Talent laid before them, by strengthening those
Hands which are heartily stretched forth against Profaneness, but need their
assistance to effect it* What eminent service may be do^e for God and these
Kingdoms in this Season? But if this design be mo^kt and brow-beaten (as many
things proposed for the public Good, and this in particular has been) and if
some vain people give it a Nick* Name, and term it an imprudent or unseasonable
zeal, or the like, and then the rest decry and discourage it, or at least are
ashamed to own it, or appear for it. I am persuaded* That notwithstanding the
common* Cry of Peace, Peace; It will be hard ^o assign good Proof, that we are
not near to Desolation.

Specimen of the Orders of the Societies before mentioned; with the Reason of
their being here made Public: And a brief Vindication of their Design drawn by
some of the Members of those Societies.
I. THAT the sole Design of 1. Pet. 1. 15.
this Society being to pro^^te real Holiness of Heart and life: It is
absolutely necessary Josh. 24. 15^.
that the Persons who enter in^^ it, do seriously resolve to apply themselves
in good earnest to all means proper to make 2 Timothy 3. 15.
them wise unto Salvation.

II. THAT in Order to their being of one Heart and one Mind Romans 15* 6, 5.
in this Design, every Member of this Society shall own and manifest Pbi. 2. 2
himself to be of the Church of England, and frequent 1 Pet. 2 13.
the Liturg^, and other public Holy-exercises of the same. And that they be
careful withal to Ephesians. 4. 2. Romans 12. 18.
express due Christian Charity, Candor and Moderation, toward all such
Dissenters as are of good Conversation.

III. THAT the Members of this Society shall meet together one Evening in the
week at a convenient place, in order to encourage 1 These 5. 14. Romans 14. 19.
each other in practical Holiness, by discoursing on spiritual Subjects, and
reading God's Holy Word; and to pray to Al^mighty God, and praise his Name
Psalm. 34* 3.
together.

AND to this Assembly any serious Person may be admitted, upon Request.

IV THAT at such Meetings, there be no hot Disputes about controversial Points,
State Affairs, or the Concerns of Trade Romans 15. 6.
and worldly things. But that the whole bent of the Discourse be to glorify
God, and edify one Ephesians. 4. 16.
^^ other in Love.

V. THAT it be left to every Persons Discretion to contribute ^t every weekly
Meeting, what ^^ thinks fit toward a Publick-Stock 1 Cor 16. 2.
for pious and charitable ^^ses: And the money thus collected shall be kept by
the two ^^wards of the Society (who shall be chosen by Majority of voices once
a year or oftener) to be disposed of, by the consent of the Major-part of the
Society, for the uses abovementioned. And the said Stewards shall keep a
faithful Reg^ster of what is thus collected and distributed; to be perused by
any Member of the Society, a^^ his Request.

VI. THAT any respective Member may recommend any Object^ of Charity to the
Stewards, who^ shall (with the consent of th^^ rest) give out of the commo^^
Stock, according as the occasion requires. And in a case of extraordinary
necessity, every particular Person shall be desired to contribute further, as
they shall think fi^.

VII. THAT every one that absents himself four Meetings together (without
giving a satisfactory account to the Stewards) shall be looked upon as
disaffected to the Society.

VIII. THAT none shall be admitted into this Society, without giving due notice
thereof ^^ the Stewards, who shall ac^aint the whole Society therewith. And
after due Enquiry ^^to their Religious Purposes, and Manner of Life: The
Stewards may admit them to subcribe their Names, if the Ma^-part of the Society
allows ^^ it; and not otherwise. And ^^^h the like Joynt-Consent, ^^y may
exclude any Member ^^oved guilty of any Misbeha^^our after due Admonition,
^nless he gives sufficient Testimony of his Repentance and ^mendment, before
the whole ^^utty

IX. IT is hereby recommended ^^ every Person concerned in his Society, to
consider the ma^^ inconveniences, (and many ^^mes sins) which attend
Ale-House-Games, Ga. 5. 13.
and wholly de ^^ine them. And to shun all ^^necessary Resort to such Houses,
and Taverns; and wholly 1 The. 5. 22.
to avoid lewd Play Houses.

X THAT the respective Members of this Society, shall heartily endeavor, through
God's Grace;

1. TO be just in all their 1 These 4. 6.
Dealings, even to an exemplary Strictness. 2. TO pray many times every 1 These
5. 17.
day: Remembering our cotinual dependence upon God* both for spiritual and
tempora^ things. 3. TO partake of the Lords Supper at least once a month, if 1
Cor. 11. 26. Luke 22. 19.
not prevented by a reasonable Impediment. 4. TO practice the profoundest
Meekness and Humility. Mat. 11. 29. Mat 7. 1.
5. TO watch against censuring others. 6 TO accustom themselves Psa. 139. 23.
to Holy Thoughts in all places. 7. TO be heipful one to an 1 Cor. 12. 25.
other. 8 TO exercise Tenderness, Tit 3. 2.
Patience, and Compassion toward all Men. 9 TO make serious Reflecti^ns on 1
Cor. 10. 11.
themselves when they ^ad the Holy Bible, or other good Books, and when they
hear Sermons. 10 TO shun all foreseen 1 These. 5. 22*
^^casions of Evil: As evil Com^any, known temptations, etc. 11. TO think often
on the Luke 16. 25.
^^fferent Estates of the glorified ^d the Damned in the unchange^e Eternity,
to which we are ^stening. 12. TO examine themselves ^very night, what Good or
Evil 2 Cor 13. 5.
they have done in the day past. 13. TO keep a private Fast Mat 6. 16.
^ace a month (especially near ^^eir approach to the Lords Ta^^e) if at their
own disposal; or Luke 5. 35.
^ fast from some Meals when they may conveniently. 14. TO mortify the Flesh
Gal. 5. 19. 24.
with its Affections and Lusts. 15. TO advance in heavenly-mindedness, and in
all Grace. 1 Pet. 3. 8.
16. TO shun spiritual Pride and the Effects of it, as Railing, Anger,
Peevishness and Impatience of Contradiction, and the like. 17. TO pray for the
whole Society in their private Prayers. Jam. 5. 16.
18. TO read pious Books* often for their Edification, but Jo. 5. 39.
especially the Holy Bible: And herein particularly, Mat. 5, 6, 7. Chap. Lu^^
15, 16, Chap. Romans 12, 13, Chap. Ephesians. 5, 6, Chap. 1 The. 5. Chap. Rev. 1, 2, 3,
21, 22, Chapters. And in the old Testament. Lev. 2^. Chap. Deuteronomy 28. Cha. Isa.
53. Chap. Ezekiel. 36. Chap. 19. TO be continually mindful of the great Obligation
of ^his special Profession of Religion; and to walk so circumspectly, that none
may be offended or ^scouraged from this by what ^ey see in them; nor occasion
^en to any to speak reproach^^ly of it. 20. TO shun all manner of ^ectation and
Moroseness; and ^ of a civil and obliging De^tment to all Men.
XI. THAT they often consi^, (with an awful dread of Mala 3. 16.
^'s wrath) the sad Height to ^ich the Sins of Many are ^anced in this our
Nation; ^^ the bleeding Divisions ^reof in Church and State. And Judge. 5. 15.
^t every Member be ready to ^, what upon consulting with ^h other shall be
thought ad^able, De^t. 13. 8.
toward the punish^ent of public Profaneness, ac^ding L^v. 24. 11.
to the good Laws of ^ Land; required to be put in Execution by the King's and
the late Queen's special order.

XII. THAT each Member shall encourage the Catechizing of Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Josh. 24.
^5.
young and ignorant People in their respective Families, according to their
stations and Abilities: And shall observe all* manner of Religious
Family Duties.

XIII. THAT the Major-Part of the Society shall have Power to* make a new Order
to bind the whole, when need requires: If it be approved by a pious and learned
Minister of the Church of England, nominated by the whole Society.

XIV. THAT these Orders shall be read over at ^east four times in the Year by
one of the Stewards; And that with such deliberation, that each Member ^ay have
time to examine him^lf by them, or to speak his and in any thing relating to
^em.

XV. ^LASTLY, That every ^ember of this Society shall ^ter mature deliberation
and ^ Trial) subscribe his Name ^hese Orders: to express his ^obation of them,
and his ^^lution to endeavor to live ^o them. In order to which, ^all
constantly keep a Copy them by him.

The End of the Orders
The Reason of this Publication ^^ the Orders and Design of these Societies.
HAVING found by discourse with several Persons (who have greatly rejoyce^ to
hear of any Public Good set o^ Foot) that they never before hear^ of these
Societies; I could not bu^ wonder that a thing of this Nature could so long
remain secret.

THEY have been erected i^ our Capital City above Eighteen Years: They procure
Sermons by way of preparation for the Lord Supper, or to engage a suitable
Holiness of Life after it, every Lord's Day about five in the Evening, in many
of the larges^ Churches in the City. Their Charit^ is extended to deserving
Objects i^ all the Parts of the City and Suburb^ and by their Procurement
Public ^ayers are daily made in several ^uches at such Hours as they can ^ost
conveniently be present at ^m. And by the means of their ^at Zeal, and giving
Informations, a ^ltitude of such as have no fear of ^^ before their Eyes, have
been pu^'d for their Profaneness and ^anchery.

SO that, it is to be admired, that ^r good Deeds and Designs could so long
unknown to so many. ^truly, this does very much re^mend their Christian
Modesty. ^emonstrates that they do not af^ to publish either their Alms or
^votion, after the vaunting man^ of the Pharisees, with which our ^ssed Savior
was so highly offen^^; but that they desire to manage ^eir holy Purposes in the
most ^ble Silence and contrived Se^cy.

I conceived therefore, that might probably conduce to the ^largement of these
useful Societi^ and to engage the Prayers of go^ People in their behalf, to
give for Public Account of their Constitu^^on, Design, and Orders; all whi^^
have been approved by diverse Em^nent Divines; and among them, ^^ our late
excellent Primate Arch* Tillotson, who after he had examin^ their Orders, and
the trifling Obje^tions that were made against the^ by some Persons, declared
it as h^ Opinion publicly, and upon sev^ral occasions, That these Societi^
were a Support to our Church: an^ surely they will not be ashamed ^^ appear in
Public, wheresoever the Christian Religion does.

AND tho'there be some litt^^ variations in the Orders of some ^^ these
Societies from others; Yet the ^^bstance of them is generally one ^d the same.
In which, I beseech ^^ Holy Spirit to establish every ^lengaged therein, and to
incline ^ers to be followers of them in that ^^h is Good.

THAT we have absolute need ^^formation from the Highest to ^owest; and that it
highly con^^ us to set about it with speed; Truths so manifest, that I need
^stand to prove them to any ^on of serious and sober thought. such must of
necessity conclude ^h me, That unless it be effected ^dily, we are undone.

AND I think it will as little be ^stioned by sober Men, but that ^e Societies
do very directly ^d toward that desired Effect. ^ever, since some Objections
^e been made against them, we ^now take them into Conside^^on.

The chief Objections which ^a^ been made against these Societi^ Considered and
Answered by some their Members.
I. WHEREAS it has be^^ Objected, That there is danger ^^ Schism and Dissension
by their we^^ly meeting, and conferring togeth^ about Religious matters.

THEY Answer. 1. That the cannot conceive where this dang^*lies. Since no
Persons do mo^ professedly own the Holy Doctrine and Constitution of the Church
England, than themselves, desiri^ always to be found in their Pra^^tice
agreeable thereunto: An^ that none do more sincerely rev^rence and esteem the
Public M^^nistry, nor more constantly and ^^verently attend upon the Publi^
^dinances: In the great Esteem of which (in Subordination to the ^lory of God,
and their own and ^hers Salvation) they have at ^eir own Expense set up daily
^blick Prayers in many Churches, after due leave obtained;) and ^we procured
(through the Assist^re of several pious Divines) ^e benefit of weekly Communi^s
in many Churches, which ^ey frequent in great numbers.

2. THAT some of their Mem^^s had by their Examples influ^ced several
Dissenters to come ^^ Church, and been a means of ^inging several Anabaptists
and ^uakers to Baptism. That they ^d also been instrumental of pre^ving from
Popery several un^ady and wavering People, in ^e late Rage of (...) Plague: and
^f reducing many licentious Persons to Holiness of Life.

3. THAT as all controvers^ Points are forbiden by their Order to be meddled
with in their Conferences, (because they only designed to promote practical
holiness by their assembling together so in their reading of those practical
portions of Holy Scripture t^ which their Orders direct them they have recourse
to Dr Hammond's Exposition, or some other Author recommended by their Ministers.

4. THAT it had in Fact been verifyed for these 20. Years past that but one
Member of these Societies had (to the best of their knowledge) left the
Communion of the Church of England for any other Of which Singular defection
some special Reasons ^ay be given.

LASTLY. That leaving Mat^ers of Fact, they did Appeal to the Sentiments of all
good People; whether their reading of the Word of God with the most orthodox
Expositors; their Praying and singing Psalms together; with their Exhor^ing,
Reproving, and encouraging one another in their Spiritual War^are, have any
tendency in Reason ^^ in the Nature of things to make ^chismaticks? Or rather,
whether any Church of Christ will not most certainly be the more established
and advanced by the consci^ntious and general Practice of such Holy Exercises?

II. WHEREAS others have ob^ected, that ill and designing Men ^ay get into
these Societies (as Po^ish Emissaries have into some others) and quite pervert
their Design, how good soever in the first insti^ution) to the prejudice of the
Church.

THEY Answer, 1. That their Orders forbid the admittance (...) any Person into
their Societies (a^ Members) who is not known t^ some of the Rest, and who does
no^ frequent the Public Ordinances i^ that way of Ministration which i^ by Law
established. Which is (...) caution they use to prevent differences and
disorder, and effectuall^ excludes such as are mentioned by the Objector.

2. THAT they are so man^festly studious to comply with the Rules of the Church
of England, (...) to yield a just Obedience to those tha^ are set over them in
the Lord: Tha^ they have been many times censu^red as guilty of rigid severity,
an^ uncharitableness toward Dissentin^ Protestants: Which they must lik^wise
account an injurious trea^ment: For as much as they ende^vour to shun all
extremes: Being desirous to practice Christian Sub^ectian without prejudice to
Christi^n Charity.

III. TO those who Object, that by their reproving and admonish^ng those they
converse with; and by their visiting the sick, and sometimes praying with them;
they do ^nvade and intrude upon the Mini^ter's Office.

THEY Reply, 1. That since they are commanded of God, in any wise to reprove
their Brother, and not to suffer Sin upon him: And ^o exhort one another daily,
lest any be ^ardened by the deceitfulness of Sin. They humbly conceive, that
their Christian Admonitions and Reproofs can by no good Person be censured as
an intrusion upon the Ministerial Function.

2. THAT since the Duty of visiting the Sick, and administering to them, is one
of the great things which will be enquired into by their Lord and Savior at
the last Judgment: And since all People are commanded to Pray one for another:
They cannot account it an invasion upon the Minister's Office; if a^ such time
as the Minister cannot be present, they use an approved Form of Prayer suitable
to the condition of the Sick-Person (which they humbly conceive any Christian
Friend may and ought upon Request, to do for an other, who by sickness is
disabled from doing i^ himself) And in any ^ase or manner but this, they do not
practice it.

IV. TO such as suggest, that there is Danger of Spiritual Pride in these
Societies, by their making a particular and special Profession of Religion, and
being thought ^ore holy than others.

2. THAT they cannot think it warrantable to omit any part of Christian Duty
for fear of Spiritual Pride, or seeming holyer then others: Since then, for the
same reason they ^ight omit the whole.

3. THAT it is indeed a due ^ence of their own and others In^rmities which
induces them to ^nite into Societies (since two are ^^ronger than one, many
than few,) ^nowing that the difficulties are very many and very great which
they ^ust encounter in their Passage ^owards Eternal Life: And that ^uch is the
Degeneracy even of Christians in these latter days, That through the Profaneness
of some, and the Luke-warmness and Coward^ise of others; they should but ^eldom
meet with such Conversation as is highly expedient for the keeping up a due
Warmth and Life in Spiritual things: Were it not for those frequent Conferences
and pi^us Exercises which are (with good effect) set up by these Societies.

V. Whereas it is Objected; That since a Church of Christ ^s a Society of
Christian People; and that these Societies are erected in a reformed Church:
That this is ^ Society within a Society, and a refining upon a reformed Church.

TO this they humbly Reply:

1. That they have not yet learnt, that the reading of God's Word and
conferring on the practical Points of Religion, in order to a more holy
Conversation; has at any time by good men been thought prejudicial to the
Church of Christ. On the contrary, Our best Divines recommend these things both
from the Pulpit and the Press, as the best expedients to support and adorn our
Reformed Church, and render it worthy of that venerable Name.

2. THAT they do not well understand what the Objector means by refining upon
our reformed Church. If it be meant; that they pretend to reform her Doctrine
or quarrel with her Government: They utterly disclaim any such Practice. But if
it be meant, that they desire to refine and reform themselves and others, so as
to come nearer to her Purity of Doctrine in their Practice, than some others
do, who shelter their profane Lives under the pretense of her Holy Communion:
They own this, and must adhere to it; not doubting but they shall have the
Prayers of all good People, that they may so do.

UPON the whole matter therefore, they conclude: That since their Societies are
neither against the Word of God, nor the Laws of Man; but manifestly conducive
to Gods Glory, the Salvation of Men, and the public Interest of our Church and
Nation: And since they have proved very beneficial to the Souls of the Members,
and are agreeable to the primitive Practice of the best Christians, and tend so
directly to revive something of their primitive Purity, and Zeal for Religion;
together with their Charity, and good works: They humbly crave, That these
Societies may be encouraged by their Governors in Church and State, suitably
to the Spiritual and National Benefits which may be reapt from them.

Directions for Religious Conference, with PRAYERS for the use of Religious
Societies, and upon other Occasions.
I Premise, that it may be very expedient, and what would much promote the
p^ous Design of these Societies: That an Orthod^x and ^ious Minister should be
chosen by each Society, as the Director and Visiter of it. Who may frequently
be present at their Assemblies, to preserve Order, excite Zeal, and resolve
Doubts.

THIS would obviate many objections concerning them; and would greatly benefit,
countenance, and recommend such Assemblies.

THIS Director may be chosen every year (when the Stewards are) by Majority of
Votes (no manner of Sallary or Reward being to be allowed on this account) and
when he is present, it will be his proper place to pray with the Society.

THE Members of the Society are often to mind one another, to be very punctual
to their Hour of Meeting: And to wave lesser Occasions that tend to divert them
from coming to it. And when a competent Number of them are met; One of the
Stewards, (if the Director be absent) or any other Person desired, may begin
the Conference thus: All standing up.

MY Brethren, we are commanded of God, that our Communication be such as tends
to the Ephesians. 4. 29.
edifying of one another; and such as ministers Grace to the Hearers. And we
find the Spirit of God commending the Education of Timothy, That from a Child
he had known 2 Timothy 3. 15.
the Holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise unto salvation, through
Faith, which is in Jesus Christ. Let ^s therefore endeavor at this time to
edify one another in the things of God, with the greatest Humility of Mind,
and the tenderest bowels of Christian Charity. For indeed, Wherewithal can a
Youngman cleanse Psalm. 119. 9.
his way, but by taking heed thereto according to the Word of God? And that it
may please God to instruct our minds therein at this time, and to direct our
Hearts and Lives thereby: Let us now put up our Prayers to God, (who is the
Giver of all Grace, and the Author of all Good) to accomplish this holy work in
every one of us, by his Holy Spirit, for the sake of Jesus Christ his Son, Our
Savior.

Then the Steward may devoutly repeat these three Collects: All kneeling.
Prevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings with thy most gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual Help; that in all our Works begun, continued, and
ended in thee; we may Glorify thine Holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ Our Lord.

[All. Amen.]

O Most Blessed Lord! who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
Learning: Grant, that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them; that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word we may
embrace and ever hold fast the blessed Hope of everlasting Life, which thou
have given us in thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

O God! for as much as without Thee, we are not able to please thee; Mercifully
grant, that thy Holy Spirit may in all things direct and rule our Hearts, through
Jesus Christ our Lord* Amen.

Then all rising, and seating themselves in their Places, the Steward may read
one of the Chapters set down in the tenth Order; resting so long at the end of
every Verse, that any one may have an Opportunity to make any serious Remark
upon it. Or some part of an approved Exposition on the Holy Scripture, or on
the Catechism, may be read. And in order to a more advised Conference upon the
most important Duties of our holy Religion; the Steward (in the absence of the
Director) may, at the close of every Weekly Assembly, propose one of the
following Subjects, to be discoursed upon at their next Conference, viz. 1. The
Duty of Self-examination required, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 2. THE Duty of Self-abasement,
and Self-renouncing required, Mark ^8, 34. 3. Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ,
Mark 16. 16. 4. Evangelical Repentance, 2 Cor. 7. 10. 5. Effectual Conversion
to God, Act. 26. 18. 6. Trust in God, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 7. Mortification, Rom 8.
13. Gal. 5. 24. 8. Humility Ephesians. 3. 2. 9. Christian Hope, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 10.
Christian Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 1, and ^ Including the Love of God, Man 12. 30.
And the Love of Men, Verse 31. ^ 11. Alm-deeds Matt. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4* 12.
Contentment, Phil. 4. 11. 13. Just dealing, 1 These. 4. 6. 14. Government of the
tongue, Mat* 12. 36, 37. 15. Prayer and Praise, 1 Timothy 2. 1* 16. Chastity, Mat.
5. 27, 28. 17. Temperance, 1 Cor. 9. 25. 18. Patience, 1 Pet. 2. 20. 21. etc.
Meekness, Tit. 3. 2. 19. The public Worship of God, Psalm 42. 2, 4. 20.
Heavenly-mindedness, Col. 3. 1, 2. And Contempt of the World, Gal. 6. 14. 21.
Of Christian Prudence, Matt. 10. 16. 22. Family Duties, Josh. 24. 15. Or,
Religious Household Government, Acts 10. 2. 23. Subjection to Magistrates,
Titus ^. 1. 24. Peacemaking, Matt. 5. 9. 25. Of Reproof, Lev. 19. 17. 26.
Sanctifying the Lords Day, Number. ^5. 32. etc. 27. Growing in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.
18. 28. Improvement of Opportunities of Doing and Receiving Good, Acts ^0. 38.
29. Duty of Parents, and Children, ^owards each other, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. 30.
Of the Husband and Wife, Ephesians. ^5. 22, to the end. 31. Of Masters and Servants,
Ephesians. ^6. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 32. Of People to their Pastors, Heb. 13. 17. 33. Of
preparing for, and watching in the Performance of all Religious Exercises, Heb.
12. 28, 29. 34. The Duty of Chistians to Enemies, Romans 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
35. Of endeavoring the Conversion and Salvation of others, 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. 36.
The Sense of Gods Omnipresence, Psalm 139. 37. Of reading the Holy Scriptures,
Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 38. Of Meditation, 1 Timothy 4. 15. 39. Of
Circumspection, or Watchfulness, Matt. 24. 42, 43. etc. 40. Of Perseverance,
Rev. 2. 10. Jude, Verse 24.
THESE are Duties of the greatest Importance, and are all suited to the Rules
of these Societies. And I have kept to the number 40, that I might assign one
distinct Subject of discourse for every weekly Conference in the year,
reserving the Discourse of 12 of them to be spent upon the Subject of the Lords
Supper, which every Member is obliged by the Orders of the Society to receive
(where he may with convenience) twelve times in the ^ear.

THUS every person knowing for a whole week before, what will be the Subject of
the Discourse at the next Conference; may the better prepare for it by suitable
Reading, Meditation and Prayer.

AND thus the chiefest parts of ^^ristian Duty will be considered and ^ne
through every year, to the great ^crease of Knowledge and Practice.

Note, THAT every Person is cheif^ to bend his discourse to further the ^^ctice
of every Duty, and to pro^te Holiness of Life.

AND it will be expedient, That ^ Person speak above 3 or 4 Senten^, without a
convenient Pause, to ^e room to others to speak their and. And in case of
Silence, he may ^^eed, but with the same Caution.

AND at the time of Conference, ^ne of the Stewards (in the absence of ^^
Director) may propose the following ^estions, for the sake of Method, and ^t
every ones discourse may be the ^re directly practical, viz. When ^e Duty to be
spoken to, is named: ^he Steward may say,

I. Qu^st. Wherein consists the Name of this Duty.

II. Quest. What Directions do you ^opose in order to make the Practice ^f it
more sure and more easy?

III. What Discouragement do any o^ you find in the Practice of it?

IV. What Motives may encourag^ our Practice of this Duty, and ou^ Perseverance
in it?

IF the time permits, such Motive as these may be touched upon, viz.

1. The Authority of God commanding.

2. The Goodness of God, promising both to assist and reward the Diligent

3. The Terribleness of Gods Threatenings and the Examples of his Wrath
sometimes seen upon Earth; and the dreadfulness of the everlasting Veng^ance of
an Allmighty God in the fierceness of his Wrath in the other world.

4. The Excellency of the Duty it self.

5. The Examples of Good Men, who have gone before us in the Ways of God.

6. The Blessed Rest and Peace of a good Conscience; and the previous Hell of a
bad one.

These general Heads may be the Method of discourse upon any Duty a^ the weekly
Conference.

The Conference being ended: One of the Stewards may read some of the ^ollowing
Sentences and the Admonition; to raise up and engage every Soul ^^ Faith and
Fervency in Prayer.

Sentences.
GOD is greatly to be fear^d in Psalm. 89. 7.
the Assemblies of his Saints, and to be had in Reverence by ^ll that are about
him. GOD is a righteous Judge, Psalm. 7. 12,
^rong and patient, and God is ^ovoked every day. GOD will bring every work
Eccl. 12. 14.
unto Judgment; with every ^ecret thing, whether it be good, ^r whether it be
evil. HE that hides his Sins shall Pro. 28. 13.
^ot prosper: But he that confes^eth and forsakes them, shall have mercy. IF
any man sins, we have 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2.
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for o^^ Sins. O Come, let us worship, and Psalm 95. 6.
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
The Admonition before Prayer, to be read by the Steward (in the Directors
Absence) if the^ time will permit.

MY Brethren, since our gracious God has promised to be present where two or
three are gathered Mat. 18. 20.
together in his Name: Let us duly consider what an awful thing it is to draw
nigh un-God; even to him, who is able Luke 12. 5.
to save or destroy us for ever: To him, who sees our very Hearts and secret
Thoughts, and who has struck some Persons dead in the place, when they sought
Lev, 10. 2 2 Sa. 6. 7. Nu. 16. 35. 1 Samuel 6. 19.
him not in the due order. As Nadab and Abihu, Vzzah, Corah, and many others.

BUT we have a perfect and ^cceptable High Priest, the Lord Heb. 7. 26.
jesus Christ, who will perfect and present our Petitions to his ^ather, and
our Father, if we de^outly Jo, 20. 17.
and sincerely serve him. and through this new and living Heb. 10. 19.
^ay we may approach to the ^hrone of Grace with an hum^^e Boldness. Wherefore
let (...) gird up the Loins of our ^lind, and rouse up our drow^^ Affections,
and watch over Ja. 1. 6.
^^r deceitful Hearts. Let us ^ay in Faith, and in Charity; ^ith Fervency and
Humility; 1 Ti. 2. 8.
^onsidering that our present and ^uture Happiness depends upon our prevailing
in Prayer. Let ^s therefore beseech God to as^^st us in this great Duty with
Romans 8. 26.
^is Holy Spirit, and thereby to ^elp our Infirmities; and that ^e would
graciously accept our ^nworthy Persons and Performances through his Son JESUS
CHRIST, whom he ^ath ordained to be an High Heb. 7. 25.
Priest for ever, to make Intercession for u^ Amen.

Let us pray. Then all devoutly kneeling, they m^ join in this Confession of
Sin. ALLMIGHTY God! Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; Make^ of all things; Judge
of all Men: W^ acknowledge and bewail Our manifol^ Sins and Wickedness; which
we from time to time, Most Greivously have committed, in Thought, Word and Deed
Against thy Divine Majesty: Provokin^ most justly thy Wrath and Indignation
against us. We do earnestly desire t^ Repent; and to be heartily Sorry so these
Our Misdoings. The Remem^brance of them is Grievous to us, the Burden of them
is intolerable. Have Mercy upon us, Have Mercy upon us Most Merciful Father!
For thy So^ Our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, forgiv^ us all that is past. And
grant that we may ever hereafter, serve and please thee in newness of Life: To
the ^onor and Glory of thy Name, through jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

OUR Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name: Thy King^m come: Thy
Will be done on Earth ^it is in Heaven: Give us this day ^^ daily Bread: And
forgive us our respasses as we forgive them that trepass against us: And lead
us not into Tempta^n; But deliver us from Evil: For, ^^ne is the Kingdom, The
Power, and ^e Glory, for Ever and Ever. Amen.

Then the Steward alone may say,

ALLMIGHTY and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made; and
does forgive the Sins of all them that are penitent: Vouchsafe to treat and
make in us new and contrite Hearts, that we duly lamenting our Sins, and
acknowledging our Wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all Mercy,
perfect remisson and forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Here may follow, the Collect for the d^ And such other Collects in the Common
Prayer as may be suitable. Then all rising. Stew. Glory be to the Father, and ^


All. As it was in the, etc.


Stew. Praise ye the Lord.


All. The Lord's Name be praised.


Then the Steward may read the following Admonition to the Praise of Go^ before
the singing of a Psalm, ^^ time will permit. LET us consider, my Brethren; what
cause we have t^ Psa. 100. 3.
praise God. He is the Autho^ of our Being; The Fountain o^ our Mercies: The
God of ou^ Life and of our Salvation. O^ Praise the infinite Goodness o^ God,
who made us little lowe^ Psa. 8. 5.
than the Angels in the State o^ our Creation; yea, who has shown to us fallen
men, more Compassion then to the fallen Angels; for they are reserved in
everlasting Chains of Darkness, to the Jude. 6.
Judgment of the great Day; whilst we have the offers of e^ernal Redemption.
And it pleases God to fit men daily ^or his nearer presence in the 2 Cor. 5. 5.
work of Sanctification, whilst Devils are wholly given up to ^eir malicious
perverseness.

LET us consider, That Man ^as made by God to be the ^outh of the dumb
Creatures ^^ the Praises of their Creator: ^an is to be the High Priest of Psa.
104.
^e lower Creation to offer up a ^ine Service for the whole Con^egation of
Sublunary Beings.

LET us remember, That Psa. 57. 8.
^an's Tongue is his Glory, a very ^onderful and peculiar Gift of ^od to men.
Let us say there^re with the Holy Psalmist, I Psa. 109. 30.
^ll greatly praise the Lord with ^y mouth; yea, I will praise him ^ong the
Multitude.

LET us observe, with what* cheerfulness the very Birds tun^ their pleasant
Notes to the Praise of their Maker, after their Capacity. They have no
Storehouse nor Barn, and know not Matt. 6. 26.
where they shall find the next mouthful of meat; yet how pleasant are they!
And how void of mummurs or ^ullenness.

FINALLY, Let us consider that by praising God now, we* learn how to praise God
in Heaven. This will be the Work and Happiness of that State of Rev 19. 1.
Glory. Let us therefore joyn^ our sincere Praises in the Church below to those
more perfect Halelujahs of the Saints above. It is said, Rev. 14. 3. That none
could* learn their Song, but those that were redeemed from the Earth: From
which we may note, that true Holiness is that which will ^it us for the Songs
of Heaven.

LET us therefore now strai^ up our Affections to the highest* ^itch; and so
sing the Praises of God ^^ Heart and Spirit, Psa. 148. 2. that Angels and
Saints may join with us now, and we with them for evermore.

Amen.

Then a Psalm may be sung; all standing up in this exalted part of divine
Worship. Then may they repeat the Apostles Creed. ^ Believe in God the Father
Allmighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: and in Jesus Christ, his only Son our
Lord; who was conceived by the Holy ^host: Born of the Virgin Mary: Suf^red
under Pontius Pilate, was Cruci^i^d, dead and buried: He descended in^o Hell:
The third day he arose again from the dead: He ascended into Heaven, and
sits on the right Hand of God the Father Allmighty: From thence he shall
come to judge the quick and the dead.

I Believe in the Holy Ghost; The Holy Catholic Church: The Comm^nion of
Saints, The forgiveness of Sin^ The Resurrection of the Body, and the Li^e
everlasting. Amen.

All. Lord, we believe; help thou c^^ Unbelief.


Then all kneeling. After the Colle^ ^^r Trinity Sunday; the Stewar^ may
proceed in Prayer for the Society, which may also be used in a private Family.
O Most Holy and Blessed God! The Creator, Governor and Judge o^ all: Who hate
Falsehood and Hypocrisy, and wilt not accept the Praye^ of feigned Lips: But
have promised to show Mercy to such as turn unto the^ by true Faith and
Repentance. Vouchsafe we pray thee to create in us clea^ and upright Hearts,
through an unfeigned Faith in thy Son our Savior. To us indeed belongs Shame
and Confusion of Face: We are not worthy to lift up our eyes or voice toward
Heaven* Our Natures are depraved, an^ ^ur Ways have been perverse before ^hee.
O! Let not thy wrath arise against us lest we be consumed in a mo^ent: But let
thy merciful Bowels ^earn over us; and vouchsafe to puri^^ and pardon us through
thine all-suffici^nt Grace and Mercy in our Lord Jesus Christ. Since it has
pleased thee to of^er him up as a Sacrifice for Sinners, ^ouchsafe we beseech
thee to cleanse ^s from all Iniquity through his Blood. We believe that he is
able to save to ^he uttermost those that come to th^e ^^ him, and we do
earnestly desire to ^mbrace him as our Prince and Savior; O! Give us
Repentance and Remissi^n of sin through his Name. All we like ^heep have gone
astray, every one in ^is own way: Good Lord, reduce us unto thy Fold through this
great Shepherd of Souls; and be pleased to lay o^^ him ^he Iniquity of us all.

AND as we have much to be forgi^en, be pleased to incline our hearts ^o love
thee much who forgivest Iniqui^y, Transgression and Sin. Give us that Faith
which works by Love, and such Love as will constrain us to ha^ regard to all
thy Commandemen^ And make us to look carefully to a^ ^ur ways, that we may
never again (...) any thing whereby thy Holy Name man be blasphemed, or thine
Authority d^^pised.

GIVE us the deepest Humility without which we can never be accepted of thee
our in^initely condescending God. Make us continually to tread in the Steps of
our blessed Lord and Saviou^ being of a meek and quiet Spirit, always
influenced by the highest Love o^ thee our God, and by the most charitable
Dispositions toward all men.

VOUCHSAFE to indue us with the saving Knowledge of Spiritual things* that we
may receive all thy Truths, in the love of them, in all Patience, Purity,
Justice, Temperance, Godliness and Brotherly-kindness; that we may adorn our
Holy Profession, and resemble the divine Goodness of thee our Heavenly Father.

AND since we are not only weak and frail, but corrupt and sinful: Vouchsafe, O
Lord, to keep us by the power of thine Holy Spirit, that we ^all not from our
avowed Stedfastness ^n all Christian Duty. Preserve us from all the Sin and
Vanity to which our Age, Condition, and Nature is prone, and to which the Devil
and this World may at any time tempt us.

Glorify, Good God, thy Strength in our weakness, thy grace in our pollution,
and thy Mercy in our Salvation. May our holy Religion be grounded and settled
in our Hearts; that out of the good Treasure of a gracious Heart, our Speech
may be savoury, and our Conversation exemplary; and that we may be fruitful in
all good works even to our old Age, and to our last day.

FIT us we pray thee for every state of Life into which thy Providence shall
cast us, prosper our lawful Undertakings, preserve us Night and Day; and
prepare us for a hopeful Death, and a blessed Eternity.

BE pleased, we beseech thee, to bless all those Societies, who in truth apply
their Hearts to thy Service and Glory: We pray thee be pleased to strengthen,
^stablish and settle both them and us in thy Faith, Fear, and Love.

LET nothing in this world discourage us from the pursuit of those holy
purposes, which thy Spirit has at any time put into our Hearts and Minds. But
make us all faithful to thee our avowed God, and our desired Portion, even unto
death; that we at last (with thy whole Church) may be partakers, of that
eternal Life and perfect Bliss, which thou have promised, through Jesus Christ
thy only begotten Son, our only Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

A General Intercession.
ALLMIGHTY God, whose Kingdom and Power is universal; Vouchsafe we pray thee to
defend and prosper thy whole Church; and so dispose the Heart of thy Servant
King William, that he may ever seek thy Honor and Glory. And grant to his
whole Council, and to all in Authority under him, that they may truly and
indifferently minister Justice to the suppressing of those Vices which reign
amongst us, and to the reviving of true Religion and Concord. And grant that
all our Bishops and Inferior Pastors may be effectually illuminated by the
Knowledge of thy Word, that by their Holy Lives and Sound Doctrine they may
convert many to Righteousness.

AND to all the People of these three Nations be pleased to give thine Heavenly
Grace, that they may live in thy Faith and Fear, in Obedience to Authority, and
in godly Love toward each other.

FINALLY, we commend to thy fatherly Goodness all those that are afflicted in
Mind, Body or Estate, especially such as suffer for Righteousness fake. O Lord
relieve them according to their several necessities, give them patience under
their Sufferings, and a happy Issue out of all their Afflictions; All which we
beg in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving.
O Most merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the inexhaustible
Fountain of Goodness, we humbly praise thy Name for all thy mercies vouchsafed
to us. We praise thee, that thou made us reasonable Creatures; That we were
born in a Christian Land; and that we were early brought into thy gracious
Covenant. We bless thee for all the Advantages of our Education; for all the
Benefits of good Examples, and of seasonable Counsel and Reproof. For all the
Comfort we have had in any Relation, Friend or Enjoyment, and for the
comfortable Use of all thy good Creatures.

WE praise thee for all the Benefits of Affliction; for thy merciful Support in
Trouble; and thy gracious Deliverances from any Evil.

WE bless thy Name for our present Health, for our necessary food, for our
peaceable habitations, and for that measure of outward things which thy Bounty
has dispensed to us.

BUT above all, we bless and praise thy Name now, (and desire to magnify thy
Name for ever) for our Redemption by the Blood of thy beloved Son; and that
thou have ordained means of eternal Life through him.

WE praise thee for thy Covenant of Life and Peace; for thy Word and
Sacraments; for the Operations of thine holy Spirit, and for any Evidence or
hope of thy Favor toward us who are less than the least of thy mercies.

WE bless thee, Good God, for thy Patience toward us, or thy Calls to us, and
for thy great Pity and Compassion to such unworthy Creatures.

SET home, we beseech thee, a due and constant Sense of these and all thy
Mercies upon all our hearts, and make us to live to the Praise of thee (the God
of our Mercies) all our days; through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee,
and the Holy Ghost, be all Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power ascribed by Angels
and Men for evermore. Amen.

Then all standing up, The following Exhortation to Humility may be read. MY
Brethren, since the Great God does often assure us in his Holy Word; That he
will resist Ja. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5.
the Proud, but give Grace to the Humble. Let us consider; that our
Undertakings, though never so good, will fail and come to naught, except we be
truly and Luke 14. 11.
deeply humble. Indeed it can not be otherwise, because the proud Person quits
his Reliance on God, to rest in himself, which is to exchange a Rock for a Reed.

ALAS! what are we, poor empty Nothings! yea, what is Genesis 32. 10.
worse, condemned perishing Sinners? We have perhaps Understanding now, but God
can soon turn it into Madness. We Dan. 4. 32.
may have some Seize in Grace, but spiritual Pride will wither all, and
soon reduce us to a very profligate and wretched Isa. 66. 2.
state: Such as we have seen others tumble into, who have begun in the Spirit,
and ended in the Flesh. What have we 1 Cor. 4. 7.
that we have not received? And which, he that gave it, may not as soon take
away?

WE that are young in years, 1 Timothy 3. 6.
and younger in Grace; are in danger of Self-conceit, and of being puffed up;
which is a Quick Sand in which thousands have been swallowed up and perished. It
is not in vain, that the Apostle requires; That Pro. 16. 18.
Young Men be exhorted to be sober-minded, Tit. 2. 6. which he elsewhere
explains, when he says; Let no man think of himself Isa. 14. 12, 13.
more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, Romans 12. 3.

BY pride the Angels fell 1 Timothy 3. 6.
from Heaven: And if ever we climb up to those blessed Seats from which they
are fallen, it must be by the gracious steps of Humility and Lowliness of Mind.
Wherefore let him that Luke 18. 14.
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. Let us walk humbly 1 Co. 10. 12.
with our God, and with all men; and ever have lowly Thoughts of our vile
selves, and of our Romans 11. 20.
poor Seize, and of our defective Performances. And with St. Paul, (who
was in nothing 2 Cor. 12. 11.
behind the very chiefest Apostles) let us always say, I am Nothing.

Let us therefore now sing to the Praise of God, to whom alone Praise is due.

Here sing a Psalm: After which the Steward may say. IT is very meet and right,
and our bounden Duty, that we should at all times, and in all Places, give
thanks unto thee, O most blessed and bountiful God, in whose hands our breath
is, and from whom comes our Salvation.


All. Therefore with Angels and Arch* Angels, and with all the Company of
Heaven, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts! Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory: Glory be to thee O Lord most High. Amen.


Stew. May the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.


At the Request of some under my Ministry, the following Prayers are added.

And let it be noted, That the foregoing Forms of Prayer and Praise may be
properly used in Private Families. And the prefaces to both may be usefully
read in Families now and then, to excite zealous Affections, and an awful dread
of God in our approaches to him.

And to the end, That the daily Worship of God may be set and kept up in every
Family. Let it never be forgotten, that the Spirit of God has denounced a most
dreadful Curse upon all prayerless Families. Jer. 10. 25. Four out thy Fury
upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon
thy Name.

And, as I have often in my Sermons, so I here again solemnly charge those that
own my Ministry, even in the Presence, and by the Authority of the Allmighty
God, that they pull not this denounced Curse upon themselves and Families. And
I again mind them to read the word of God daily, and to Catechize their
Children and Servants in a serious and effectual Manner: And that they Remember
the Lords Day to keep it Holy; even the whole day, and that they suffer not
their Children or Servants to pollute any part of it, or trifle it away by
unnecessary worldly business or vain discourse, or diversion.

These things are necessary to your Peace with God, and your dying in Hope.

A Prayer for a Family in the Morning.
O Most Holy and Blessed God! who fillest all places with thy Presence, and art
a searcher of all Hearts: With ^hee is Terrible Majesty to confound ^hine
Enemies, but infinite Mercy to ^uc^or the humble and contrite Soul; we pray
^hee meet us not at this time in thy just ^engeance as a consuming Fire; but ^e
pleased to accept us graciously through ^hy Mercy in our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is our Hope.

WE have indeed lived too long as without God in the World: We have wickedly
followed our own corrupt Desires and Devices: And have not ^uely owned thy
Sovereignty and Do^inion over us. We have broken our ^ows, and stifled our
Consciences, and ^xceedingly defiled our selves, and of^ended thee, setting at
naught the Pro^ises and Threatenings of thy Book, and hating to be reformed.
Lord, we lament our Impenitency, and Unbelief, and all the sinful fruits of our
^^lthy and ungodly Hearts, Lips, and Lives. And we earnestly beseech thee, that
thou would not give us up to our own filthyness, and folly, and hardness of
Heart: But that thou would graciously reduce us into thy Fold and Favor, by
the Power of thine Holy Spirit, and to accept and pardon us through the merit of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

AND, O Lord, vouchsafe to cleanse and sanctify us in Soul and Body: And make
us to glorify thy Name on Earth, and to do the work thou have given us to do.
Be pleased to subdue our Corruptions, and to mortify every inordinate Affection
and unruly Passion: And make us entirely resigned to thy Will, and subservient
to thy Praise, now and Ever.

KEEP us, we beseech thee, from the Snares of worldly Pleasures and Enjoyments,
and make us to set our Hearts on things above: And bring all the Powers of our
Souls and Bodies into a willing subjection to thy Rule and Government. And save
us from all carnal Ignorance and Unbelief, and from all Ungodliness, and Sinful
indulgence of the Flesh.

VOUCHSAFE, Good God, to pity our weakness and imperfection: And to succor us
in all our Temptations: And to support us in all our Sorrows and Afflictions:
And grant us a happy end of all our Sorrows at last in thine eternal Kingdom.

MAKE us ever mindful of the End for which we were made; and the chief work we
have to do; and the uncertainty of this present Life; and affect us duly by the
forethought of that unchangable Eternity to which we are hastening.

AND let thy Faith and Fear ever dwell in our hearts; that it may be our
continual Exercise to keep our Consciences void of Offense both toward thee,
our God, and toward all Men.

SUFFER us not to spend the Day of our Salvation idely and unprofitably: But
make us to work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, through thy grace and
spirit: And make us to stand always upon our Watch; prepared for our Master's
Call: That whenever thou shall put an end to this mortal Life, it may be the
beginning of a Blessed Immortality.

VOUCHSAFE, O Lord, to Bless all our Governors in Church and State; and grant
that they may be thy Ministers to us for Good: And that we may never be guilty
of any sinful disobedience toward them. And give to all the people of this
Nation thy grace to live in Unity and Godly Love, and to further each others
present and eternal welfare.

BE pleased to bless all our Relations and Friends; and multiply thy mercies
upon them in the Blessings of this and of the other World. And vouchsafe to
succor all that lie under any Sorrow or Affliction, and be near unto them in
all they call upon thee for.

MANIFEST thine especial Love and Favor, we pray thee, to this Family:
Vouchsafe to provide for us, and defend us by thy good providence. Preserve us
from all Evil throughout this day; prosper us in our lawful Affairs; let no
variance nor ill will prevail amongst us, but keep us in Peace and Christian
Love to our life's end.

FINALLY, We praise thy great and glorious Name for all thy mercies toward us.
For the Rest and Safety of the last Night; for the renewed comforts of this
present day, and all the good Providence of our past Life.

MORE especially, for the means of grace, the motions of thy spirit, and for
thy great patience and long-suffering suffering toward us. But above all, for
the Merits and Mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who ever lives
to make Intercession for us; for whose sake we beseech thee to hear us, accept
us, and pardon us; together with these our unworthy Praye^s, in whose most holy
Nameand Words we further pray:

OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come; Thy
will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily Bread: And
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that Trespass against us: And lead
us not into Temptation, but Deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and
the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for a Family in the Evening.
O Eternal God! Infinite in all Perfection, and worthy of all Praise! who wilt
be glorified in or upon every Creature which thou have made: It is meet, that
with Fear and Trembling we consider thy holy and righteous Attributes, and our
own polluted Natures and sinful Lives.

O Lord! we have sinfully forgotten thee our Creator in the days of our Youth;
and vainly misspent our precious time in Sin and Folly. Alas! with what
diligence have we served the Flesh, and the Devil, and this present World! and
how little have we minded the Concerns of our Salvation and eternal Life! We
have not glorified thee the God that made us, and in whose hands our Breath
is: But have lived as if we had been made only for this world, and to please
our selves.

O! how justly may thou Snatch away our Breath from us, since we have so
much abused it in idle and ^ngodly speeches; and call us speedily into an other
World, since we have so persumptuously built our Hopes of Happiness in this!
And should this be thy Pleasure and our ^ortion; O Lord, how could we ap^ear
before thee in the Guilt of Thousands of unpardoned Sins! or how ^ould we
endure to dwell with ever^asting Burnings!

BUT with thee, O Blessed God, there is Infinite Mercy and plenteous
Redemption. Thou so lovedst the world as to give thine only begot^en Son, that
whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have ever^asting Life. Lord,
we desire to be^ieve on him, help us we pray thee against our Unbelief. Enable
us to submit all the Powers of our Soul to him in his saving Offices, and grant
that we may so believe on him, that we may obtain Eternal Life through his Name.

BE pleased to take away all impurity and hypocrisy, all insensibleness and
perverseness from us: And make us thy willing and obedient Servants for ever. We
know, that without Holiness, none can enter into thy Kingdom: O Lord, make us
Holy through the effectual Regeneration and Sanctification of thine Holy Spirit:
That we may love thee with all our Heart and Soul; and serve thee with all our
Might and Strength. And may delight to do thy Will, and to deny our selves for
thy sake.

AND since we have too long neglected that great Salvation which was purchased
for us by the Blood of thy Son: A waken us, we pray thee, to improve the
remaining space of our Days with all possible care, giving all diligence to
make our calling and Election sure.

ENABLE us to break loose from the Snares of this present World, and from all
the sinful entanglements of the Flesh, and from the seducements of wicked and
dissolute men: That we may run with speed that Race which thou have set before
us, and may persevere in it to the Death, that we may in the end attain
everlasting Life.

TO this end, make us habitually mindful of the shortness and uncertainty of
this mortal Life, and the unprofitableness of all Earthly things in the hour of
Death, and in the other World. And make us now to choose thy Favor as our
chiefest Good, thy Son as our Prince and Savior, and thy Kingdom as our
Portion. And when our Souls shall be summoned to leave this earthly Tabernacle,
vouchsafe, Good God, to receive us into those everlasting Mansions which our
Blessed Savior has Prepared for those that love Him.

FOR whose sake, we Pray thee, Bless these three Nations with Plenty, Peace,
and Safety, and with the Increase of all that is good. And send Peace and Truth
amongst all Nations.

BE pleased to bless and direct all that are set in Authority over us; And
gran^ that they may Govern us, and we obey them, in the Fear of thee our God.
Vouchsa^e to succor all that are objects of Misery, whether they labor under
spiritual or temporal afflictions: And be pleased to administer to them as
their Necessities of Soul or Body require.

BE gracious to all our Relations and Friends, preserve them from all Evil, and
bind up their Souls in the bundle of Life.

BE more particularly gracious, we pray thee, to this Family, and to every
particular person in it. Be pleased to dwell with us, and rule over us.
Preserve us in Peace and Safety; and let thy Spirit rule in every one of our
Hearts, that we may faithfully discharge our respective Duties one to another,
and may live in Christian Union and Peace. Vouchsafe, O thou that never
slumberest nor sleep! to grant us thy Protection this Night: Give thine Holy
Angels charge concerning us: Preserve us from danger by Fire, and Tempest; and
from the violence of unreasonable men: And suffer no Evil to befall any of us,
nor any Plague to come nigh our dwellings.

AND for as much as we know not whether we shall see the light of another day,
be pleased, Good God, now to seal to every Soul of us the Pardon of all our
Sins through the Blood of the New Testament: That when we come to lie down upon
our Death*Beds, we may rest in hope of a blessed Resurrection.

FINALLY, we la^d and magnify thine Holy Name, O Lord, for thy goodness in our
Creation, and daily Perservation: For our Health, Ease, Peace, Friends, Food,
Raiment, Deliverances, and all the comforts of this present Life: And for all
the means of attaining everlasting Happiness: For the price which our Ld. Jesus
Christ has paid for our Redemption, for thy blessed Gospel, thine Holy
Ordinances, and all the Motions of thy Good Spirit: Humbly imploring thy Grace,
that we may so live to thy Praise here on Earth, that we may at last be joined
with Glorified Saints and Holy Angels, to Praise thy Name for ever. All which
we humbly beg for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, in whose
prevailing Name, and comprehensive Words, we conclude our unworthy Prayers. Our
Father, etc.

A Prayer for a Person at Sea.
O INVISIBLE and Omnipresent God! the Allmighty Creator and absolute Governor
of the whole World! Thou hold the Winds in thy fist, and give Laws to the
Sea which it cannot pass. My whole dependence is on thee, from whom comes my
present safety, and my eternal Salvation. I humbly beseech thee, for the sake
of Jesus Christ thy Son, that thy Grace and Mercy may be with me all my days.

I have indeed dishonored thy Name, despised thy Government, and broken thy
Laws; I have often ind^lged my sinful Lusts and wrathful Passions, contrary to
my Vows and Covenant made with thee, and thy word revealed to us.

BUT O Lord, for Christ's sake, (who is our Passover, slain for the Salvation
of Sinners) be merciful unto me, and pardon my Sins. Let not thy wrath cut me
off in my pollution, as I have deserved; but let thy Mercy abound toward me
for Ever.

AND vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep me by thy Grace from the Sins to which I am
daily exposed by temptation, and my own sinful Heart. And let thy good
Providence preserve me from the dangers wherewith I am encompassed.

WE behold, O Lord, thy Wonders in the deep: Wonders of thy Goodness, as well
as of thy Wisdom and Power: O Lord, give me Grace to admire and praise thine
infinite Perfections; and grant that my Lips may never blaspheme thy Great and
Glorious Name, nor ever curse Men who are made after thine Image and likeness.

OUR times, O Lord, are in thi^e hand; how soon might thou make this Sea a
Common Grave to us all? If but a Plank burst, or give way, or a Rock, or a Heap
of Sand lie in our way, how oon shall we be swallowed up in the Deep, and be
wa^ted into our endless and unchangeable Estate?

BUT thy good Providence is a sure Defense: I pray thee, vouchsafe it to me,
and to all that Sail with me, in order to our continual direction and defense.
And vouchsafe to carry us in safety to the place of our Habitation, and to
preserve all our Relations and Friends in their several Dwellings, that we may
behold each others Faces again with Comfort.

AND fit us all for that Place of Rest and Peace which thou have promised to
thy faithful Servants, and give us thy Grace to make us meet for that eternal
Inheritance amongst thy Saints, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, in
whose Holy Name and Words we further pray. Our Father, etc.

In a Storm.
O LORD our God! the Father of Mercies, the God of all Power and Might! Who
command the Winds and the Seas, and they obey thee. We, O Lord, thy
dependent Creatures, do send up our Cry unto thee in our Distress. O! let the
voice of our Prayers, and not the Cry of our Sins come before thee: Hear, we
pray thee, the Intercession of thy Son for Sinners, and for his sake send us
Relief.

THERE is no Power in the whole Creation to help us. Lord, Save us or we
perish. Manifest, we pray thee, the greatness of thy Power in our Succor and
Comfort, in the dark and deep Calamity wherewith we are distressed. The Winds
and Waters know their Maker's Voice: And though they are now in their Rage, yet
if thine Almighty Voice speaks the word, they will soon calm and be still. O
Lord, be pleased to arise for our Help* that we may live to speak of thy Mercy,
and tell of all thy wondrous Works.

AND, we pray thee, give us Grace that we may never forget nor abuse thy Mercy:
But incline and enable us to live Holy, Righteous, and sober Lives, to the
Praise of thee, our God, through Jesus Christ our only Mediator and Advocate.
Amen, Amen.

A Thanksgiving after a Storm.
O LORD! Thou art the God of our Mercies, and the God of our Praise. I humbly
present unto thee, O thou Preserver of Men! all possible Praise and
Thankfulness for thy merciful and seasonable appearance for us in our late
Distress. We said, We are cut off from the living, and all our earthly Hopes
are withered away; but thy good Providence appeared for us, and the Hand of our
God brought us Deliverance from the Jaws of Death. Good Lord, enable us to
comply with the end of thy Patience and Bounty toward us, and make thy present
Mercy to us an inviolable Band of future Obedience to thee, and an Earnest of
thine everlasting Mercy to us, through Jesus Christ, our Blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving when safely Arrived at any Port.
O INFINITELY Great and Good God! by whose good Providence I am brought in
safety to my desired Haven! I humbly ascribe the whole of my Preservation and
Success to thy Conduct and Blessing. It is not in the Power of Man to preserve
himself, or to prosper his best Endeavors: but it is by thy Goodness that we
live, and in which we hope. O Lord! give^ me thy Grace, that as I live by thee,
I may live to thee, and may never more dishonor thy Name, or abuse thy Mercy;
but may live such a Life of Praise to thee on Earth, as may be an introduction
to that state of perfect Bliss and Glory above, where Holy Angels and Saints
extol and praise thy Glorious Name for ever, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a Young Person.
MOST Glorious and Blessed God! The Life of our Life, and the God of our
Salvation! I look up unto thee, the Fountain of Goodness, (through the Lord Jesus
Christ, whom thou have ordained to be our Mediator) with humble Thankfulness
for all the Mercies of this present Life, and for any Hope of everlasting
Happiness.

IT is of thy great goodness, that I was born in a Christian Land: And of thine
infinite Mercy, that I was early brought into thy Covenant; thy Covenant of
Life and Peace, through the blood of the New Testament.

O my God! I desire to embrace the Engagements, as well as to enjoy the
Blessings, of this thy gracious Covenant: Earnestly imploring thy Grace, that I
may live suitably to my holy profession. That so I may never, never dishonor
thine Holy Name; nor in any Thought, Word or Deed deny the Lord that bought me.

SEND thine holy Spirit, I beseech thee, into my Soul: Vouchsafe to regenerate
and make me born anew of the Holy Ghost: Baptize me, O Lord, with that divine
Fire which may at once consume my sinful Lusts, and en^lame my soul with divine
Love.

LORD make me to know thee, and Jesus Christ whom thou ^ast sent; Prepare my
Soul to receive him sincerely in all his saving Offices; And make him
effectually to me a Prince and a Savior to give me Repentance and forgiveness
of Sin. Through Him, O Lord, forgive my natural Corruption, and heal my leaperous
Soul. And for his sake, forgive all my actual Sins; all the transgressions of
my Youth; my sins after Vows, contrary to Knowledge, and against thine infinite
Goodness. O Lord! for the sake of my Crucified Savior, ^e merciful to my
Unrighteousness, and remember my iniquity no more.

And that I may no more commit the same or other Offenses. Vouchsafe, O Lord,
to keep me by thy Grace from every sinful way, and lead me in the way
ever^asting. Preserve me from the Pollutions of youthful Lusts; and harden me
against the Solicitations and evil Examples of impudent and daring Sinners. Be
pleased to show me the vileness of sensual Pleasures, the emptiness of worldly
possessions, and the Folly of getting any thing on Earth by the loss of thy
Favor. Bless me, O Lord, with an early Conversion, with an unblameable Life,
with a hopeful Death, and a blessed Eternity.

Give me, Good God, thy Peace which passes understanding; and so preserve me
from the Corruptions of this world, that I may inherit the Glory of thine
undefiled Kingdom.

And whereas there are Legions of in^ernal Powers who seek to hinder my
entrance into that Rest; O Lord, leave me not to their Malice, nor my own
Frailty; but ever succor me with thine especial Grace and peculiar Providence;
and make me as ready to help, and to forgive others, as to desire help and
forgiveness of thee, my God.

Make me to lead my Life in thy Fear, and in the sense of thy Favor, and to
grow in Grace as I advance in years, ever mindful of my Creator, my Mortality,
and my future Account. That living here to thy Glory, I may for ever praise
thee in thy glorious Kingdom. through Jesus Christ, who is my Hope; to whom with
thee, O Father, and the eternal Spirit, One God, be all Honor and Glory
ascribed by Angels and Men for evermore. Amen.

ADVERTISEMENT.
BY the Procurement of these Societies, the following Lectures are constantly
preached at Five in the Evening, on the Lord's Days after mentioned. viz.

On every first Lord's Day in the month. at St. Laurence Jewry, St. Clements
Danes, St. Michael Woodstreet, St. Olaves Southwark.

On the second Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Brides Fleet Street, St. Albans
Wood-street, St. Buttolph Aldgate.

On the third Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Martins in the Fields; at six in
the Morning, St. Giles Cripple-gate.

On the last Lord's Day in the Month, at St. Giles Cripple-gate, St. Mary
White-chappel, St. John Wapping.

Every Lord's Day, at St. Ann's near Alders-gate, at 5 in the Evening; with
public Catechizing.


