Fides Divina: The Ground of TRUE FAITH Asserted.

OR, A useful and brief Discourse, showing the insufficiency of humane, and the
necessity of Divine Evidence for divine or saving Faith and Christian Religion
to be built upon.

Being a Transcript out of several Authors extant.

Joh. 10.37. If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. Joh. 15.24. If
I had not done among them the works that none other man did, they had not had
sin; but now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father. 1 Cor. 2.4,
5. My speech and my preaching was not with perswasible words of man's wisdom,
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power, That your faith should not
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. LONDON, Printed for the
Author, 1657.

A Just and necessary Vindication of all such as endeavor to be satisfied
concerning the anthentickness and demonstrative authority and perfection of
Copies, or Translations of Scripture, or any Expositions, Doctrines, or
Conclusions drawn from them to be a ground sufficient for Divine and saving
Faith; scruples herein unavoidably arising from the Tongues and Pens even of
the learned themselves, who both in public and private will often tell us,
That this or that is not rightly translated, but should be read out of the
Hebrew or Greek word for word, thus, or thus much different from the
Translation; or that this, or that word or sentence is not in some, or most of
their Greek Copies, or here or there should be a Parenthesis; or that the Comma
is not rightly placed, or the like; something or other is usually amiss,
especially when from some Text of Scripture the unreasonable or doubtfulness of
their Opinions or Doctrines are questioned.

In further prosecution hereof, I shall not need to cite any of the learned
Papists, who urge many shrewd Arguments and Reasons to prove the corruption of
our Scriptures, and the insufficiency of any Scripture for the purposes
aforementioned. Nor need I insist on our learned Countreyman, Mr. Hugh
Broughton, though a Protestant, who being a great Linguist, charged the Bishops
with perverting the Text in the Old Testament in the English Translations, in
848. places. Nor on the Charge delivered to King JAMES by the Ministers of
Lincoln Diocese; telling him in the Abridgement of their grievances, That the
English Translation of the Bible was such, as takes away from the Text, and
adds to the Text, and that to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the
Holy Ghost. Nor yet on the palpable differences and contradictions in
Translations, wherein some Texts are rendered with much suspicion of Nonsense,
untruth, or both, observed by private men.

Nor will I at present descant, Whether it was through negligence, ignorance,
or design in the Translators or otherwise, that all this was done; yet that de
facto, it is so done, may be seen, and must be confessed by all intelligent men,
not blinded with superstition like the Ephesians, Acts 19.17, 18. nor pindiced
with worldly interest, like the chief Rulers, Joh. 12.42, 43. But for the
present (among many other that might be cited) I shall produce some few modern
English Protestant Authors of most eminent learning whose concurrent Testimony
herein (together with the precedent and subsequent considerations) may be more
then sufficient to our purpose, it being also backed with such Arguments and
Reasons as are evident to our own understanding and experience.

THe Translators of King JAMES his Bible in their Epistle to the Reader, do set
forth how they wtre charged and upbraided by some of their Brethren, as well as
by the Papist, in that they so often altered and changed the Bible by their new
translating it thus, viz. Many men's mouths have been open a good while (and yet
are not stopped) with speeches about the translation so long in hand, or
rather perusals of Translations made before, and ask what may be the reason,
what the necessity of the Employment; has the Church been deceived, say they,
all this while? Has her svveet bread been mingled with leaven, her silver
with dross, her Wine with Water, her Milk with Lime, ( Lacte Gypsum male
incestur, says Jeremy) We hoped that we had been in the right way, that we
had had the Oracles of God delivered unto us, and that though all the world
had cause to be offended, and to complain, yet we had none. Has the Nurse
holden out the Breast, and nothing but vvind in it? Has the bread been
delivered by the Fathers of the Church, and the same proved to be Lapidosus, as
Seneca speaks? What is to handle the Word of God deceitfully, if this be not?
Thus certain Brethren. Also the Adversaries of Judah and Jerusalem, like
Samballat in Nehemiah, mock, as we hear, both at the work and workmen,
saying, What do these vveak Jews, etc? Will they make the stones whole again
out of the heaps of dust which are burnt? Although they build, yet if a Fox go
up, he shall even break down their stony Wall; Was their Translation good
before? Why do they now mend it? Was it not good? Why then was it obtruded to
the people? Yea, Why did the Catholics (meaning Popish Romanists) alvvayes go
in Jeopardy for refusing to go to hear it? Nay, if it must be translated into
English, Catholics are fittest to do it; They have learning, and they know
when a thing is well; they can manum de tabula: We will answer them both
briefly; The former being Brethren, thus etc.

And after their answering these, they answer the Papists and retort as many
or more faults of the same kind, upon them in these words follovving, viz. Yet
before we end we must answer a cavil and objection of theirs against us, for
altering and amending our Translations so often, wherein they deal hardly and
strangely with us, for to whom ever was it imputed for a fault (by such as
were wise) to go over that which he had done, and to amend it where he savv
cause? Saint Augustine was not afraid to exhort St. Hierome to a Palmodia, or
Recantation. The same St. Augustine was not ashamed to retractate, we might
say revoke, many things that had passed him, and does even glory that he sees
his infirmities: If we will be sons of the Truth, we must consider what it
speaks, and trample upon our own credit, yea, and upon other men's too, if
either be any way an hinderance to it. This to the cause: Then to the persons
we say, That of all men they ought to be most silent in this case; for what
variety have they, and what alterations have they made, not only of their
Service-Books Portesses, and Breviaries, but also of their Latin Translation:
The Service Book supposed to be made by St. Ambrose (Officium Ambrosianum) was
a great while in special use and request; but Pope Hadrian called a Council,
with the aid of Charles the Emperor, abolished it, yea burnt it and commanded
the Service Book of St. Gregory universally to be used: Well, Officium
Gregorianum gets by this means to be in credit; but does it continue without
change or altering? No; the very Romen Service was of two Fashions, the new
Fashion, and the old (the one used in one Church, the other in another) as is
to be seen in Pamilius, a Romanist, his preface before Micrologus: The same
Pamilius reports out of Radalphus de Rive, That about the year of our Lord,
1277 Pope Nicholas the third removed out of the Churches of Rome the more
ancient Books (of Service) and brought into use the Missals of the Friars
Minorites, and commanded them to be observed there; insomuch, that about an
hundred years after, when the above named Radulphus happened to be at Rome, he
found all the Books to be new (after the new stamp) Neither was this chopping
and changing in the ancient times only, but also of late, Pius Quintus himself
confesses, That every Bishopprick almost, had a peculiar kind of Service, most
unlike to that which others had, which moved him to abolish all other
Breviaries, though never so ancient, and privileged, and published by Bishops
in their Diocesses, and to establish and ratify that only which was of his own
setting forth, in the year 1568. Now when the Father of their Church, who
gladly would heal the sore of the Daughter of his people softly and slightly,
and make the best of it, finding so great fault with them for their odds and
jarring, we hope the children have no great cause to vaunt of their uniformity.
But the difference that appears in our Translation, and our often correcting
of them, is the thing that we are specially charged with: Let us see therefore,
whether they themselves be without fault this way (if it be to be counted a
fault to correct) or whether they be fit men to throw stones at us; o tandem
major pareas minori; they that are less sound themselves, ought not to object
infirmities to others. If we should tell them that Valla, Stapulensis,
Erusinus, and Vives, found fault with their vulgar Translation, and
consequently, wished the same to be mended, or a new one to be made; they would
answer peradventure, That we produced their Enemies for Witnesses against them;
albeit, they were in no other sort Enemies then St. Paul to the Galatians, for
telling them the truth; and it were to be wished that they had dared to tell it
them plainer and oftener. But what will they say to this, That Pope Leo the
tenth allowed Erasmus Translation of the New Testament, so much different from
the vulgar, by his Apostolic Letter and Bull, That the same Leo exhorted
Pagnine to translate the whole Bible, and bare whatsoever charges was necessary
for the Work; surely, as the Apostle reasons to the Hebrews, that if the
former Law and Testament had been sufficient, there had been no need of the
later: So we may say, That if the old Vulgar had been at all points ollowable,
to small purpose had labor and charges been undergone about framing a new: If
they say it was one Popes private Opinion, and that he consulted only himself;
then we are able to go further with them, and to aver, That more of their chief
men of all sorts, even their own Trent-Champions, Paiva and Vega; and their own
Inquisitors, Hierominus ab Oleastro; and their own Bishop Isadorus Clarius, and
their own Cardinal Thomas a vio Caietan, do either make new Translations
themselves, or follow new ones of other men's making, or note the Vulgar
Interpreter for halting; none of them fear to dissent from him, nor yet to
except against him: And call they this an uniform Tenor of Text, and judgment
about the Text, so many of their Worthies disclaiming the now received conceit?
Nay, we will yet come a little nearer the quick; does not their Paris Edition
differ from the Lovaine and Hentenius his from them both, and yet all of them
allowed by authority? Nay, does not Sextus Quintus confess, That certain
Catholics (he means certain of his own side) were in such a humor of
translating the Scriptures into Latin, that Satan taking occasion by them,
though they thought of no such matter, did strive what he could, out of such
uncertain and manifold a variety of Translations, so to mingle all things that
nothing might seem to be left certain and firm in them, etc. Nay further, did
not the same Sextus ordain by an inviolable Decree, and that with the counsel
and consent of the Cardinals, That the Latin Edition of the Old and New
Testament, which the Council of Trent would have to be authentic, is the same
without controversy which he then set forth, being diligently Corrected and
Printed in the Printing House of the Vatican; thus Sextus in his Preface before
his Bible. And yet Clement the eight, his immediate Successor (to account of)
publishes another Edition of the Bible, containing in it infinite differences
from that of Sextus (and many of them weighty and material) and yet this must
be authentic by all means. What is it to have the faith of our glorious Lord
Jesus Christ with yea and nay, if this be not? Again, what is sweet harmony and
consent if this be? Therefore as Dimaratus of Corinth advised a great King
before he talked of the dissentions among the Grecians, to compose his own
domestic broils; so all the while that our adversaries do make so many and so
various Editions themselves, and do jarre so much about the worth and authority
of them, they can with no show of Equity challenge us for changing and
correcting: Thus far the said Translators. From which may be observed, At what
great uncertainty the most wise and learned on both sides have been, and are
about the Scripture, contesting which side has the true, not knowing that
either side has it.

2. At what great uncertainty they likewise are in respect of those Scriptures
which they have, not certainly knowing the undoubted true sense and meaning
thereof; this plainly appears in that they do on each side so often alter,
change, amend, and new translate their respective Bibles, wherein will be found
many variations, if not contradictions to the former; and when they have done
all they can, it will be far from satisfying all the learned of the same party,
who having opportunity; will alter and new translate it to their own minds,
which will as much displease others, who will take their turn again to alter
it; and in this manner may it run ad infinitum, from time to time, and still
upon like uncertainties and that the case is no better with us, our next Author
more fully sets forth.

3. Jer. Tailor Dr. in Divinity, and a great Scholar, he in his Discourse of
Liberty of prophesying page 61, 62, 63. shows, and by many Reasons proves that
which in effect amounts to an impossibility for any man to find out a true Copy
or Translation, or right sense of Scripture; his words are these:

Viz. There are so many thousand of Copies that are writ by persons of several
interests and persuasions, such different understandings and tempers, such
distinct abilities and weaknesses, that it is no wonder there is so great
variety of readings both in the Old and New Testament. In the old Testament the
Jews pretend that the Christians have corrupted many places, on purpose to make
symphony between both the Testaments: On the other side the Christians have had
so much reason to suspect the Jews, That when Aquilla had translated the Bible
in their Schools, and had been taught by them they rejected the Edition, many
of them, and some of them called it Heresy to follow it. And Justin Martyr
justified to Tryphon, That the Jews had defalk'd many sayings from the Books of
the Old Prophets, and amongst the rest he instances that of the Psalm, Dicite
in Nationibus quia Dominus Regnavit a ligno.

Englished: Tell it (or say, i.e.) amongst the Nations, the Lord has reigned
for (or by) the wood or tree.

The last words they have cut off, and prevailed so far in it, that to this day
none of our Bibles have it; but if they ought not to have it, then Justin
Martyr's Bible had more in it then it should have, for there it was; so that a
fault there was eitheir under or over: But however, there are infinite readings
of the New Testament (for in that I will instance) some whole verses in one
that are not in another; and there was in some Copies of Saint Marks Gospel, in
the last chapter a whole verse, a chapter it was anciently called, that is not
found in our Bibles, as St. Hierom ad Hedibiam Q. 3. notes; the words he
repeats Lib. 2. Contra Polygamos: Et illi satis faciebant dicentes saeculum
istu and iniquitatis and incredulitatis substantia est, quae non sivit per
immundos spiritus veram Dei apprehendi vertutem, idcirto jam nunc revela
justitiam tuam.

Englished. And they did satisfy, saying, that age is the substance of
iniquity and incredulity, which by reason of unclean spirits, does not suffer
the virtue, power, or efficacy of God to be apprehended; therefore now reveal
thy righteousness.

These words are thought by some to savor of Manichaism, and for ought I can
find, were therefore rejected out of many Greek Copies, and at last out of the
Latin, etc.

The Parable of the woman taken in Adultery, which is now in Joh. 8. Eusebius
says, It was not in any Gospel, but the Gospel secundum Hebraeos; and St.
Hierome makes it doubtful, and so does St. Chrysostom, and Euthimius, the
first not vouchsafing to explicate it in Homolies upon St. John, the other
affirming it not to be found in the exacter Copies, etc.

But the instances in this kind are too many, as appears in the variety of
readings in several Copies, proceeding from the negligence or ignorance of the
Translators, or the malicious Graci corruperunt novum Testamentum ut Testantur:
Tertul. l. 5. ado. Marcion. Eusebius. L. 5. Hist. C. ult. Irenae: l. 1. c. 29.
Allu. Haeres. Bafil. L. 2. Contr. Eunomium
endeavor of Heretics, or the inserting Marginal Notes into the Text, or the
neerness of several words.

And in page 82. he says, That since there are in Scripture many mysteries and
matters of question, upon which there is a vail; since there are so many
Copies, with infinite variety of readings; since a various interpunction, a
Parenthesis, a Letter, an Accent, may much alter the sense; since some places
have diverse litteral senses, many have spiritual, mystical, and allegorical
meanings; since there are so many trops, metononies, ironies, hyperbolies,
properties and improperties of Languages, whose understanding depends upon such
circumstances, that it is almost impossible to know its proper interpretation;
now that the proper knowledge of such circumstances and particular stories is
irrecoverably lost; since there are some mysteries which at the best advantage
of expression are not easily to be apprehended, and whose explication, by
reason of our imperfections, must needs be dark, sometimes weak, sometimes
untelligable: And lastly, Since those ordinary means of expounding Scripture,
as searching the Originals, conference of places, purity of reason, analogy of
faith, are all dubious, uncertain, and very fallible; he that is wisest, and by
consequence the likeliest to expound truest, in all probability of reason will
be very far from confidence, because every one of these, and many more, are
like so many degrees of improbabilities and incertainty, all depressing our
certtainty of finding out the truth in such mysteries, and amidst so many
difficulties; and therefore a wise man that considers this would not willingly
be prescribed to by others; and therefore if he be also a just man, he will not
impose it upon others; for it is best every man should be left to that Liberty
from which no man can justly take him, unless he could secure him from Error.

And in page 82. he tells us, That Osiander in his confutation of a Book which
Melanchthon wrote against him, observes, That there are twenty several Opinions
concerning Justification, all drawn from Scriptures by the men only of the
Augustan Confession; there are sixteen several Opinions conncerning Original
Sin; and as many definitions of the Sacraments as there are Sects of men that
disagree about them.

And then he proposes a question with i'ts answer, in these words, viz.

And now what help is there for us in the midst of these uncertainties? if we
follow any one Translation, or any one man's Commentary, what Rule have we to
choose the right by? Or is there any one man that has translated perfectly, or
expounded infallibly? No Translation challenges such a prerogative as to be
authentic, but the vulgar Latin, and yet see with what success; for when it
was declared authentic by the Council of Trent, Sextus put forth a Copy much
amended of what it was, and tied all men to follow that; but that did not
satisfy; for Pope Clement reviews and corrects it in many places, and still
the Decree remains in a changed subject. And secondly, that Translation will be
very unapt to satisfy, in which one of their own Issidore Clarius a Monk of
Brestia found and amended 8000. faults; besides innumerable others, which he
says he pretermitted. And then thirdly, To show how little themselves were
satisfied with it, diverse learned men among them did new translate the Bible,
and thought they did God and the Church good service in it. So that if you take
this for your president, you are sure to be mistaken infinittly; if you take
any other, the Authors themselves do not promise you any security: If you
resolve to follow any one as far only as you see cause, then you only do wrong
or right by chance, for you have certainty just proportionable to your own
skill, to your own infallibility. If you resolve to folllow any one
whithersoever he leads, we shall oftentimes come thither where we shall see our
selves to become ridiculous.

Thus far that learned and ingenuous Doctor who also shows, and by many
pregnant instances and reasons proves the results of Councels, Fathers,
Traditions, yea, of Churches, Popes and pretenders to have the Spirit, to be
all dubious, very fallible, and uncertain, yea often contradictory to
themselves, and to one another; and therefore from all or any of these
satisfaction in respect of the former uncertainties cannot be expected.

3. Mr. Joh. Goodwin, a man both of great learning and deep judgment, who
though he has already discovered much more herein then any of our dissenting
Brethren would hitherto ever acquaint us with, yet it is supposed to be much
less then he knows, (which for his own accommodation and security, its thought
by some) he conceals not so much from the Spanish Inquisition, as from the
Scottish and English, of the same spirit, though under several more specious
forms of godliness, but are much worse, and more to be abhorred then the other,
by how much we appear more like Angels of Light, yet act from the very same
Principle of self-interest upon pretense of Divine Right and Authority, as
unjustly challenged and usurped by any of these, as by the other, or by any
formerly condemned and removed for the like usurpation and practice, whereby
they would subject other men's judgments and consciences to their Dictates
(even as the other do) and bow them as it were to dead Images, set up only in
some finer shapes and dresses merely of their own divisings, and upon refusal,
to judge them Schismatics and Heretics, exposing them thereby to the hatred,
rage and contempt of the people, who (being generally led by stupid ignorance,
superstitious zeal, and blind devotion) are (in all such cases) outrageous,
like the waves of the sea, hurried to and again, even as the wind and the tide
of Authority and Doctrine drives them; and not ceasing here, they will dispose
them to utter destruction, at least, to the uttermost, whereto they can get the
Civil Powers concurrence; or, as in more plain English it s said, Rev. 17. As
the Kings of the earth shall give their power and strength unto the Beast,
wherein they deal most injuriously and inhumanely in depriving men of that
natural native Right which God has given to every man, being born a rational
creature, to be saved by his own Faith, and therefore must have that liberty in
matters of Religion and Worship, as to be led by the result of his own
understanding, and not of any other man's.

Yet all this brutish wickedness among the sons of men, is no more then what
St. John long since foresaw would come to pass, namely, That the Kings of the
earth should not only give their power and strength to the Beast, and commit
fornication with the Whore, but also, that the Inhabitants of the Earth should
be made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, even with the blood of the
Saints; and that power should be given to the Beast, not only to cause it self
to be worshipped, but to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them: All
which being thus foretold, what marvel then is it to see the generality of men
so drunk therewith, as to thirst for the destruction of their harmless
Neighbors and friends, more then to see a common Drunkard in his drunken
frenzy to stob or kill his own Brother or Friend, whom he ought (and out of
that drunken fit would) most dearly love and respect; but it is a great rarity
and wonder (almost like the sight of a black Swan) to see any in a high place
and power so far recovered out of this zealous spiritual drunkenness, as to
know, and openly acknowledge the aforesaid natural Right to be a fundamental,
and every man's due, and that he that would have it ought to give it,
constituting a Law for every man's enjoying it accordingly, etc. But it is no
such wonder to see such so far to relapse again into that Epedemical distemper,
as by some foreign sense put upon that Law; or by some hidden and reserved
intention of the Lawmakers (unintelligable by any words therein) in effect
quite to uull and make void the same, making it a mere empty shell without the
Kernal; a mere Character without any certain sense or meaning; or a mere snare
to men for their destruction, rather then any security for their preservation;
for if there had been no such Law, and instead thereof some positive Law made
to the contrary; might not they then as well by such a reserved sense and
intention have preserved whom they had pleased? and is it any otherwise by
having a Law for security, when by such a reserved sense or intention they may
suffer whom they please to be destroyed? Where Is then the difference? My
dullness is such (I must confess) that I can see little, or none at all.

And if it be no better from the best of men, what can be expected from the
worst (whereof the generality consists) who with open mouth cry for fire from
heaven (when otherwise they cannot procure it) to devour all men of contrary
Judgments to their own, quite forgetting of what spirit they are, and not at
all considering from whence that inhumane and unnatural heat proceeds; but the
unreasonablenesse of these is well set forth by a learned and ingenuous Author,
in these words following, viz.

It is unnatural and unreasonable to persecute disagreeing Opinions; unnatural,
for understanding being a thing wholly spiritual, cannot be restrained, and
therefore neither punished by corporal afflictions; It is aliena republica, a
matter of another world; you may as well cure the Colic by brushing a man's
clothes, or fill a man's belly with a syllogism; these things do not communicate
in matter, and therefore neither in action nor passion; and since all
punishments in a prudent Government punish the offender to prevent a future
crime, and so it proves more medicinal then vindiclive, the punitive act being
in order to the cure and prevention; and since no punishment of the body can
cure a disease in the soul, it is disproportionable in nature and in all civil
Government, to punish where the punishment can do no good; it may be an act of
Tyranny, but never of Justice; for is an Opinion ever the more true or false,
for being persecuted, some men have believed it the more, as being provoked
into a confidence, and vexed into a resolution; but the thing it self is not
the truer; and though the Hangman may confute a man with an inexplicable
delemma, yet not convince his understanding; for such premises can infer no
conclusion but that of a man's life and a wolf way as well give Laws to the
understanding, as he whose distates are only propounded in violence, and writ
in blood; and a dog is as capable of Law as a man, if there be no choice in his
obedience, nor discourse in his choice, nor reason to satisfy his discourse.
And as it is unnatural, so it is unreasonable, that Sempronius should force
Caius to be of his Opinion, because Sempronius is Consul this year and commands
the Lictors; as if he that can kill a man cannot but be infallible; and if he
be not, why should I do violence to my conscience, because he can do violence
to my person. Force in matters of Opinion can do no good, but is very apt to do
hurt, for no man can change his Opinion when he will, or be satisfied in his
reason that his Opinion is false because discountenanced; if a man could change
his opinion when he lists, he might cure many inconveniences of his life; all
his fears and his sorrows would soon disband if he would but alter his Opinion,
whereby he is persuaded that such an accident that afflicts him is an evil, and
such an object formidable, let him but believe himself impregnable, or that he
receives a benefit when he is plundered, disgraced, imprisoned, condemned and
afflicted, neither his sleeps need to be disturbed nor his quietness
discomposed; but if a man cannot change his Opinion when he list, nor ever does
heartily or resolutely; but when he cannot do otherwise, then to use force may
make him an hypocrite, but never to be a right believer; and so instead of
erecting a Trophee for God and true Religion, to build a monument for the Devil.

Infinite examples are recorded in Church story to this very purpose, but
Socrates instances in one for all; for when Elucius Bishop of Cyzicum, was
threatened by the Emperor Valence with banishment and confiscation if he did not
subscribe to the Decree of Ariminum; at last he yielded to the Arian Opinion,
and prosently fell into great torment of conscience openly at Cyzicum, recanted
the Error, asked God and the Church forgiveness, and complained of the Emperors
injustice, and that was all the good the Arian party got by offering violence
to his conscience; and so many families in Spain, which are (as they call them)
new Christians, and of a suspected Faith, into which they were forced by the
Tyranny of the Inquisition, and yet are secret Moors, is evidence enough of the
inconvenience of preaching a Doctrine more gladly Ceventandi; for it either
punishes a man for keeping a good conscience, or forces him into a bad; it
either punishes sincerity, or persuades hypocrisy; it persecutes a truth, or
drives into an error; and it teaches a man to dissemble, and to be safe, but
never to be honest. Thus far he.

Notwithstanding all which, where can we see it otherwise with any Nation or
people in any form of religious Worship, but that they have drank so deep of
that Whores cup, as to thirst for the blood of their opposites, especially if
they shall but in the least discover to the world the unsoundness of the
foundation on which their Babel is built.

All which the aforesaid Mr. G. well knowing, and by experience finding, that a
little Light will much offend the tender sights of many, who therefore (like
Owls in the dark) will both skreech and strick at the mere shine of a Candle;
yet nevertheless in this Divine Authority of Scripture, page 10. he tells us, If
no Translation whatsoever, nor any any, either written or printed Copy
whatsoever be the Word of God, or foundation of Religion, certainly our English
Translations cannot challenge this honor.

And in page 18. of the same (he says) Questionless no writing whatsoever,
whether Translations or Originals, are the foundation of Christian Religion.

And in his Youngling Elder, page 35. (he says) It is very possible, that
either through negligence, ignorance, want of memory, or the like in Scribes
and Correctors of the Press, some such Error may be found in every Copy of the
Scriptures now extant in the world, which will render this Copy contradictious
to it self; yea, it is possible that many such errors as this may be found in
the best and truest Copies that are.

And in the 36. page of the same Book (he says) The true and proper foundation
of Religion is intrinsecally, essentially, and in the nature of it
unchangeable, unalterable in the least by the wills, pleasures, or attempts of
men. But there is no Book, or Books whatsoever, Bible, or other, but in the
contents of them may be altered or changed by men. Ergo, The major he proves
thus; If the proper Foundation of Religion were intrinsecally, and in the
nature of it changeable and alterable by men, then can it not be any matter of
truth, because the nature of truth is like the nature of God himself,
unchangeable, unalterable by men, Angels Devils, or any creature whatsoever;
yea God himself cannot alter it any whit, more then deny himself, or change his
own nature or being,

And for the minor (says he) That also is no less evident, experience teaches
us, that Books or Bibles themselves are de facto, changed and altered by men
from time to time, every new Edition or Impression, almost, commending it self,
for somewhat corrected or amended in it, which was delinquent or defective in
the former.

Yet this learned Author (notwithstanding all the aforesaid passages of his) in
his Divine Authority of Scripture, page 13. does affirm, If by Scripture be
meant the matter and substance of things contained and held forth in the Books
of the Old and New Testament, commonly known amongst Protestants by the Name of
Canonical, he fully with all his heart, and all his soul, believes them to be
of Divine Authority, and none other then the Word of God.

And in the 26. page of his Youngling Elder, he does distinguish and lay down a
double sense and acceptance of the word Scripture, and in the one sense
clearly acknowledges them to be of Divine Authority, and so the foundation of
Christian Religion, only denying them to be such in the other sense.

And in that sense here denied by this Author, his learned Oponent Mr. William
jenkin does affirm them to be both of Divine Authority and the Word of God,
disallowing that distinction made by our Author, demanding How any can believe
the matter and substance of the Scripture to be the Word of God, when he must
be uncertain whether the written Word or Scriptures wherein the matter is
contained, are the Word of God or no.

Now although both these learned men do affirm the Scripture to be of Divine
Authority the Word of God, yet it is so, that the one affirms it to be such in
one sense, and the other in another sense, neither of them allowing it to be
such in the others sense nor yet producing any competent proof to evidence it
to be such in his own sense. The truth of it in either sense must still
therefore remain much (the more) to be doubted and that from these grounds and
reasons following.

First, Because the Scripture, as it came from the Original Penmen, was then
(if at all) of Divine authority, and the word of God to the world; but it was
not so then, being in an unknown Tongue, to the generality of mankind; and
therefore according to St. Paul's Doctrine was (both in form, matter and
substance) so far from being such that it was mere Barbarism to them 1 Cor.
14.11. And if any urge. That it was afterward made of Divine Authority, and the
Word of God to all by its being translated into all Languages; here I demand,
What humane Power could confer upon Translations that Prerogative which the
Authograph never had, especially since all Translations have many such Errors,
Mistakes, and Contradictions in them as the Authographs had not, and as the
Word of God cannot have; for to affirm any thing not perfectly true and
infallible, to be the Word of God, implies a flat contradiction.

Besides, herein also is a great failer, (namely) in that the most learned are
at great variance, not certainly knowing, but much disagreeing about the right
sense and meaning of words in Scripture; this is evident by their often
changing, altering, amending and new making of the Bible; and by the palpable
material differences and contradictions which still remain among Traaslations
when all is done, and the many exceptions taken by some or other of the learned
against every Translation.

Nay, if the original Language were the Mother Tongue of some amongst us, yet
the Scripture would not be much the easier to them; and a natural Greek or Jew
can with no more reason or authority obtrude any Translation upon other men's
consciences then any other man of any other Nation can do.

Consider further the infinite variety of Translations of the Bible that were
in the primitive Ages of the Church (as St. Hierome observes) and never a one
like another: And can any man think, but that the most learned of these later
ages have differed, erred, and be mistaken as much in Translations as the other
were,
and that the medium is as uncertain to these as it was to them, which is
evidently seen by the great variety of late Translations and Commentaries,
which are too pregnant an Argument, that the most learned neither agree in the
understanding of the words, nor of the sense: and therefore Translations can
bind no man to believe them to be of Divine Authority, or the Word of God; for
an unknown, or uncertain sense binds men as little to the belief thereof, as an
unknown tongue does; this also St. Paul plainly sets forth, 1 Cor. 14.7, 8. in
these words, Even things (says he) without life giving sound, whether Pipe or
Harp, except it give a certain distinction in the sound, how shall it be known
what is piped or harped; for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself to Battle.

Secondly, Because the Word of God, or Gospel of Christ, which was of Divine
Authority, and which universally concerned and bound all men to believe it so
to be, came not in any unknown Tongue, nor upon any such uncertainties to any;
nor only in plainness of speech to be rightly understood of the meanest,
vulgar, rational capacity, but with divine and evident demonstration to attest
the certain truth thereof, as may be seen in St. Paul's expression to the
Corinths (besides many other places of like import) 1 Cor. 2.4.5. where he
tells them, That his speech and his preaching came not to them with perswasible
words of man's wisdom (only intelligible to them all but with evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God, that there faith might not stand
in the wisdom of men, but in the Power of God; evidently implying, That if it
had come to them only in never so great plainness and wisdom of speech, and
they had thereupon believed it, that then their Faith had stood merely in the
wisdom of men, and not in the Word and Power of God.

Now let it be considered, whether St. Paul's mere preaching (so as aforesaid)
be not of as much Divine Authority, and the Word of God, as any of his own or
other men's writings in Scripture are, or ever were.

Thirdly, Because the Word of God is powerful, Heb. 4.12. Jer. 23.29. for God
did but say, Let there be light, and there was light; Gen: 1.3. Christ did say,
Lazarus come forth; and the dead came forth bound hand and foot, Joh. 11.44.
These words and actions were afterward recorded, and so became Scripture. The
words and acts of the Kings of Israel were afterward recorded, and so became
Scripture. The words and acts of the Devil (in his tempting of Christ in the
Wilderness) were afterward recorded, and so became Scripture. But as the
record of the words and acts of the Devil, are not the words and acts of the
Devil; and as the record of the words and acts of the Kings of Israel, are not
the words and acts of the Kings of Israel; so the writing or recording of Gods
Words, is not Gods Word, but only a Declaration what was Gods Word whereby he
created the Light, not that it is Gods Word so written, or so read, or so
spoken by us; for if it continue truly and indeed Gods Word in our mouths, it
must then still powerfully produce Light when spoken by us, as then it did when
it was spoken by God himself.

And the like evident difference was in the Power that followed the Faith that
was built upon the very Word of God, above any faith that is built upon the
Scripture in any sense: These signs followed the first (namely) The stopping
the mouths of Lions; quenching the violence of fire; casting out of Devils;
speaking with new Tongues; healing of the sick by mere laying on of hands, etc.
Heb. 11.33, 34. Mark 16.17, 18. But no such signs follow the Faith built upon
the Scripture, or on the matter and substance contained therein, nor on the
Doctrines drawn from them by any men, who usually borrow or steal the words of
God, of Christ, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, or any other which they there
find recorded; and then (by the help of some Commentor, whereof there are
diverse and many) devise some Doctrines, etc. which they afterward deliver as
from God to the people. But such would appear to deal more ingenuously if they
did follow the Prophets advice, He that had only a dream, should tell it but
as a dream, and not as the Word of God; for what is the chaff to the wheat?
Jer. 23.28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

And especially, I conceive it would be much more pleasing to God, beneficial
to men, and comfortable to themselves not to trouble the world with any sublime
and mysterious Doctrine, as that of Trinity, Election, Predestination,
Reprobation; the Nature or Essence of God; the order or number of his Decrees;
the nature or extent of Christ his death, Justification, or any other matters
in Divinity, so much controverted among Schoolmen, and other of the learned,
and are but doubtfully and uncertainly known to the wisest of them all, as is
evident, in that each opposite among them with great confidence maintains the
verity of their several contradictory Propositions in these Points, which is no
marvel, since we see them likewise at no small variance, even about the very
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, which the Apostle reckons but as Milk
for Babes, who are unskilful in the word of righteousness, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14
and 6.1, 2. And would it not then be much wisdom in them so far to observe the
prophilbition of Christ to his Apostless ( Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4.8.) as to
forbear teaching these points until they were undoubtedly assured of the truth
of them themselves, and endued with power from on high evidently to demonstrate
the verity of them to other men, whereby to convince them. And in the mean time
to teach men altogether such practical points as are evident to every rational
man's understanding and conscience (wherein they would find work enough, much
more profitable) as to the forsaking of all kind of wicked, sinful, dishonest
and deceitful dealings in their lives and conversations; together with all kind
of tyranny, cruelty, oppression, injustice, pride, high and earthly-mindedness,
covetousness (which is Idolatry and the root of all evil) drunkenness, and all
other abuses of the good creatures of God in any kind of excess whatsoever,
suffering in the mean time many of their poor Brethren to pine away and starve
for want of necessaries, and on the contrary excite them to the diligent and
constant practice of all honest, virtuous, pious, just, charitable, good and
conscionable living, to the exercising mercy, love and peace toward all men,
and to a despising of the riches, honors and glories of this world, showing
them the vanity and deceitfulness of them, and the many thousand great evils
and mischiefs which they certainly bring upon the lovers and possessors of them.

Hereby undoubtedly many great benefits would accrue unto themselves always
provided, that indeed and in truth they reform their own affections and
conversations accordingly, which is absolutely necessary in the case.

For first, Hereby they would free themselves from all the just contempts,
gainsayings, and contradictions both of the Quakers and all other men.

Secondly, instead of men's envying, hating, and persecuting one another (being
now the usual product of their teachings) they would breed amity, peace and
concord amongst men, and (in all likelihood) make their Congregations generally
to consist of pious, honest, just and good men, full of all courteous and civil
deportment toward all, both at home and abroad, which would be no small
Ornament, Honor and Benefit, both to the place wherein they live, and to the
Commonwealth whereof they are Members.

And now for further illustration of the point in hand, let us consider, That
when the Word of the Lord came to the Prophets of old, and when they had
delivered it as Gods Word to them to whom it was sent, and when it had
dispatched the business for which it came, then, and not till then both it,
and its event was recorded, and so became Scripture; now though it was the Word
of the Lord both when it came, and when it was delivered to them to whom it
was sent; yet it may be questioned whether it continued so in the writing of
it; I will instance only in the Prophet Jonah, to whom the Word of the Lord
came, commanding him to arise and go to Nineveh, and to cry and preach against
it these words, viz. Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown: He went
and did so, whereupon they repented; all which was afterward written, and so
became Scripture: But if the same Prophet in like manner had preached the same
words to the same City any time after they had repented, then it had been
false, and no Word of God at all unto them; how then can it reasonably be
accounted the Word of God, either to that City, or any other, only by its being
written, and so becoming Scripture, but to be merely as a declaration what was
the Word of God which he once sent by his Prophet to Nineveh, upon which they
repented, and so escaped the Judgment threatened. Nay, suppose the same City
had soon after relapsed into the the same sins, yet the same Prophet could not
(without sin) have preached the same words as Gods Word unto them, nor yet
have pronounced the same Judgment, nor any other, as from the Lord, against
them, without some new Commission, which might have been to pronounce some
other Judgment, or to have some shorter time allotted them for Repentance.
Many other Scriptures come under the like consideration.

Fourthly, Because the Famine thratned by the Prophet, Amos 8.11, 12. that the
Lord would send, that men should wander from sea to sea, from the North even to
the East, and run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord and should not find
it, cannot be understood of Scriptures, or Bibles; nay, it were well if we had
not cause to fear from the Apostles Prophecy 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. and from
experience, That that, or the like Famine has befalne Christiendom it self,
even where, and when Bibles, (with its matter and substance) Professors and
Teachers have been most plentiful: See and consider if any other then Christian
Professors and Teachers can be meant by that prophecy of Saint Paul.

Fifthly and lastly, Because whereas it is said 1 Samuel 3.1. That the Word of
the Lord was precious in those days, this is not meant that Scripture or
Bibles was then searce, for the text renders the reason thereof to be, because
there was no open vision; So where it is often mentioned in Scripture of Saul,
David, and many others making inquiry of the Lord, and of the Word of the Lord
in matters of difficulty, this is not meant, that they had recourse to the
Bible or Scripture, for if that had been the meaning, then Saul needed not in
his distress to have sought to the Witch at Ender to help him to the speech
with Samuel, that so he might of him enquire the Word of the Lord. Nor if after
the seeking to God by prayer, the propencity or bent of men's spirits were the
answer or Word of the Lord, then Balaam by taking that course to know the mind
of God, had not missed of the advancement proposed to him by the King, nor of
being King himself, if that had been the question and the desire and motion of
his heart after his seeking God by prayer, or otherwise, had been the answer to
that question; and to be taken as the voice, word and answer of the Lord.

And indeed, the offer of such great preferment and honor in this world by
Balaack, was a great temptation to Balaam; but the offer of Kingdoms of this
world, and the glory of them, was a temptation of the devils own invention, and
sufficient enough in his judgment to have entangled, and by consequence to have
overthrown Christ himself, and so to have frustrated all his glorious deelared
purposes and designs of freeing mankind from all kind of bondage and slavery
whatsoever, and instead thereof, to have made him become subservient to him, to
keep men under all the slaveries wherein they were involved; yea and to become
a chief supporter of all subordinate corrupt interests of worldly and wicked
men, whereby (as the devils instruments) they unjustly hold their
Fellow-brethren as captives in oppression and slavery; It is therefore to be
lamented, when at any time we see him thrive in any such devilish project. The
Lord in mercy deliver every honest man from being overcome by any such
temptation; Amen.

But to find the word and answer of God (in the way aforementioned) may apear
to be very uncertain by this, viz. If four pious men should each of them seek
by prayer for an answer from God in one and the same thing, be it of public
concernment, or otherwise, wherein their interests, judgments and persuasions
are different and various each from other; you will find the propencity and
bent of their hearts and desires after prayer, for the most part will vary as
much as before, which will manifest this to be no sound or sure way to find out
or know the word or answer of God; nor is this intended to discourage any from
seeking to the Lord in any occasion, but from trusting to the bent of their own
hearts to be any sure Rule to know the answer of God by; because, that may be
the effect of some pride or vain desire of wordly glory, or of some other lust
secretly lurking in the heart of man undiscerned, for the heart of man being
deceitful above all things, who then can know his own heart, or the secret
turnings thereof? Jer. 17.9.10.11. or who can say his heart is so pure and
clean, as to be quite purged from all kind of vain, carnal, and eatthly
affection, and lust, he must then be no longer a man, having flesh, blood, or
any other infirmity like other men on earth, but be equal to the purest Angel
in heaven.

And now having proposed and left these things to consideration, we will
proceed to the next.

Fourthly, Mr. R Baxter, a man of Eminency both for exquisite learning and
parts, in his Saints Rest, Part. 2. page 201. of the sixth Edition tells us,
thus, viz.

R.B. That Divine Faith has ever a Divine Fvidence. And in page 205. thus; We
must know it to be a Divine Testimony, before we can believe Fide Divina And in
page 211. he says, As Translations are no further Scripture then they agree
with the Copies in the Original Tongues; so neither are these Copies further
then they agree with the Authographs, or original Copies, or with some Copies
perused and approved by the Apostles.

Obj. But it is a thing worth the knowing of this Author, Whether he, or any
man else, can infallibly produce the Authographs, or any such original Copies
of the Bible as have been so perused and approved of by the Apostles, and if
none can do this, how can they then prove any Copy or Translation to be true
(or Scripture as he phraseth it?) And if any can do this, how shall it be known
to be such without Divine Evidence undoubtedly to prove it?

Answ. But to this he gives us a general answer in his Preface to his Book of
Infidelity, where he tells us,

R.B. That the Holy Ghost by special inspiration was the Author of the
Scriptures, and by extraordinary Endowments was the Author of the miracles
which were wrought for its confirmation. Obj. But here it is necessary, that he
tells us where, when, and by whom those miracles were wrought which so
confirmed the scriptures. And in the second place he should tell us where, and
which are those Scriptures that were so confirmed; and withal, to produce some
Divine Evidence to prove what he therein says, before any wise man believe
him; for he himself in his Rest, Page 201. before cited, informs us,

R. B. That to believe implicitly, That the Testimony is Divine, or the
Scripture is the Word of God, this is not to believe God, but to resolve our
faith into some humane Testimony, even to lay our foundation upon the Sand,
where all will fall at the next assault.

And yet notwithstanding in Page 238. and 239. of his Saints Rest, before
mentioned, he tells us,

R.B. That something must be taken upon trust from man whether we will or no,
yet no uncertainty in our faith neither.

For, 1. says he, The mere illitterate man must take it upon trust, that the
Book is a Bible which he hears read, for else he knows not but it may be some
other Book.

Obj. What! may he not take it so upon trust that the Book is a Bible and yet
never the more know but it may be some other Book? or does not a man's simple
taking a thing (especially of such high concernment) so groundlesly upon trust,
argue some diminution of his knowledge and wisdom too, rather then any
augmentation of either.

R. B. 2. That these words are in it which the Reader pronounces.

3. That it is translated truly out of the Original Languages.

Obj. How can it be translated truly and imperfectly, or imperfectly and truly?
for in page 211. of the same Book he positively asserts, That there is an
impossibility that any Translation should perfectly express the sense of the
Original.

R. B. 4. That the Hebrew and Greek Copies out of which it was translated, are
true authentic Copies.

5. That it was originally written in these Languages.

6. Yea, and the meaning of diverse Scripturepassages, which cannot be
understood without the knowledge of Jewish (ustoms, of Cronology, Geography,
etc. though the words were never ^o exactly translated; all these, with many
more, the vulgar must take upon the word of their Teachers.

Obj. Alas poor Vulgars! what miserable hard tasks are here imposed upon you,
and almost all men, with a must? much like those put upon the children of
Israel, to make their full tale of brick, without any allowance of straw,
whereby they were put to take up any stubble wherever they could find it? But
can any wise man take these Doctrines to be divine, or come from God, they
being so irrational and absurd, and so contrary to him and his ways, who
oppointed his Gospel to be dispensed (not in an unknown Tongue, or upon any
such uncertainties to any, but) to all people in their own language, himself
also evidently and powerfully attesting the same, otherwise he obliges no man
to take it for truth, nor blames any man for taking it otherwise.

And whereas he positively asserts in page 211. of his Saints Rest, as before
is noted;

R. B. That there is an impossibility that any Translation should perfectly
express the sense of the Original.

Obj. It Is now incumbent on him to tell us whether it was the expressable
imperfect sense in Translations, or the unexpressable perfect sense of the
Original that was so confirmed by miracles; or whether it was all, or any of
those many books which are mentioned in Scripture (and whereof we have neither
original nor Copy) that were so confirmed; plain dealing herein would be very
satisfactory, and is even more then necessary.

In his book of Infidelity, Part 1. Page 11. he tells us, That

R. B. Besides the sanctifying Spirit of Christ proper to Gospel Times, there
is also a miraculous pouring out of the Spirit proper to the first age of the
Church.

Quest. How is miraculous pouring out of the Spirit proper to the first age of
the Church, when as Mr. Baxter himself affirms and proves by Irenaeus and
others, that it continued in the Church three or four hundred years at least
after the Apostles.

And in page 31. he gives a reason why Christ would then thus convincingly send
abroad such abundance of the Spirit, namely, Because he had the old Law of
Moses to repeal, and that was well known by the Jews to be Gods own, and men
must not believe Gods Law ceased or abrogated without proof.

Quest. Are there not yet many thousands of the Jews that adhere to the old Law
of Moses, and remain still in unbelief? And was not the Gospel miraculously
confirmed to the Gentiles, who owned not Moses Law, as well, and as much, and
more then it was to the Jews.

And in page 32. 33. among many other reasons against any such miraculous use
of the Spirit to continue in the Church, he gives two.

R.B. 1. Because (says he) we have the full use and benefit of the holy Ghost,
which was given then; that seal that was then set to the Christian Doctrine and
Scriptures, stands there still.

Quest. Is it to all the various and contradicting Doctrines and Scriptures in
the world that this seal is set, and stands there still, or to some only? and
if but to some, how may a man undoubtedly know to which of them that seal is
set, and to which not?

R.B. 2. Because Christ does still continue his spirit to his Churches, and
every true member thereof, but not the same use, and therefore not to enable
them to the same work as then; Tongues are not for them that believe, but for
them that believe not (says Paul) 1 Cor. 14. 22. that is to show the power of
Christ, and so convince them; but now the Scripture is sealed by these, there
is not the same use or need of them.

Obj. It Is true, the spirit was given and continued to true Churches, and every
Member thereof, but not without manifestation; for the manifestation of the
Spirit was given to every one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. as well as the
Spirit it self; for how else can any true Church or Member be known from false,
since all different sects and sorts of Christians pretend to have the Spirit;
yea, and this learned Author, with all his learned Oponents (no doubt) do
conceive themselves to be true Members of the true Church, and so each of them
to have the spirit, notwithstanding the many great and vast differences between
them in the most material and essential points of the Gospel, which is
inconsistent with their having the Spirit, whose Office is to evince truth, and
to lead into all truth; besides this Author himself in his Saints Rest, Par. 2
page 206. asserts, That he has still known those that pretend to the strongest
sense of spiritual Revelations, to have proved the most wicked and deluded
persons in the end.

And indeed, where see we in any that manifest power which always did, and
must accompany those that had this Spirit, Joh. 7.37.38. Mar. 16.17.18.20. Joh.
14.12.16. Heb 2.4. Lu. 24 49. Act. 14.8. Joh. 16.7.8. but the use and need of
this power is now denied by this Author, and by many other, who yet retain the
form of godliness, even as Saint Paul long since foretold that such should be
in these last days, and even then also injoined true Christians from all such
to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.1.5. Wherefore I conceive it would be very rash for any
man to believe this Author while he alleges that the Scripture is sealed by
the former powerful works of the Spirit, until some such powerful Works can be
produced by him to evince the verity thereof; and likewise, in the same manner,
to evince and set forth undoubtedly which, or what Scripture it is (of all the
many varius scriptures now extant in the world) that is so sealed, whereby it
may certainly be known and distinguished from all the rest; for this also is
absolutely necessary, unless his meaning be, that all Scripture whatsoever is
so sealed. And whereas he here tells us, That the gift of Tongues was for them
that believe not, to convince them; hence it will follow, That as long as there
are unbelievers in the world to be convinced, so long the gifts of Tongues is
necessary for that end.

And in Part 2. page 36 he gives another reason of the discontinuance of that
Divine Evidence and powerful convincement, in telling us,

R. B. That miracles would loose their convincing force and be no miracles if
they were common to all, and in all ages.

Yet in Par. 3. page 242. 243. he tells us, That it is certain from current
testimony, and Church-Records, That the gift of casting out devils and making
them confess themselves mastered by Christ, did remain in the Church three or
four hundred years at least after the Apostles. And for this he there produces
many Authors, and after says,

No where could Satan keep his possession, where the power of Christ did
assault him.

And in his Saints Rest, Part 2. page 232. he cites the words of some of those
Authors, telling us,

R. B. That Irenaeus affirms, That in his time the working of miracles, the
raising of the dead, the casting out of Devils, healing of the sick by mere
laying on of hands, by prophesying, were in force, and that some that were so
raised from death remained alive among them long after; and that Cyprian and
Turtul mentioned the ordinary casting out of devils, and challenge the Heathen
to come and see it.

Quest. Since miracles (as is confessed) were common, not only in the first age
in the Apostles time, but for four hundred years at least after, and yet lost
not their convincing force, nor ceased to be miracles, why then might they not
have continued in the ages since, without losing their convincing force or
ceasing to be miracles?

And if without any absurdity a man may affirm (as no doubt but he may) that
for those 400. years after the Apostles these miraculous and powerful gifts
were useful and necessary, then he may with as little absurdity affirm and
maintain, That they were since, and are still useful and necessary, even for
the very same ends and porposes; for Miracles or Tongues (as was said by this
Author) are not for them that believe, but for them that believe not; and are
there not still Heathens, Infidels, Jews, Turks, Pagans, Sorcerers, Witches,
Conjurors, Idolators in abundance of all sorts, many spiritual Wickednesses in
High Places now in the world, as well as then, and infinite numbers of
Mahometans now as were not then? And are there not in the world a numberless
number of all sorts and sects of Christians, of various Opinions, different
interests and persuasions, yet each pretend to have the Spirit, and be in the
Truth, and therefore condemn all the rest, among whom may be found more wicked,
base, tyrannical, bloody, cruel, covetous, and deceitful persons then
ordinarily among the Heathen themselves, witness the many Persecutions, Wars,
Massacres, Murtherings; Poysonings, Assassinations, Burnings, Killings, and
other ways of destroying of mankind, from, and among those called Christians,
and in particular, the cruel burnings and destroyings of men in queen Marys
days, in England; the many massacred and destroyed in France; the bloody
Inquisition in Spain; the unheard of Cruelties exercised upon the English by
the Dutch in Amboyna; the most monstrous abominable bloody cruelties done by
the Spaniards, in destroying many millions of harmless creatures, men women and
children in the West Indies, spoiling, robbing, and depriving them causlesly
both of their Estates, Countries and lives, and that so inhumanly and
barbarously, that it is sufficient alone to make the very name of a Christian
to stink all the world over, and as by report in some foreign parts, even
among Mahometans it does, where they use to say upon occasion one to another
[What do thou think I am a Christian to swear, lie, cozen, and deceive thee]
this is soon credited by such as know any thing of the manifold mysterious
frauds and over-reachings usually practiced in tradings and commerce even in
Christendom it self: For,

Are there not among them Publicans and Harlots, yea, and many
Whole-sale-Thieves, who rob and impoverish many men at one clap by getting
great store of Wealth into their hands upon credit, and then break, and so
cheat them all at once, and be safe by getting sanctuary in some Church,
Prison, or other prerogative Protection?

Nay, have there not been some Whole-sale-Thieves in Office and Authority, who
beggar Particular men and families at once by color of Law and Justice, and
yet escape scotfree, when in the mean time some so beggared or impoverished, do
but steal to supply natures necessity, shall be judged to death, when perhaps
the fault is most in the Government or in the Governors under which they live,
either in not punishing such great Thieves according to their demerit, and
causing restitution to be made, or at least, in not making some Provision for
the necessary supply of all such as are brought into unavoidable necessity and
streights, even as God commanded the Jews, Levi. 25 35. if thy brother be waxen
poor, and fallen to decay with thee, then thou shall relieve him; yea though he
be a stranger, or sojourner, that he may live with thee; and that all such
should be much indulged, is both reasonable, and according to Scripture, Pro.
6.30. Men do not despise a thief, much less revile him, (and lest of all ought
they to hang him) if he steal, to satisfy his soul when he is hungery.

And is there not in some places Justice and Right ordinarily so hard to be got
through multiplicity of Mizmazes, Intanglements, Intricaties, quirks and
Collusions divised and practiced by crafty and unconscionable Lawyers Clerks,
etc whereby Causes are usually protracted, Clyents perplexed, their Purses
dreined, and their Remedy made worse then their Disease, to the undoing of
many; how then can any ordinary or poor man think to be able to get Justice
that way wherein the rich are so frequently made beggars by seeking it, and go
without it too, when all is done.

For, may not some be seen thus spoiled by the injustice of ordinary Courts,
who thereupon appealing to the chief Magistrate and supremest Power (the only
means left them) for their relife, and after discoveries made of much injustice
done them, and after many fair words and promises of redress, may not some
nevertheless be yet seen still languishing without help, yea, and after many
years spent in tedious and chargeable attendances whereby their grievances are
more then trebbled upon them: And may not some such be yet seen (with much
sadness and affliction of spirit) still attending and still languishing under
all these oppressions, without any the least ease or relief.

And indeed, where can be seen any King or chief Magistrate to lay the heavy
burdens and grievances of the people so to heart, as out of pity, conscience,
or good disposition to ease and disburthen them, or so much as effectually to
reform the aforesaid abominations after they be discovered so offensive to
honest, wise, and virtuous men, and so great a shame to any
Christian-Commonwealth to permit, and more then any man, having power in his
hand, with any true fear of God in his heart, can possibly endure.

These, with innumerable other great and horrid wickednesses, are perpetrated
among the sons of men, yea, and some such too in Chtistendom, as would make a
mere moraliz'd Heathen blush to hear; wherefore it is strange to me, that any
such considerate wise man should think, much less in print affirm, That there
is no use or need now of those powerful gifts of the Spirit to convince this
Reprobate and ungodly world, and to bring them from all these wicked and
sinful practices unto true faith and repentance, that so they may become true
and real Christians, not in name only (as the present mode is) but in deed and
in truth; and in particular, convincingly to reveal to all Kings and chief
Magistrates the greatness of their sin and wickedness in permitting, and not
remedying the aforesaid practices and oppressions, which are so hateful to God
and all good men.

And it is yet more strange to me, that any such man should so much neglect and
over-see all Experience in this and late ages, as to think that the usual
flatteries of mere Pulpit-Sermons by Trencher-Champlains, or any Mercenary
Clergy, or others who generally have men's persons in admiration because of
advantage, preach for filthy lucres sake, and are no small corrupt interest
themselves, living deliciously by the sweat of other men's brows, will ever
effect this Divine and powerful work in the world; let him believe it that can,
I cannot believe even what I might possibly desire to believe; their
conversation, their actions must work it in me.

R. B. And in his Saints rest, part 2. page 236. he has these words, viz. I
demand with my self By what argument did Moses and Christ evince to the world
the verity of their doctrine; and I find it was chiefly by this of miracles;
and surely Christ knew the best argument to prove the divine Authority of his
doctrine; and that which was the best then, is the best still.

And soon after he uses these words, namely, Does not Christ say, If I had not
done the works that no man else could do, ye had not had sin; (that is) Your
not believing me to be the Messiah had been no sin, for no man is bound to
believe that which was never convincingly revealed.

Obj. This Author by his asserting here that Christ did evince to the world the
verity of his Doctrine by Miracles, and that he surely knew the best Argument
to prove the divine Authority of his Doctrine; and by his concluding thence,
That that which was the best then, is the best still, had almost made me think
that he intended a perfect agreement with the truth which all along he had
opposed, but that I found him presently to falsify that Text in Joh. 15 24. in
like manner as he had done the same Text in many other places, viz. In leaving
out the Emphasis thereof even that which chiefly corroborated and upheld that
truth which in his precedent assertion he seemingly maintained; namely, in
omitting these words, viz. Among them, and that they did both see and hate^ for
the Text is, If I had done among them, etc. (that is, in their presence that
they might both see and hear the Miracles done by Christ, as the Samaritans did
those that were done by Philip, Acts 8.6.) they had not had sin; but now have
they beth seen and hated both me and my Father.

And with the like unfaithfulness does he bring up the Rear in the words
following by omitting to add [to him] by which it is made neither current nor
found; for if St. Paul were now living, and had convincingly revealed the
Gospel to many thousand men, and not to me, this (though it bound them to
believe, yet it) binds not me, to whom it was never convincingly revealed; but
when ever it is convincingly revealed to me, as well as to them, then it binds
me, as well as them, but not else.

These bawks are not comely in any man, especially if in the least he pretends
sincerity; for as the sin of the Scribes and Pharisees there, was much
aggravated by their seeing and hating, so is every man's else (though not in the
same degree) that shall see this, or any other Text flatly against his purpose,
and then to cite it so maimedly, as to make it speak against the intention or
genuine sense thereof (as by this Author this is often cited) whereby to make
Christ, whose words they were, to bear false witness so much against himself
and his truth, this I conceive is no small offense, nor is this any other then
a friendly caution, that when ever this Argument is again handled, both Christ,
his truth, and this Text may be better dealt with.

R. B. And whereas this Author here tells us from current Testimony, That the
gift of casting out Devils, and making them confess themselves mastered by
Christ, did remain in the Church for three or four hundred years at least after
the Apostles; and that Satan could no where ^eep his possession, where this
power of Christ did assault him.

Now then let it be considered:

Quest. 1. Whether there be not many Pagan Nations whereof Satan has full
possession, and wherein he is worshipped by the Inhabitants as God.

2. Whether he has not in all Nations, places and persons, some large
possession, at least in their hearts, by envy, pride, covetousness, or some
other base affection and lust.

And shall any such man yet think that there is not now need or use of these
powerful gifts of the Spirit to dispossess this powerful Prince that yet so
rules in the world and hearts of men? Or can he, or any man else be so simple,
as to think that Satan ever was, or yet is so weak or foolish, as to be scared
and cast out of any of all these his strong holds, merely by the various,
uncertain, and contrary holy winds, blown from Pulpits by artificial Divines,
any more then he ever was or will be cast out of any place or person by virtue
of holy Water sprinkled by Friars or Monks.

Wherefore for these and many other good causes it may be well deemed, That
there was since the said four hundred years, and is yet, the same need of the
said powerful gifts of the spirit as were formerly given by Christ to his
Church, notwithstanding all, or any thing said by this learned Author to the
contrary.

5. Dan. Featly another Doctor in Divinity, and famed for a great Scholar; in
his Dippers Dipped, page 1. likewise plainly tells us, That

No Translation is simply authentical, or the undoubted Word of God; in the
undoubted Word of God there can be no error, but in Translations there may be,
and are errors. The Bible translated (therefore) is not the undoubted Word of
God, but so far only as it agrees with the Original.

Now these passages coming forth by Authority as licenced Virtues, if the
learned Licencer know any; and this Argument being approved as sound and good
by other of the learned in my hearing, I cannot choose but query thus of my own
understanding, or of any man's else that has charity and ability to inform me
better.

Whether the very same Argument, upon the very same grounds and reasons, may
not in like manner be enforced against all Copies whatsoever, in any Language
whatsoever, as well and as truly as against Translations? thus: viz.

No Copy is simply authentical, or the undoubted Word of God; in the undoubted
Word of God there can be no Error, but in Copies there may be, and are Errors.
The Bible copyed (therefore) is not the undoubted Word of God, but so far only
as it agree^h with the Original.

For, although it be admitted by many that the original Penmen of the
Scripture were all inspired by God, yet it may be, and is by all denied, that
the Copyers thereof were any more inspired then the Translators, but that they
might err, and have erred as well as Translators as before is manifest) how
else came there such diversities of Copies into the world as well as of
Translations?

And whereas in the conclusion of the Argument is employed, That so far as
either Translation or Copy can be proved to agree with the Original so far only
it is to be accounted the Word of God: Whence I query.

Whether it be possible for any to produce the undoubted several Originals of
the several Books of the Bible, or undoubtedly to know them if it were possible
to produce them, they being written by diverse persons, in diverse places, in
diver ages, in div^rs Languages, and upon diverse occasions?

And if none be able to do this, I then query,

How it can be possible for any undoubtedly to prove any Book, Chapter or
Verse, either of Translation or Copy to agree with the Original.

Besides, seeing reason and experience teach, That time produces such
variations and changes in languages, as that a word signifying one thing in one
age, may and often has another signisication put upon it by use and custom in
another age; whence else is it, that some Hebrew and Greek words bears diverse,
some six, some seven, and some contrary significations, as one word to signify
both to bless and to curse in Job 2.9. And it cannot in reason be imagined, but
that some words may have quite lost their Original signification, since the
first writing of the Bible; wherefore it would prove a very difficult work (if
not impossible) for any to give to each passage and word its genuine sense and
undoubted signification, if it were possible (as it is not) that the very true
originals might be both produced and known.

For Resolution in the Premises, conference being had with diverse Scholars of
eminent esteem for piety, learning, and ability in Divinity, one whereof (with
womanish frowardness) used altogether authoritative admonitions and censures
instead of Argument and Reason, which was expected, and only could satisfy.
But the other no less learned, but much more ingenuous (acknowledging the
charge in the general to be just) answered. That notwithstanding the variations
or contradictions, either in Copies, or in Translations, yet they were all true
in the substance; whereas the truth in the substance was not the doubt nor
question, but this, How the said Copies or Translations so qualified as
aforesaid, could, or can with any Justice or Reason be imposed in each several
Language, on each several Nation and people, as the undoubted Word of God. And
how the various Expositions, Doctrines, and Conclusions drawn from these by
their several and respective Ministers, can be proposed to the people in each
several Nation, as the preaching of the true Gospel of Christ and Word of God
to be believed in for salvation; especially considering how that their
preaching is altogether fallible, seldom probable, often contradicting, and
condemning one the other for erroneous persons, and Heretics; and one the
others Doctrine for Error and Heresy, etc.

Whereas it is evident by these Scriptures we have that the true and only
Gospel, Gal. 1.8, 9. or Word of God, being a great Mystery was hid in God, Ephesians.
3.9. and first delivered to Christ, Joh. 12.49, 50. who gave it to his
Disciples, Joh. 17.8, 14. Whom he deligated as his Witnesses and Ambassadors,
Acts 10.41. 2 Cor. 5.20. Authorizing them to publish the same unto the world as
Gospel to every creature, Mar. 16.15. Act. 10.42. Yet this their deligation or
Authority was not complete until they were endued with power from on high, by
coming down of the holy Spirit upon them, Lu. 24.49. Act. 1.4. And when they
were thus baptized with the holy Spirit themselves, Acts 1.5. they then
preached this Word of God, 1 Pet. 1.25. or this Gospel by the holy Spirit sent
down from heaven, 1 Pet 1.12. (i.e.) God confirming the Word, Mar. 16.20. and
bearing witness thereto with signs and wonders, and diverse miracles and gifts
of the holy Spirit, Heb 2.4. Upon which infallible Testimony and evident Divine
demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God, was the Christian faith and
Churches then founded by the Apostles and true Ministers; 1 Cor 2.4, 5. Heb.
6.1, 2. and no other then the same Foundation can any man now lay, more
lawfully then he may now preach any other Gospel then the same that was then
preached by the Apostles and true Ministers, 1 Cor. 3.11. Gal. 1.8, 9.

Nor did these only publish this Gospel, or Word of God thus witnessed, but did
also in their Ministry propose the gifts of the Spirit to be promised to all
believing the Gospel, or called thereby, both near, and afar off, Acts 2 38,
39. And they being made able Ministers of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. did
accordingly administer the same by laying on of hands upon them, Acts 8.17, 18.
Acts 19.6. Gal. 3.5. making good the promise of Christ to all believers, that
these signs should follow them that believe, Mar. 16.17, 18. Thus were they
all baptized into one body by one spirit, and were all made to drink into one
spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. (i.e.) every one of this body had some manifest gift of
the Spirit, whereby they became Members of that body to profit the body withal,
1 Cor. 12.7.12. Romans 12.4, 5, 6. so as if any one had not some such gift of the
spirit, the same was none of Christ's, (i.e.) none of that his body or Church,
Romans 8.9.

The consideration of all which, puts me thus further to query.

1. Whether the said Copyes or Translations of the Bible, or any Doctrines or
Conclusions drawn from thence by men fallible and subject to error and mistake
as other men are, be any other or more then humane Testimony, or so great as
that of John Baptist, mentioned Joh. 1.27, 28, 29, 31, 36?

2. Whether all humane Testimony (even that of John Baptist among the rest) was
not rejected by Christ as an insufficient ground for divine and saving faith to
be built upon? Joh. 5.32, 33.

3. Whether did not Christ produce greater witness then that of John or any
other humane Testimony, without which the sons of men were not bound or
required to believe? Joh. 5.36. Joh. 15.24. Joh. 10.37.

4. Whether any ought to be received for true Ministers or Ambassadors of the
Gospel of Christ who seek their Ambassie out of Books or Libraries, or make the
various Commentaries or Expositions of the said Cop^es or Translations, or
their own or other men's Doctrines or Conclusions therefrom, the matter or
ground of their Ministry or Embassy.

5. Whether any ought to be received for true Ministers or Ambassadors of the
Gospel of Christ who are not witnessed to by evident demonstration of the
Spirit and Power of God, as aforesaid, seeing the reasons thereof both in the
Apostles time and since, are the same; so that if it was not then superfluous,
it was since, and is yet necessary, even for the same ends and purposes, Romans
15.18, 19. Acts 8.6. and 9 35, 42. and 11.21. and if the said witness of God
was so absolutely necessary to evidence the Truth of Christ's own Ministry, as
without it his own and other men's Testimony of him was invalid, and not to be
believed, but might be waved without sin, then no Ministry of the Gospel since
ought to be believed or received (as such) upon easier or lesser terms; for no
servant is greater then his Master; but the first is true, Joh. 5.31.33, 34,
36. John 15.24. Joh. 10.37.

6. Whether any ought to be accounted true Churches, or Members of a true
Church of Christ, who are destitute of the said baptism of the spirit, or who
make the said fallible matter, or Ministry, or humane Testimony the ground of
their faith? and where in Scripture can we find mention of any such Church of
Christ, it being most consonant both to Scripture and Reason?

1. That every member of that body be conformable to its Head, in partaking of
the Spirit in some measure, with manifestation, which Christ the Head received
above measure, whereby it ran down, or extended it self to the whole body, and
to each member in particular, whereof the Oil poured on Aarons head, and
running down to the very skirts of his Garment, was a lively type and figure.
Psalm. 133.2.

2. That the great structure of Christianity, whose Principle is. That a man at
his first entrance therein should be required to deny himself and to forsake
all his worldly enjoyments in this life only on the assurance he then receives
of the great glory and rewards promised in the life to come, should then also
have this faith of his established upon Divine and infallible Evidence; less
then which cannot be any sufficient ground, nor prove better in this case to
men, then the house mentioned by Christ did to the foolish builder, who built
the same upon the earth without foundation, which suddenly fell, the fall
whereof was very great, Lu. 6.49.

When the Premises are duly weighed, it will be the less marvel that the
Doctriens and Opinions of the most able, learned, and best men in the world
have been, and are so various, full of cantradictions, and opposite one against
another, as may appear to any that shall but look into the great controversies
that in all, or most ages that we hear of, have been holden and maintained both
in Churches and Councils, and amongst the most studious Fathers, and wisest
Penmen and Preachers in all these points, viz. Some have, and do hold the
Deity to be ubiquitary. Some circumscribed of the later Opinion was our late
King JAMES, renowned for learning and depth of Judgment. Some have and do
judge the Deity to consist of a threefold personality. Others have and do hold
Christ and the Holy Chost to be creatures, and Gods only by deputation.
Concerning the Decrees of God, some have and do hold the greatest part of
mankind and devils to be designed to everlasting damnation. Some have and do
hold and believe the contrary. Some conceive that all mankind may be saved if
they will. Others have and do believe, that not only they, but the Devils at
the last day shall be saved, yet so, as by fire. Concerning the ordering and
governing of the world, some will have it performed by God, whom they say is
present in all places and does all things as himself will, not allowing any
thing to be contingent, but that all things whatsoever, even the most
inferior, yea, and the most wicked, to be wrought by him; affirming, That
wicked men do commit their Wickedness by the just impulse of God: That the
Devil and wicked men cannot conceive, nor contrive, nor execute any mischief,
nor so much as endeavor its execution any further then God himself does
command them; and they are compelled to perform obedience to such commands.
That Adultery or Murder, in as much as it is the Work of God, the author,
mover, and compellor, it is not a crime; but in as much as it is of man, it is
a wickedness; and so making God the predeterminer of all events, whether holy,
or unholy; clean, or unclean; good or evil. Some ascribe only good actions to
God, and to his good Angels. Others assign all to men, because they shall be
judged according to their Works, which they conceive cannot be reputed theirs
if they were not free and voluntary agents in the doing of them. Some will have
all evil actions to be done by the Devil. Some judge him to have sole command
of this world, because he is called the God of this world, and Prince of the
Air. Concerning the person of Christ, some have judged it to be constituted of
two natures; some only of one, which some have holden to be Divine only. others
humane. Concerning the death of Christ, some have; and do restrain it only to
the Elect; others have, and do extend it to all mankind; and some to all
creatures, or the whole Creation. Concerning the nature of his death, some
thought all men's sins to be discharged thereby; some the sins of the Elect
only; and that Faith serves only to reveal this to them, and to give them
comfort in it. Some conceive no man's sins to be pardoned by his death, but that
it served only to confirm the truth of his Doctrine, namely, Remission of sins,
and salvation through an endeavored conformity to his life and preaching.

And according to this diversity of Opinions of God and Christ, are the
diversity of definitions of Faith, and the end and use of it, which some
conceive to be Justification, others only Sanctification, and some both: No
less various are they in their Doctrine concerning Faith how it is obtained,
which some hold to be by infusion; others, that it is acquired so concerning
perseverance in Faith. Concerning our Estate by birth, whether damnable or not.
Concerning the Sacraments, and wherefore they serve. Concerning the persons
that are to administer them. The persons whom they are to be administered to,
and when, and upon what conditions. Concerning the Sabbath Day, whether moral,
divine; or humane; when it begins, when it ends, and what works may, or
may not be done upon it. In all these, and sundry others, even concerning
Marriage, we find them no less divided then in those before mentioned.

Moreover there are many of great learning, who affirm Remission of sin to be a
fruit or consequence only, and no part of our Justification. Many there are on
the other side, who make Remission of sin antecedent to Justification, and
Justification to be its immediate consequent. Many take Remission of sin to be
the whole of our Justification; yea, What large disputes and Treatises are
written very much to prove this, and many famous men for learning there are
that maintain it. Many there be that take Justification to consist partly in
Remission of sin, and partly in the imputation of Christ's own Righteousness;
and these, with the former, say, That accepting us as Righteous, is a
consequent of Justification. Sin must first be remitted, (say the former) and
Christ's Righteousness imputed ours (say the later) before God can accept any
man as righteous.

Likewise are they at variance both how, and when Justification is obtained.

1. How; whether it be by the active or passive obedience of Christ, or both;
some say one way, some another; some say it is by Faith as it is an act;
others, as it is an habet; and some say it is by Works.

2. When it is obtained: Some say it was from eternity by an eminent act of
God; and that all the sins of the Elect were actually pardoned; the Debt-book
crossed; the Handwriting cancelled, etc. and that this grand Transaction
between God and the Mediator Jesus Christ was concluded on, and dispatched long
before men had any being in Nature or Grace. Some say it was only from the
death of Christ; and some others say it is not until we actually believe.

Infinite are the differences even between men of greatest eminency, and of
most exquisite learning and parts, as well about the definition of Faith,
Repentance, and almost all other graces, as about the most substantial and
highest points in Divinity and of the Gospel, as may be further seen in Mr.
Blakes Exceptions, Mr. G. Kendals Answer to Mr. Joh. Goodwin; Mr. Ayre's
Justification of Infidels; Mr. Joh. Craudons Anatomy, and Mr. R. Baxters
Answers and Replies to all these.

And from whence can it be imagined that all these variety and contrariant
Faiths and Opinions do come, but from the variety, uncertainty, and
insufficiency of the Scripture clearly to resolve these Points, and vindicate
them from all such Exceptions as lie against them on each hand; but the
Scripture is so far from doing this, that each various and contrary Faith and
Doctrine is stiffly upheld and maintained from the various Copies and
Translations thereof, and from the various and contrary readings and meanings
which each Opinionist respectively may and does put upon the Scripture it self,
insomuch, that indeed it is now made capable of any impression which every
learned and witty man can invent and pleases to put upon it to serve his own
turn and occasion, though he face about and change never so much, never so
often. And thus each man still makes the Scriptures to be like to Pictures,
wherein every man in the Room believes they look on him only, and that
wheresoever he stands, or how often soever he changes his station.

Now whether all this does arise from a natural hidden sense of the Scripture
or from the brevity of them, or for want of many Books mentioned in Scripture,
whereof we never had either Original or Copy; or from mistakes made by
Transcribers, Printers, or Translators; or from the varions acceptance of
words and phrases contained in them; and in probability, understandable only by
such persons to whom they were first written, who being beforehand grounded in
the Faith and Principles of Christianity, and instrueted in the things treated
upon, were thereby enabled aright to understand the mind of the Penmen in what
they did but briefly touch upon, in their Writings to them: Or whether from all
of these, or from any other cause or causes, I leave to the wise and
considerate to determine; but certainly were they perspicuous in their sense,
so many learned, studious, good men could not possible so much have erred and
been divided in their understanding of them. And if such as these,
notwithstanding all their advantages of learning, have not been able to resolve
the truth of these Doctrines so familiarly mentioned in the Scripture, and so
necessarily required to true Christianity, who shall conceive that they were
intended by God for the ground of Faith and Worship for all, or any sort of men
whatsoever, except we shall conceive that the unlearned sort of men are in a
better capacity perfectly to resolve the sense of Scripture then the learned,
which is too gross to imagine; or else that all men are bound to know and
conform their Faith and Worship to a Doctrine that none of them certainly
understand, which none will affirm, it being inconsistent with that Justice and
Goodness which all confess to be in Almighty God.

Let us see what to this point is said by learned Dr. Tailor in his forecited
Book, page 13. his words are these, viz. It is a demonstration that nothing can
be necessary to be believed upon pain of damnation but such propositions of
which it is certain that God has spoken and taught them to us, and of which it
is certain that this is their sense and purpose: for if the sense be
uncertain, we can no more be obliged to believe it in a certain sense, then
we are to believe it at all if it were not certain that God delivered it; but
if it be only certain that God spoke it and not certain to what sense; our
faith of it is to be as indeterminate as its sense, nor is it consonant to Gods
justice to believe of him that he can or will require more.

But to go on, and bring this neater; It is manifest (even in those Scriptures
we have) that Jesus Christ requires no credit to be given to his Doctrine,
either upon his own bare word, or the bare word of any persons whatsoever (as
before is set forth) If I bear witness of my self (says he) my witness is not
true; neither receive I testimony of men; the works that I do in my Fathers
Name, they bear witness of me that the Father has sent me. And when he is
blaming the Scribes and Pharisees for their unbelief in him, he thus far
excuses them in it, That if he had not done among them the Works that none
other man did, they had not had sin.

Now who can conceive that Christ should pronounce men guiltless for not
believing him upon his own bare testimony, and yet not hold men much more
guiltless for not believing the Scripture upon its bare testimony. Christ,
though he bare witness of himself, his witness was certain and true: whereas
Copies and Translations, as before we have seen, are uncertain and erroneous;
Christ disclaims the Testimony of men, yea of John the Baptist, as a ground
insufficient to engage men to believe in his Doctrine, though all that John
said of him was true; and what he had heard and seen, that he testified. And
shall we imagine that he will bind all the succeeding generations of men to
believe the truth of Christ and the Gospel upon any such inferior testimony as
the testimony only of such as disclaim infallibility, and have neither heard
nor seen as John did. Shall God and Christ be true, and all men liars? and yet
shall fallible men be preferred before them, in being believed upon lower and
easier terms then either they, or their most infallible servants? Or shall God
be conceived to require contraries of men, as not to believe supernatural
truths (such the Gospel is judged to be) without a suitable evidence? and on the
other side, require men to believe it without any such evidence: Shall men be
blameless, and blamed by him upon one and the same account? If this cannot be,
as surely it cannot, then it must necessarily follow, That the Scripture was
never instituted or intended by Almighty God to be the ground of Christian
Faith and Religion, or to be believed in, and obeyed by mankind to salvation.

Moreover it is evident, if we may take the meaning according to the sense of
the words, as they are delivered to us in Translations; That the Epistles, and
St. John's Revelation in the New Testament were all written unto Believers; and
that both the Acts and Lukes Gospel were written to Theophilus, an instructed
Disciple, Luke 14. And it is most probable, that the other three Gospels were
written to believers also, at least, for their sakes, especially for such of
them as did not see Christ themselves after his resurrection, whereby he
mightily declared himself to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4. whereof the rest of
the Apostles, as well as Thomas, much doubted whilst he lay dead, as may
appear by 1 Pet. 1.3. where St. Peter, speaking of himself and of the rest,
says, That God of his abundant mercy had begotten them again to a lively hope
by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and what may be understood
by this, but that all their hope was extinct, or languished by his death, and
revived again by his resurrection? And that his being risen from death was very
hardly believed by any of them, may appear from Mark 16.10, 11. when Mary
Magdalen told the Disciples, as they were mourning and weeping, that Christ was
alive, and that she had seen him, they believed it not, and from Luke 24.21,
22. where two of the Disciples, after they had with much sadness declared how
the chief Priests and Rulers had delivered Christ to be condemned to death, and
had crucified him, (said) we trusted that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel, intimating thereby, that he being then dead and gone they were
quite hopeless, expecting nothing less then his rising again; for after, when
they heard by the women that he was alive, they were astonished at it, and in
Mark 16.13. when upon his appearing unto two of them these went and told it to
the rest of the Apostles, yet they believed it not, and hence it was, that he
appeared and showed himself to his Disciples, 500 at once, and familiarly and
often to such of them, as he intended to make his Apostles and chief witnesses
to the world, to confirm this their belief in his resurrection, insomuch that
when he first appeared to them, he showed them his hands and his feet, and bad
them handle and see, Luke 24.39. Jeh. 20.20, etc. where it is very observable,
that Thomas not being then present, would not believe the report of all the
rest of the Apostles that he was risen, unless he might see and handle his
wounds also as they had done, wherein also afterward Christ gave him
satisfaction, by permitting him to do so likewise, and then withal left a
blessing in the hands of the Apostles for all such other of his Disciples who
had not seen him (as they had done) yet did believe his resurrection. Wherefore
most requisite it was, That as well for the communicating of this blessing, as
for the confirmation of the Disciples and believers in the belief of Christ's
resurrection, they should write the Narratives of all these things, and most
probable it is, the Apostles did therefore write the three other Gospels, for
these ends and purposes as may be gathered by comparing John the Apostle with
the Apostle John, (that is) Joh. 20.31. with 1 John 5.13.

I have been the larger upon this, because I find not only ordinary men, but
most learned profound Teachers do pervert this place of Scripture to the
mis-leading of many (whether ignorantly or purposely I will not determine.)

1 In making the sense of the words, as if Christ thereby did intend a blessing
on all such, as in the future should believe the teachings of men without
seeing any divine evidence to attest the truth of their Doctrine: whereas
Christ's words had respect only to such other of his Disciples or believers,
who had not seen Christ as Thomas did, yet did believe his being risen again,
which Thomas by no means would do, until he had both seen and felt him.

2 In making the Apostles words in verse. 31. to be intended to all the world as
a ground sufficient for true and saving faith, whereas if it were so, it might
serve instead of a true Ministry in all nations, when as to the generality of
mankind it was mere barbarism coming from the Apostle but in one language
only, which would have been a failer, not imaginable in the Apostle, having
the gift of tongues enabling him purposely to teach all nations and people in
their respective languages, and accordingly no doubt he would have written, if
he had intended it for any such great and general use, but it is most plain,
that his intention therein was only to confirm believers of that one language
in their belief of that one great article of Christ's being the Son of God
whereof they could not doubt, if they firmly believed his resurrection.

And if we may have leave to give a like credit to the Scripture in this matter
and to make conclusions from plain premises, such as many would have us give
and make from none at all, or at best, from such as are far more dark; We may
both see and conclude, that the Scripture is so far from testifying it self to
be any sufficient ground for faith and conviction to the unbelieving world,
that it testifies the quite contrary.

1 In that it testifies, that the power of God by signs and miracles
accompanying the Ministry, and attesting the truth and divine authority of
their doctrine was the only true ground of faith and conviction unto
unbelievers, as before is set forth, and is evident by these texts, Ioh. 16.7,
8, 9. Acts 1.4, 8. Luke 24.49. Act. 1.1, 2, 3. Mark 16.20. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
compared with Romans 15.18, 19, 20. Act. 8.6. And that thus, and upon this
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, the true Ministry of the Gospel fitted
by gifts, Ephesians 4.8, 11, 12, 13. Christ Jesus himself being the chief
Cornerstone, was Christian belief, and Churches founded, Ephesians. 2.20. And that
no foundation other then such, can any man warrantably lay or plead for, 1 Cor.
3.11.

2 In that it testifies, That whatsoever is delivered in any unknown tongue, or
but in a doubtful and uncertain sense, is as barbarism, not obliging any to
believe it, 1 Cor. 14.7, 8, 9, 10. for no man is bound, or can infallibly and
convincingly believe any thing which is not infallibly and convincingly
revealed to him.

Notwithstanding all the uncertainties before specified, yet how does each Sect
of Christians assert, that they are of the true belief, and many therefore
challenge the highest privileges of true believers, mentioned in Scripture to
belong unto them, yea, and some such do they assume to have, as no true
believer ever had in this life, I shall give instances. They assume to be true
believers, and to have the Spirit of God, yea the same, as true believers
formerly had, and by which the Scripture was given forth. To be actually
justified, to have eternal life, and to be already passed from death to life.
To have Christ, and his divine nature within them, and that white stone wherein
a new is written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it, etc.

Wherein if I am not exceedingly mistaken, they are, first in their conceiving
themselves to be true believers, yet ground it upon various, yea on contrary
doctrines, and want both the true ground upon which true believers built their
faith and the same power whereby true believers were to be known, Mark 16.17,
18. or that they have the same spirit by which the Scripture was given forth,
and yet make use of, and cite texts amiss rendered in translations, even as
others do, who pretend not to have the Spirit.

Secondly, what can reasonably be imagined or understood by believers being
justified by faith, I am inclined to think it is no more then their being saved
by hope, and what is or can be meant by this more then now in this life to hope
to be saved hereafter in the life to come, as the Apostle reasons, Rom 8.24,
25. where speaking of himself and other believers (says) we are saved by hope,
but hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man sees, why does he yet hope
for, for if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for it,
and why may not the same be said of being justified by faith, i^ being likewise
the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. which when they once come to be
seen (or actually to be enjoyed) then faith as well as hope (in respect of
those things believed and hoped for) shall cease, for what need a man either to
hope or trust any longer for that, of which he has already the sight or actual
possession, 1 Peter 1.19.

The like may be understood at least, as I conceive, of these and the like
texts. He that has everlasting life is already passed from death to life, must
not the meaning be? That he believes in this, that he shall actually enjoy
everlasting life in the world to come, and at the resurrection, even that
everlasting life, which he has here only by faith, unless it can reasonably
be imagined, that every believer must have actually two everlasting lives; one
here in this world, and the other in the world to come, to commence not until
the resurrection. Luke 20.35, 36.

And whereas it was said of believers, That Christ was in them, this was by
faith likewise; and where it was told them, that they were partakers of the
divine nature it was there also told them, that it was by having promises, 2
Pet. 1.4. which they laid hold on by faith and to be actual partakers of the
divine nature at the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.47.48.

And for the white stone that is likewise to be received in the life to come
actually, even at the same time when believers shall receive power over
Nations, etc. which will not be until the resurrection, Revel. 2.17, 26, 27.
Revel. 20.4.

How sottish therefore is the practice of all such as attribute any divine
esteem, honor, or worship to any man, conceiving him from these and the like
texts to have Christ, or the divine nature in him, or to be sent of God, to
have the Spirit of God, or to have divine authority, not bringing with him
divine power evidently to attest the same.

And since there are such various and contradictory opinions, even among men of
eminent learning; parts, and integrity, as before is seen about justification,
wherein its more probable that all have erred, then possible all to be in the
truth. I have also proposed my opinion, though different from all theirs,
declaring what I conceive may be meant by believers, being justified by faith,
comparing it to, and expounding it by the phrase of the Apostle, we are saved
by hope, and by some other texts of like import, as, He that believes has
everlasting life, and is already passed from death to life; and I think that no
text can be found more positive for present and actual justification of a
believer in this life, then these and some other texts are for his everlasting
salvation and glorification here also; as namely, He has translated us into
the Kingdom of his dear son, Col. 1.13. has raised us up together, and made
us sit together in heavenly place in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. but ye are come to
Mount Sion, etc. Heb. 12.22. whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans
8.30. And now without offense to any let me here propose in this point my
thoughts alittle further, not imposing any thing upon any man but leaving all
men to that freedom, from which no man can justly take them. Thus whether that
actual justification and salvation of men, come not both together, and neither
to be until the day of judgment; and that faith or believing simply
considered will not then save any man: How then can it now justify or make any
man at any time the more acceptable in the sight of God.

To make that which is here intended plain to be understood, we need
distinguish of believing:

1. There is a believing a thing to be true, which is the proper act of the
understanding; this I call a believing simply considered. Thus to believe (not
being in a man's choice, but imposed upon him by force of the evidence that is
brought to evince it) procures no reward or acceptance with God, and the not
believing in the same sense procures no punishment.

2 There is obeying or disobeying of that truth so believed, which being an act
of the will, and in a man's choice procures reward or punishment. This also is
called a believing, or a not believing, and in some places a hearing, or a not
hearing, in Joh. 16.8, 9. it is called a not-believing, and in Act 3.22, 23.
it is called a hearing and a not hearing; and when or wheresoever eternal life
or salvation was promised upon believing or hearing, or punishment threatened
upon not believing or not hearing, there always obeying or disobeying is
implied, though not expressed. And herein let appeal be made to any rational and
impartial man, if any of the Jews, who only believed Christ to be the true
Messiah, or the Gospel to be truth, without obeying him or it, should have been
saved thereby; when as we find that salvation and damnation at the last day, to
be disposed only according to obedience and disobedience, Matthew. 16.27. Matthew.
25.27, etc. Romans 2.6. to the end.

Herewith judicious Dr. Tailor concurs, speaking the very same, in sense,
though different in expression. In his forecited Book, page 24, 25. his words
being as follows. Faith (says he) if it be taken for an act of the
understanding merely, it is so far from being that excellent grace that
justifies us, that it is not good at all, but in genere naturae, and makes the
understanding better in it self, or pleasing to God, just as strength does the
arm, or beauty the face, or health the body; these are natural perfections
indeed, and so knowledge or true belief is to the understanding, but this makes
us not at all more acceptable to God, for then the unlearned were certainly in
a damnable condition; and all good Scholars should be saved, (whereas I am
afraid too much of the contrary is true) but unless faith be made moral by
mixture of choice and charity, it is nothing but a natural perfection, not a
grace or a virtue, and this is demonstrably proved in this, that by the
confession of all men, of all interests and persuasions, in matters of mere
belief, invincible ignorance is our excuse, if we be deceived, which could not
be, but that neither to believe aright is commendable, nor to believe amiss is
reprovable, but where both one and the other is voluntary, and chosen
antecedently or consequently, by prime election, or ex post facto, and so comes
to be considered in morality, and it is part of a good life, or a bad life
respectively.

And if any shall say otherwise, it is to say, that some men shall be damned,
when they cannot help it, perish without their own fault, and be miserable for
ever, because of their unhappiness to be deceived through their own simplicity,
and natural, or accidental but inculpable infirmity; for it is inconsistant
with the goodness of God, to condemn those who err, where error has nothing
of the will in it, who therefore cannot repent of their error, because they
believe it true, who therefore cannot make compensation, because they know not
that they are tied to dereliction of it, thus far the Doctor.

In the first sense Pharaoh with his Egyptian Magicians, believed, that the
miracles which Moses did was by the finger of God, to which belief or
convincement they were not Volunteers, but compelled by force of the said
miracles wrought in their sighs, yet they disobeying the message confirmed so
by those miracles were destroyed, notwithstand their so believing.

In this sense also it is said, Joh 12 42, 43. That many of the chief Rulers
believed in Christ, but did not confess him, because of the Pharisees, lest
they should be turned out of the Synagogues, because they loved the praise of
men more then the praise of God.

Hereunto compare, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. where Christ sets forth the ends of his
sending the spirit or power, by which the Apostles and others wrought such
mighty works, one whereof was to convince the world of sin, where note the
expression, when he comes (says Christ) he will convince the world of sin, As
if he had said, That when or wheresoever this spirit and power which I will
send you shall demonstate it self in the world to the sons and drughters of
men, it shall certainly procure the convincement of their understandings to
believe the truth of the Gospel attested thereby; And why of sin? because they
believe not (that is) obey not the Gospel in their wills and affections being
convinced (or believing) of the truth thereof in their understandings.

For further justifying this Exposition, take notice, That, that which in the
former text is termed a belief, is here in this later text termed a
convincement and both having reference to the understanding. And in like
manner, that which in the former text is termed a not confessing, is in this
later text termed a not believing, and both having reference to the will and
affections; in respect of obedience, so that in the Scripture-sence a man at
one and the same time may be said to believe, and not to believe, (that is) to
believe intellectually, and not to believe obediencially, whereby he becomes a
self-condemner, being found guilty even by the verdict of his own understanding
and conscience.

This being that great condemnation, which in Joh. 3.17. is set forth with an
Emphasis on men for loving darkness rather then light, which no man can
reasonably be said to do, unless he sees the light; for how can any man be
said to love one thing rather then another, which he never saw. Add to this 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. where St. Paul speaks of some that perish, because they received
not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. This they could not justly
be blamed for, unless they had apprehended it in their understandings to be a
truth; For whatsoever in my understanding I judge an untruth, (though the same
in it self be a truth, yet whiles I do judge it otherwise) I neither can or
ought to love it as a truth.

Hereunto also contributes the parable declared by Christ, ( Mat. 22. Luke 14.)
of a King who at the marriage of his son, made a great feast, and bad many
thereto; and when all things were in readiness he sent for his guests, who
(although all were unwilling to come, yet) not one of them said, or could say,
That he did not know of the Kings invitation, or that he did not believe the
truth of the message, or of the great preparation made for his bountiful
entertainment and welcome, none of all which was doubted by them, nor did any
of them say, that between them and the Kings Palace was any gulf or sea,
mountain, or rock, exceeding their power to get over, or that any one of them
were either sick, or lame or otherwise disabled to come, but their mere wills
and affections adhering to the things of this life was the only impediment,
and all their excuse.

Object. And for that which may be objected from John 12.37. Though Christ had
done so many miracles before the Jews, yet they believe not on him, but said;
He cast out Devils by the Prince of Devils.

Answ. It may be answered, That though they believed not so as to love or obey
him, yet they believed (as the chief Rulers aforementioned did) being
convinced in their understandings by the mighty works done by Christ among
them: for how else could their mere saying so amount to any sin, much less to
the unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, wherewith they were charged by
Christ, if they had but spoken in the simplicity of their hearts, and as in
truth they apprehended and believed; for it is of none but such, that Christ
speaks in Joh. 15.24. where he says, If I had not done among them the works
which no other man did, they had not had sin, but now have they both seen and
hated both me and my father. Where note, 1. What the great works done among
them produced; namely, their seeing, convincement, or believing intellectually.
2. What the consequence of that their seeing was; (namely) their hating both
him and his father, from whence sprang this their saying, which aggrevated
their sin, which had had nobeginning, or being unless they had seen and been
convinced.

And therefore I conceive from the premises may be safely concluded, That none
at years of discretion, in whose sight and presence signs and miracles were
wrought by Christ, or his Apostles and Ministers to attest the truth and divine
authority of their doctrine, but they were so convinced, as to believe the same
to be true, and of God; or thus; That all unbelievers (seeing the great witness
by signs and miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, which God gave to their
doctrine) were so convinced in their understandings, as they could not but
rationally conclude and believe the same to be true, and of god.

Notwithstanding all that is premised, and all the late and great pretenses of
Reformation, yet the pretense of divine right still remains, and is challenged
by many without divine power or manifestation, for (besides the Episcopal, or
rather Papal relics of ordination, that is, still retained and upheld amongst
us to be of divine right) did not the Assembly of Divines (so called)
consisting of Independents as well as of Presbiterians, hold themselves and
their Assembly to be divinely authorized from the mere recital of the Apostles
and Elders assembling at Jerusalem, mentioned in Acts 15. And as these still
maintained their authority to be divine, which was by holy Orders (as they call
it) conferred upon them from the Bishops supposed divine authority, lately
exploded as Antichristian; So these (with the Separatists) do still maintain
the baptizing of Infants, to be of divine right from the mere recital of the
Covenant of Circumcision made with Abruham and his natural seed, wherein
Abraham was commanded to circumcize all his male-servants, whether born in his
house, or bought with money of any stranger, though not of his seed, as well as
his natural seed, Genesis 17. but these baptize no servant from that ground, which
they may as warrantably do as baptize any Infant.

Nor are the Anabaptists (who deny the baptizing of Infants) excusable upon the
same account, in pretending to derive divine authority to preach and baptize
from the mere recital of that authority which was by Christ given personally to
the eleven Apostles, who both received and exercised the same long before the
recital thereof in Matthew. 28. from which no such authority can be derived to
any, because on that recital no authority at all was conferred by the eleven
Apostles themselves there mentioned, nor was their authority the more for it is
being there recited; nor had it been the less, if it had never been recited,
either there or any where else, and therefore no such authority can be derived
from that or any other Text.

Besides, these are very partial, in that they assume such great and sublime
authority to themselves, from the mere recital of such authority given by
Christ to his Apostles, and not withal judge themselves also, as well bound by
the recital of that prohibition given also by Christ to the same Apostles,
(viz.) That they should not go out in the exercise of that Ministerial
Function, until they were endued with power from on high, by the coming down of
the Holy Ghost upon them, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4.8. And therefore upon due
consideration of the whole matter it will be found. That these do assume to
themselves (from mere recitals) more authority then that which Christ gave to
the Apostles themselves, and whereof the Scriptures are but bare recitals.

Some other there are, who disowning all the former ways of conveyance yet to
keep on foot that divine authority, and that reverence and accommodation which
usually they received thereby in the world, would by another trick both cozen
themselves and all others (their own consciences only excepted) by telling the
people that this divine authority (which hitherto they have mist of) must needs
be in them; and that they by their free election and bountiful contribution may
convey it on whom they will, and on them if they please; but this also will be
found a mere shuffle and as vain as any of the former; for we find both by
Scripture and reason; That a true Ministry divinely authorized and empowered,
did and always must precede, beget, and constitute a true Church divinely
authorized; and that no Church or people whatsoever, who are not so begotten
and endued with divine power and authority themselves, can possibly convey any
such divine authority on any other: this is evidently seen a truth by all the
empty, vain, and fruitless laying on of hands, used as well in particular
Churches, as by others in their Ordination of Ministers, in imitation of the
Apostles laying on their hands whereby the manifest and powerful gifts of the
Spirit (as that of tongues and prophecy, etc.) were conveyed, Act. 19.6.

This form is still retained generally throughout Christendom, as well as
amongst us; but where is the power that should follow? here is the shell, but
where is the kernel? Might not little children or Apes, in imitation of these,
lay hands one upon one another, to as good purpose, and with as much success.

Nor want we many amongst us, who would needs have this whole Nation governed
merely by the Laws and Ordinances of the Jews recited in Scripture, and by
Scriptural precepts only, pretending its divine authority to be alike over us,
as the Laws and Ordinances given by Moses were over the Jews; but how by this
our case would be better then now it is (I cannot imagine) unless our Lawyers
could (which is not likely) and would against their own profit (which is not to
be hoped) make more certain and undoubted Translations, Commentaries, and
Expositions of Scripture, then ever any of the most Orthodox Divines have
hitherto done.

But these men (as it seems) deeming themselves Saints, and to be divinely
authorized from Scripture, to make this Nation the Kingdom of Christ, (and to
set up, and enthronize themselves, to rule and reign for Christ, and in his
stead) do declare it now their duty to effect all this by force and power, In
their Standard set up, page 10.
inviting all the upright in heart to follow and join with them in this the
work of the Lord, I wish that all Christians, besides such as do jump with
them, were not to be numbered among the Heathen, upon whom they would execute
vengeane if they had power in their hands to do it.
To execute vengeance upon he Heathen, and punishment upon the people, etc. and
for this take their warrant from Psalm. 50.5. Psalm. 94.15. Psalm. 149.7.
applying these and very many other Scriptures of like import now unto
themselves, which do properly belong to other times and persons, and not to be
fulfilled until the times of restoration of the Jews, and the personal coming
of Christ to set up his Kingdom.

But these mistakes (at least as I conceive) do arise from their deeming (as
many others inconsiderately do) that the coming of Christ and his Kingdom is
to be merely spiritual by his grace coming and ruling in men's hearts, without
his personal coming, whereas the Scripture plainly sets forth his personal
coming in power and great glory visible to all men, Act. 1.11. Act. 3 20, 21.
Matthew. 24.30. Luke 21.27. Esa. 40.5. after which he will gather together his
ancient and elect people the Jews out of all Countries where they are
dispersed, Luke 21.28. Matthew. 24.31. compared with Esa. 11.12, etc. after which
he will set up his Kingdom, Luke 21.30, 31. Luke 19.11, 12, 13. which shall be
upon the earth, and at the end of this world, when he will gather and destroy
out of his Kingdom (the earth) all the wicked, and them that work iniquity,
Matthew. 13.39, 40, 41. Then (and not till then) shall the righteous shine forth
as the Sun in the Kingdom of there father, verse. 23. and then Christ will be
King over all the earth, Zach. 14.9. which will not be until his personal
coming on the earth, as ver. 4, 5. do manifest. And then will be fulfilled the
promise to Abraham, and his seed to inherit the land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession, Genesis 17.8. wherein whilst he lived he did but so journ
and dwell as in a strange Country, with Isaac and Jacob, heirs with him of the
same promise, Heb. 11.8, 9. Act. 7.4, 5. these all died in faith and
expectation of that promise nevertheless to be performed to them afterward,
Hebr. 11.13. Then will the Kingdoms of this world become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and his Christ, wherein he shall reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11, 15.
having the Heathen for his inheritance, and the utter parts of the earth for
his posession, Psalm. 28. And then also will be fulfilled that promise to the
righteous and meek, to inherit the earth for ever, Psa. 37.9, 11, 18, 29.
although in the mean time, in this life they lie under all oppression and
tyranny of wicked men, at whom the Lord laugheth, for he sees that his day is
coming, verse. 13. even the same Lords day, wherein Saint John was in the
Spirit, heard a great voice behind him like a trumpet, and saw Christ being
come in glory, talking with him, Rev. 1.7.10. to 20. and after seeing in vision
the great transactions and mutations, which Christ at his coming will really
make upon the earth, as that all the tribes of Israel were The marking their
houses with the blood of the passover, whereby to exempt them from hurt by the
plagues and judgments then to be poured out on their enemies the Egyptians, was
a lively type, Exodus 12.12. which judgments may be counted but as flea-bitings
in comparison of those that shall be poured out upon the world at their great
and final deliverance by Christ himself.
sealed, before liberty was given to hurt the earth, chap. 7.3. To preserve
them from being hurt by any of the great plagues then ready to be poured out
upon their enemies, and the Antichristian world. The great overthrow of the
beast, false prophet, and the Kings of the earth, with all their great and
formidable Armies, the fall of Babylon and destruction of the Whore. The
Kingdoms of this world to become the Kingdoms of Christ. The new Jerusalem to
come down from God out of heaven, yea all things made new; as new heavens and
new earth, which shall be so established that it cannot be moved, Psalm
93.1.96.10. not being created in vain, but to be inhabited and remain world
without end, when Israel the very seed of Jacob shall be gathered together out
of all Nations, and be saved with an everlasting salvation, Esa. 11.12. Esa.
45.17, 18, 19. and 60.20. yea, the Gentiles shall bring their sons in their
arms, and their daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders, Esa 49.22.
Then the earth shall yield her increase, and God, even their own God shall The
Gentiles have great cause to long and pray for this mercy and blessing upon the
Jews from the Lord, that his way may be known upon earth, and his saving health
among all nations, v. 1, 2. for then will the law go out of Sion, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem, Esa. 2.3. and then peace shall be established to
the end of the earth, Ps. 46.9. not only amongst men, but among the beasts of
the field also, Esa. 2.4. Esa. 11.6. according to the Angels proclamation at
the birth of Christ, Luke 2.14.
bless them, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him, Psalm. 67.6, 7. Then
shall a handful of corn be sown upon the top of the mountains, the fruit
whereof shall shake like Libanon, and they of the city shall flourish like grass
of the earth, Psa. 72.16. for then the Lord will make their wilderness like
Eden, and their desert like the garden of the Lord, joy and gladnesshal befound
therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody, Esaias the 51.3. Then shall they
eat the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall they boast themselves,
for their shame they shall have double, and for their confusion they shall
rejoice in their portion, therefore in their own land they shall possess
double, everlasting joy shall be unto them, Esa 61.6, 7. And their seed shall
be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: All that
see them shall acknowledge, that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed,
verse. 9 and hence it will be, that ten men out of all languages of the nations,
shall take hold of the skirt of him, that is, a Jew, saying, We will go with
you, for we have heard that God is with you, Zach. 8.23. And then also the Lord
will be a great King, above all gods; in whose hands will be the deep places of
the earth, and the strength of the hills will be his also, Ps. 45.3, 4. Then
the Lord with righteousness will judge the poor, and reprove with equity for
the meek of the earth, Isa. 11.4. The throne of iniquity shall then have no
fellowship with him, which frames mischief by a law, Ps. 94.20 for all the
horns of the wicked shall be then cut off, and the horns of the righteous
exalted, Psalm. 75 10. yea; the Lord will then utterly destroy, and cast out all
wicked and unrighteous oppressors and tyrants from off the face of the earth,
even in the sight of the righteous, to their everlasting joy, Ps. 37 32. to 37.
Prove. 10.30. Rev. 11.17, 18. Matthew. 13.41. Ps. 21.8; 9, 10. -- whereupon the
righteous will then say among themselves; Come, behold the works of the Lord,
what desolations he has made upon the earth, Ps. 46.8.

Then shall the Jews, and the ten tribes be united in one Kingdom, and never
more be divided, be brought again into their own land, and dwell therein, both
they and their children, and their childrens children for ever, Ezekiel 37
although immediately before this their deliverance they shall be in such great
affliction and dejection of spirit, that they shall in their own sense account
themselves a lost people, cast off, and quite forsaken of the Lord, and without
any hope of deliverance; and this is most elegantly set forth under the
similitude of dry bones, and even as men quite dead and buried, Ezekiel. 37. but
even then out of this great tribulation of theirs (which will be so great as
there was never any the like upon any people since there was a nation upon the
earth, no nor ever shall be) shall they be delivered and saved by Christ with
an everlasting salvation, Jer. 30.4, 5, 6, 7. Dan. 12.1. Matthew. 24.21, 22. Luke
18.1, 7, 8. And therefore it is (as I conceive) that thoroughout the Scripture
are scattered such eminent and emphatical expressions and promises concerning
this people to support them, and prevent their fainting in this day of Jacobs
trouble; as then bidding them to look up and lift up their heads with comfort,
for then their redemption, restoration, and the setting up the Kingdom of God
will be nigh at hand, Luke 21.26, 27, 28, 30. And although many generations and
nations shall perish, and be forgotten from off the earth before that day come,
yet their generation or nation shall not pass away, but be preserved to see
this great deliverance and saving the whole house of Israel, according to the
promises and oath of God to Abraham, Luke 1.68. to 76. Romans 11.24, 25, 26,
compared with Esa. 59.20, etc. Luke 21.32, 33. Matthew. 24.22. Esa. 65.8, 9. Luke
18.1, 8. And in Ezekiel. 36. the Lord expresses himself concerning this people
thus, In my jealousy, in the fire of my jealousy, and in my fury, because ye
have born the shame of the Heathen; He would therefore take them from among the
Heathen, and gather them out of all Countries, and bring them into their own
land, would build their ruined places, He the Lord had spoken it, and would
perform it, v. 5, 6.24, 36. and in Ezekiel. 37. O my people come out of your
graves: and again, O my people, etc. And in Esa. 41.9, 10. Thou art my servant,
I have chosen thee, and will not cast thee away, fear not, I am with thee, be
not dismayed, for I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand
of my righteousness, and v. 13, 14. I the Lord thy God will hold thy right
hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee, fear not thou worm Jacob,
ye men of Israel, I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy
one of Israel: and in Esa. 49.14, 15, 16. where Sion said, The Lord has
forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me: (It Is answered,) Can a woman forget
her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb,
yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee; Behold I have graven thee
upon the palms of my hands, etc. And in Jer. 30.10. Fear thou not, O my
servant Jacob, says the Lord, neither be dismayed, O Israel: for lo, I will
save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob
shall return, and shall be in rest, and he quiet, and none shall make him
afraid.

These with many promises more of like tendency (for the comfort and support of
this people, the natural seed of Jacob) are scattered throughout the Scripture.

And that after their deliverance out of this their great trouble, They will
become the mightiest people and Nation upon the earth, Mich. 4:1, 6, 7, 8: it
being said of these, That they shall be among the Gentiles, as a lion among the
flocks of sheep, who if he go through, both treads down and teareth in pieces,
and none can deliver, and all their enemies shall be cut off, Mich. 5:8, 9:

These shall be like a harth of fire among wood, and like a torch of fire in a
sheaf, and shall devour all the people round about on the right hand, and on
the left, Zach: 12:6:

These shall be as the Lords battle, Axe and weapons of war, wherewith he will
break in pieces the Nations, and destroy the Kingdoms, Jerem. 51:20:

These are they whose horns shall be made Iron, and hooss brass, to break in
pieces many people, whose gain and substance shall be consecrated to the Lord
of the whole earth, Mich. 4.13.

These are they that shall be as a fire and flame to the house of Esau, to
devour them, for the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, Obed. 18: And then will be
verified the Word of the Lord to Rebecca, which he told her, That two Nations
were in her womb, and that the elder should serve the younger, Genesis 25:23:
which is not to be understood of the two persons Esau and Jacob, as some
unadvisedly do imagine: for Esau never in person served nor worshipped Jacob,
as Jacob did Esau, Genesis 33:3, 13, 15. but this was a prophecy concerning their
posterities, and to be fulfilled at the time of the Jews exaltation and power,
set forth by these Texts.

These are they that shall be made a new sharp threshing Instrument, having
teeth, wherewith the Lord will thresh the mountains, beat them small, and make
the hills as chafe, Esaias 41.15.

These are they to whom shall be restored Judges, as at first; and Counselors,
as at the beginning, and whose officers shall be peace, and whose exactors
righteousness. Esa. 1.26. and 60.17:

These are they on whom the glory of the Lord will arise, and so shine, that
the Gentiles may come to their light, and Kings to the brightness of their
rising, so that the abundance of the Sea shall be converted to them, and the
forces of the Gentiles shall come unto them, Esa. 60:1. to 7:

These are they, of whom a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one
a strong Nation, Esa: 60:22:

These are they to whom Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and Queens shall
be their Nurses, and shall bow their faces to the earth, and lick the dust of
their feet, Esa. 49:23:

These are they of whom Balaam prophesied, That they should have the strength
of a Unicorn, to eat up the Nations, their enemies, break their bones, and
pierce them through with arrows, and lie down as a lion, and as a strong lion,
and who shall stir him up, Numbers 24.5, 8, 9.

Who then can be meant, but these that shall rise up for the Lord against evil
doers, and stand up against the workers of iniquity, Ps. 94.16.

And in whose mouths shall be the praises of the Lord, and a two edged sword in
their hand, To execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and punishment upon the
people, and to have that honor to bind their Kings with chains, and their
Nobles with fetters of Iron, Ps. 149.6, 7, 8, 9.

These forecited texts in the general, with many more the like are properly
applicable to the Israelites the natural seed of Abraham, at their return and
restoration into their own land, the land of Canaan, as is evident to any
rational man, (that carries not both his eyes in his pocket) that shall but
consult these texts particularly and impartially, not being prejudiced by any
uncouth and absurd senses put upon them by the traditions of men; for when the
text in Ier. 31:31: shall say thus: Behold the days come, says the Lord, that
I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Juda, not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day
that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, etc.

Which Covenant is again repeated long after in the same words to the same
people, Heb: 8: besides the place in Jeremiah expresses Gods further promise
to them; (namely) That after those days he would put his law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and that all of them should know the Lord,
and their iniquities should then be forgiven them, verse 33, 34: and in Ierem:
32:40, 41, 42. the same Covenant is again repeated thus: That the Lord would
make an everlasting covenant with them, that he will not turn away from them to
do them good, but would put his fear in their hearts, that they should not
depart from him, yea he would rejoice over them to do them good, and would
plant them in that land (the land of Canaan) assuredly, with his whole heart,
and with his whole soul, and like as he had brought all this great evil upon
this people, so he would bring upon them all the good that he promised them,
and in verse 37, 39. it is said, That God would gather them out of all
Countries, whither he had driven them in his anger, and in his fury and in
great wrath, and would bring them again in that place (the land of Canaan) and
would cause them to dwell safely, and would give them one heart, and one way,
that they should fear him for ever, for the good of them and their children
after them.

Which plainly sets forth the conversion of the Jews to the true fear of God,
and never more to depart from him, and their being gathered out of all
Countries into their own land again, to be there safely planted assuredly, both
they and their children after them, to fear the Lord for ever, which was never
yet performed to this people.

It cannot be meant that this Covenant is promised to be made with any Gentile
believers or Churches already converted, whose fathers were never led by the
hand out of Egypt, nor planted in the land of Canaan, to be there again
re-planted, much less can it be meant of every Gentile Church or Congregation
of supposed believers, as it is usually expounded and applied by the several
Pastors and Ministers to their respective Congregations; but they may as soon
make me believe, that all they say is truth, as to believe this exposition of
theirs; or that this is not meant of Israel and Juda, the very natural seed of
Jacob, or that it does not mean the general conversion and gathering of that
people into their own land again; out of which they have been driven, even the
natural Israelites, whose conversion Saint Paul also positively asserts, Romans
11. by the name of Israel, the natural branches, and his kinsmen according to
the flesh, affirming them to be holy, and beloved for their fathers sake, even
when they were broken off, and in the state of unbelief, (wherein they yet
remain unto this day) terming the Christian Romans (though their faith was then
famous throughout the whole world) Gentiles; and in comparison of them but wild
branches cut out of the wild Olave-tree, and then after many hints of their
coversion, of their being received and graffed in again, at last affirms, that
all (or the whole house of) Israel shall be saved, and proves it by that which
is written in Esa. 59.20. (which is) That the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and
to them which turn from transgression, in Jacob, says the Lord As for me this
is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my spirit that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

Hence it is evident, by Saint Paul's exposition, that the great deliverance,
blessing, and mercy intended and meant in this text, properly belongs unto
Jacob, or natural children of Israel, whence it will follow, That the great
exaltation, permanent glory, security and peace, prophesied and spoken of in
the chapter immediately following appertains to them also, none whereof being
fulfilled when Saint Paul wrote that Epistle, nor at any time since, it is all
yet to be fulfilled to them: And therefore whosoever expounds this Scripture
otherwise, thwarts Saint Paul, to the deceiving both of themselves and others,
which is much and often done by such as turn the true and plain sense of this
and other Scriptures into mystical or allegorical meanings, the mere inventions
of men's brains, whereby many excellent passages of Scripture, yea in effect the
whole Scripture has been and is perverted, and made (not helpful but) hurtful
to many, which if rightly understood would be of excellent use and benefit to
all men; but by such and the like misinterpretations, and blind senses put upon
the Scriptures by our blind guides, and And have we not seen, Curse ye Meroz
displayed, nor heard them cursed bitterly, who came not out to help the Lord,
nor yet known many honest and sincere hearts extremely cheated on all sides,
and by none more then by such charms and charmers, who though they knew little
of the right application of that text, yet, it bearing a sound for their
purpose, it was made use of by them merely upon design and interest; for no
sooner did they perceive the waters begin to run besides their Mill, (i.e.
their ambitions, covetous, domineering ends were not served) but they turned
cat in pa^, and cursed as fast the contrary way; and this at pleasure upon
occasion can they do (viz.) bless and curse, curse and bless, one and the same
person, one and the same cause, one and the same opinion, with one and the same
mouth, and possible from one and the same text.
corrupt interessed men, as it may seem, the honest zeal and good meaning of
these men (I speak as charity binds me) has been so much misled as to
conceive themselves divinely authorized, to make this rash and un-advised
attempt, so dangerous both to themselves and the whole Nation.

But if instead thereof they had employed all the power and interest they had
in a lawful way upon a civil account to have procured for the honest and good
people of the Nations, the performance of such honest and righteous things, as
of right do belong unto them, and are but the just return of all the blood and
treasure laid out and spent by them, for the purchase, or rather for the
redemption of them, and which have been so much and so often promised to them,
and that upon most-solemn and sacred appeals to heaven, (and yet hitherto most
unjustly But we be to them and him, by whom these offenses come.
detained from them) I conceive they had been far less (if at all) blamable,
then in that which they have attempted: For can they think it just for them to
domineer over their fellows and brethren, merely by a supposed divine authority
from Scripture, and may not any other upon the same account, by a contrary
exposition put upon the Scripture challenge the like superiority over them? and
must not we then needs fight it out, and after conclude the strongest to have
expounded truest; for the weakest must to the wall, perhaps into some castle,
or prison, or into the bottom of some dungeon, as erroneous, or heretical
persons, whilst all such as have but the power over castles and prisons are
always orthodox all the world over, and who may say to the contrary?

Or can they think it reasonable or feasible for them to set up that Kingdom
of Christ, to prevent and save him the labor of coming, and so to rob him of
the glory of doing it himself, by the mighty power of his own arm, without the
arm of flesh, Esa. 63.1, to 7: whereby he will exalt his great name and glory
to all eternity, more then by any of his former archievements.

The bringing the children of Israel through the red Sea, out of the hands of
Pharaoh, was indeed a very wonderful and glorious work, whereby God made his
Name great in all the earth, yet this his deliverance and restoring of them
(yet to come) and his setting up of his Kingdom will so far and so much exceed
that, that it will swallow it up, and cause it to vanish as the light of a
candle will do at the presence of the Sun, and so far bury it in oblivion, that
it shall never more be remembered for ever, Jer.: 23 from 3: to 9.

This whole life is the time for the Saints and righteous to suffer in, for,
and in hope of reward and rest in that Kingdom, with Christ at his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 1:4, to 9: but these men would fain be reaping before harvest, and
before the time of sowing is ended; and be reigning in that Kingdom before the
blessed Patriarchs and Apostles, who yet sleep in the dust, and who are to be
the prime heirs and inheritours with Christ of that Kingdom, Matthew 8:11: Luke
22:30: yea, and without, and before Christ there raigns himself, and before
that Kingdom, or the time of setting it up be come, which may not be.

But the authority assumed and now attempted by these men, seems (at least to
me) to be much like to that which is exercised by his Holiness the Pope, as
Christ's Vicegerent upon earth, over all both persons and causes, for which he
pretends divine authority, and that from Scripture also; for from Ps. 91.13.
which says (thus) Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and
Dragon thou shall trample under feet.

By pretense of divine authority from this Scripture, he most presumptuously
tramples under foot all civil Magistracy, and sets his feet upon the necks of
Emperors. Like as I my self once heard Psa. 45.16. expounded from a Pulpit in
Paul's: the Text runs thus; Instead of thy Fathers shall thy children be, whom
thou shall make Princes through all the earth.

By Fathers (said he) are meant the Patriarchs and Apostles; and by Children
are meant the Lords Bishops, who are their successors.

Hence this learned Preacher, in further prosecution of this his Text, with
great confidence asserted the principality of Bishops, and their superiority
over other Ministers to be of Divine Right.

And there is no doubt, but these (called fifth Monarchy-men) may prove their
dominion over all others to be of Divine right as well as this. Nay, who can
doubt, but that Presbyters, Independents, Separatists, Anabaptists, yea and
Mohammedan Priests also can prove their several authorities to be of divine
right, as well as either of the former, and that from Scripture too; and if
they can not, they are very unworthy such offices of dignity, and such places
of profit, as to be Masters and Heads of Colleges, etc. and if the Revenues of
the best Bishoprics were also added thereto, there is no doubt but that these
would easily swallow it up, without making any bones thereat, the name being
only changed.

Nay, have we not had some, who lately riding on hors-back into Bristol,
received such honor, acclamations, and attributes, as were given to Christ
when he rode into Jerusalem: and no doubt but all this was done by some divine
authority drawn from the Scripture, Mat. 21. where the manner of Christ's so
riding into Jerusalem is recited.

And why might not the horse have run and bruised the riders foot against a
wall by divine authority likewise from that Scripture, which recites how that
Balaams Ass dealt so, by that false prophet, Numb. 22 25.

But I shall, at present, forbear to trace this divine Goddess and great Idol
any further, but shall now leave her to the view of all men, as she is set
forth in Rev. 17. like a Queen sitting upon her Throne, most sumptuously
arraied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls, having a cup in her hand full of abominations and filthiness of her
fornication; upon whom the more I look, the more I wonder, even with greatest
admiration, when I consider how such a counterfeit painted strumpet as this,
has so much, so long, and so universally beguiled (in effect) the whole world,
and intoxicated many such men, as are otherwise most exquisite, wise and exact
in far smaller matters.

I shall now conclude, removing only a scruple, which from this Discourse may
arise in some honest hearts to this effect:

Object. Since there is no name given under heaven whereby men can be saved,
but by the name of Jesus Christ, and none can be saved by that name but such as
truly believe therein; and none can have a sufficient ground for true and
Christian faith, but by a true Ministry, evidencing the truth and divine
authority of their doctrine, by demonstration of the Spirit, and power of God.
And if the case be so, as by this Discourse it seems to be; In what condition
are all such, who never enjoyed such a Ministry? is not their case necessarily
damnable?

Answ. I say no; for although it be granted, That none are saved but by Christ,
yet many millions of thousands may be and are saved, and that by Christ, who
never enjoyed any such Ministry, never believed in Christ, nor heard of him;
for what else think we, should become of all infants since Adam, who died in
their infancy, whose salvation (at least) their freedom from condemnation,
cannot (upon any good ground) be doubted of: for they have suffered death, the
natural effect of Adams transgression, from which at the resurrection they
shall be redeemed and discharged by Christ, for what or for whose sin can they
then be condemned at the day of Judgment, since they have committed none
themselves, and shall have already suffered death for Adams sin, and from which
they shall then be acquitted by Christ.

And their salvation (as I conceive) is as little to be doubted of, because
that condition or sort of mankind, which Christ himself did put as a president
and example for his Disciples to conform themselves to, for to become
inheritours of the Kingdom of heaven, must needs be inheritours of the
Kingdom of heaven, but such are little children: and Christ affirmed, that of
such is the Kingdom of heaven, and who then has need or reason to doubt
thereof.

The same may be deemed the case of all born Idiots living and dying so.

And what may be thought of all the Heathen nations and people in the world
(since Adam) that have lived to years of discretion, can any man reasonably
think that God has left all these quite destitute of all means of salvation,
and of acceptance with him? did God afford them, or any of them such an ample
excuse at the day of judgment, as they might then have upon that account? No
surely, for then all men's mouths will be stopped, and no such reasonable and
just excuse shall be found in the mouth of any.

What means Saint Paul, when he says, (in Act. 17.25, 26, 27.) That God had
made of one blood all Nations to dwell on the face of the earth, giving to all
life, breath, and all things (as rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling their hearts with food and gladness, chap: 14:17:) and to what end did
God all this, but that they might seek him, and happily find him, not being far
from any of them, giving them (by these daily blessings) opportunity at least
to know, consider, and thankfully to acknowledge some divine goodness (be it
under what name or notion soever) to be the author and bountiful bestower of
these daily mercies, whereby as God leaves not himself without witness, so he
leaves all without excuse or ability to plead that they were destitute of all
means to obtain acceptance with God, to their salvation.

Again, what means the giving of talents; to some more, to some less, or fewer,
but to all some; one at least, to know good and evil; so far as to know when
another wrongs him; in like proportion must he know when he wrongs another; and
that as he would not have another wrong him in the least, so should not he do
the least wrong to any other; but to do as he would be done unto, according to
the Golden Rule, or Law written in every man's heart. What else means the
Apostle Paul in Romans 2:26, 27. If the uncircumcision keeps the righteousness
of the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision, and shall
not the circumcision which is by nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who
by the letter and circumcision do transgress the Law. See further the 11, 12,
13, 14, 15 verses of the same Chapter, wherein it is said thus; When the
Gentiles which have not the law, do by nature the things contained in the law,
having not the law, are a law unto themselves, which shows the work of the law
written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing witness, and their
thoughts in the mean while accusing or else excusing one another.

What may we think of Job, being an upright and just man that feared God, and
eschewed evil? what can be thought of Jobs friends, Bildad, Zoph^r, Eliphaz,
and Elihu, but that they were sober, honest, wise, and just men fearing God,
although they were mistaken (as who might not) in Jobs particular and
extraordinary case.

And what means the story of Cornelius, Act: 10: being an uncircumcised
Gentile destitute of the knowledge of Christ, yet had acceptance with God, and
his prayers heard notwithstanding. And what think you of Peter's Proclamation
thereupon, saying; Of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons,
but in every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted
with him.

Hence I conceive, (without offense to any otherwise minded) may be concluded;

First, That all those who never enjoyed true Ministry of the Gospel of Christ,
shall never be judged for not believing, or not obeying the Gospel of Christ;
but shall be judged either as in sincerity they have endeavored to observe the
good, and eschew the evil known to them; or have wilfully swerved from it
without repentance and amendment; for God accepts men according to that they
have, and not according to that they have not, 2 Cor. 8.12. And to whom much is
given, of him only much shall be required: and little of him to whom little is
given.

Secondly, That God never concluded any Nation or person so to condemnation, as
not to afford them and him sufficient means within his reach and power to
escape the same, and to procure acceptance with him.

These J deem (with submission to better Judgments) may as safely and truly be
concluded, as to affirm, That God is most just, good, and merciful, That his
mercy is extended over all the works of his hands, who hates nothing that he
has made, but fills all things with his goodness, and hears the young
Ravens that cry to him for meat, Ps. 104.27, 28. Ps. 145.16, 17. Ps. 147.9.

Accursed then are the tongues and pens of such evil servants, that render this
indulgent, bountiful, and good Master to be hard and austeer, to reap where he
did not sow, and to propose grace and mercy to far the greatest part of the
sons and daughters of Adam, when he never intended it to any of them; but
contrariwise had inevitably, absolutely and personally concluded them to
exquisite and endless misery, of his mere will and power, long before they were
born, and that without respect to any sinful or evil action of theirs.

FINIS.
Prove. 27.5. Open rebuke is better then secret love. Pro. 12.1. Who so loves
instruction, loves knowledge, but he that hates reproof is brutish. Pro. 28
16. The Prince that wants understanding is also a great oppressor, but he
that hates covetousness, shall prolong his days. Verse. 17: A man that does
violence to the blood of any person shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him.
Pro. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy. Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. POSTSCRIPT.
MR. John Brain, a learned man, in his Book entitled (The unknown Being)
published 1654. in page 3. tells us, as a matter of exceeding great note and
concernment to all men, which is the gross corruptings of the Word of God, in
the false translating of it, the Translators putting down in an hundred places
near, life for soul, rendering (...), life, and sometimes (...), soul, which
ought not to be, the word and sense is destroyed by it, and false doctrine
taught to the people: wherefore in especial there is an extreme necessity of
another Translation to be published, and this called in: The Old Testament in
this particular is better translated then the New, though some such in the Old,
as that the mind of God is no way expressed, but clean contrary things.

And in page 11. he further tells us, (viz.) That its no wonder Austine and
others run to Philosophy (having lost the knowledge of the Spirit, which was
immortal) to prove the soul immortal against the Scripture; upon which
Philosophical hinges the Divinity of the now times are hanged, in which,
Untruths, Errors, and Deceits are told the people, to the overthrow of hope,
and shaking of faith in men, and destruction of the truth; And in this follow
not the Lords Spirit, but their own, Ezekiel. 13.3.

After my setting down this learned Authors judgment (concurring with the rest
of the Authors formerly cited) concerning the erroneous Translations of
Scripture, there came to my hand another small Treatise of his ( entitled
Heavens witness to the worship and worshippers on earth) wherein he not only
confirms what in this Discourse is asserted for the necessity of divine and
powerful evidence, to attest the truth of doctrine, Believers, and Churches of
the Gospel; but also shows how God by some such divine evidence gave witness to
true worship, both before the law, in time of the law, and to the worship of
the Gospel from Christ to the Apostasy, Anno 406.

Together with abundant Testimonies of Scripture, proving that the Truth and
the true Church was not, nor when restored, shall not be without the same; with
which (as at first) God again will restore the Church.

ERRATA.
IN page 3. line 16. for incestur says Jeremy, read, micetur, says S.
Irency. page 6. lin. 17. for pareas minori, read pareas insane minori. l. 21.
r. Erasmus. p. 7. l. 7. r. allowable. l. 16. r. Isidorus, and there and
elsewhere for Sextus, r. Sixtus. p. 12. l. 21. f. untelligable, r.
unintelligable. p. 14. l. 1. r. Brescia. p. 20. l. 7. r. in ore gladii
Cruentandi. p. 23. l. 25. r. Anthographs. p. 27. l. 24. r. of the Trinity. p.
51. l. ult. r. verities. p. 55. l. ult. r. 1 Cor. 12.7, 12. p. 72. l. 3. f. He
that has, r. He that believes has. p. 81. l. 9. f. on, r. by. and l. 10. f.
by, r. on.


