THE NEWEST PROCEEDINGS IN IRELAND: BEING A true Discovery of a famous Victory
obtained against the Rebels by the Vice President of Munster, where the great
Oneale was put to flight, and forced to put himself into the habit of a common
soldier, to save himself from the fury of the English.

Also true Information from the ships which ride before Galway, wherein is
manifested a true Relation how certain ships from Spain laden with ammunition,
made an attempt to land, but were pursued by the said ships, and forced to
strike into a small Creek, where they stuck fast, and were taken by the English.

Likewise the true Proceedings of the Scottish Forces in the North parts of
Ireland.

With a true information that many of the Irish Commanders have left their
service in Ireland, and are come for England: namely, the Lord Grendison,
Captain Bartlet, and Captain Gibson, with many others: also how the Officers
now resident in Ireland have all this Summer been backward to oppose the
Rebels, pretending that they are commanded so to do.

Being the Copy of a Letter sent to J.R. a Merchant in Bishops-Gate Street,
and now published to ptevent false copies.

Printed for Th. Cook. October 3. 1642.

THE NEWEST PROCEEDINGS IN IRELAND, BEING A true Discovery of a famous victory
obtained against the Rebels, by the Vice President of Munster, where the great
Oneale was put to flight, and forced to put himself into the habit of a common
fouldier to save himself from the fury of the English.
Loving Brother,
HAVING received information from you of the passages in England, I have
thought it necessary to give you by this bearer (a friend of mine) notice of
our occurrences and proceedings of late in this Kingdom.

On the 22. of September the great Rebel Oneal came before Munster with near
15000. men, threatening ruin and destruction to all that should any way resist
them, pretending withal, that he had the Kings authority for what he did: but
I conceive that is but a counterfeit show and false pretense, wherewith he
beguiled the ignorant Irish, taking example, as I conceive, of the malignants
of your Kingdom, who color all their wicked and malicious designs under a
pretense of standing for His Majesty, and the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, when indeed their ends are like his, tending to nothing but ruin and
destruction.

But we, being well acquainted with his treacherous actions, and knowing that
our chief security consisted in Gods protection and our own timely prevention,
gathered our selves together under the command of our Vice President: and
though we were but a small number in comparison of his forces, yet being put
into a martial equipage, we fronted boldly, without demanding the cause of his
present arrival.

This sudden and unexpected charge proved very advantageous to us, and
disadvantagious to them: for instead of making good their ground, they lost
their order, which by the continual motion and striving of the gross body,
was rather more disordered, then any way recovered, by which means our men did
very great execution upon the army of the Rebels, routing and scattering their
maine Batalia, our Troops of Horse falling upon their flanks, and trampling
the Irish Kernes like mortar upon the ground: it was a kind of delight to us
to hear the music that was made betwixt the Drums and Trumpets, our shouts,
and their acclamations, which were much shriller then the Trumpets, and indeed
were heard louder then any part of the consort. To be short, we slew above two
hundred of the Rebels forces, and we lost not above twenty five: only some
that were wounded in the pursuit with their weapons which were scattered upon
the ground, especially pikes, and some skenes, which we reserved; only the
pikes, by reason that we wanted wagons, we were commanded to burn them, to
the end that they might be made unfit to be imployd in any service against us.
Philomy Oneale was in such haste to escape, that he took up his lodging that
night in the woods, and the next day stole away disguised in the habit of a
common soldier. Our Province is cleared near thirty miles round about.

I received information from the harbor of Gallway, that the English ships
employed by the Parliament of England have lately had in chase certain Spanish
Frigots, laden with ammunition, which were intended to be landed for the
service of the Rebels, but being prevented and closely chased by the English
ships, they struck into a Creek some three miles from Galway, which goes from
the Ocean up to Munster, but being unacquainted with the turnings of the
channel, and running with a stiff foreright wind, they struck upon a shelve,
and stuck fast, so that before they could get their Ordnance ashore to guard
their fraught, they were close set upon by the English, which were put on shore
from the ships in long boats, and they with their rich fraught were seized on
to be employed against the Rebels.

The Scottish Forces under the command of Colonel Lesley have behaved
themselves very nobly, and oftentimes put the rebels to the worst, having taken
many Castles, and other places of great eminency.

Our Commanders play false play, and leave us: My Lord Grandison has left his
Troop to the wide world, Captain Bartlet has forsaken us, and Captain
Gibson, with many others. Other our Officers that are resident with us, play
least in sight: they have got into strong holds, and do nothing, but suffer
the Rebels to come up to the very walls of Dublin, doing spoil, robbing and
plundering the inhabitants without contradiction: Likewise they pretend, that
they are commanded to desist, but by what authority, they deny to make known:
but we have great cause to fear that they are popishly affected, and by their
practices do further the commotions in England. If we had but some present
supply, we doubt not but to recover our pristine liberty; but if things
continue at this stay, we are all destined to ruin, and the Kingdom must of
necessity be utterly lost. I pray remember our distressed estate in your
prayers, and according to your opportunity let me hear what passes in England.
So in have I rest,

Your loving brother, J. WALSGRAVE.

FINIS.

