THE Case of Mrs Mary Walker, the wife of Clement Walker, Esquire: Truly Stated.
Humbly tendered to every individual Member of the Supreme Authority of the
Nation, the COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honor,

CLement Walker Esquire, being seized of the Office of Chief Usher of the
Exchequor, as his ancient inheritance, did at the time of his intermarriage
with me, in consideration of a considerable portion by him received, settle the
said Office by way of jointure upon me, the remainder to the heirs of our
bodies, as by several Deeds of ancient date enrolled in the said Court of
Exchequor, ready to be produced, together amongst other things, more at large
appears.

That my said husband (being under the displeasure of the Parliament, and by
them committed prisoner to the Tower) although he never yet received any
Charge, (much less stands convict of any Crime) one Humphrey Edwards, a
supposed Member of Parliament, contrary to Law and a good Conscience, having
first endeavored to procure my husbands Sequestration, (which failing, upon
what false surmizes and slanderous suggestions is not known) has, by his power
and perpetual solicitation, delusively enduced the Honorable Committee for the
Revenue to pass an Order in haec Verba.

Febru. 1. 1649.
Whereas Clement Walker Esquire Usher of the Public Revenue, is now a Prisoner in
the Tower, and thereby not in a capacity to execute that Office himself, it is
therefore this day Ordered by this Committee, That Humphrey Edwards, a Member
of Parliament, do execute the said Office, until the Parliament shall declare
their pleasure therein, and that he shall have, receive, and enjoy all lawful
and just Allowances, Perquisites and Privileges to the said Office belonging,
in as full and ample manner, as the said Clement Walker had and enjoyed the
same.

Upon pretense of which Order the said Humphrey Edwards, upon Thursday the 21
of March, 1649. riotously, reproachfully and wickedly, without respect to the
Laws of God, which forbids to covet his neighbors Goods, the Laws of the
Land, the Honor of the Parliament, and contrary to a good Conscience, forcibly
entered into my house, and thence (after many threats and reproachful names
(fit only to be used by Brothellers, and not persons professing themselves to
be Christian Magistrates) expelled my ancient servant, taking and keeping
possession of the same, as if he conceived that the single Order of the
Committee of the Revenue would both in the Judgment of Parliament, and Eye of
the Law, not only be equivolent to, but sufficient to destroy mine and my
husbands ancient Right and Title to the Premises.

But maugre all his malice and cruelty; it shall never enter into my heart to
believe, (notwithstanding by reason of some misapprehensions my husband be a
prisoner under displeasure) That the Parliament can so far either forget my
husbands faithful Services, large Contributions, and great losses, sustained by
his acting, with, and adhering to them, much less their own many frequent
solemn Declarations, as to suffer him to be destroyed, either in his life,
liberty, or estate, without, or contrary to Law, before he be convicted. For it
is notoriously known, and ready to be proved,

1. That he has not only adhered to the Parliament from the beginning, but
laid out upon public Service about three thousand pounds.

2. That he stands bound at this time for about five thousand pounds, taken up
at Bristol for the Parliaments Service with Colonel Alexander Popham, for which
he is daily threatened to be sued.

3. That he has lost above ten thousand pounds of his estate by the Enemy, but
never had any reparation, or beneficial employment conferred on him in liew
thereof.

Now, if after all my said husbands service and sufferings for the Parliament,
together with the hard measure by him sustained, by reason of about twenty
weeks imprisonment, upon a suggestion or supposition of a misdemeanor, although
nothing material in Law can be proved against him, his estate also of
inheritance, and my jointure shall be taken away by Order of a Committee upon
the suit and request of Mr Edwards, (who, for ought I know, is a Conspirator
against his life or liberty, and suggesteth matters against him, thereby to
color his wicked covetous proceedings. in getting and enjoying the said
Office,) the Parliament shall not please upon this my Appeal to redress this
crying grievance, suffering their own Honor, and the Subjects Propriety to be
destroyed by Mr Humprey Edwards, (a person who attended the King unto the
House, when he demanded the five Members,) contrary to all the known Laws of
the Land, and their several Ordinances, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Acts,
wherein they have solemnly engaged to preserve the same. I say (if
notwithstanding all this) the Parliament shall permit mine and my husbands
destruction in this way, let God and men judge whether the Laws of the Kingdom,
or their many Promises, hold forth any security, but on the contrary discover
the slavery that we are in, and are like to undergo through the exercise and
exaltation of lawless will and pleasure, and neglect of the execution of those
precious Conservators of the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the good People
of this Nation, the established Laws, etc. For,

1. By the 29 Chapter of Magna Charta it is provided, That no man shall be
disseized of his Freehold, or Free-customs, or Birthright, but by due course
and process of Law, not upon Petition or Suggestion. See Sir Edward Cooks
Exposition of Magna Charta, fol. 46. published for good Law by this present
Parliament. So also the same Edw. Cook in his third part Institutes, Chap. 114.
fol. 228. declares, That regularly the Goods of a Delinquent cannot be taken
and seized before forfeiture; and in the same Chapter he draws these two
principal Conclusions:

1. That before Indictment, the Goods, or other things, of any offender, cannot
be searched, inventoried, or in any sort seized; nor after Indictment seized
and removed, or taken away before conviction and retainder.

2. That the begging of the Goods or Estate of any Delinquent, accused or
indicted of any Treason, Felony, or other offense, before he be convicted and
attaitned, is utterly unlawful: And he gives these Reasons:

1. Because it makes the prosecution against the Delinquent more precipitate,
violent, and undue, then the quiet and equal proceeding of Law and Justice
would permit. Or,

2. It occasioneth some underhand Composition or Agreement thereby to stop and
hinder the due course of Justice for the exemplary punishment of the offender.

3. It discourageth both Judge, Juror and Witness to do their duty.

And as it is contrary to Law, so it is derogatory unto the Honor of
Parliament, all their Ordinances, Declarations, Remonstrances, and Acts,
(wherein they have solemnly engaged to preserve unto the People their just
Rights, in the Preservation of the established good old Laws and Customs of
England, by themselves declared to be the Badges of our Freedom, especially
those excellent Laws Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, by themselves so
called, in their Declaration of March, 1648. declaring the Reasons of their
altering the present Government, as also their Declaration of Febr. 9. 1648.
wherein they declare, that they are fully resolved to maintain, and shall and
will uphold, preserve and keep the Fundamental Laws of this Nation, for, and
concerning the preservation of the Lives, Properties and Liberties of the
People, with all things incident thereunto: I say, all these solemn
Declarations, by this Act of Mr Humphrey Edwards, upon pretense of an Order
from the Committee of the Revenue, are rendered but a mockery and delusion: for
if mine and my husbands just Right and Propriety to the said Office shall thus,
by the Authority of the said Committee, be taken from us, (my husband having
never yet received any Charge, (although two or three Goal Deliveries have been
since his imprisonment, by which he ought to have been tried, acquitted or
condemned,) much less was ever convicted; or if he had, his Conviction could
not forfeit my Interest and Right, which I had sixteen years before his
supposed offense:) I say, if this shall be owned, or not remedied, and
publicly declared against by the Parliament, let God and good men judge,
whether the good old Laws and Customs of the Nation be upheld, or our Lives,
Liberties or Estates preserved.

But (notwithstanding the hard measure I have sustained in all the foregoing
Premises) it shall not enter into my heart to believe, That the Parliament,
which has so frequently declared against Tyranny, and so highly advanced
Justice and Equity, not exempting the greatest, will either own, or permit so
great a dishonor to themselves, or oppression to me: In the assurance whereof I
am bold to present this my Appeal unto the Parliament, and every Member thereof;

Humbly praying, That the Order of the Committee of the Revenue for authorizing
the said Humphrey Edwards to officiate in the said Office, may be by the
Authority of Parliament annulled and declared against; and that I may be left
unto the Law to obtain reparations of the said Mr Humphrey Edwards, as well for
his Conspiracy against my husbands Life and Liberty, as for his riot and
forcibly entery into my said house.

For which I shall be engaged to pray, etc. Mary Walker.


