A VINDICATION OF THE KING, WITH Some OBSERVATIONS upon the TWO HOUSES: By a
True Son of the Church of ENGLAND, and a Lover of his Countries Liberty.

London, Printed Anno Domini, 1642.

A Vindication of the King, with some Observations upon the two Houses, by a
true Son of the Church of England, and a Lover of his Countries Liberty.
Reader,
I Shall not be curious to satisfy the Reason of any preposest opinion, yet
since the Times has given an open Press to clear every imagination which is
not stifled in this Dampe; I have endeavored to contract my own Meditations in
a narrow room; and rather expose them to the censure of the most judicious,
then rest satisfied alone, and admit this cloudy surface to overwhelme so Vast
a Body.

I confess it was no mean part of my happiness in our dangerous extremes, to
hope for a happy Union by that Sovereign medicine of a fading State, a
Parliament, and knowing the admirable affection of our gracious Sovereign to
the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, though it was His unspeakable misfortune,
never to know the misery of the People, till their discontents were grown to
that head, they became almost (if not altogether) uncurable, by those
unreasonable and illegal Monopolies, exacted by some ill affected agents,
conducing little to his advantage, but to the furthering of their ambition, who
notwithstanding, could as easily desert him in hi^ misery, as before be the
reddy Instruments to importune him to this mischief, upon presence of a Legal
Anthority, which who knows not a Prince, may be soon mistaken in, since none
can be so silly, as to believe him a studied Lawyer: Yet that this should
expose us to so great an adventure, as not only to divest him of this
suspected arbitrary power, but to confer an absolute Government to any
whatsoever, renders me no other action then the Poets,

Incidit in Syllam cupiens vitare caribdim. But if you please to take the true
State of the business, let your Impartial Judgment confer with your Reason,
upon these few notorious truths. What has the King denied which concern our
Liberty, and are the undoubted securities of our happiness, under the regiment
of a Just and unquestionable Monarchy?

Are not our Rights and Properties already established this Parliament, by such
acts of Grace, as could never find Presidents from His Ancestors: besides the
utter extirpation of Shipmony, Monopolies, upon what pretense soever, those
arbitrary Courts of Justice, High Commission, Star Chamber, Marshalseas, etc.
Has He not importuned the settling of Religion in his purity, and that there
might be a Law, to secure the tender Consciences of those who will not agree
the Ceremonies. Are not the taking away these, sufficient ground to desolve our
Jealousies if ever we meant to be satisfied. As for their fears, I wish we had
as little reason to suspect the som^nt^rs, as we have the King, who is so
clearly divested of any Power, to make good the least Injustice, that it is too
great a hazard on His part to adventvre what our Consciences enforce us to make
good for Him on our part: and the conservation of these are so attested by Him
(in the Word of a King) with such unusual expressions, that if they came from
a Stranger, (I suspected not an Infidel) I was bound to believe in Charity?
Witness those serious asseverations, God so deal with Me and my Children, as
I intend to conserve my Parliament in it is Privileges, the Rights of the
Subject, and the true professed Protestant Religion, God so prosper me in what I
take in Hand.

Is there yet a further way to establish them, whereby they may be so secure,
that a violation may seem impossible, without the subversion of the very Letter
of the Law: Why is it not proposed if it be no Invasion of that Just
Prerogative, was never denied His Ancestors? and what he has deserved of us,
that he may not be as far trusted, is as hard to Object as easily answered. If
then we must needs agree that there being nothing so clear, why should any
subtle pretenses, hinder our desired accommodation, unless there be that
intend the alteration of our Government; and how inconsistant that may prove to
a People already managed, under the united Order of a virtuous King, daily
experience offers it too easy of conjecture. Yet for our better satisfaction,
lets weigh the amends we are like to make our selves, from these few
Inconveniences, amongst the thousands which daily expose themselves to our view.

1. The unlimited power of the two Houses have already assumed into their own
hands a formal Ordinance countermanding, suspending, nay, creating Acts of
Parliament, though not in the name of Acts, yet in the power of Acts, whereby
both King and People are obliged to obey; how to distinguish this Ordinance
from an Act of State, I am not well satisfied: yet I have heard it called
Treason in one of their Members, for this comparison, though with that caucious
provisoe, That it should be no leading case to future ages for Judges to
imitate. Is this the security of our undoubted Rights we have so long
endeavored: who carries not now his life in his hand, managed by an exact
power of a bare Vote, which if any contradicts, must suffer under the name of a
malignant party, though of their own Members, and not proceeded against by the
Justice of any precedent Acts, but condemned by the Votes of the present
Session; and if this be not an absolute subversion of the Rights of Parliament,
and destructive to the fundamental Laws of our Kingdom (wherein our Liberty
consist) I would fain be satisfied what is: for it is most apparent to whosoever
examines their ordinary proceedings; we have no Law left, but what serves their
turn; and if that be defective to punish those they please to call Delinquents,
their Legislative Ordinance can as well supply that defect, as it could make
that obnoxious, which till this Parliament no Man could ever call a fault.

2. This continuing Power of the two Houses, which if they had had a mind
should ever be remitted, they would have either expressed it in their first
demand, and limited it to a certain time, wherein they might have completely
qualified the disquiet countenance of a troubled Estate; or since have
endeavored some Remonstrance for our satisfaction in that particular: For I
would fain be answered, First, If they fit while they list, and pass what they
list, whether they have nor (during their pleasure) subverted our Monarchy by
their democrasie, and Invested themselves of a power more Arbitrary, then the
Monarchical Government could pretend to, that having his limitations and Rules
of Law, which the Judges are to answer (if they mistake) or those that advise
the King; their democracy having no bounds, be but a thing of Yesterday, and
which as yet we cannot understand, assuming to themselves the sole power to
Judge of our dangers, and propose such remedy, as may answer their pretenses.

2. How every conscientious Man can dispense with that sacred Oath of
Allegiauce, wherein He calls God to Witness for the Vindication of His Princes
Just Prerogative; and their Protestation to maintain an absolute and unlimired
power in the two Houses, wrested to those Ordinances expressly inhibited by
His Majestis special commands: in my understanding it is to no other purpose,
then to lead us into a Maze, where, when we are lost by our m^sunderstanding
(which must necessarily be the principal of our subversion, They will offer us
a Clue, shall eirher lead us to their premeditated designs, whereby of
necessity they will become our Masters, or to an inevitable Ruin, before we
know the reason of our Fears and Jealousies, being the old Rule they so often
enveighed against, First to trouble a State, then to subvert the Government.
Let it not be objected now, That I am against Parliaments, for (God knows) I
am for them, and as zealous for my Country as any Man that lives: But in my
opinion, the best way to secure our Liberty had been, That our Members of both
Houses might continue subject still, liable to the Regiment of those Laws which
shall be enacted by them, wherein they will have a care of securing their own
Estates for future, as well as ours, which was certainly the intentions of our
well advised Ancestors, in exposing so great a trust into their hands, when the
Prince called for their advice in matters of greatest concernment; but by this
continued Session, they not only are Invested of an absolute power, but are
able to make themselves amends at leisure for those moneys exhausted out of
their Estates, while we groan under the insupportable burden of theirs (as
they call them) Legal Taxes; and thus they may well be careless what Laws are
past, never intending to be observers, but Lords of what they make.

3. Who are these pretended reformers of the Commonwealth, but the very
instruments who were the favorites during our oppression; I need not name them
to any, who has once attended the Epidemicke trouble of our age, and what
unheard of Conversion we can make of their lives, whereby such a Confidence
should be reposed in them, as to divest so Religious and Just a Prince of his
unquestionable Rights and Prerogatives, and confer such an unlimitted power so
readily upon them, if we return our former senses, renders me amized; it is not
amiss to ruminate some words his Majesty used in his own vindication at
Newmarket, My Lords lay your hands on your hearts who were the Contrivers of
these Illegal taxes, wherewith you have so incensed my people, to whose
advantage were these impositions levied, are my Exchequers at all larger, or
did you not rather conduce to your peculiar benefit, who were the only
perswaders of them, that you have now repayd me with condign thanks. Those
favorites being content to be the Causers, though not Companions of their
Princes misfortunes being like Crows upon a Carkas that have no sooner bared
the bones, but they are flown, are we not yet sensible the rules of policy, not
of honesty, to secure their lives and fortunes, not their Consciences, exposed
you to this politic, not public service, and had you not in so exact a course
served your turns of these Loyal pretenders, they had been as liable to the
extremity of Justice as the greatest Delinquents that underwent the most heavy
sensures; and undoubtedly had had their deserved shares, which would have given
a better Color to their upright proceedings as they would have you so
believed. If they had impartially distributed Justice amongst the then
Malignant party: but now that we should be so stupid as to be circumvented with
any pretenses whatsoever, which outstrip the Essential rules of Government or
Reason, and confide in the positive Vote of an ambitious party for ought we
know, would admit my perswader to be a madman that could allow that in his
opinion, but make them what you will, suppose them to be the most real and
upright men in their lives and consciences in the whole world: They are but the
Counsel of the King and Kingdom, not their Commanders, for the health of our
State is admirably balanced if that have but his due proportion; The
Parliament consisting of three bodies, the King, the Lords, and Commons, so
that if two should be distructive and the third remain sound during those
Laws already in force, there can be no danger to our Kingdom, but if either
of the ^^o can pass at their pleasure what they will, the third (...) then of
necessity stand for a Cipher, for consenting or disagreeing is then of equal
value, and in my opinion yt's a profident of too great an adventure, for
suppose the King and the Major pure of the Lords should agree an Ordinance or
Law, we should think extremly prejudicial to the Liberty of the Subject, our
Commons should be concluded peremptorily against their Consents: I heard an act
not long since vouched in president that had been tatified against the Consent
of the Lords Spiritual, where they declared nec possumus nee volumus
consentir^, and this so rare we could not find a second. At the Parliament at
Oxford in 17. (...). 3. when the Lords were not there present, they were feign
to disolve the House without passing one Act, confirming my first proposition,
That the consent of two bodies are not of force to make Us Laws without the
third, much less conclude; the King who is not only the supreme head, but the
very soul, whose power gives life to their actions, when their body is once
dissolved, besides how incoherent is it, with that authority committed to them,
sor if the Parliament (which are only His great Council) offer him a Bill,
which He is bound to agree, it was more then ever His Ancestors were; and of
their Counselors, it must necessarily follow, they are His Commanders.

We have a Maxim with the Subject, Modus and conventio vincunt legem. In
former ages and ever since Parliaments were in use, Le Roy s'avisera were
sufficient authority to make a Bill of both Houses unwarrantable; and how the
King has lost that Right, or what new Laws are found out distructive to that
Prerogative, I never yet read, nor ever shall, unless some such new Ordinance
or bare Votes can pretend to such an unwarranted power (whereof there was never
yet sound a President) which can have no other operation upon my understanding,
then, That the Votes of the present Members which can at their pleasures
dispose the undoubted Privileges of the Crown (by a Law recorded only in
their own breasts) and given out to us under the gilded Title of the Peoples
Liberty, when indeed they are but Golden Chains in stead of Bulrushes, and
(reserved till occasion shall make it too appitant) may find out a Law of
equal force to dispose the Crown, when they shall so far debilitate the Prince
as he shall be no way able to make resistance; for when the supporters are not
only undermined, but clearly taken away; by what reason can we imagine the
Structure may continue firm, that you may be sure we will not unjustly charge
them, be pleased to observe with me their Orders in these few instances.

1. Their countenancing these unwarranted Acts, either by a seditious huddle of
indigent people, and so procuring Petitions to necessitate these premeditated
proceedings, or leavying an absolute War against the King; securing us upon no
other reasons then that they are the represent ative body of the Kingdom, and
therefore our Obedience, rather to be expected, then our Reason satisfied,
which indeed is true enough, if they proceeded upon that warranted rule to
which no man could refuse observance, or being entrusted by us with the power
of preceding Parliaments; that they would pursue points of so high concernment,
with the same mature reasons and deliberations, as they have done, and and then
they might well expect our readiness to secure their actions: But suppose we
elect one that should speak or endeavor to enact Treason, does our election
bid us to secure him, or will future Parliaments blame us hereafter for giving
up so great a Delinquent to the Justice of the Laws: dare we countenance their
Intentions, who has fetched Presidents from the weakest Princes, (nay, and go
beyond them to) to the disadvantage of as able a Prince as ever yet held the
Scepter, nay, and offer their suppositions to the Vulgar, If the Prince be a
fool, a child, etc. ought he not to be governed by his Counsel, though it be
against his consent, if it stand with the public benefit: what Implication to
make of this I understand not, but I am sure that it was none of our meaning
when we gave our voice in the Elections Can an Ordinance of Parliament without
the consent of the King renew a repealed Act, and with so bold a countenance
trample upon the heels of that Parliament in Richard the seconds time, and
this very repealed Act renewed this Parliament, be within one step of it,
wherein the Parliament took the Crown and gave it to the then Earl of
Bullingbrook, which was the reason of so much Blood in our Civil Wars, and was
not well settled till of late Years? And can we blame the King if He desires
shelter from such a storm: If it be their intentions, sure one Bullingbrook
will not serve their turns, since there has been equal shares in this so
great an adventure. And to vouch the Oath of this Usurper H. 4. which came in
at their benevolence to a Prince of an unquestionable Title, and never offered
before or since to any English King that ever we read or heard of (out with
it is limitations) is so far from their Loyal pretenses, that they are rather
to be believed studied mischiefs and endeavors, to embroyle the Kingdom in a
Civil War. 2. To disingage all that would out of affection or love, interest
themselves to secure the Kings Person, and Dignity (it being too apparent to
any ordinary understanding) that such proceedings were never warranted by any
precidents of preceding Parliaments, or those Laws they call fundamental in
our Kingdom, they scandalize such with the name of malignant Persons, whereby
His Meniall Servants either absolutely refused, or durst not adventure His
attendance, and countenance this medley in such a sense, that the King himself
is perpetually traduced under this obstruse Dialact; which though they dare not
put down in plain English, for fear the most violent amongst them should be
ashamed to own it; yet by such an implication, as the plainest capacity cannot
but blush, and with admiration wonder, whereto this may tend, I would feign be
satisfied, what these might not do, when they had once mastered these their
malignants; For if you will give us as much reason as the Ants, you must
believe a Winter may come, as well as think a Summer is come: durst any Man
then oppose their proceedings, when they have reduced all to their own Terms,
do you not speak your selves the very Law, and we as we ought to yield no
appeal from Parliament, being the highest Court in the Kingdom; yet in this
sense as the King is a part of it (for otherwise I understand not by what
right) it has the pre-eminence of those they call the Kings Courts, being both
conveen'd by the same Royal Authority. 3. The discountenancing any Petitions
whatsoever (wherein we desire to interpose our advice for acommodation or
otherwise) though never so agreeing with our Laws, unless they stand with the
sense of their party, as if all our Wisdom were shut up in so narrow limits,
and these the only Men in England infallible; yet give me leave to aver, That
to the number of almost two hundred approved able Men, whose warranted
Judgment and sufficiencies were the only inducement of their Countries
Election, have been fain to sit still, and see things carried in this
disorderly confusion (peremptorily against their earnest endeavors) and have
not bin so much as asked their opinions in matters of greatest concernment; but
being unwilling to expose their Consciences to so high a Guilt, have withdrawn
themselves as unvsefull Members of such a Body. 4. To insinuate a belief of
their care to the Vulgar, They have perpetually, surmised terrible Jealousies,
which have produced no other effect, then a desired suspicion of the King, yet
these offered upon most improbable conjectures, as every private Letter is
sufficient grounds to piece up their designs, or by such Persons whose private
discontents, lead them to offer these high indignities to that sacred Person,
they were never worthy to serve in the meanest Office; and though their Lives
were so notorious for their former extravagancies, they have by these
superfluous invectives found countenance, till presuming upon their merits,
which were none, except to abuse the King, can be called desert; That they have
been given up to capine or some such damnable sin, that nature would never have
pardoned, if we had had no Law; Yet these Men's informations, sufficient
grounds to traduce the King, these Letters most necessary Animadversions to
leavie Forces, to maintain the Kings Forts, Towns, and Magazines against Him,
I, and in His own name to, as if they could derive that authority from Him,
that has no power (according to your Ordinance) to leavie them in His own
Defense, though His Person is in never so apparent imminent danger; yet they
for His good, and the good of the Kingdom, can pretend to this Power, and
beyond, yet that all is not of that infallability, let Mr. Pims Letter from Sir
John Hotham witness with me.
I have committed these few Observations, to the view of the Public, finding
so many bold Pamphlets (with so high impudence) fly at the Face of Majesty
unreproved, and every corner stinks of this unclean Doctrine; yet since it is
come to this height, that we must declare our selves, or lose our King,:
wherein my purpose fails, my Life shall make good to my last Breath; but if
Religion, Reason, and Law had not warranted so Just a cause, I should never
have adventured to clear a Glass to so foul a countenance: yet before I
conclude, let me propose one Question in Religion: Whether the Church was not
in its purity in the Primi^ive times; the World agrees they had in those Days
a King that was no Christian? Whether Christ had not more power (then ever any
can or dare pretend to since) to eclipse that Regal Dignity, if it had been
distructive to the Church? yet He refused the lowest office of a Magistrate,
But gave to Caesar the things that were His, for when the young Man came to Him
and said, Lord command my Brother that he devide the Inheritance with me, He
replies, Who made me a Ruler or a Judge amongst you? But now, That we having a
Christian King, professing by his unblemisht Life, the same way to salvation
with us, protesting to conserve our Liberties with his Life, to make such an
apparent difference, which may bethe occasion of the effusion of so much
Christian Blood, upon mere Jealousies, will be the most unheard of disloyalty
that can be committed to future Ages.

FINIS.

