A COMMENT On the TIMES, OR, A CHARACTER Of The Enemies OF THE CHURCH.

Written by Thomas Wall, Mr in Arts, and Minister of Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1657.

To His Most Dear Brother, Mr S. VV.
TO entitle a Book to the name of a Brother, is neither unusual or undecent;
the Primitive Fathers more frequently, in all Ages some, no less eminent for
Piety then Learning, have done it; and it is good to take example from those
who are capable to give it.

As well to relieve my own affections, as to acknowledge your kindness, I
Dedicate this to you: I should have been as little satisfied in my self, as
shown my self thankful to you, had I made any other choice.

It Is your acceptance that I crave, and not protection, because it is a dish
not agreeable to all Palats: In Book-feasts, men hate those that feed on that
which themselves love not. While I would hereby give you a testimony of my
thankfulness, I would not have it prejudicial to its Parent: I hope the Author
you may own, though not the Subject. Much of my support have I received from
you, and (to speak in my second Religion, gratitude) though I should pay all I
have, I should have all to pay: It Is yet my comfort* as God has made you a
means of doing good to me, so he has he made me an instrument to embalm your
name. To which I will add one grain more, my Prayers: Beseeching God to bless
you with the same blessings which I beg for the person of

Your most affectionate Brother, Thomas Wall.

To the READER.
Reader,
IF thou art a part of the Subject of this Discourse, thy reduction into the
Bosom of the Church is my aim therein; and surely my desires thereunto are very
strong, but can send no help to my endeavors. Arguments can never prevail,
where we are resolved to persist. Many men (even with disadvantage) fight with
death, because they think they are never truly conquered, who had rather die,
then be so; and so make a foolish Bargain with the world, exchanging their
lives for reputation. And so many persist in destructive errors, sillily
thinking they are never overcome, while themselves do not acknowledge it, and
lose the Truth, to save credit: Where then just arguments cannot convince,
there is no hopes to reclaim. He, to whom man never spoke the like, spoke yet
to no purpose to such men, but yet he spoke: So holy a president secures my
attempt: If thou therefore wilt not permit me to benefit thy soul, at least
give me leave to discharge my own. But if thou art a Reader, who have as well
courage to own the truth, as knowledge to discern it, let not thy affections to
read, outrun thy judgment in the reading, fully to observe the dependence of
every sentence with the former, may happily require more then perfunctory
perusal; the want of a more severe observance may be injurious to thy self, as
well as to me, it may be a loss to both. I have subscribed my name hereunto,
not that I suppose so mean a piece can gain any reputation to my name, or my
name to it, but that my holy* Mother may take notice she has one Son the more,
who has a greater zeal to serve her, then ability; who had rather discover his
weakness, then neglect his duty* If any desire to have a further account of me,
I am content to give them this convenient notice, That as there is no tittle in
this Treatise either directed or intended against this present Government, so
do I profess my self willing to yield all submissive obedience to it. Among
other Arguments wherewith I have satisfied my Conscience for so doing, this is
one, For that I do believe it was by a special Divine providence raised up, to
give a stop to the violent and unrighteous actions of these men, who now by an
argument taken out of their own mouths, must be forced to confess, That either
the design at which they drove, was wicked, or themselves wicked in the
managing of it. In what I have writ, it is little to me to be judged by men, it
is God that judges the heart. I expect not success herein from popular noises,
but the secret blessing of the same righteous God, who knows the integrity of a
heart inflamed with zeal to his glory, and the Churches peace: And if I reclaim
none that are fallen, I have my hire, if I can but confirm them that stand.

Farewell.
Psalm 68. 30. Rebuke, O Lord, the company of the Spear-men (or the beast of
the reeds) the multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the people; till they
submit themselves with pieces of silver* scatter the men that delight in war.
LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scattered; so begins this Psalm, and it
shall be the subject of my discourse.

When the enemies of God rise up against his Church, it is time for the Church
to fall down to God, to implore his aid against those enemies. Holy Prayers are
more powerful then profane Swords: It is not so much the arm that imploys them,
as the cause against which they are employed, that makes the swords profane.
The vigor of faith in humble devotions, has a greater prevalency, then the
valor of the arm in an abused instrument of cruelty.

Samuel wrought no less deliverance for Israel, then Gideon or Sampson; and yet
I never find him in the head of their Troops, The people fought, but it was he
obtained the victory. In vain is that Religion, whose Patron cannot shield its
Professors: In vain are any attempts against it, if he can. It is good seeking
help from an allpowerful hand. If the Bulls roar for rage against the Church,
it is time for the Lambs to bleat out for rescue. Rebuke, O Lord, the company,
etc.

A secret ordination summons all things to the end of their being, the glory of
God. The very malice of his enemies shall set forth the triumph of his mercy
and power, in the preservation of his Church. It may be strongly opposed, but
not wholly ruined.

What can the Church do against so many adversaries, and so violent? The less
help it finds on earth, the more it seeks from heaven. The more violent are her
adversaries, the more earnest are her prayers. Rebuke, O Lord, the company, etc.

The words contain, First, A Declaration of God's enemies. Secondly, An
Imprecation against those enemies.

The enemies are marshalled into four ranks.

1. A company of Spear-men, or (as some Translations read it) the Beast of the
reeds.

2. The multitude of the Bulls.

3. The calves of the people.

4. The men that delight in war.

The Imprecation is also twofold; The first more gentle; it is but Rebuke the
Spear-men; and that with a limitation too; till they submit themselves with
pieces of silver.

For they that will not, but delight in war, more severely deal with such,
Scatter them; Scatter the men that delight in war.

Before I enter upon the description of these enemies of the Church, according
to their several ranks, observe first from the general scope of the Text,

That the Church of God never wanted enemies, never will. There is no peace to
the wicked, says God: There shall be no peace to the godly, say the wicked.
The wicked shall have no peace which God can give; the godly shall have no
peace which the wicked can take away.

God is the Lord of all the earth, it is fit that all parts of the earth should
yield him some tribute of souls. There may be seven thousand and one in one
part of the earth; but alas, what is seven thousand and one in one part, to
scarce one of seven thousand in all the other parts: Sure I am, God's flock is
but a little one; all the rest are enemies. Whoever are the enemies, great is
their enmity; and proportionable thereunto, their cruelty.

Whoever are the enemies: for there are enemies without the pale of the Church,
and there are some within. Some without. There are, that hate the Church, the
seed of the Serpent, their father's own brood: Ye are of your father the devil,
says our Savior Christ. There are, that mock it; an Ishmaelitish issue: There
are, that deride, Sanballets progeny. There are, that rail at it, Rabshekah's
race. There are, that curse it, Balaams brood; All seek to destroy it.

There is no agreement between good and evil: Neither of which can subsist in
any part of the other: Meet they may, but not unite: There is nothing good
which is not wholly so. The least defect changes the title. Thus stands it
also between truth and falsehood: Truth is but one, it has no subsistence but
in it self admits of no agreement with what is not one with it. Look then what
difference there is in the nature of the things which are entertained; such
difference there is in the affections of those that do profess them.

Religion is the surest tie of love: where this knits not the hearts, there can
be no perfect Union. A seeming truce there may be, but no true concord. It is
their Religion (true or false) which all Nations of the world believe
themselves most engaged, both to defend and propagate. When this comes into
competition, that spurious concord which is knit by secular respects, like some
goodly Fabric founded upon the sands, is suddenly overthrown with every puff
of passion or misprision. Enmity grounded on difference of Religion, may be
lulled asleep by some secular interests, but cannot be extinguished: If the
cradle be not continually rocked, it quickly wakes; like a fire which has some
while lay smothering under the pile, breaks forth ere long more violently into
a sudden flame.

If disagreement in m^tters of faith causes enmity, the more contrary one
faith is to another, the greater is that enmity. The world ha^^ embraced three,
and but three several Religions; the Jewish, Christian, and Mahumetan. The Jews
expect their Messiah yet to come, who with great state and glory, shall subdue
all Nations to his Scepter, and reign gloriously with them upon the earth.

The Mahumetans have their Savior already come; and shall come again, and
receive them into a paradise above, to all fleshly delights: Wine, and Women,
Music, Banquettings, and all things that delight a sensual and brutish
appetite.

Neither of these are so contrary the one to the other, as the Christian is to
both; teaching against the one, that the Savior of the world is already come;
whose Palace was a Stable, and his Couch a Manger; whose Crown was Thorns, and
his Scepter a Cross; whose Revenews was poverty, and his State humility; whose
Sword was his Word, and his conquest Dying. In a word, whose Kingdom was not of
this world.

Teaching against the other, nothing but spiritual joys, and incomprehensible
consolations in the glorious vision and fruition of God.

Go to now, O thou Christian, go to the Jews first, and tell them, You are a
faithless Nation; your Messiah is come, and ye have rejected him, and with
cruel hands have crucified the Lord of life; and therefore your expected
felicity is turned to misery^your glorious reign over all Nations, to a no less
strange, then sad dissipation over all the earth; and your carnal security, to
spiritual confusion: Will thou tell them this, and not expect their enmity?

From the Jew, go to the Turk, and tell him, abused Musselman, your Prophet is
an Impostor, his law, a lie, the carnal delights which he has promised you,
will turn to unutterable dolours of soul, his beautiful women into misshapen
hags, your harmonious music, into hideous howling; and your delicious fare,
into surfe^s of woe and bitterness. Will thou tell him this, and not expect his
enmity?

2. But secondly, There are enemies within the pale of the Church too: It is
not (says David) an open enemy that has done me this dishonor, for then I
could have born it: But it is thou, mine own familiar, we walked in the house
of God as friends, etc.

A stab from a friend, wounds the heart deeper then the body: while the body
weeps in blood at the stroke, the soul bleeds in tears at the unkindness:
Brutus received a greater wound from Caesar then he gave, and Caesar a greater
wound from Brutus then his weapon, when he cried, and tu fili Brute!

That misfortune does most amaze, which we do least expect; and those injuries
do most trouble, which we least deserve. No sight so uncouth, as to see
children pierce those Breasts which gave them suck. Good milk turns to bad
blood in a wicked heart. The juice of the same Flower which becomes honey in
the Be, converts to poison in the Spider. Corrupt affections abuse the
greatest blessings.

O dear and sacred Mother! My soul shall weep in secret for thy ungrateful
sons: these Birds had not peck'd out thine eyes, had not thou brought them
out; nor kicked against thee* had not thou fed them full of such excellent
viands of knowledge, which thus puffs them up. Have thou purchased such a pure
Reformation for them, from that adulterous Synagogue of Rome, with so much
blood of thy dearest children, that they should turn their weapons into thine
own bowels, to seek for a new one there?

There are sure some crudities in their ill-disposed stomachs, that have turned
the wholesome food of the Church into these venomous practices: My Meditations
have suggested four.

1. Scrupulosity. 2. Envy. 3. Ignorance. 4. Ambition or Pride. Upon which,
these four Beasts in the Text do act their enmity against the Church:
Scrupulosity sets forth unto us the Beast of the reeds: Envy* the Bulls:
Ignorance the Calves, and Pride the men that delight in war.

Scruples are the reeds: the Beast that lurks in them, is a peevish spirit:
which thence takes all occasions to prey upon the peace of the Church. Every
blast of wind shakes the bending reed to and fro: every idle scruple staggers
the unsettled humorist in his obedience. Were these doubts the zeal of a well
meaning mind, there might be place for pity, though not excuse. Ignorance has
no praise, but what it gains by yiedling. There is safety in the greater and
less degree of knowledge, whiles the middle sort lies open to all assaults. The
greater does surmount all captious apprehensions: the less, out of conscience
of its own weakness, submits to the guidance of more able judgments: while the
middle degree finds force enough to lead them into many labyrinths of doubts,
but none to conduct them out.

But if their hearts be not as faulty as their heads, there is the spirit of
meekness to restore, whom the spirit of error has misled. It Is the Beasts in
the reeds that marreth all. A peevish spirit in a scrupulous conscience. When
love of contention would seem desire of assurance, every straw seems a block*
How many foolish doubts are proposed, wherein nothing is discovered, but the
weakness of him that raised them. A weak brain, and a wilful heart, commonly go
hand in hand: The one begins the quarrel, and the other maintains it. To
endeavor their conviction, in stead of quenching the fire, does but blow the
coals: Where satisfaction is but pretended to, it is never received; or if
happily* really intended, yet if not received, suspicion is but augmented; in
either case, further dispute does more exasperate then reclaim. They fear in
arguing nothing but present contradiction, which though they cannot escape, they
will not acknowledge; and though they cannot divert conviction, as usually they
do, by starting to some other matter, if they cannot (I say) divert conviction,
they yet will smother it in an outbraving contempt: A perverse generation,
which will not open their eyes to see a truth, which either they do not know,
or not affect: Nothing can silence them, but either their own confusion, or
else the Churches. And this is the first, the beast of the Reeds; a peevish
spirit in a scrupulous conscience.

The second is Envy, herein fitly emblematized by the Bull; for who can stop
an enraged Bull? And who can stand before envy? says the wise man, Prove. 27.
Nothing is either more mischievous or lasting, then enmity, whose foundation is
laid upon envy.

First, where envy is, there is confusion, and every evil work, says St.
James. It is impossible they should be good themselves, that malign others for
being so: or, that grieve, not because themselves want, but that another has:
Not because themselves are evil, but because another will not be so too:
Mischief must needs be their greatest delight, whose greatest grief is another
good,

Neither is it more hateful for its effects, then for its continuance. An
injury may be forgotten, where sufferance makes not the offenders more
insolent. But envy never cease, because that cease not which occasions it.
Will you see one of these envious Bulls? You shall find Zedekiah with his iron
horns, bellowing out defiance against Micaiah, in the voice of exprobation:
Which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee? How has innocence and
desert been batted by the salvage Bulls of these times? Goring the sides of
their reputation with the horns of misprision and detraction: And like that
elder brother of theirs, the forenamed Zedekiah, blaspheming the Spirit of the
Lord, by ascribing thereunto the acts of that spirit, that lusts unto envy.
But more of these in the proper place. Let this suffice for the second ground
of their enmity.

The third is ignorance, discovering its self in the Calves of the people.
Calves you know are but stollida animalia, silly creatures, do but follow where
their Sires do lead them. Those Calves of the Jewish Nation, had never cried up
the Lord Jesus to be crucified for a seducer, had not themselves been seduced by
those envious Bulls, the chief Priests and Scribes, who persuaded the people to
ask Barabbas, and crucify Jesus. I wist now (Brethren) that through ignorance
ye did it, or else you would not have crucified the Lord of life, says St
Peter. Ignorance is the mother of all mischief, whatsoever it be that leads it,
miserable are the effects thereof.

Sometimes it is lead by passion, which oversways the judgment. Nothing does
more unman us, then this vice: a violent passion of grief at the prosperity of
the wicked, transported even David himself, almost to condemn the generation of
God's saints: his own testimony shall be our warrant; So foolish was I, and
ignorant, even as a beast before thee. Another fit of furious zeal (for zeal is
but a passion, if it be not according unto knowledge) enflamed Saint Paul to a
bloody persecution of God's Church.

Sometimes it is lead by affection, which blinds the judgment. Great affection
is subject to great deceit: It first believes a possibility of that, to the
liking whereof it is enchained: then strains the wit to find out arguments to
prove it as possible, as pleasing: The possibility of it thus fancied, begets a
conceit that easily clothes it self in a contented error.

Sometimes ignorance is lead by self conceit, which seduceth the judgment. The
conceit of knowledge, ruins almost as many as the professed want of it: How
many had been better taught, if they had not thought they needed it not? How
many had been happy, if they had had more knowledge, and less opinion of it?
Knowledge puffs up, says St Paul, but that the conceit of it only should do
so too, is not more lamentable then usual. Busy ignorance is ever accompanied
with an opinion of wisdom.

Nor do such more offend in the opinion they have of themselves, then in that
they have of others: They have a bad opinion of all that flatter not that good
one they have of themselves: Corrupt minds hate those that love not that which
they like in themselves. This is another ground of that enmity that springs
from ignorance. Let Us see a fourth.

Sometimes it is lead by a prepossession, which prevents the judgment: There is
nothing more dangerous, then an hasty admittance of any thing into our
allowance: What has once won consent upon the Will, is hardly removed.
Deliberation presupposes doubt, and tends to choice; where choice is made, and
we are already resolved, deliberation is excluded as needless; and the error
is both swallowed and digested, ere the truth is proposed; and when it is, it
is rejected: for prepossession begets affection, affection is impatient of
contradiction: where we love to retain, we love not those which would dissuade
us from it, that is another.

Sometimes it is lead by self-interest, and that corrupts the judgment. If
godliness be great gain, as St Peter says, what are they that make great gain
out of their godliness? A man may possibly reap secular advantage by that
service which he does for God: but not greedily affect it, without the just
censure of guilt. Abraham would not be made rich by the King of Sodom. Either
greedily or unjustly to heap up profit to themselves in the prosecution of
God's service, is an undoubted argument that it was their own benefit, and not
God's glory, that gave first motion to those endeavors; although the desire of
gain may so blind the eyes, and pervert the judgment, as to deem the service
will acquit the guilt of those corrupt affections. Saul had never impleaded the
intent of sacrifice in the reservation of the Amalekitish cattle, had it not
yielded him some hope to wipe off the guilt of his disobedience thereby. And
although I dare not affirm, yet I dare suppose, that his words did but speak
his thoughts, and yet those thoughts gave no diminution to his sin, because it
was an evil eye first conveyed the motion of that service into his heart.

When men make self-interest the sphere of their actions, they neither see, nor
understand beyond it. And therefore St Paul made self-seeking one character of
the Churches enemies: All seek their own. The primitive Christians did justly
glory in the community of these outward things, as one evidence of their
integrity. If this community did first help to support the Church, for ought I
know (so far as it pleases God to permit) self interest may help to pull it
down. These are the five grounds of that enmity which springs from ignorance.

The fourth general ground is pride, which sets forth the men that delight in
war. The analogy holds in this: Other sins hate the light, Pride only loves to
be seen: The commission of other sins is attended with shame, perhaps we are
humbled for them too, Pride only delights and glories in it self; as therefore
pride delights in its own enormity, so do they that delight in war, glory in
their cruelty: sober minded men wage war out of necessity, and have peace for
their end, blood-thirsty and deceitful men raise war for delight, and have
tyranny for their aim. It is a prodigious pride in the hearts of these men in
the valuation of themselves, that think the blood of others a price low enough
for their ambitious ends: But all may not aspire: there is also a spiritual
pride, which as it is more epidemical, so is it more destructive to men and
Religion: Both the knowing are infected with it, and the ignorant too: It
befools both, and by a strange kind of working, it makes the knowing more
learnedly ignorant, and the ignorant more opiniately knowing; In both, it works
a delight to disturb the peace of the Church.

In reference to the first: There is nothing more dangerous then knowledge
without grace, humility, and charity. The greatest heresies have sprung from
the deepest wits. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge have perverted thee, says the
Prophet Isaiah. Knowledge is good, without which the mind is not good, says
Solomon: but it often proves bad, because they are bad who use it. Those reaches
of the brain, which tend not to unity, are the buds of fury, not discretion;
and argue more a love of contention, then desire of Reformation; whether it be
in opposing established truths, by straining the wit to find out how reason
might back their dis-affection to them, or else, by forging of errors, by
casting a fraudulent show of reason upon those things which are indeed
reasonless: Either way yiedling an equal glory, stirs them up to show the
bravery of their busy spirits. And there is no ignorance so mischievous as
perverted knowledge; nor does Pride work only upon the knowing, but upon the
ignorant also: Sometimes by arrogating a conceit of those abilities, which as
far transcend their capacities, as their conceit transcends their abilities.
The men are in a dream, conceit is no more, but that is enough to beget a
faculty supersentiendi; by virtue whereof they are able to teach their
teachers: if these were as forward to learn, as they were to instruct. Sometime
again, by condemning all they cannot understand; and contemning learning,
because themselves want it: as if (as that Oracle of humane wisdom did once
observe) reason were the only enemy of Religion, and childish simplicity the
mother of ghostly wisdom. Thus does their practice justify the wise man's
constant asseveration, by pride only comes contention.

Thus have I shown you that the Church has enemies both abroa^ and at home;
and the grounds of that enmity: A word of their cruelty, and then I will show
you what Beasts they be.

We can as little expect, as find mercy at the hands of the professed enemies
of the Church: Their Religion does as much commend, as their inclination excite
their cruelty: But that the waters of the Sanctuary should be turned into
blood, is the astonishment of Angels as well as men. Oh that the blood of the
Covenant God made with men, should be turned into a covenant of blood, the
engagement of Christians to devour one another! A Turkish cruelty befits them,
who have practically translated Christ's Gospel into Mahomet's Alcoran.

Nor does the retained name of, and profession of Christianity, serve to any
other end, then that by seeming religious, they may be more securely malicious.
Agreements in some points, does but heighten the hatred occasioned by
difference in others: False zeal transports them, fury knows no mean; does
neither fear, nor is satisfied with revenge. Like as we see in some sudden
tumults, where there is store of pates, there is store of confusion; in which,
while any one breaks forth into outrage and mischief, emulation and desire to
seem no less zealous then he, prompts the second to act the like, or a greater
mischief, till some few hands has conveyed the example to all. So likely, when
difference of opinion causes difference of affection, it breaks forth into all
hateful effects; the heart is enflamed with malice, that kindles the tongue to
all bitter invectives, hateful revilings, terms of reproach, envious
detractions, causless slanders, false accusations. The tongue summons up the
hands to acts of violence, and hastneth the feet to shed innocent blood, till
at length all the affections join in the conspiracy, and help to set forward
the mischief: love to their errors does excite them, hope to prevail does
encourage them, passion precipitates them, and fear suggests necessity upon
them, to go on, where nothing but ruin is expected in desisting: for that
Religion being a matter of highest concernment, the undispensable prop of
States, the opposers thereof expect no favor, if success in the defense
thereof prove answerable to the endeavors; and it is usual to show no mercy,
where we expect none; much less to expect any, where we have showed none; they
must be cruel.

Thus far of the proposition raised from the general scope of the Text. I must
now produce the enemies themselves, and will first draw them up, and show them
in a full body, and then set them in their several stations.

First, the Beast of the Reeds are a certain sort of people, that undermining
the peace of the Church by a fained show of holiness, these heap up Teachers to
themselves, who make a breach in the quiet state thereof, and are the Bulls of
the Text: who by bellowing out reviling reproaches against the ecclesiastical
policy, beget the Calves of the people, who confusedly run to their assistance,
who arriving at the very point of bringing their long endeavors to a wished
period, up starts a fourth sort, the men of the Text that delight in war, I
mean, this spiritual warfare, in whom alone (thanks be to some Romish Jesuits
for it) the art and policy of the other three do jointly meet: As first,
pretending as great, nay, greater show of holiness. 2. Arrogating better
abilities of teaching by inspiration, and yet as very Calves as the rest; and
these like Jehu (though not in act, yet in desire) march furiously on, beat
down all before them, snatch the power out of the others hands, beat down
Churches, disanuls all Orders, overthrows all Ecclesiastical policy, confounds
Religion, and delight in it too, and glories in their mischief. Thus have I
shown the enemies in gross, observe them now in their particular ranks.

1. The Beast of the Reeds, some translations read, a company of Spear men; the
word in the Original reconciles the reading: It signifies both a company, and a
Beast, say Expositors upon the text. If we translate it a company, it imports a
rank of men, armed with Spears, made of a certain kind of Reeds: Spears were in
use in David's time, they used then that weapon to gore the sides of his
mystical body, with which a wretched caitiff pierced the side of his natural
body, John 19. 34. But if we refer the sense to the signification of a Beast,
it denotes some perilous beast, which out of the covert of their reedy
thickets, attends the opportunity of their desired prey, the specification of
these other Beasts in the text, prompts my inclination to this sense. What
manner of Beast this should be, my former reading determines not; Our Christian
Seneca out of Cassiodor^, conjectures it a Lion, Leones canneta reliquerunt,
says he. Give me leave to add Pardus unto Leo; If Leones, Lions, for their
proud insulting; Leopardi, Leopards, for their cunning insinuating. The great
Naturalist observes it of this beast, the Leopard, that being by nature endowed
with a sweet odoriferous scent, but of a formidable aspect, will hide it self
in some secret place (what better then a thicket of reeds?) for otherwise, the
ugliness of its shape would more affright, then the sweetness of its scent
allure: the terror of its sight being thus secured, his sweet savor and scent
allures other Beasts to the place, upon whom, when they come within the compass
of his reach, he seizes thence upon, as his desired prey.

Your thoughts cannot fall besides the application. The Hypocrite is this
Beast. A generation of such beasts have made this age infamous to all
posterity, who cloak their mischievous intent under a show of sanctity. Holy
semblances, religious protestations, pretenses of Reformation, are the sweet
allurements, whereby they attract the hearts, and steal the affections of the
silly Calves; whom, when the pleasing savor of these Saint-like professions,
have drawn into an engagement with them, they make the instruments of their own
thraldom, and the Churches ruin. As the Devil did of old, so still his
ungodly imps, betray others to the guilt of evil practices, by faming some good
to be reaped by it. There be many secret reaches in the mystery of iniquity;
they pretend good, when they act evil; and intend evil, when they act good.
Crafty and subtle men seem always good, that they may be once bad to purpose.
All operations tend to some end: It was an aim at an higher degree of
perfection, that first occasioned sin in the world; and the greatest evils are
still occasioned by pretending it.

When men appear so good, and are not, they must have some evil end, or else
some ill intent: The first thing they conceive withal, is glory and applause:
Who take upon them the semblance of doing like Saints, but are not, although
they stand condemned of themselves; because they know how to be good, and are
not: yet men usually dare not think them to be bad, whom they see know so well
how to be good. Glittering pretenses dazles the eyes of men, God only judges of
the action by the heart, man of the heart by the actions. When as therefore God
has placed majesty as well as beauty in the face of Virtue, that where the one
cannot allure, the other may enforce respect: Hence it is, that wicked men
admire and reverence that power of godliness, which yet they deny to practice;
and vainglorious men practice that godliness, the power whereof they yet deny:
coveting more to be honored for it, then bettered by it* So glory is the first.

Self-interest is the second. Religious they will be, and't be but for the
benefit they receive thereby. Saul will be devout, that he may preserve such
goodly cattle; he will keep them to sacrifice to the Lord: some perhaps to God,
but most to his belly. The people of Sichem's country will enter into the
covenant of God with Israel, on condition that Israel's substance might be
theirs, Genesis 34. 23. It is the hateful practice of these times, wherein the
increase of knowledge has been the bane of practice, to pretend Religion, and
intend Promotion: But God and Mammon cannot dwell together. Religion was never
the principal end of those undertakings, where they that manage the cause,
thrive so fast upon it, and grow more rich, then they were before devout. A
rich man may be truly pious, but they are justly suspected, who so greedily
work riches out of piety: the blessing is promised to them that lose all for
Christ, not to them who gain all by him. It is very hard for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but it is harder for them that make
themselves rich by pretending to it. They can expect no reward from God, that
pay themselves so well for the service they do for him. Self-interest then, is
the second end.

But thirdly, Will you see the very Devil in Samuel's Mantle? Here comes malice
and mischief under the cloak of piety too. How often has malice wrought out
its own satisfaction, wherein the pretense has been only zeal to Religion? How
often have men, by how much the more they have pretended service to God, by so
much the more injurious violence have they harbored under that pretense, to
prosecute their dissenting Brethren? They that dare rob God of glory, less care
what outrage and mischief they do to man, so they may do it with credit,
advantage, and safety. And although to a more vigilant observation, hypocrisy
is seldom without those practices, without which we should not know it to be
hypocrisy, God permits them to go so far, that till by their fruits they might
be known, yet vulgar eyes sees not the malice and mischief that is palliated
under such specious and plausible insinuations. I had almost said, that
mischief is ever intended by specious pretenses, which are ever assumed for the
effecting of it. And the gall of this bitterness is, that this mischief is not
to be diverted, either by lenity, or benefits, or by wisdom: First, not by
lenity; for if they think they do well, (as many of the seduced Calves may do,
like those in Jerusalem, who followed Absolon in the simplicity of their
hearts) upon this account, they think toleration of them, to be an effect of
that awful regard which is due unto such pretensions, and not of lenity: which
gives more encouragement to proceed, then works any relenting submission. Or if
the spirits either of malice, or of contention, or of the world employ them, as
without doubt one of these spirits does the Bulls of the Text, forbearance then
does but serve for an incitement more contemptuously to provoke. Secondly, The
mischief is not to be diverted by benefits; sor that advantage is always
greater, which they hope to gain by successful commotions, then undeserved
favor. Lastly, Not by wisdom, for strong pretensions, if they win not belief,
yet they make even wise men suspend their judgments; if they draw not help,
yet they make men that they do not oppose. And to be sure, hypocrites put not
off their counterfeit shape, till they have so far advanced their intended
wickedness, till it be past redress. Nor do they receive discouragement from
the discovery of a few more piercing eyes, for, for the most part, men are
generally either ensnared by it, or else amated; either engaged to help, or
resolved not to oppose; and who are backed with the assistance of many, fear
not the power of a few. In a word, there is nothing more easy then to be
succesful, where men dare make Religion a cloak for their wickedness, and dare
allow in themselves, violation of oaths, and the perpetration of any unjust and
ungodly actions, that may promote their designs. And these are the first rank,
the Beast of the Reeds. Rebuke, O Lord, the Beast of the Reeds.

The second is a multitude of Bulls. The effects of the rage and brutish
qualities of these beasts, are found in none more eminently, then in a sort of
factious Ministers, who creep into the Church of God, and occasioneth this sad
confusion of it. The Pastors are become brutish, says the Prophet Jeremiah,
chap. 10. 21. Brutish is a general term, set down to express the various
effects of their cruel dispositions, which are not to be comprised in any one
particular word. Hence it is, that for the waste they make in the Church, they
are called Boars, Psalm. 80 for their factious Schisms, Foxes cubs, Cant. 2. 15.
for devouring souls, they ate called ravening Wolves, Mat. 7. 15. for their
poysonsome malice, Serpents, and Vipers, Mat. 3. for their greediness, dogs,
Phil. 3. 2. for their bloody persecution of their Brethren, they are called
Bulls of Basan, Psalm 22. 12. which Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, the
principal actors of whose death, were the chief Priests and Scribes* to this
Beast the text resembles these their Successors. Bulls, especially if enraged,
are fierce, headstrong, mad, they roar, spurn, scrape up earth, traverse the
ground, exalt their horns, breath out fury, and scorn all opposition
whatsoever. Such are the qualities of those factious and schismatical Ministers
which did infest the Church*

First, They are fierce: Men of lean abilities, what they cannot attain by
desert, will endeavor by faction; and it is easy to find exceptions, when we
resolve to oppose: what a numerous issue did they pretend burdened their weak
and tender consciences? but all begotten by envy, upon misapprehension; but
how weak soever their exceptions be, they are violently insisted on: What
bitter invectives did they froth out against a few innocent Rites, and things
of unimporting consequence, in comparison of those many horrid blasphemies,
heresies, and frenzies, that have hurried so many thousand souls since to hell
and damnation? Every fancied dislike transports them into rage and fury; they
are all on fire in detestation, though the things that incense them, carry no
other blame, but what their misconstruction gives them. Their hands and their
feet speak as loud, as their tongues, says the Wiseman, Prove. 6. 13. as if
there were as much sense in the noise of the one, as in the voice of the other:
The less reason they have for the disturbance they make, the more would they
seem to have; they would have the bitterness of their malice, evince the
betterness of their cause; and the vehemence of contending, prove them to have
some great reason for the doing that, which indeed shows they have neither
reason nor Religion: An indiscreet passion in all strifes, either imports some
secret guilt, or else betray us to it.

Secondly, Nor are they more furious then headstrong. There is no tyranny
like to that of a slave, whom vilany has set a cock-horse: Nothing can divert
him from that mischief which he has once resolved; so it is in the Isle of
Man. When corrupt affections have inslaved the judgment, it is to no end for
the captive to give a Law to the Law to the conquerours, which will admit none.
When the affections which are the servants to the superior powers of the soul,
get the mastery, they commonly beget an invincible resolution not to alter our
persuasions: Shame will not permit them to yield, whom desire of glory caused
to contend* The more zeal they have shown in a wrong cause, the more
ignominious would their conviction be; and consequently, their resolutions more
engaged to persist. The Church must be pulled down, to make up the breaches of
their reputation. Nothing is more terrible to contentious spirits, then to read
their own shame in the suppression of mischief fruitlesly attempted: Reputation
must maintain what ignorance did broach. To mis-apprehend, denotes a man. It Is
headstrong persistance that degrades him into a Beast: Silliness and
stubbornness fattens them in that Bestiality.

3. In this fury and obstinacy, they outrun their wits: a violent prosecution
of their religionated designs of mischief, transports them into ridiculous fits
of madness: The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, says the Prophet
Hosea, chap. 9. 7. what is folly but a tame madness? What is madness, but a
raging folly? The fool rages, and is confident, says the wise man: mad
conceits, mad gestures, mad practices, make up these mad Bulls.

1. Mad conceits; They run to hell, and say they are going to heaven: They
practice the Devil, and say they are taught of God so to do. They confound
Religion, and say they restore it: Sacrilege they would christen in blood with
the name of devotion; their confused and incongruous intermixture of the
different parts of prayer, vain battologies, yea unsavory nonsense, they
conceive for method, the direction; for matter, the immediate dictates of the
holy Spirit; and many such like mad conceits they have.

2. Mad gestures; Staring, grinning, gnashing, tossing themselves, this way,
that way, up and down; thumping, beating, stamping, and the like; these they
deem the becoming deportments of holy zeal, and divine ravishment.

Lastly, Mad actions; Like him who took up a stone to beat off a fly from his
neighbor's forehead, which knocked out his brains: Or like that other, that to
shave the hair, cut off the head. I need not speak the application. O once most
glorious Church, now mended into ruin! O monstrous Reformation! But the proper
work of such frantic Bulls, They are mad.

Fourthly, They are roaring Bulls: With what strained throats do they stund the
giddy multitude into wonder and seducement? What Civil Atheism do they bellow
out against that Authority, to which the Law of God, and man, and themselves
had subjected them? With what impetuous clamours do they blaspheme God into an
engagement with them, by chalging a protection from him, in their sacrilegious
and unjust proceedings? As if they would level heaven with hell in the
allowance of their practices. With what loud clamours do they cry up the Lord
Jesus into a pretended Throne, prepared for him in the F^rge of their own
fancies? With what swelling words of ostentation, would they deifie their
Cause, with a presumptuous Warrant of its happy success? To whom the Proverb
has happened true, None more shamefully deceived, then those that thought
themselves most confidently assured. Lastly, How do they thunder out damnation
against all opposers of them? For they are roaring Bulls

Fifthly, They scrape up earth. No far-fetched emblem of these spiritual
Bulls, in their greedy scraping up these hardened clods of white and red earth.
The desire of wealth and preferment, has tanght them to be religious. God must
be beholding to Mammon for the service these men do for him. They have prepared
Christ Jesus a Throne, but they will be paid well for the setting it up. Wicked
men hold that Religion best, which they most thrive by; nor will set up any,
but by what they may: They had not that preferment which they desired, but
considered not they desired that which they deserved not; and it is not so
easy to counterfeit Learning as Religion. What? Are they so good? and yet so
covetous? Surely these men are the only men that have got a way to reconcile
God and the world together.

Sixthly, They exalt their horns: They are as proud as covetous; a pair of sins
that usually go hand in hand, says pious Bernard. There is nothing so hateful
as a proud Priest; because the holiest Calling makes the greatest sinner. Pride
was first begot in Heaven, by the reflex of an Angel's understanding upon his
own excellency, and it still aspires to an eminency in eminency in them, who
profess themselves most heavenly. Holy semblances has set upon them an high
esteem in other men's opinions: Self love doubles it in their own. True piety
humbles us; It is no marvel if their fained piety puffs them up in a proud
estimation of themselves, they despise others: Come not near, for I am holier
then thou. With what a scornful eye do they look upon those, who have not
learned an high estimation of, and a due submission to them, as the only
supporters of Religion. Surely Saint Paul when he said, Let every one think
others better then themselves, spoke not to them who make a proud contempt of
others, all the arguments they have of their own excellency:

Seventhly, They breathe out fury: In what bloody characters do they write the
evidence of their pride and covetousness? What they cannot attain by the sword
of God, they will by the sword of Gideon: who ever knew error not accompanied
with violence and cruelty? They sow Sedition, raise tumults, rend the Church,
and run to violence for security. They more fear the power of men, then of God;
or else they would never seek to secure themselves from the one, by those
mischievous practices, which does more incense the other.

Lastly, Like enraged Bulls, they break through all opposition; for what can
restrain them?

Can persuasions? No; for reason can never persuade them to desist, who had no
reason to attempt, but hope to prevail. They who have no reason but their Will,
will hear none against it.

Secondly, Can Conscience? No; for they will not fear to commit sin against
their Conscience, who dare to pretend Conscience for the sin which they do
commit. That Conscience which will for its own end patronize some sins, to
advance those ends will act any.

Thirdly, Can Duty restrain them? No; for while they pretend to higher
perfection then is taught in the Church, they forget to acknowledge that degree
whereunto she has brought them; and are more ready to quarrel at her defects,
then to reverence her graces, as if those might better justify a separation
from her, then these challenge any thankfulness or duty to her.

Fourthly, Can Laws restrain them? No; for the use of Law is not to persuade,
but to enforce: But their Conscience, they say, may not be forced. A true
principle, but they may either ignorantly apply it, or else maliciously: Though
the coercive power of the Law has no just dominion over the Conscience, yet
may not every silly pretense of Conscience be obtruded, to render the power of
Laws of none effect. They ignorantly apply it, who make those things matter of
Conscience, upon which the Conscience has no immediate influence; as certainly
it cannot have upon things which are not directly prohibited by God's Word.
Where obedience is required by lawful Authority, wherein yet, a man doubts
whether he may obey or not; that man cannot without sottish ignorance, be said
to be persuaded in Conscience that he may not obey, unless he can produce some
just prohibition from Scripture, of the things whereunto his obedience is
required. Or secondly, They may maliciously apply it, and often do so too, when
it is the Authority that enjoins them, that does more distaste, then the things
enjoined. In vain shall they complain of severity, that do all they can to
provoke it; but in the mean time, whether they apply it ignorantly or
maliciously, they make no Conscience to violate those Laws which they pretend
would force them against their Conscience.

Fifthly, Can shame restrain them? No; for the fear of that can never deter
them, which they presume shall never happen, especially where there is certain
shame in desisting, and a conceited assurance both of gain and glory too in
proceeding: Powerful arguments both, to win upon corrupt affections: For some
will be always found to commend those attempts, that are by never so wicked
means crowned with success.

Sixthly, Will a personal Oath restrain them? No; for an Oath, which is a most
sacred thing, cannot partake of any thing which is evil, Herod sealed his
promise with an Oath, but that Oath had no obligation from the strumpets
demand. If Herod had broke that Oath, it could not have made him perjured;
because no Oath can bind to an unlawful action. Whence they may have argued,
that they may safely renounce that obedience, though by oath engaged to it,
which an after new light has discovered to be contrary to the power of
Godliness, but if this new light be nothing el^e but either 1. A settled
resolution to do what we have a mind to. Or, 2. Some violent prevailing f^ncy,
that has stole first upon our affections, then upon our judgments. Or 3. A
strong persuasion begotten by private ends, and received growth from false
principles. Or 4. Diabolical Infusion; for it must needs be so when injurious,
malicious, and apparent ungodly practices are used for the promotion of
pretended piety; if it be (I say) any of these pretty Images (which this new
light has insinuated into these men) disguised under the name of Conscience,
what shall become of them? What will they do? when they shall lie under the
stinging lashes of a guilty Conscience, and the either dreadful apprehensions,
or unsufferable strokes of divine wrath and indignation, both for their own
breaking through the sacred tie and band of a just, lawful, ancient, solemn,
and holy oath, and cancelling all other bands of Religion and Reason; but also,
as if men did not run fast enough to hell and damnation before, for that they
should hold forth this light to others, to make them run the faster.

Seventhly, and lastly, Will a National Covenant restrain them? No; for that
Covenant which they entered into for self ends, it failing to effect those
ends, they will as readily break, and (if they can) work their desires into
fruition by any means, though never so contrary to that League, or any part
thereof: Who fear not to take an oath contrary to God's Law, will not fear to
break, if contrary to their own, not so much as unlawful, but as invalid: Not,
out of conviction that they ought not advance their own ends by it, but out of
vexation, that they cannot.

Thus have I shown you the Bulls of the Text. Now let us see the Calves of the
people, whom they mislead in their trains of error. They cause my people to
err, by their lightness and lies, says the Prophet. There are no such plagues
to a Commonwealth as seditious Priests. The infection of error is worse then
the guilt; it no sooner finds approbation in one, but it borrows his
persuasions for entertainment in another. But keep we to the Bulls, the grand
ringleaders of all; how many pernicious Tenants have found both allowance and
entertainment in vulgar minds, from the authority of them, whose positions they
have found to jump with their own affections and private ends, whence proceeds
an admiration of their persons for advantage sake, as the Apostle speaks, which
comes at length to a belief of the infallibility of their positions in all
things, whom they find uncontrollable in some, and remarked for men that
pretend to a greater measure of sanctity then others. Now when these begin to
make a breach in Church, those incitations against* the present state of
things, never want favorable audience, which have prepared their way by the
opinion of their holiness from whom they proceed: with what spungy souls do
these poor Calves soak in these waters of the Sanctuary, which their applauded
Teachers have either ignorantly or deceitfully corrupted, to intoxicate them!
They are first induced to believe, then to defend; and the bold predictions of
success from the Zedekiahs of the times, and a mischievous confidence in the
swelling numbers of their partisans, gives them encouragement to all acts of
violence and outrage. Wicked men ask no leave to do, when they find their
hearts in their hands; I mean, their power answerable to their will: And now
traveling with the pangs of a false zeal, they fall in labor of a monstrous
Reformation: Religion, and Liberty of Conscience, are made the grounds of their
quarrel. An easy persuasion wins the assistance of the Vulgar to those
attempts, whereby they are taught to believe, they shall at once do service to
God, and right to themselves. But hear, O ye seduced Calves of the people! It
is the show of goodness that maintains sin in the world: The world could not be
so bad as it is, if all that were bad in it did appear so. These Bulls could
not have trained you on to these acts of violence and outrage, but by
dissembled piety: but you must know, it is almost as great a crime in matters
of Religion, to be deceived, as to deceive. God will require your blood at
their hands, but you also may die in your sins; and when you are in hell, it
will be no case to you that they are more tormented. There is nothing more
pleasing to the Devil, then to see his malice against the Church, to triumph in
your folly and misprision. It was once piety to build Temples to the public
service of God, and is it now piety to pull them down? Did you pretend to fight
for Religion, to keep it from the violation of others, that ye might commit a
rape upon it your selves? But alas, the wound is incurable; Here is no room for
expostulation; let us therefore see in a word the Religion this many headed
monster has hatched, and the liberty of conscience they would have: These also
having their particular aims, either secular advantage, or desirous to pass for
men enflamed with a godly zeal, or rather led by both together, for they have
learned this art from the Bulls, their Sires, to have reconciled gain and
godliness, profit and zeal; profit pricks forward zeal, as provender does the
Ass, and their zeal countenanceth them in the profit they get, and then it is
piety in them to pull down Churches, which was once piety to build up: It is
pure devotion that consecrates their fingers to the committing of sacrilege:
It is the fire of zeal that kindles their tongues to all manner of bitter
invectives, against all kind of Order and Government; It is love to the truth
makes them lovers of themselves in standing for it: It is hatred of sin makes
them so malicious: It is separation from the wicked that makes them void of
Christian society, and common Morality; and so full of pride, scorn, and
contempt: It is fear of maintaining idleness, that makes them so uncharitable:
It is the correction of nature, makes them without natural affection: and the
rooting out the wicked, makes them unjust: and their liberty of conscience, is
the practice of all this impiety permitted with impunity. The sum of all, It Is
a Religion that will give them liberty to break down all the Houses of God in
the Land, and seize upon the Revenews thereof, and tie the Ministers of Jesus
Christ to their allowance; a Religion that may give them liberty to commit
sacrilege, to speak evil of Dignities, to turn the wicked out of their
estates, and invest them in their inheritance: Briefly, a Religion that may
tolerate and countenance, yea, and justify them in their covetous, malicious,,
cruel, unnatural, uncivil, proud, contemptuous, and uncharitable actions. This
is only the Religion and Liberty of Conscience that will please the Calves: In
the sweet pastures whereof we will turn them to grass, and come to the fourth
rank, The men that delight in war.

There be five marks of the delight men take in war.

First, When they attempt it upon fained causes.

Secondly, upon frivolous causes.

Thirdly, When they attempt it against the rules of that faith which they
profess.

Fourthly, Out of pride and vainglorious ends.

Fifthly, The cruelty with which they manage it.

Answerable hereunto, there are five things which in the spiritual application
of it, will make up these men of blood. Bloody Brains, Bloody Consciences, a
Bloody Religion, Bloody Affections, and lastly, Bloody hands.

1. When it attempted upon fained causes; There be bloody brained men, who are
witty in nothing more, then in picking quarrels. It was a wise argument of a
wicked King of Israel, concluding a quarrelsome intent in the Syrian King, in
the request of a thing beyond the compass of humane power, the cure of Naamans
leprosy, Am I in God's stead, that he should seek occasion against me? The
Syrian did not, but the conjecture yet was grounded upon good reason. There is
a generation, says Solomon, that seek rebellion: that is, do all that they can
to provoke, that out of enforced justice they may seek occasion of revenge: and
then like Jonah, they dare outface God and his word, that they do well to be
angry. They seek offenses, that they may commit them: and often times nothing
grieves them so much, as when they can find no occasion to be provoked; which
when they find not, they fain; if they meet not with, they make: What black
comments do they write upon the fairest actions? All offers of peace they
translate into the language of suspicion, and measures others intents by their
own guilt. David's piety in talking to them of peace, is but policy in their
gloss; they had no mind to believe what he spoke, that had no mind to that of
which he spoke; and the preparations which they make to offend him, they
pretend but a necessity, to defend themselves: While I speak to them of peace,
they make themselves ready to Battle, says he: but let them subtlely insinuate
necessary defense, sure enough the preparations they make, show a delight in
war. Nor are they more crafty in laying the grounds of their hostile designs,
then in managing the prosecution of them. So far as piety may advance them,
they can counterfeit innocence, while they oppress it. But when it comes to
gross wickedness, they can both defy and practice it. And this is the first
thing that make up these men of blood; bloody Brains, that plot out occasions
of commotion.

The second mark is, When they attempt it upon frivolous causes: Bloody
Consciences! Men that out of conscience can make those quarrels deadly, which
indeed deserve not to be quarrels: Consciences that can swallow down whole
draughts of Christian blood, to the effusion where of a wretched scrupulosity
in things of indifferent nature prompted them. Estridge Consciences, that can
digest iron, but not straw. Consciences that startle at doing of what God
forbideth not, but without remorse or scruple, can fall upon those inhumane
practices which God abhors; as if a superstitious nicety in smaller matters,
could by way of commutation expiate the guilt of such bloody outrages, which
needs must damn. These are the second mark.

3. The third mark of the delight they take in war, is, when they attempt it
contrary to the rules of that faith which they profess. Bloody consciences
beget a bloody Religion. Christ will own ^o Religion, but what is christened in
his own blood; It is the divel's (of whom Mahomet learned it) that is dipped in
the blood of men. Our Savior came indeed to bring a sword, but Peter must not
use it. Hear O ye Christians! mistake not your Savior, meddle not with this
sword. Nec^ssary it is that offenses come, but woe unto them by whom they come.
Christ came indeed to die, but they were never the less wicked that killed him*
Can the necessity of his suffering justify that malice, cruelty, and injustice
by which he suffered? God brings good out of evil, because otherwise he could
not permit it a moment in the world, without destroying it: But does God allow
the evil for the good? Permission is no allowance. Or can he make that which is
evil in it self to be good? He may not impute a sin to a man, yet cannot but
repute it for a sin; he may remit the guilt of sin, but not alter the nature of
it: But it seems these men can do more then God, they can legitimate any
wickedness, with a fiat from the unerring Court of their own Consciences; for
if they cannot, those actions surely which caused the death of Christ, can
never give life to his cause. He suffered through injustice for our fakes, but
does he require we should do it too for his sake? Oh the mystery of this new
light! (for the mystery of it is as dark as the pit out of which it came) It
was once, Thou shall suffer wrong of others for his sake, but now it seems we
may do it too for his sake: It was once you shall be persecuted for my cause,
but now, we may persecute: It was once, ye shall be killed for my sake, but now
we may kill. Nay, so many, the most inhumane, cruel, bloody actions; such,
which no generation but this ever did the like; and at which the ears of all
posterity shall tingle, have been done, and yet a cause we have can make them
lawful; a light we have can justify them: nay more, none truly enlightened,
none zealous for the cause of Christ, but such who either act, or side with the
actors of them. But O my soul! Come not thou into the secrets of this cause;
and by this light, my better, be not thou directed: For that cause, or that
Religion which is planted by sedition, watered with blood, that brings forth
pride, feeds ambition, maintains sacrilege, nourishes hatred, malice,
uncharitableness, and injustice, and is upholden by lying, however strength of
conceit may seduce the judgment, has no author but some of those wicked
spirits, who have broke loose from their chains of darkness, and transformed
themselves into Angels of light, that they might range a land, to seduce the
minds, and pervert the ways of a people, whose hearts, pride, self love, and
self conceit had prepared for their entertainment. In a word, it is a wicked
Religion, especially professing it self Christian, that dares justify
proceedings, contrary to the rules of Christ's Gospel, and they are men of
brazen brows, and reprobate sense, that shall presume to divide Christ himself,
as well as his coat; I mean, to enforce a belief upon us, that he would teach
us one thing by his Gospel, and his Gospel another thing by them: Or, that that
Religion which tolerates the worst actions, should demonstrate the best
Christians: Or, that that Religion which teaches us to supprese sacrilegious
and unjust actions, should tolerate the same actions, though in its own
defense, is a riddle to men and Angels. And thus much of their Religion.

4. When they attempt it for proud and vainglorious ends: Bloody Affections.
Pride first bred the quarrel between God and man. Adam would have been a God,
before he knew well what it was to be a man; and while he thought to betroth a
Deity, he betrayed humanity; and fell, I had almost said, as much below
himself, as he thought to have been above. And there is still a secret pride in
the heart of man, that lifts up it self to a secet affectation of a Deity: and
therefore as a just and proper punishment, men still as men, aspire to be what
they are not, and reaching in their fancies at an higher degree of perfection
in knowledge, they disquiet both themselves and others in the pursuit thereof,
How did the Arian heresy fill the whole world with war and blood? If
discontent first broached that heresy, yet it was pride of heart that brewed
it, and stirred up his busy spirit, by inventing some notable novelty of
doctrine, to insinuate to the world, how far his competitor came behind him,
who was yet preferred to that Ecclesiastical Dignity before him. Of all
affections, the desire of being Authors of some new device in matters of
Religion, is (if not the strongest) yet to some most pleasing. There are some
contentious spirits, that hugely delight to swim against the stream. While the
thoughts are tickled with the sweetness of fame, the itch of vain glory
presently infect the powers of the soul* and there is no man which (if that
lovely pair, charity and humility interpose not) but will dote upon the issues
of his own brain, and propose them to general entertainment: yea, they will at
once both wonder, and be angry, wonder at the incapacity, and be angry at the
obstinacy of any that shall refuse to yield that approbation and reception of
them, which themselves, the Authors, think them worthy of. Whence springs an
earnest desire (and that desire whets the endeavors, by any means whatsoever,
to win entertainment for them in the allowance and be^^^f of men; nor do they
regard what practices they use to effect it. The wickedness of the means, is
gilded over with the splendor of the reputation they hope shall be gained by
it: either fear or favor, inability to resist, or affection to defend, strike
reprehension dumb, and sometimes blind, measuring justice in the cause, by the
sword she holds in the one hand, and not by the balance in the other; but it
is not more pleasing to the Authors, as pernicious to the Church. Like as we
see in secular interests; No man can rise, but by the fall of another. Every
one covets his own advantage, which depending on the destruction of anorher, he
seeks it there. So it is here, Error cannot rise, but truth must fall; what
the one does gain, the other loses; the interest of either, depends upon the
ruin of the other; and truth and error never happen to quarrel, but they
leave bloody marks behind them upon the body of the Church. But the gall of
this bitterness too, is, that when the success of error has crowned the
endeavors of those, whose pride of heart and vainglory gave it birth; the
very fruition of their desires stops not the issue: for what is acquired by
violence, must by violence be preserved: Heresy would have less guilt, if the
defense thereof did not necessitate the addition of more, or at least, the
continuance of the same mischief, which the introduction gave beginning to:
wherein they are not unjustly said to delight, if not as the principal end of
their desires yet as a means for the accomplishment of that end. That Is the
fourth mark of them that delight in War, attempted for proud and vainglorious
ends.

5. The last mark is, Their cruelty which they show in managing of it. If there
be a bloody heart, there will be a bloody hand too. Men would think it vain to
be wicked, if they should not make use of their wickedness: whose covetous and
other b^^e ends, have carried them beyond the bounds of Law and Equity, care
not whither they run: The apprehension of their danger, frights them into all
acts of violence, for their security. They think all plot their ruin, that
side not with them; and therefore seek their own safety, though it be with the
ruin of all. But safety, which first occasioned this cruelty, ends it not. For
guilty fear brings malice with it into a wicked heart; when that is eased, this
will also be satisfied. So that now disposition causes cruelty, as well as
necessity, and that safety which at first was sought by it, ends at last with a
delight in it. And thus much of the enemies, I will briefly touch the
imprecation.

The Imprecation is made up of two terms, but ^f different ^ffections; ^^ is
bu^ Rebuke the three first; it is Scat^er the ^ourth. Whence we note,

That (...) must be proportioned as well to the manner of offending, as the
nature of the offense. Circumstances, though they do not alter the nature, yet
may aggravate the hainousness of crimes. It is the intent that extends the
guilt: and the manner of committing the offense, either shows it capable of
being restrained in a wholesome rebuke, or else worthy of judgment in a just
dissipation. Rebuke, and Scatter.

To Rebuke, tends to a possible conviction, that ends with Reformation. To
Scatter, tends to an otherwise impossible frustration, that ends with
confusion. Rebuke to amendment, they may submit: Scatter to confusion, for they
delight in mischief, and it shall happen to them. Imprecations are of a
dangerous consequence, they are, I grant, rather to be feared then imitated:
yet on the other side, I doubt not to affirm, that as our charity to man
commands our prayers to God for the conversion of the weak, and seduced enemies
of the Church; so our zeal to the truth and glory of God, may warrant us to
pray for the dissipation of the wilful and malicious enemies thereof. The
writings of the Prophets are full of these* Imprecations. And although St
Augustine, a miracle of understanding, supposes those to be only prophesies of
what should come to pass, then requests of what they desired; yet his charity
herein is rather to be commended, then his sentence in all those to be
embraced. For how these words of David (Be not merciful unto them who offend of
malicious wickedness) should be reducible to the form of a Prophecy, is not so
easily apprehended: Nor that St Paul, when he wished, I would that they which
trouble you were cut off; meant only with the sword of excommunication, is not
so easily believed, as some would have it. Patience in our own sufferings, is
Christian, but when God suffers, it is impious. God suffers when his Truth is
persecuted and martyred: when therefore wicked men shall merely either out of
fained scrupulosity, as does the Beast of the Reeds; or else out of envy, as
does the Bulls, or out of ignorance, as do Calves of the people; or else out of
ambition, as do the men that delight in mischief; when I say, wicked men upon
no other ground but such as these, shall with bloody brains invent, as did the
Beasts of the Reeds, and with bloody consciences allow; and with a bloody
Religion defend, as did the multitude of the Bulls, and with bloody affections
advance, as did the Calves of the people, and with bloody hands execute, as did
the men that delight in mischief, such sacrilegious and bloody practices as
these; then it is time for us to say, Rebuke, O Lord, etc.

FINIS.

