THE Peacemaker.

BEING A Letter sent from J. W. in London to N. C. his Friend and Countryman
in Holland, to be communicated unto others for public good

Wherein is set forth the state of the last Treaty: And what advantage it will
be to the Netherlanders, to accept the offer which the Council of England then
made to their Messengers.

PSALM. 120.7. I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for war.

Being according to the Dutch Copy.

LONDON, Printed by M: Simmons in Aldersgate Street, next door to the gilded
Lion, 1653.

THE Peacemaker.
Being a Letter sent from J. W. in London, to N. C. his Friend and Countryman
in Holland, to be communicated unto others for public good.
Myne-Heer.
THE singular and sincere affection which I bear to my Native Country, that
our liberty, lives, laws, and exercise of the Protestant Religion, (redeemed
with a sea of blood and millions of Treasure from the sword and tyranny of the
Spanyard) may not at once be lost and swallowed up either through a crafty
design of some seeking themselves, and their own corrupt Interest, or through
the ignorance and misunderstanding of other men. I have of late made it
purposely my work seriously to search into the transactions and passages of
things between the two S^tates, and so to inform my self of the most expedient
and ready way and course to prevent all further VVarts and blood: and how
instead of raising more Forces one against the other, that a happy and blessed
peace speedily may be made.

I know there are too many amongst you, who by mis-reporting things to the
people, do endeavor to highten the difference: But for my part, I shall
deliver nothing but what is truth and certain; as well knowing there is
seasonable and good counsel here tendered to you all, if the Lord move your
hearts effectually to embrace it.

I shall not meddle with what has passed between the States here and our
former Ambassadors, but speak only to the present mttter of the last Treaty.

The Council of the late Parliament insisted only upon two things. 1
Satisfaction. 2 Security. The which by them was thought to be most proper,
necessary, and convenient as a manuduction to a Treaty for Amity between the
two Republics. The same particulars afterward did the present Council desire
to proceed upon: but this our Messengers refused, and were unwilling to do,
propounding to have them come after the 36. Articles for Amity, and so to be
taken in and debated. The Lords of the Council here manifested their
unwillingnesse, to wave either the one or the other, as having in their
understanding good reason and cause for it.

First, they were not willing to decline their Claim in point of satisfaction:
alleging.

1 That it stood with the rules of Justice and Equity contained in the Moral
Law of God and nature, and sound natural Reason, That wrongs ought to be
repaired.

2 That the charge of the Wars ought to be born by the wrong doers: A thing
undeniable, and no more then what is just, and all States will demand and
expect in their own Cause.

3 To decline the claim of satisfaction, it was (they said) to wave the right
of their Cause, and in a sort to make themselves transgressors, which they
could not do.

Again, for the other particular, namely mattter of security: Here likewise the
Council gave their Reasons wherefore they desired it.

1 Because it would be no way for their safety and good to end the present
difference by a Peace, if nothing were done to secure it.

2 Because we brake first with them, or rather fell upon them, whilst the
Amity between us and them continued, yea whilst our Ambassadors were treating
with them, of a strict League and Union, and had no thought of engaging us.

Another Reason why they desired Security, was, because formerly we had made
it our Interest to differ with them, and several times took advantage thereby,
both at home and in foreign parts to their loss and prejudice many ways very
much.

These and such like were the Reasons which the Lords of the Council gave our
Messengers, why they were not willing (neither could according to the trust of
the Commonwealth committed to them) wave their Claim either to the matter of
satisfaction or security.

Our Agents perceiving that the States of England stood so fast and fixed, and
would not decline the particulars, desired then to know what security they
would have of them, as in what way, and how to be given. To this their Answer
was, that they knew not for their part any better way or course in order to a
lasting and profitable Peace, for the good and safety of both Nations, then by
a Coalition, that is, the two States to become one entire Republic. And if
this would be accepted by the Netherlanders, we should soon see how real and
sincere they were for Peace and Amity, and how much they intended and sought
the welfare and prosperity of our Nation, as no less every way then their own.

Moreover, that it should appear, if this proffer would be accepted, they
minded our happiness and good indeed, in not standing upon the quantum of
satisfaction, but would use so much reason and moderation, as our selves should
be willing to it, and be no way loosers, but gainers rather by it.

And that we might not startle, or take offense in their propounding this way
for Peace, by a Coalition, or making the two Republics one sole and entire
Commonwealth, they made it to appear most plainly to our Messengers, that the
gain and advantage following this Conjunction, would not be theirs, but ours
abundantly, and that in many respects and Considerations.

And to say the truth, it cannot be otherwise, and therefore I most earnestly
wish and desire, that my Countrymen every where were rightly and well informed
concerning this particular, to wit, what cer^ profit our Nation may expect, by
a willing and thank full embracing of this large and loving tender of the
English, and not suffer our selves to be any longer deluded, and become a prey
to such men, who seek not the safety and public good of our Co^ntrie, but to
carry on their own design, not regarding what becomes of the Nation, if it
perish, it perish.

And to the end we may not repent when it is too late, but know the things
which belong unto our peace in this our day: there are five things which I
desire by you, may be communicated to all my Countrymen every where. First,
how much it will be for our good, if England and the Netherlands be united and
made one Commonwealth, this appears

1 It is well known what a numerous people we are, and how straightened and
locked up (as it were) by reason of that small portion of land we have.
Whereas being one with England, and free Denisons, our Territories will be
larger, and we in a capacity to plant our selves either in England, Scotland,
or Ireland, where we shall live fart better, and more comfortably then now we
do, there being land enough for us, and places most proper and fit for our
condition, as to improve to our great advantage, all which we know to be true
by experience already.

2 We are not ignorant of the usefulness and commodiousnesse of their ports
and Havens; all which being ours as theirs, what infinite gain and profit we
shall have by them in our trade continually, is not unknown to our Nation.

3 For the great trade of fishing upon the Coast of Great Britain, and what
wealth and profit is gotten thereby, no nation knows better than ours, nor
have had more profit thereby then we. Indeed this very thing duly weighed, is
enough to move us all to accept their proffer, and does plainly demonstrate,
that such as endeavor to obstruct the same are Enemies and Traitors to the
welbeing of our Nation.

4. Whereas there belongs to the Commonwealth of England many foreign
Islands and Plantions which do afford several rich Commodities, for us to
Trade freely to them, and no otherwise then the English do, our gain will be
great which we shall have continually thereby.

5. By this Coalition we shall be the better strengthened against all Enemies,
whether nearer or farther off: Manage our Trade abroad the better, and live at
home (where ever our dwellings are) the safer, and without disturbance or
molestation.

6. Our Country will be much enriched by the Commodities which England
affords, besides what we bring from other Nations, by carrying the same into
England, Scotland, Ireland, etc. will be no small gain both to our Merchants
and Mariners in point of Trade.

Secondly, if we consider of the present condition of the Commonwealth of
England, there is no cause (no necessity at least) on their part to unite with
us: for though there be a necessity (as we showed before) for us to be one with
them, yet they without us can do well enough, and they need us not; this we
prove,

1. Because their Territories are so large and abounding with all necessaries
as to food and raiment, for the preservation of mankind, and they can live
prosperously and happily without the supplies and Commodities of other
Countries, (specially ours) the which we cannot do.

2. Such has been the Lords povversul presence with them, both by Land and
Sea, so clearly has he owned hitherto, and born witness to the justnes of
their Cause in many unparalleld and glorious Characters. as all Nations round
about them, taking notice thereof, would willingly have Peace and Amity with
them: Yea no doubt, even Spain, France, Denmark, etc. would gladly enter by
copulation and Treaty, into strict League, both offensive and defensive, though
it were to leave us to shift for our selves.

3. Such is their present strength and power both at Land and Sea, and the vast
Treasure and Wealth of the Nation, both to maintain and enlarge the same, as
they see occasion, that they need no addition from us, either of men, money,
shipping, ammunition, etc. but are herein sufficiently stored and furnished
themselves, to carry on the work which they have in hand both at home and
abroad.

4. Howsoever our people for many reasons have encouragement to plant
themselves in the Commonwealth of England, yet there is no such encouragement
for them (specially the Husbandman) to live amongst us, we having no land to
spare whereby to better their outward condition.

5. Seeing the Lord has made them every where successful in their Wars, and
given them peace round about, made their Dominion and Territories so large, it
would be much more for their ease, contentment, quietness, to sit still and
peaceably possess what they have, then by joining with us, to contract more
labors and care, there being nothing else which they can expect, in reference
unto us, but troubles and but thens by the Coalition.

Thirdly, as the gain of this Union will be ours, and theirs: so not being
accepted on our part, our sufferings thereby will be many and great.

For 1. Our trade every day by continuance of War will be weakened and
lessened, whereby our Merchants will be broken Laborers, and Tradesmen
impoverished, houses worth little or nothing, and so a common calamity suddenly
spread the whole land over.

2. Divisions, Factions, and intestine Tumults (already broiling amongst us)
will be heightened and increased every day: so that in a little while there will
be no need of a foreign Enemy to invade us; for through the Commotions
arising and growing among our selves, we shall shortly devour and destroy each
other.

3. Neither can we imagine, but besides the fearsull sword of War within and
without, a sore destroying famine will be in all our Cities; for if tnis breach
between us and England be not healed, our provisions will be stopped, and the
Nation exposed to such want and penury, as we must be constrained to sell our
selves for bread.

4. Whereas our Country flourished by reason of many Foreigners living
amongst us, as English, French, Germans, Danes, etc. by which means great
profit and trade was brought to us. All those (if possible) will speedily
return to their own Countries, a prejudice and loss to our Nation beyond
measure, as we see already in part by sadd experience.

5. It is well known with what difficulty and hardships our former Navy was
raised; what a stir there was to get men, money, ships, provisions; how
discontented the people were to have such taxes and heavy but thens laid upon
them, now who sees not, but it will be more difficult hereafter, even
impossible, the people not being able to do as formerly they did: For Trading
ceasing, and Famine like an armed man coming upon us, what can be done, but
mourn to behold such desolation.

6. For Spain or France, what may we expect from them, but if brought low by
the English, they will endeavor to enlarge their Territories upon us, and lay
our necks under the yoke of their tyranny. Whereas by joining with England, we
shall retain our freedom, and need not fear any such oppression: Besides for
the Dane, if he would, he cannot stead us, being no otherwise than an Egyptian
Reed, not to be trusted to, nor leaned on.

7. Not only is our Navy weakened by a great number of ships, some sunk, others
taken, but our chiefest and choifest Mariners either slain or prisoners:
Besides, such a fear and dread of the English is fallen upon our Nation,
Soldiers, Sailors and all, as there is not among an hundred, one (almost)
willing to engage again. And whereas there is so much complaint made against
some of our Capt. for cowardliness; this I take to be, not so much a natural
fear or dastardness in them, as the just hand of God upon us and our Fleet,
speaking to us as it were from heaven, that we should not fight against
England, and that good Cause for which they have engaged, but accept of Peace
in the terms propounded to us.

I come now to the fourth head or consideration: As by this Coalition, the gain
would be only ours, and much danger prevented: So it is worth the observing,
that this will bring loss and damage to no man, but every one will be the
better; none (I say) suffer or be the worse by it. It is true, the vain title
of High and Mighty States may be laid aside, as not fit indeed, not proper for
poor Creatures, dust and ashes to assume; but Attributes rather to be given to
the High and Mighty God. Besides, it is probable that the common people would
more sweetly enjoy their liberty and freedom, and not be kept under by so
Lordly and Arbitrary power as now they are.

For the great business of the English Council is to remove all such things
as are opptessive and destructive to the lives, liberties, persons and estates
of the Nation, and to establish such who some and good Laws as may conduce to a
full and perfect freedom.

Hence it is that the people here are much encouraged to bring in their just
Complaints concerning any Grievance or Oppression which lies upon them, and
great care is taken for a speedy and effectual removal thereof. Whereas
amongst us, no door is left open to have bad Laws and worse Customs abolished,
but what formerly has been ostablished, right or wrong, that is still held up,
and no care taken for the satisfaction and ease of the people therein.

In this regard therefore it is greatly to be desired that the Lord would open
the eyes of our Countrymen to see how extremely they are abused by some in
power among them, who for no other cause or end endeavor to continue the
War, and embrue our Nation in blood, out only to keep up themselves in state,
pomp, pride, and to Lord it over their brethren: This I say again, and it is as
clear as the Sun at noonday, that there is not any other imaginable Reason,
why our General and Provincial States accept not of Peace offered to them by
the Council of England, but because they alone will domineer and will uot let
fall that sole Rule and Domination which they have formerly exercised over the
people: As for any other inconvenience or loss I am sure there is none: no
loss or inconvenience to the people at all, but good many ways.

And here I heartily desire my Contrymen to consider what sollie and
madness it is for them to assist their Superiors in this War against
England. What, my dear Friends and Brethren, will ye shed your blood? spend
your treasures? utterly undo your selves? your Wives? Children? Posterity?
only to satisfy the lusts of some sew ambitious persons? Is it not better,
that the title of High and Mighty States does fall, and these with it, that
esfect it, then the whole Nation should be undone, by espousing so
dishonorable, unjust, and badd a Cause?

The fifth and last Consideration which I shall commend to you, and by you to
the Nation, it is

First, That you would observe who the persons be which are Obstructers and
Enemies to this good ^ender of the English.

2. The deceitful ways and devices which they use to contirue the bleody
War between the two Nations.

3. What their drift, end, and design is in all.

For the persons, no doubt they are such as are not well-affected to either
Nation, but desire the hurt of both: Hence it is, that Rome has her Jesuits
amongst you, Spain and France their Boutesues or Fling-fires, the Prince of
Orange his Foction, and the titular King of Scotland his Incendiaries; all
which like Sampsons Foxes, with sire-brands at their tayls, endeavoring to
burn our Country, desiring rather to see our Towns and Cities laid waste, than
England and the Netherlands happily united into one flourishing Commonwealth.

Neither are our Magistrates there without guilt and sin in this particular;
but some of them prostrate the blood and treature of our Nation to satisfy the
lusts of other States.

Some again, either through a base fear lest they should be displaced, or an
ambitious desite to keep up their Hogen. Mogen Title, join with the rest in
their evil doings.

Thus through the covetousness of the one, and pride of the other, the poor
people are like sheep led to the slaughter.

2. For the deceitful and sinful ways used by these Incendiaries, whereby to
carry on their evil design, I am ashamed and blush to think of them: It is
such a dishonor and scandal to our Nation:

1. By falsehood, making lies their resuge. Hence it is, that in your Letters
and printed News which we have from thence, we find continually such
abominable untruths, as if we were a Nation which knew not God, nor ever
heard of his righteous Judgments thratned against Liers.

Is there no way to hearten and keep up the spirits of our people, but by false
relations, as to boast of Victories when we are bearen? to report the Enemies
losses to be such, when it is neither so nor so? What is this for? but a
design of some men, to deceive and blind the people, that they may not hearken
to Peace, but run on into unavoydable mischief and misery.

2. By Pasquils and Libels, and setting forth base pictures and scurrilous
forgs, whereby some seek to render this State contemptible to the world, and
to exasperate the Common people there against this Nation, a practice most
unseemly in any civil people, and no where else I believe practiced in any
Christian Common wealth.

3. By mis reporting the loving tenders and proffers of this State for Peace,
as publishing what was never said, and concealing in the mean time the truth of
things.

Hence it is, that our people there are made to believe, that the Council of
England has no inclination to Peace; that their Demands are unreasonable, and
impossibilities. Whereas No Nation under heaven does more desirously desire
Amity then the English with us, and what they do propound is the only course
(in the judgment of all judicious and unbyassed men) for the security of both,
away to remove all emulation, and to make our Nation really happy.

So that I am very consident, if my Countrymen did truly understand how things
have passed here, what desire this Nation has to Peace, and how good for us
all the thing is which is propounded, they would not any longer follow their
Superiors to War, but rise up as one man, and immediately become one Common
wealth with England.

Lastly, As the Incendiaries in your Council there are diverse, so they have
several designs. Some act to raise up the House of Orange, and under pretense
of his greatness and Authority, make account to reap no small advantage.
Others more in reference to Charles Stuart, as thinking to rise by raising him.
Others are secretly in pay, and promise with France, and others with Spain,
every one driving forward his own Interest, as hoping by the continuance of
this War, to profit their Masters and themselves too.

Thus is our poor Country rent and torn by the treacherous and crafty designs
of these several Factions, every one seeking himself and his own Interest,
not regarding in the mean time what ruin and desolation befalls the Nation.

Is it not therefore high time, that my Countrymen would awake, and lie no
longer asleep and secure, through the deceit and hypocrisy of such crafty men,
who like Vipers seek to eat out the Bowels of their own Mother, and that
they take care for their own peace and safety, which is immediately to make
peace with England upon the terms propounded.

Moreover, that it may appare how heartily and really the English Nation has
desired peace with us, and that there might be no more effusion of blood
between the two Nations.

The Council desired our last Messengers, if they liked not this way of
Security by Coalition, they should then propound any better way unto them,
which they never did, but lay still fishing at this state, as to get out what
they could; so that it is most evident and clear, that what they did, was only
to make some advantage upon what might be offered, but had no mind, neither
they nor their Superiors, who sent them, to have a good and lasting peace with
the Commonwealth of England, unless it be such a one as cannot be condiscended
to, neither with the glory of God, nor honor, nor safety to the people of this
Nation, no nor really to the happiness and prosperity of our own Country.

Thus I have, as with much brevity, so in sincerity and singleness of heart,
laid before you the true state of things: And I do once more earnestly
entreat, that from your hands, This Peacemaker may, as from my hand be spread
all our Country over, to the end that my dear Friends and Brethren may see how
the War is neither desired nor continued by the English: But so much is
granted and offered to us, as were our Country as flourishing as ever, and had
England no advantage at this time over, yet would it have been a singular mercy
and bleshng to us to enjoy what is now offered, it tending wholly and
altogether to our good as I have proved before.

Neither is the thing either dangerous or difficult to the effectual
accomplishment thereof: For you there do but once stand up for your freedom and
liberty, and openly declare that you will accept of Peace, be united to
England, and make one Commonwealth; the Firebrarnds and Incendiaries in your
Councels or elsewhere, will have no heart to oppose; Besides, the thing is so
just and necessary, as you may expect protection and assistance from the Lord.

Now this I press the more earnestly upon you, as not to further or promote
the Wars against England any longer either in your persons or Estates, seeing
it is but to fight your selves into slavery and bondage, and to satisfy their
ends and turn, who seek not your good and prosperity, but their own, and that
to your ruin and downfall.

Now consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

