A SERMON Preached at the Oxfordshire Feast, AT St. MARY LE BOW, November 15.
1694.

By Samuel Walker, M. A.

Non memini me legere mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera Charitatis
exercuit; habet enim multos Intercessores, and Impossible est multorum preces
a Deo non exaudiri. Hieronymus. Published at the Request of the Stewards.

Imprimatur,

Jan. 23. 1694/5. Guil. Lancaster.



LONDON, Printed by Fr. Leach, for the Author, 1695.

TO THE STEWARDS OF THE Oxfordshire-Feast, For the Year 1694.
Gentlemen,
YOur Kindness and Request has obliged me to publish the ensuing Discourse of
Brotherly Love and Christian Charity. God grant that you, and I, and every
Christian, may increase in that, and every good Grace and Virtue in this Life;
that at the last Day we may partake of the Mercy of God unto Eternal Life,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord; is the hearty wish of

Your most Affectionate Countryman and Humble Servant, S. W.

1 THESSALONIANS. IV. 10. But we beseech you Brethren to increase more and more.


NO sooner had our Blessed Lord (the glorious Son of the Eternal God)
completed that grand mysterious work of our Redemption, but he sent his
Disciples to preach the Gospel, not to some few selected people, whom he better
loved than the rest of mankind, but to all the Nations of the world, for so
their Commission runs, Mat. 28. Go, preach the Gospel to all Nations. And among
other Gentile places, the happy news, the glad tidings of the Gospel, was
affectionately delivered, and charmingly preached, by St Paul (the Apostle of
the Gentiles) to the Inhabitants of Thessalonica, the Metropolis of Macedonia:
Where his Doctrine found such kind entertainment, that a great multitude of
devout Greeks believed, and of the chief women not a few, Acts 17. v. 4. But no
sooner had the good Apostle preached unto them the Resurrection of the author
and finisher of our Faith, but the malicious ill-natured Jews (with certain
lewd fellows of the basest sort) assaulted the house of Jason, for Paul's sake,
carrying both the Apostle and Disciple before the Magistrates of the City,
accusing them of Tumult and Sedition, representing them troublers of the World,
and Enemies to Caesar; so that the good Apostle was under a constraint to
depart from Thessalonica, which made him leave his new Converts unsettled, not
thoroughly established in the Faith: But yet so firm and solid was the
foundation which he had laid, that all the black Regiment of Hell, with the
Prince of the Powers of Darkness, could not extirpate, nor overturn it. The
slight, and the cunning, the violence, and force of all the false Prophets,
could not court them to embrace another Doctrine, nor fright them into an
Abhorrence of that which they had received from St Paul: Who hearing from some
of his Brethren, and Fellow laborers, of their stedfastness in the Faith,
wrote this Epistle, to congratulate their constancy, their perseverance in the
same, and to arm them against all temptations, all afflictions, which might
attack their sincerity, and assault their Christian fortitude; and having thus
confirmed them, in this Chapter he exhorts them, v. 1. to please God by
abounding more and more in all the duties of piety, v. 4. to keep their bodies
pure and undefiled, v. 6. he dehorts them from fraud and oppression, v. 9, 10.
he commends their fraternal love and charity, for says the Apostle of them, Ye
exercise it toward all the brethren that are in Macedonia. And without vanity
and self-reflection, my beloved Brethren, and Fellow Countrymen, I must commend
your charity and love, which you have often showed one to another; but we
beseech you brethren, that ye increase more and more. Now the reason why St.
Paul addressed himself, in this humble courteous language of entreaty is, I
conceive, that his Doctrine might the better charm their affections, and be the
more firmly rooted in their hearts; that love might lead them to the practice
of their duty, rather than fear frighten them into a compliance with it. The
Apostle who had taken some with a holy guile, experimentally knew, that that
Obedience is more sincere, which proceeds from a principle of love, than that
which is compelled by fear. My body and external parts may be forced, but no
compulsion can prevail against my soul; That Is the most sweet and welcome
Obedience, which is voluntary and unconstrained. A Lion peradventure may be
stroaked into a bondage, but sooner will he be hewed in pieces than beaten into
a chain. That is surely an imperfect kind of Obedience, which bows men to their
duty by threats and terrors; there is very little of the heart in such
performances, which can therefore find very little acceptance with God our
Savior, who would have the ground of our Obedience to be love, John 14. v. 15.
If you love me keep my commandments: The drift and design of St. Paul, was to
encourage his Thessalonians in their virtuous practices in their Christian
progress; and therefore he beseeches them to increase, and that he might the
better prevail with them, he adds that christian appellation of Brethren, I
beseech you Brethren. But how the Apostle, a Jew born at Tarsus in- Cilicia,
could call the Thessalonians, Grecians by birth, Brethren may perhaps be
questioned: For the satisfaction therefore of such a Curiosity, it may be
observed, that the word Brethren is variously used, as well in the Book of God,
as our common language; for not only they are called Brethren, that are born of
the same, as Jacob and Esau but they also, who derive their Original from the
same stock, so Abraham and Lot, though but Brothers Sons, were called Brethren:
People of the same Nation, such as follow the same Art or Trade, that are
partners in the same Office or Employment, are called Brethren. Paul and
Sosthenes, fellow laborers in the work of the Ministry, are so called, 1 Cor.
1.1. but in neither of these respects does Saint Paul call the Thessalonians by
that Christian name, but because they were brethren in the Christian Faith; and
they may properly be called brethren, that profess the same Faith, worship the
same God, and in the same manner; are members of the same Church, and through
the merits of the blessed Jesus, are interessed in all the privileges
belonging to the Sons of God. This is a Spiritual brotherhood, and in this
sense we are all Christians, and as such we are brethren in Christ Jesus. And
therefore, my beloved, I shall use the loving language of the Apostle, to
persuade you to that excellent duty of Charity, upon our solemn Feast Day,
which is a Feast of Love and Charity, which you have often exercised to the
lowly branches of your Country, to your honor. But we beseech you Brethren, to
increase more and more. Highly reasonable, necessary for us, and incumbent upon
us, is the practice of this great and honorable duty; if we consider that God
Almighty is our merciful Father, that he daily feeds and clothes us, that he
provides abundantly for us in this life, his mercies are renewed to us every
day and every morning is a fresh instance of his goodness; in him we live, move
and have our being; and these obligations should engage us to love him with all
our hearts, and our neighbor as our selves; to promote the interest and
welfare of our brother; if he is in misery, to help him; in want, to relieve
him; if in trouble, to comfort him; if ignorant, to instruct him, if wicked, to
admonish him in the spirit of meekness; if godly, to encourage him and imitate
his pious example, let his condition and state be high or low, noble or
ignoble; thou may be useful and serviceable to him, in praying to God in his
behalf. Thus the vilest mortal that rakes a kennel, the poorest beggar that
craves an alms, may show his charity to the greatest King: In this sense the
deaf, the blind and lame may do good to themselves, and the Church of God. This
is our duty, and ought to be our practice, to love all men fervently without
exception, to pray for them constantly without intermission, and heartily
without dissimulation. If we consider in our most sober thoughts and serious
meditations, that God Almighty is our bountiful Benefactor; that he daily loads
us with his benefits, and multiplys his blessings upon us: This consideration
will surely move our affection and compassion to their proper objects, in
raising up the drooping spirits of those who lay low in the world, filling
their bodies with good things, and their hearts with joy and gladness. Thus we
should imitate the divine Goodness we should refresh others with some of those
comforts, which daily flow upon us from the fountain of eternal bliss. God
Almighty requires us to acknowledge his bounty, by our kindness to those who
are unable to resist a low and contemptible state, and too weak to overcome it:
Not to act like the sordid earthly Mortal, who wants (if I may so speak) the
good nature of the Gadaren's Darling, the brutish Hog, to pity and
compassionate the miseries and calamities of his fellow creatures, his own
flesh, who like a standing Pool is confined within his own filthy black and
deadly banks; but God requires us to act like men full of bowels of compassion,
to be ready to every good work, to help the miserable, to relieve the
distressed, to support the weak, to comfort the brokenhearted, continually to
give our helping hand to those of a low fortune, and to promote the interest of
our indigent brother; to pour the wine of gladness, and oil of comfort into the
wounds of our neighbors body, or soul; whether they be afflicted like Lazarus
with the sores of poverty and want; or like Gehazi, covered with the Leprosy
of their own sins; thus the merciful man acts, dealing his bread to the hungry,
clothing the naked, visiting the afflicted soul, filling the poor with good
things, seeking all opportunities of doing good, bringing forth the blessed
fruits of Righteousness and Mercy; for the merciful man, like the kind and
lively stream, disfuseth his love liberally into his neighboring soil, and
gives fatness to the poor and barren land.

Secondly, The constant practice of our blessed Lord, commends this duty of
increasing more and more in charity and mercy; for he went about continually
doing good, giving eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, understanding to the
ignorant, and wisdom to the simple; curing the diseases of the body, healing
the distempers of the soul, quickening those who were dead in trespasses and
sins. And if we who call our selves his disciples, do not abound in gentleness,
meekness and love, in acts of benevolence and beneficence, he will not own us
as his Sheep, nor give us a Mansion in his Fathers House: If we do not imitate
him, in those works of kindness and love to our Brethren, the Son of God will
not acknowledge himself our Lord, nor will he give us any Reward in the life to
come, but that which he has prepared for unprofitable servants, and
disobedient Children. If we call our selves his Members, and walk not in
conformity to him, our Head, we deceive our selves, provoke him to wrath, and
he will take no pleasure in us.

Thirdly, Our most holy and excellent Religion obliges us to perform works of
charity and mercy, and to continue in the performance of them; for that exhorts
you to increase in every good work Col. 1. v. 10. To be kind one to another,
tenderhearted, Ephesians. 4. v. 32. But to serve one another by love, not to be
weary in well doing, Gal. 5. v. 13. To be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are unto the praise and Glory of God, Phil. 1. v. 11.
Without these holy dispositions and divine acts, you cannot be sincerely
Religious, nor bear such fruits, by which our heavenly Father is glorified.
Therefore says St. Peter, add to your faith, virtue; to virtue, knowledge; to
knowledge, temperance; to temperance, patience; to patience, godliness; to
godliness, brotherly kindness; to brotherly kindness, charity: for if these
things be in you, and abound, they make you, that you shall neither be barren,
nor unfruitful, in the work of the Lord. And now, my beloved Brethren, Natives
of that delightful, and well-situated City, in whose situation the goodness of
the Lord has greatly appeared; for God has blessed her Inhabitants, with all
things conducive to the health of their bodies, as a sweet serene Air, neither
too mild, nor too severe; pleasant Rivers, fruitful Hills and Valleys, full of
fatness. And God has provided for the health of their souls, spiritual
Physicians, endued with wisdom and knowledge, who administer milk to the infant
Christian, and to the strong they apply more solid and substantial nourishment:
For that glorious City is adorned and beautified with a famous University,
which is admired abroad, and preferred at home by all, but the contenders for a
parallel. Some of her venerable body, late ingenious Members, are at this
instant the reverend and laudable Pastors of the most honorable Churches in
this magnificent City, and are as much the Honor and Renown of the Metropolis,
as she is the Splendour and Glory of the Nation. Now my Fellow Countrymen of
that pleasant and fruitful Country, which is superior to most, inferior to
none, I beseech you strive with a spiritual Ambition, and holy Emulation, to
exceed the rest of mankind, in Piety, Charity and Mercy; strive to excel each
other in Courtesy, Friendship and Generosity, in Peace, Goodness and Love;
that others may walk by the light of your bright and splendid examples, in the
blessed path of brotherly love, and Christian Charity, which leads to eternal
life. Oh let not your Charity grow cold to your Brethren, your own flesh!
kindle it into a holy and generous flame, that the poor and lowly Cottages of
your Country, may be warmed by the heat of your compassion and mercy. The man
that has no affection for his own Country, deserves not to be a member of any,
for he will be kind to none; he neither follows the Example of Christ, nor
obeys the Doctrine of his Gospel, who prefers his private interest before the
public good; blameable then in the superlative degree are those men, which
having been advanced by their Country, and enjoying a prosperous fortune, a
plentiful portion of this world, refuse to perform those kind Offices by which
they have been raised. Such black ingrate, such prodigies of unthankfulness;
have not the Spirit nor natural Love of that noble Heroic Roman, who preferred
the good of his Country before, and above his own Life, for he sacrificed the
one for the preservation of the other. Such Men deserve not the Name of
Christians, for they have nothing of the genuine temper of the Gospel Spirit;
nay, such Men are strangers to natural affection, as well as to a holy Catholic
Charity, and are not so morally virtuous as many of the Heathens. Surely such
Men have no Souls, or no value for them, that consider not affectionately the
many obligations due to their native Christian Soil; that are so wilfully
blind, as not to see the benefits and blessings they have received; and so
obstinately unthankful that they will not acknowledge the hand which frankly
gave them. But I hope better things of you, my beloved Countrymen, that as you
have already begun to exercise your benignity and Charity; so you will increase
more and more in that excellent Grace and Virtue; for the same Commandment of
God which obliges you to day, will be of the same force to morrow; the same
kind of Tribute thou payest this day, will be no less due the next, for every
day brings a new obligation of that Obedience which we owe unto the living God.
This Life of ours is as it were a Journey, the Commandments of God are the ways
of it: there is not a more frequent expression in the sacred Pages, than
walking in the Law and Statutes of the Lord, walking in the ways and paths of
God; and they who are not exercised day and night in the Law of the Lord, do
not walk in the paths of God, but rather stand still in the way of Sinners; for
Gods Servants must not imitate Ahaz's Sun, that moved gradually backward; nor
Joshua's Sun that moved neither backward nor forward, but David's Sun, that
appears gloriously arrayed, like a Bridegoom out of his Chamber, and rejoices
as a young man to run his race: and he runs in vain, that runs swiftly setting
out, but faints before he arrives at the mark; for such a racer will never
obtain the prize; and it is as fruitless to begin in a virtuous course, and not
to continue in it to the end. Such a man will be never able to say with St
Paul, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness. He that
will be Paul's Scholar, must persevere in the good course he has begun to walk
in: his Doctrine is to increase, and his Practice answerable to it. I press
toward the mark of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3. v. 14. It
is not sufficient to know the way of Righteousness, and to make some progress
in it, there must be a daily and constant abounding, a going on in the good and
the right way, or else we can have no comfortable hope of that glorious Crown
of Eternal Life. The Apostle beseeches you to increase more and more, he
frequently pressed this laudable Duty, he exhorted his Philippians to abound in
love, his Corinthians to abound always in the work of the Lord: Nor is he
singular in this, he has many Joint-labourers, Timotheus and Silvanus: St.
Peter also accords with him in the last words of his second Epistle, Grow in
Grace, says he, and in the Knowledge of Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. And
growth, there is not an addition, a daily increasing more and more. Gods
Husbandry has no time to lie fallow, nor will he suffer the branches of his
Vine at any time to be unfruitful; nay he expects from it a great increase, and
therefore he prunes off the bad branches, dresses, trims, and cultivates the
goodones that they may bring forth more fruit John 15. v. 3. Have thou then
been exercised in the School of Virtue, in the performance of a pious Duty, of
a virtuous Office? thou have done well, but not enough, for constancy and
perseverance are required in all the works of the Lord. Have thou been
charitable? continue in the practie of that sweet, noble, and divine grace:
have thou been devout? proceed in thy devotion: have thou been meek and humble?
deck thy self still with lowliness of mind: have thou been bountiful? slack not
thy liberal Hand, abound more and more in piety and charity; do good to all
Men, says the Apostle, but especially to the Household of Faith, when it stands
in need of your charity, increasing in this heavenly Virtue more and more.
Every creature almost in the World yields you a motive, a persuasive to the
Duty. The Sun is restless in her rounding course; the Moon and all the Stars,
move as constantly in their courses, as the Days and Time; the flaming Fire is
always ascending, the liquid Water even running, the sprightly Air in perpetual
motion. Let us therefore not stand in the way of Sinners, nor set in the Seat
of the Scornful, but walk in the Law of the Lord, and exercise our selves in it
Day and Night. Where is the Husbandman that does not dig his Garden, dress his
Orchard, till and manure his Lands, that they may yield a good increase, a
plentiful crop in due Season? and should not a man be more industrious, more
careful for his Soul than his Garden, or Orchard? is not his Eternal State
preferrable to Temporal Possessions, and all the good things of this Life? And
how do they then value and esteem those precious Jewels, their immortal Souls,
who neglect the Doctrine of the good Apostle in my Text; that inwardly adore the
Mammon of Unrighteousness? and say in their hearts to a wedge of Gold, thou art
our hope and our Confidence, and lay no foundation for Eternal Life, by the
works of Charity and Mercy. Some men there are, but not members of this
honorable Society, whose Mouths are full of Charity, but in their Hands are no
Gifts; they give large Portions with their Mouths, but kindnesses from their
Hands, are very difficult to be seen, felt, or understood: this lip-love, and
mouth-charity is condemned by the Apostle, because it consists only in words,
not in deed: and to say God bless you to a Brother that is naked, and wants
Clothing; or I wish you well to a Sister that wants Food, are no better than
airy, empty Compliments, and do no more fill the belly and warm the back, than
a golden dream does fill the pocket and enrich the Man. Jam. 2. v. 15. If a
Brother or Sister be naked, or destitute of daily Food; and one of you say unto
them depart in peace, be ye warmed, be ye filled: Notwithstanding, ye give them
not those things which are needful for the Body; what does it profit them?

Finally, My Beloved Brethren, that you may be encouraged to practice the Duty
of the Text, consider the great advantages and blessings peculiar to a holy,
pious Charity. The first is, that the merciful, charitable Christian has the
promise of Gods protection, in the day of distress and danger; of his favor
and loving kindness in the day of his visitation. Psalm. 41. v. 1. Blessed is he
that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. v.
2. The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
earth, and thou will not deliver him into the will of his Enemies. v. 3. The
Lord will strengthen him upon a bed of Languishing, thou will make all his bed
in his sickness. Prove. 19. v. 17. He that has pity upon the poor lends unto
the Lord; and that which he has given he will pay him again. Prove. 28. v. 27.
He that gives unto the poor shall not lack, he that increases more and more
in charity, shall find favor with God, which is better than life it self.
Prove. 11. v. 25. The liberal Soul shall be made fat, and he that waters shall
be watered also himself. These are the good Blessings of this Life, which God
has promised to the Righteous, Merciful man. Secondly, Spiritual Blessings,
and those of the Life to come are likewise promised to him, as you may read,
Psa. 112. v. 9. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his
Righteousness remains for ever; that is, he shall be remembered, not only in
this Life, but in the Life to come. 1 Timothy 6. v. 17. Charge them that are rich
in this World, that they trust not in uncertain Riches, but in the Living God:
that they do good, that they be rich in good works, laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold
on Eternal Life. In a word, unless we show it to our Brother, God will show
none to us: they who have not charity for their fellow Christians, will receive
none from the hands of the Lord when they stand most in need of it. We shall
all be judged at the last day according to the works of Mercy; therefore I
beseech you to increase more and more in Charity and Mercy, that the Son of God
may welcome you into his heavenly Kingdom, with a Come ye blessed Children of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.

FINIS.

