THE NARRATIVES OF Sir Robert Walsh, Knight. and Btt. Being by the false
Instigations of Edmond Everard, An Irishman, Seized upon.
This small one is to show to the WORLD what Sir ROBERT Subscribes in relation
to his NARRATIVE, Desiring all Loyal Subjects to admit of a just Censure
therein, He being ready to affirm what he has writ, not by any private
Information; but to maintain the same before any Court of JUSTICE, either in
the Civil, Common or Marshal Law; or unto any particular Man's face who shall
contradict it.
IN the Month of July 1679. I published a Narrative relating to the late
Troubles, as well in my own Vindication, as for public Satisfaction; In which,
nothing was contained but what I always offered to make good, and justify
before any Magistrate, or in any Court of Justice whatsoever. Nevertheless, so
it fell out, that one Edmond Everard, who was so long kept Prisoner in the
Tower, for his intent to have Poisoned his Grace the Duke of Monmouth, (as is
at large set forth in the said Narrative,) finding no other way to obtain his
Liberty, pretended to become an Evidence for the King, in discovering great
Plots and Conspiracies of many years standing: And by this Pretense, as also
giving his Bond for 50 l. (of which he never paid a Penny, though the Work was
done,) to Mrs. Betty Mackrel, for prevailing with some near the Duke of
Monmouth, to take off his former Displeasure against him; at last he obtained
his Liberty, entitling himself one of His Majesty's Evidences. Now this Everard
understanding that my Narrative confuted several passages of his Depositions,
and fully discovered the true cause of his Imprisonment in the Tower; He
applied himself to Sir John Frederick, and Sir Robert Hanson, Justices of the
Peace in the City of London, falsely suggesting that my said Narrative was a
Libel; and thereupon obtained their Warrant to seize my Books in the Binders
House, (about 2000 in number,) which to this day continue in the Constables
hands one Gray of St. Martins, London: And though the said Justices declared to
the Constable, that he should return them to me; and the Constable often
promising me the Delivery of them; Yet by the said Everard's means, he still
detains them, contrary to all Law and Equity; and (as I am credibly informed,)
has sold several of them for 3 s. apiece, without my privity, consent, or
order. But I am glad that my Books are not of that Seditious Disloyal strain,
as those most Malignant and Invective, False and Traitorous Libels lately
produced by this Everard, for which he now absconds, (if not already taken,)
Warrants being thereupon issued out against him.

In my Narrative, I declared, that being in France from the year 1669, till
1675. I came to understand of a Plot designed to be put in Execution by some of
my Kings Subjects, toward the subversion of his Majesty's Fundamental Laws and
Government, now established; they presuming to be upheld and born out by
Foreign assistance, as it is more amply set forth in my Narrative. These
Plotters and Abettors I was always willing fully to discover, were I
interrogated thereupon; For no pretense of Religion, Protestant, Papist or
other, shall ever blind me so far as to conceal any Treacherous Design against
my Sovereign: No, on the Word of a Christian, I hold Honesty and Loyalty the
best Religion upon Earth.

As for his Royal Highness, I declare, and am ready to prove that he was
altogether a stranger to these practices; nay, I am sure he would be the first
in his Royal Person, that would hazard his life to quell and oppose such
Traitorous Attempts. What Dangers has he ever declined, to give a Testimony of
his Zeal and Care for His Majesty's Service, and the Preservation of his Laws
and Loyal Subjects. Some will Censure his Belief, though they know not their
own, much less another man's Religion. Can any groundedly say him to be
otherwise, than a true Catholic of the Church of England? Sure I am, he is of
that temper, That he loves all honest and peaceable Christians, let them be of
what Religion they will; and hates nothing more than such as have too much
Religion in their Mouths, but none in their Hearts, making a Cloak thereof to
carry on their own evil designs against Church and State. Let none think I
write this to curry Favor with his Royal Highness; no, I do but my Duty, and
what I owe to the Posterity of his late Majesty of most blessed Memory, whose
goodness is so deeply imprinted in my heart, that although his Royal Highness
has been pleased to have an ill Opinion of me, nay, to disgrace me in public;
yet this shall never alienate or lessen my Loyalty to my King, or my Duty to
his Royal Highness: And were it not wholly against my Inclinations to prove
disloyal, I am sure I have met with as much provocation as ever Subject did;
and all this proceeding from the Malice of Fabulous Tale-tellers, and Lying
Informers.

And though it came out of his Royal Highness mouth; The Calumniating me with
the Title of Informer, it was he who inculcated the same into his Highnesses
head, who durst not to my Face, say or lay any thing to my Charge
disadvantagious; This I say and will maintain in any ground in Christendom:
that whoever he was that buzzed that ill Character of me, into his Royal
Highness ear, he could be no other than a most Villainous Lying Rascal in that
particular; This he perhaps may read, and will swallow: If he durst have owned
to my face what he said, I would bid him kiss, (or make him,) my --

I will no longer exspatiat upon my unjust sufferances, which my Narratives
gives a full Account, and in what is perfectly true.

Now I will beg your Patience, in giving you a relation of what Barbarous usage
I received but this year last past, In the month of October 1679, intending to
avoid the Darts of Malice, I obtained his Majesty's Gracious Protection, and
Pass in this and in all Kingdoms in Amity with his Majesty; whereupon having
sent my Equipage to be Embarked at Graves-end, I went my self to take Boat at
Strand-bridge, and follow it; but passing by the New-Exchange, my Coach was
stopped, and I seized upon by half a dozen; I asked at whose Suit I was so seized
upon? they answered, at the Kings; I replied, I was ready and willing to obey,
yet was I pulled and hall'd out of my Coach; I asked where I was to be carried?
they answered, before Sir William Waller and Mr. Everard; I asked where were
they? they answered, at the Half Moon Tavern: Thither was I hall'd, and
hundreds of People about me; There sat in State Sir William Waller, and this
Edmund Everard on his left hand; I asked Sir William why I was so pulled and
halled out of my Coach? He answered, That I had got a Narrative Printed, which
I could not justify, and was then Arrested for it; I asked, what did my
Narrative contain contrary to the Laws of the Land? He Answered, That I Printed
what I could not maintain of his Royal Highness rights, and it did reflect on
Mr. Everard, who was an Evidence for the King; I replied, that I got indeed a
Narrative Printed in my own Vindication, against the malicious Calumnies
published by that Everard who sat by him, whose Narrative did scandalously
reflect on me without the least appearance of Truth: and since I subscribed my
name, neither Everard, nor any body else could term my Narrative a Libel,
neither did I reflect on Everard, as he was the Kings Evidence, whether real or
counterfeit, but as he maliciously traduced me in his Narrative, and abused my
name; I farther represented, it was not seemly nor handsome in any man, that
upon the score of being an Evidence for the King, he should arrogate to himself
the liberty not only to slander and calumniate whom he pleased, but also favor
and secure others more probably Criminal, by giving them a formal Protection
under his hand, as this Everard did with good success, prevailing with several
that were Evidences for the King to countenance this his Presumption, and
Prosecute none so Protected by him: Thus one Mr. Kearney having this Everards
Protection, had the opportunity to shift himself out of the Kingdom, he being
at the same time charged and Proclaimed to have been one of the four Ruffians
engaged to Murder his Sacred Majesty; and though I may presume, and am fully
persuaded, he could not be concerned in so base a Design, (I knowing the person
well, and partly his Education) yet is not Everard excusable, he then
understanding that Mr. Kearny was nominated in the Conspiracy, and yet presumed
to favor and protect him. And here I cannot but observe how preposterous a
World is this, that Everards Protection should secure Mr. Kearny, who was sworn
Guilty of High Treason; and yet the Kings Protection could not secure me,
though neither Treason, Disloyalty or Felony could be laid to my Charge. After
my thus declaring to Everards face before Sir William Waller, yet Sir William
tells me I must put in security to appear at the King's Bench in Westminster,
otherwise the Constable should take me into his Charge, and keep me Prisoner in
his own House, I told Sir William I had no security, unless he would take the
best in the Kingdom; and that I was then to take Oars immediately for
Graves-end, to leave the Kingdom; whereupon I produced my Pass and Protection,
with my Kings hand and Seal; which Sir William and Everard read, yet took no
notice of it, but laughed and scoffed at it: Sir William gives the Constable
charge to take me into his Custody; but the Constable seeing His Majesty's
Pass, tells Sir William he had no room for me in his House. Whereupon Sir
William cries, Sir Robert Walsh, You are a Person of Honor, and if you will
oblige your self to appear on the 6th. of this Month at the Sessions in
Westminster, where Mr. Everard, and I will be to make Party against you, you
shall have your liberty. To this I consented, and did accordingly give my
attendance, and did appear upon the Bench at Westminster, where sat the
Honorable the Lord Craven, and diverse Noble Gentlemen that knew me. I
attending there from Nine of the Clock till Twelve, did represent my Sufferings
and hard usage to the Bench, and this for Publishing a Narrative, to which I
did subscribe my Name, and was ready to Justify; Sir William Waller, and
Edmund Everard were called to prosecute their pretended Action against me, but
neither of them appearing all that day, I was discharged by that Honorable
Bench. Yet by this contrivance I sustained a greater loss than either Waller or
Everard is able to repair; for the Ship in which I was to Embark, went away
with my Goods and Equipage from Graves-end, and to this day I could never hear
thereof; so that I lost my Passage and Goods, to my great damage, leaving me to
seek for remedy against Sir William Waller, and the Worshipful (absconded)
Edmund Everard, who now lurks in holes, while I am ready to appear in discharge
of my Loyalty and Duty to my King and Country, and to justify what I have
declared at large in my former Narrative; and so would my Manifesto's, (were
they at Liberty,) do set forth.

Sir Robert Walsh his Narratives which lie seized upon, may let the World see,
his Loyalty and his Honor, where and how gained and attained, which the Golden
Medal at his Breast does Witness, carrying the Effigies of His Majesty of
Blessed Memory, and that of His now Glorious Majesty on the one-side, and
insculped on the other side the form of his Royal Banner, used at the Battle of
Edgehill, where Sir Robert received the Dignity of his Knighthood, and has
his Majesty's most Royal Hand to wear and carry the said Medal; Yet some will
be dashing and carping at the said Medal, I wish they may go so far fairly to
gain the like. I should not envy them.

Sir Robert Walsh, has set forth in his Narrative, his Imprisonments for above
seven years. The first he was by the Usurper made Prisoner in the Tower, for
which he had reason.

The next was Prisoner in the Bastile, not without reason, he having served the
Prince of Conde against the French King.

The third Imprisonment, he was kept Prisoner 33 months in Brussels, through
the ungrounded Instigation of some, as the best of men does know, whose Pardon
or Grace Sir Robert ever did disown, and does, if any Crime of Disloyalty ever
was, is, or could be laid to his Charge.

Witness my hand, Sir Robert Walsh Knight. and Btt.

FINIS.

