A LETTER FROM EXON to his Friend, Mr. T Wills, in London, concerning the
Landing of the French, July 26; with the particulars of the Burning the Town of
Tingmouth, etc.
Loving Kinsman,
MY Service in the Camp, against the French Fleet, hindered me from Writing the
last Post. The Enemy now lie as they did when I wrote to you last; and on
Saturday Morning, about Five, the 15 Galleys, and one Man of War, with the
Long-boats, made up to Tingmouth, and Rang a Peal of Canons about half an hour
long; afterward landed about 1000 Men, who entered the Town and burnt about 30
Houses: went into the Church, broke the Communion Table in pieces, the Pulpet
and Desk; tore the Common Prayer Book in pieces, and did some injury to the
Font. I observed the Proclamation for the Fast against a Pillar, which had but
one cut with a Sword. There were in the Harbor about Eight Ships and Barks
which they also burned, not sparing the Passage-Boat, nor the Village which
lies the Yonder side the Passage. They also made an Incursion about a Mile
above the Town, and burnt several Country Houses. About three Hours before they
Landed, Coll. Bampfield was in the Town with his Regiment, but they pretending
to Land about Brixham, he was Commanded there; and the Town left to the Guard
of the Mobile, and a Mob. Troop of Horse, Commanded by the young Heyden, who
all scoured upon the first Firing of the Enemy, and left two pieces of half
Canon planted upon the Shore, which the Enemy took with them. When they landed,
there was so great a Mist, that one could not discern the other: About Nine a
Clock it broke up, and the Enemy retired to their Boats, when I entered the
Town, in the Head of 200 of the Posse Com. where we found the Town all in
Flames and Ruin, but no one stayed to be killed; all left their Houses, except
an old Woman, of Eighty Years, who was taken in the Bed, and in danger of
Ravishment; but pleading her Age, escaped. She says, about Twenty entered her
Chamber, all English; they made bold with her Coffers, but assured her, she
need not be afraid of burning her House; and told her, If the rest had stayed,
they might have saved theirs. I send you some of their Match, which I took
burning in a House; and were it not for the charge of Postage, would send you a
Bullet of 30 l. weight, which I took up in the Ruins of a Chimney. I am just
mounting again (having seen your Mare, who will be serviceable against you
come) and therefore must bid you adieu, wishing us Victory over the Enemy, and
a happy meeting,

Yours J. W.
Exon, July 28. 1690.
LONDON, Printed by H. Hills. 1690.


