THE DECLARATION OF Sir HARDRESSE WALLER, Major General of the Parliaments
Forces in Ireland, and the Council of OFFICERS there.
THe Signal Turns of Gods hand challenge of right our signal observation and
improvement, that we may express in (...) ^eart and life, the due counterpane
of his various dealings. Providence has of late wrought wonders of mercy, as
in these Nations, so particularly in this City and throughout this Land. The
Lord has remembered us in our low estate, because his mercy endures for ever.
Who is so great a stranger in our Israel, that observed not the dreadful
symptoms of threatened ruin to our Religion, and all our Liberties Sacred and
Civil? Has not God saved us with a notwithstanding, by the late dispensations
of his gracious appearances in our greatest straights and perplexities? Were
not the mountains of sinful provocations and strong oppositions raised up to
their height, to obstruct the great work of Reformation, so happily begun, and
so solemnly engaged for among us? Had not the Romish Emissaries and Ingeneers
of darkness prevailed far, to divide and distract, to delude and destroy us?
Were not the hopes of our Common Enemy exceedingly raised up, gaping for the
confusion and dissolution of Christ's interest and People in these Nations? Had
not the powers and policies of Hell prevailed far, and laid the very necks of
Magistracy and Ministry upon the block of direful Anarchy and Arbitrary rule?
Were not all foundations religious and politic so put out of course, in all
Relations, as to threaten eminent ruin both to Church and State? Which
Ordinance of God was not slighted, opposed, maligned and scorned by specious
pretenses and strong delusions? Were not Gods own people very deeply guilty of
apostacy and hypocrisy, of unfaithfulness and breach of Covenant in all
Relations? Were we not all ready to devour one another by sinful mistakes and
woeful miscarriages, whilst our ill neighbors were laughing at us, and
combining against us? Did not unclean spirits range and rage among us,
possessing many, foaming out their shame, torturing souls and all societies
with deadly convulsions? Were not our distempers, personal and public, grown
so inveterate, so complicate, and so multiplicious, that our best Physicians
could do little else then pity and bewail our expiring Liberties? Was not the
name of Christ, and whatsoever is dear unto his people, ready to be made the
scorn and prey of our ill neighbors? Were we not hastening to the sad
Catastrophe of the German Tragedy, and Munsters desolations, procured by the
like fanatic spirits, which then obstructed Reformation work? What cause then
have we to admire the miraculous patience and bounty of our God, that have made
us now the living monuments of undeserved Mercy? Should not we adore and
celebrate that good will of his, who dwelling in this Bush, has thus prevented
the consumption thereof? He that is our God, now appears indeed to be the God
of all salvations, to whom belong all issues from death. He has delivered, he
does deliver, in him we hope that he will still deliver. Thankfulness to him,
verbal and actual, cordial and constant, will be the best preserver of mercy,
and improver thereof. The choice circumstantials of this Salvation, are so
many, and so remarkable, that the sense thereof cannot but engage and inflame
our hearts to the highest expressions of gratitude and praise. That such a God,
so highly provoked, should show such favor, to such an unworthy people, in such
a season, and by such means, in such a manner, and to such an end, this indeed
is the wonder of Mercies, the complex and complement of Free Grace. That so
great a change should be brought about with so little noise, so little blood,
so little opposition, and so hopefully; Is not this a miracle of Mercy? This
day of small things should not then be despised, being the Lords doing, so
mavelous in our eyes. Though our Redemption be not yet perfected, yet do we
see cause abundantly to provoke all Christ's friends to solemn Acknowledgments.
Should not they praise him, that have been seeking him? Do not the Signal
returns of his mercy challenge proportionable returns of our Duty? Is not this
the best way to assure and increase, to improve and hasten the blessings
promised and begun? Does he not command and commend such a course? has it not
been his own and his peoples method in all former ages? Have not we received
notable experiences ever since the beginning of our famous Parliament, to direct
and strengthen us thereto? Does not the posture of Gods reforming people, so
signally foretold Rev. 15. challenge this from us? Those very persons who have
been unhappily seduced into snares and illegal Engagements against the supreme
Authority, may in this great Turn, find sufficient ground of blessing the Lord,
that they have been stopped in such a career, posting to confusion. To be thus
kept from sin and ruin will be then known and acknowledged for a singular
mercy; when the Lord shall please to remove prejudice and pre-ingagements.

That all Gods people in this City and throughout Ireland may orderly concur
in all humble return of praise to our good God, on this account; it is
therefore seriously recommended and desired, That Tuesday next, being the 3. of
January 1659, be set apart and solemnly observed as a day of public
Thanksgiving within the City and Liberties of Dublin; and the Tuesday
fortnight, next after it, being the 17. of January, to be likewise observed for
a solemn Thanksgiving throughout all the parts of this Nation; and the several
Ministers of the Gospel in their respective places are desired to give public
notice thereof, on the first Lords day after the receipt hereof.

Dated at Dublin-Castle, the 28. of December; 1659. HAR. WALLER.

DUBLIN, Printed by William Blader, by special Order: and Reprinted at LONDON
by John Macock. 1659.


