THE CONSIDERATOR CONSIDERED: OR, A brief view of certain Considerations upon
the Biblia Polyglotta, the Prolegomena and Appendix thereof.

Wherein, amongst other things, the certainty, integrity, and Divine Authority
of the Original Texts, is defended, against the Consequences of Athiests,
Papists, Antiscripturists, etc. inferred from the Various Readings, and novelty
of the HEBREW points, by the Author of the said CONSIDERATIONS.

The Biblia Polyglotta, and Translations therein exhibited, with the various
Readings, Prolegomena and Appendix, vindicated from his ASPERSIONS and
CALUMNIES.

And the questions about the punctation of the Hebrew Text, the Various
Readings, and the ancient Hebrew Character briefly handled.

By BR. WALTON. D. D.

2 Cor. 13. 8. For we can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth.

LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft, and are to be sold at most Booksellers
shops, 1659.

A SUMMARY Of the several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.
AN Introduction to the whole, page 1. Chap. 2. The occasion and motives of
these considerations examined 19 Chap. 3. The Charges against the Biblia
Polyglotta enumerated, and proved to be for the most part Calumnies 37 Chap. 4.
The first, and main charge; That the Original Texts have gross corruptions,
particularly answered, and proved a Calumny page 45 Chap. 5. The 2, 3, 4.
charges. That our Copies are not the same with those anciently used. That the
same fate has attended the Scripture, with other books, and that we may
correct the Originals upon conjectures, answered and proved to be Calumnies 72
Chap. 6. The fifth Charge about various Readings out of Translations answered.
The sixth, That the Keri and Ketif are Critical notes of the Rabbines, showed
to be a Calumny. Of the notes out of Grotius 83 Chap. 7. The Various Readings
in particular, collected and printed in the Biblia Polyglotta, vindicated 149
Chap. 8. The consequences against the certainty, and Divine authority of
Scripture, inferred by the Adversary from Various Readings, etc. on the behalf
of Papists, Atheists, Antiscripturists, etc. answered, and retorted upon
himself 149 Chap. 9. His arguments against the several Translations. The
Samaritane, Chaldee, Syriack, Arab. Greek, Latin, Aethiopick, Persian,
answered 169 Chap. 10. The Question about the Hebrew points propounded. The
Hebrews had vowels before the invention of points, (...). The reading certain
without points. The Masorites pointed not the Text at pleasure, but according
to the true and common Reading. The first occasion of this Controversy about
the points 196 Chap. 11. The arguments against the Divine Original of the
modern points vindicated. The testimony of the chief Protestant Divines, and
of the most eminent for Eastern learning, and greatest patrons of the Original
Texts against their divine extract, produced. The contrary Arguments urged in
the Considerations answered. 231 Chap. 12. The consequence of uncertainty of
the Hebrew Text, if the points be not of Divine authority, urged by Papists,
etc. and inferred by the Considerator, answered. The Argument retorted upon him
260 Chap. 13. Of our knowledge of the Hebrew, derived from the Sept.
Translation. That the Samaritane was the ancient Hebrew Character, changed by
Esdras into the Assyrian, proved. The arguments to the contrary answered. The
conclusion 268
THE CONSIDERATOR CONSIDERED.
CHAP. I.
I. The Church of England assaulted by Romanists on the one hand, and
Novellists on the other, so are some of her Sons in this Edition of the Biblia
Polyglotta. II. The like fate of others who labored most in exact Editions of
the Bible, Origin, S. Hierome. III. Arias Montanus, Erasmus, the Publisher of
the late Parisian Bible, the late Translators into English IV. The nature of
Envy. V. This Edition of the Biblia Polyglotta generally approved; more
performed in it then in any former Edition: The usefulness of it: No Book free
from opposition. VI. The Considerations published against it, what they are VII.
A new Plot pretended to be discovered amongst Protestants, against the
Original Texts, approved in the Prolegomena to the Biblia Polyglotta: The
particulars of this Design: The Principles and Consequences: The chief
Protestant Divines and Linguists of this age named, whom the Adversary makes
guilty of this Plot: Himself says the same things. VIII. The calumnies about
Various Readings. IX. Other parts of this charge mistaken. X. Reasons why this
Pamphlet was answered.

I. IT was the speech of a grave Historian (Thucyd.) That (...), Those that are
in the midst are slain (or assaulted) on both sides. With which agrees to that
of Aristotle, Ethic. l. 2. c. 8. (...). expellunt medium extremi uterque ad
alterum. This was the case of our Mother the Church of England in former times,
as was long since observed by a Reverend Author, when she was (like Christ
crucified between two Theives) opposed by the superstitious Romanists on the
one hand, and by the fiery Novellists on the other, the first accusing her of
departing too far from them, the other of coming too near to them; which
contrary accusations of men running into extremes, were a strong evidence that
she walked in the mean, which is the best and safest; for, Medium tenuere
beati. This which was the condition of the Mother, is now become the lot of
some of her Sons in the late Edition of the Biblia Polyglotta: for whereas the
Publisher of the said Bible has labored to assert the purity, integrity, and
supreme authority of the Original Texts, against those of Rome on the one
side, rejecting some Jewish opinions, unwarily swallowed by some amongst our
selves on the other, he has incurred the displeasure of both; the one
complaining that too much is ascribed to the Original Texts, the other, too
little: which is a good argument that he has kept close to the Truth, from
which those that do extrema sectari do usually swerve.

II. This is no new thing, that Endeavors to promote the public good, should
be thus rewarded, for in former ages we find, that those who labored most
about the Sacred Oracles of God, to restore them to their primitive and
original luster, and to wipe off that dust which by injuries of time and
ignorance or negligence of Transcribers was contracted, and so to transmit them
pure and incorrupt to posterity (for such God raised up in all ages) whose
endeavors, one would think, might have set the Authors without the reach of
calumny and envy, have yet been aspersed and slandered, their labors
calumniated, and their aims perverted by such as S. James speaks of 4. 5. In
whom the spirit that lusts after envy reigned. Origens pains in compiling his
Tetrapla, Hexapla, and Octapla, a work of that admirable use, that it was
styled Opus Ecclesiae, and which by the unexcusable negligence of the Greek
Church is now lost, was carped and cavil'd at amongst others by Hierome, as if
he had corrupted the pure Translation of the LXX. by the additions which he
made out of Theodotion: When as Origin to preserve the LXX in its integrity,
distinguished all the additions by an Asterisk, which being left out, what
remained was the mere and true Translation of the Septuagint, as Hierome
himself sometimes acknowledged, Epist. 11. ad Augustine. The same Hierome was
paid in the like coin by others, who rejected his Latin Translation (the
first in Latin that was made out of the Hebrew Text) as appears by Ruffine, S.
Augustine, and other learned men of those times, who interpreted this attempt
of his (though in it self very laudable) as done, in contumeliam versionis
(...) to disgrace that of the Septuagint (as some now interpret all that is
said of the use of ancient Translations* as tending to the depressing of the
Hebrew^ whereupon he was often put to apologize for himself.

III. To come nearer to our own times, that Magnificent work of the King of
Spaines Bible (by some styled Orbis miraculum) was approved by the Pope
himself to whom it was presented, as by his Breves prefixed appears, yet all
could not protect the Publisher thereof, Arias Montanus (a learned and moderate
Romanist) though he did nothing without the advice of the University of
Lovaine, and of sundry particular learned men, from the jealousies and
calumnies of malignant spirits, of his own Brethren, against whom he was feign
to write Apologies, and hardly escaped the Inquisition. Erasmus his
extraordinary pains, in publishing the Greek Testament by comparing ancient
copies and Translations, was sufficiently railed at by some Friars and ignorant
Zelots, as if he took upon him to correct the Word of God, as appears in his
Preface to his Annotations of 1535 (whose very words are used, as we shall see
hereafter, against the Biblia Polyglotta. And that late splendid work of the
Parisian Bible, published at the charges of Michael de Jay in seven languages,
which far exceeds the Biblia Regia, by addition of that ancient Syriack
Translation of the Old Testament, the Arabic of the Old and New, and the
Samaritane Pentateuch, etc. though it be not without its defects, which
ingenuous and moderate men would rather have excused then aggravated, yet has
not wanted its detractors, who envying that others should have the glory of
that which themselves were unable to perform, have defamed it what they could,
witness those bitter and virulent expressions of Simeon de Muis, Regius
Professor of the Hebrew at Paris, in his Epistles published against it. And, to
come yet nearer home: The last English Translation made by diverse learned men
at the command of King James, though it may justly contend with any now extant
in any other Language in Europe, was yet carped and cavild at by diverse among
our selves, especially by one, who being passed by and not employed in the
Work, as one (though skild in the Hebrew, yet) of little or no judgment in
that or any other kind of Learning, was so highly offended, that he would
needs undertake to show how many thousand places they had falsely rendered, when
as he could hardly make good his undertaking in any one.

IV. Thus we see, That for every good work is a man envyed of his Neighbor, as
the Wise man observed, Eccles. 4. 4. Our Savior, for the good works he had
done, had like to have been stoned by the people; and the Scribes and Elders
out of envy, delivered him to be put to death; Licet invenire regionem ubi
venena non sunt, quemadmodum affirmant de Cr^ta, at non licet invenire
Rempublicam quae non alat invidiam, as Plut. in Moral. Some Countries there be,
where no venom^us creature lives, as they say of Candy; but none where the
poison of envy is not found* yea, so monstrous is this sin, that the envious
man makes another virtue his vice, and another happiness his torment;
Invidia Siculi non invenere tyranni, Majus tormentum. Whereas he that rejoices
at the good of another, is thereby made partaker of it: For, Toll invidiam,
and tuum est quod hab^o, Toll invidiam, and meum est quod habes, as Chrysostom.
in Joh.

V. It cannot seem strange then, That this late Work of the Bible, though
generally approved by Learned men, both in the first undertaking, when the
particulars, whereof it was to consist, with a specimen thereof, were published
to the World, and since it was finished, when not only all was performed which
was undertaken, but also more then could justly be expected should
notwithstanding, meet with some disaffect^^ persons, who seek to defame and
blast it. There have ever been some, that would make themselves seem fairer, by
throwing dirt in the faces of others, and acount themselves the better, by how
much they speak the worse of others: For Gloriae comes invidia, and it never
was the hap of any Book yet, to meet with no opposition, (...) as Clemens Alex.
observed long since, Deus omnibus placere non potest, and tu placere credis?
said Jul. Scal. God himself cannot please all men; and how can any of us then
hope for it? Erasmus his complaint was just against his censurers: Superbum est
de libro sententiam far quem non intelligis, superbius and de eo quem ne
legeris quidem, Praef. eadem. Yet we find usually, that this envious humor is
attended with ignorance, Vituperant quae ignorant, said Tertul. Ignorance is
the greatest enemy to any kind of knowledge; and Jos. Scaliger met with such,
of whom he writes, Quicquid eorum captum superat erratum vocant, and quod non
intelligunt pro i^fcitia sua damnant; how this may be applied, I leave to the
Judgment of others: This I find too true, That though there never was so much
done in any Edition of the Bible in any age, (absit invidia verbo) as to
exhibit the original Text of the Scripture at one view, attended with so many
ancient Translations, approved by the Church in her purest times, and that
according to the best Co^ies and Editions, which bear witness to the ^^thority
and Integrity of the Originalls, and serve as so many gl^sses to represent the
true sense and meaning of them to succeeding ages, and to preserve the sacred
truth to posterity, as far as humane industry can reach* against the
corruptions and false glosses, wherewith Sectaries and Heretics (who in no age
so abounded as in this) would adulterate and imbase it; yet this could not free
the Work from the opposition of malicious tongues and pens of such, whom the
envious man has stirred up to hinder the benefit which the Church of God might
reap by it, witness a late Pamphlet, pretending to the integrity and purity of
the Hebrew and Greek Text, to which are added, certain Considerations on the
Prolegomena and Appendix to the late Biblia Polyglotta.

VI. In which, I was sorry to find so much clean paper fouled with so many
palpable untruths, wilful and studied calumnies, such contradictions,
tautologies and impertinencies, as appear in those Con^iderations, that if they
should be culled out of the Book, we might say of it, as Apollodorus the
Athenian of Chrysippus his writings, That if one should take away, (...) All
that was either none of his own, or nothing to the purpose, (...) they would be
empty of all matter; for there is scarce any thing true or useful concerning
the subjects here disputed, which was not formerly said in those Prolegomena,
nor any thing concerning the same which is added by the Adversary, as his own,
which is not sufficiently confuted in the same Proleg. Not to mention the
incoherence of the things here handled, the whole being, rudis indigestaque
moles, a confused heap of Independencies.

VII. In these Considerations, we are told of a new Plot or Design amongst
Protestants, after they are come out of Rome, a Design which they dare not
publicly own, Page 329. The leprosy of Papists, crying down the Original
Texts, is broken forth among Protestan^s, with what design, to what end or
purpose he knows not, God knows, and the day will manifest* Epist. page 14.
That this design is owned in the Prolegomena to the Bible, and in the Appendix*
That they print the Original and defame it, gathering up translations of all
sorts, and setting them up in competition with it, Epist. p. 9. That they take
away all certainty in and about all sacred truth, Epist. p. 25. That there is
nothing left unto men, but to choose whether they will turn Papists or Atheists,
Epist. p. 9. That there are gross corruptions befallen the Originalls, which
by the help of old Translations, and by conjectures may be found out and
corrected, page 205. as pernicious a Principle as ever was fixed upon since the
foundation of the Church of Christ, Epist. p. 21. That it is the foundation of
Mahumetanisme, the chiefest and principal prop of Popery the only pretense of
phanaticall Antiscripturists, and the root of much hidden Atheism in the
World, p. 147. That he fears the pretended infallible Judge or the depth of
Atheism, lies at the door of these Considerations, p. 161. That they are
enough to frighten unstable souls into the arms of an infallible Guide, p. 196.
That these various Translations, as upon trial they will be found to be, are
such, as many will be ready to question the foundation of all, p. 207. and
therefore he had rather all translations should be consumed out of the earth,
p. 318. then such a figment should be admitted. That (setting aside two Theses)
there is no Opinion ventilated among Christians, tending to the depression of
the worth, and impairing the esteem of the Heb. Copies, which is not directly*
or by just consequence owned in these Prolegomena p. 205. Hence are these
tragical exclamations of dreadful distemper, which may well prove mortal to
the truth of the Scripture, page 314. Of horrible and outrageous violence
offered to the sacred verity, p. 315. That men take upon them to correct the
Scripture, page 344. to correct the Word of God, p. 180. These are some of the
expressions, used by the Author of the Considerations, who yet writes with all
Christian candor and moderation of spirit, p. 151. Heartily for the sake and
pursuit of truth, with a mind freed from all prejudice and disquieting
affections, p. 155. Now, those dangerous Principles about which all this stir
is made, are chiefly reduced to two, (though many be pretended) 1. That the
Hebrew points, (that is, the modern forms now used, not the vowels and accents
themselves, which are acknowledged to be coeve with the other Letters, and that
the reading of the Text was never arbitrary, but the same before and after the
punctation) were devised and fixed by the Masorites about five hundred years
after Christ. 2. That there are various readings in the Old and New Testament,
both in the Hebrew and Greek (by the casual mistake of transcribers, yet in
matters of no moment) which by comparing ancient Cop^es, may be found out, and
in some cases out of ancient translations, and when they are discovered, the
true reading may be restored. Hence is inferred, the uncertainty of all Divine
truth, that the Scriptures are corrupt, etc. And hence are those fears and
jealousies, Epist. page 19. which how justly deducible from* these, or any
other principles in the Prolegomena or Appendix shall hereafter appear. In the
mean time, our Author practices what Quintilian said of some Roman Orators,
who did causarum vacua convitis implere, and instead of Arguments, loads his
adversary with reproaches, like that Soldier in Darius his Army (mentioned by
Plutarch) who, instead of fighting with his hands, employed his tongue in
railing upon Alexander, whereupon the General struck him with his Lance, and
told him, he hired him to fight, and not to rail. Who those Protestants are
that concur with the Prolegomena in those Principles the adversary is ashamed
to mention, though he knew they were at large cited in the Prolegomena, because
their very names would have spoiled his whole project and make his charge
appear a mere calumny. They are no other (concerning the novelty of the Hebrew
punctation) than Luther, Zuinglius, Brentius, Pelican, Oecolampadius, Calvine,
Beza, Musculus, Paulus Fagius, Mercer, Cameron, Chamier, Piscator, Scaliger,
Casaubon. De Dieu, Grotius, Capellus, Erpenius, Sixtinus, Amama, Salmasius,
Schickard, Martinius, also Rivet, Spanhemius, Fest. Hommius, as appears by
their Epistles to Capel. in his Defensio Criticae. etc. and amongst our selves
Archbishop Usher, Bishop Prideaux, Mr. Seldom, Mr. Mead, Mr. Eyres, and many
others, not to name those now living, the most eminent Divines that have
appeared in the Protestant cause, and most zealous defenders of the purity and
authority of the Original Texts, or the chiefest ^inguists that this age has
produced and best skilled in the Hebrew and other Oriental learning. And for
that other point of various lections, not only the same men* but all others
generally which will believe their eyes, (two or three excepted) grant the same
which the author of the Prolegomena does, and that without any prejudice to the
certainty or divine authority of Scripture, as is showed at large in the
Prolegomena, and shall hereafter be made manifest: yea our adversary himself
frequently confesses the same, and says that ocular inspection makes it
manifest, that there are various readings both in the old Testament and the
new, and its confessed there have been failings in the transcribers, who have
often mistaken, and that its impossible it should be otherwise, etc p. 165 191.
178. 296. whereby he makes himself evidently guilty of the crimes which he
unjustly charges upon others, and of those consequences which he infers on the
behalf of Papists, Atheists, Antiscripturists, etc. and so overthrows that
which he would seem to contend for, viz. the certainty and supreme authority of
Scripture; and therefore I may say unto him, ex ore tuo, out of thy own mouth
shall thou be judged, and use the words of the Apostle, Romans 2. 1. Wherefore
thou art unexcusable O man that condemnest another, for hereby thou condemnest
thine own self, for thou do the same things.

VIII. When I first read this Pamphlet I stood amazed at the strange boldness
of the Author, charging the Prolegomena with such tenets and assertions, which
they are so far from maintaining, that they do assert and prove the plain
contrary, and that not obiter, or by the by, but ex professo, in full tracts.
As for instance the main Charge, p. 206. That there are corruptions, yea gross
corruptions befallen the Original Texts, which men by their critical
conjectures may discover and correct, is so far from truth, That the whole
Prolegom. 7. is spent in proving that the Original Texts are not corrupted
either by Jews, Christians or others, that they are of Supreme authority in all
matters, and the rule to try all translations by, That the copies we now have
are the true transcripts of the first (...) written by the sacred Penmen. That
the special providence of God has watched over these books, to preserve them
pure and incorrupt against all attempts of Sectaries, Heretics and others, and
will still preserve them to the end of the world, for that end for which they
were at first written. That the errors or mistakes which may befall by
neglilence or inadvertency of Transcribers or Printers, are in matters of no
concernment (from whence various readings have risen) and may by collation of
other copies and other means there mentioned be rectified and amended. The
arguments also brought by some Romanists against the purity, certainty and
authority of the Original Texts are clearly answered, wherein I doubt not but
the Reader may find more satisfaction, than in all these confused
Considerations. And for gathering various readings by mere conjectures, the
author of the Prolegom. is so far from approving that way, that he expressly
rejects it, and gives reasons against it. Prol. 6. sect. ult. which the author
of the Considerations, p. 209. 305, 307. does also acknowledge with
thankfulness.

IX. The like may be seen in most of his other charges, wherein he fights with
his own shadow, and like a wanton whelp runs round after his own stern,
dissembling his adversaries opinion, and instead thereof substituting any lame
confectary which came suddenly into his distempered fancy; For whatsoever might
seem odious to vulgar apprehensions he ascribes to the Prolegomena, that so he
might have color to say what he lists. Other things are by him wilfully
perverted and misconstrued, the controversy never truly stated, not one
argument faithfully recited, much less answered, nor the tenth part of what is
said in the Prolegomena on the matters in question taken notice of, much less
confuted; so that I was a long time in doubt whether to take notice of these
Considerations at all by way of answer, there being nothing in them which is
not in the Prolegomena and Appendix already fully answered, as those that shall
please to compare both together may easily see, and this was the opinion of
some men of great learning and judgment, that I should not trouble my self
with any answer. Besides I have to deal with one so possessed with prejudice
and passion, and thereby so pertinacious in his opinions, that I shall but
Aethiopem lavare; he may be convinced, but not converted, and will hold his
Conclusion in despite of the Premises. Neither is his authority of such weight
with judicious and learned men, as that they will esteem the Biblia Polyglotta,
either the better for his praises, or the worse for his censure, so that as his
praises should not tickle, so neither his dispraises trouble, Declamationes
ambitiosorum are only otiosorum cibi (as Scal. exerc. 307) nor is it my lot
alone to be thus handled by him, he lays about him on all sides, and like
Ismael, his hand is against every one, so that we may say with the
Epigrammatist, Omnibus invideas Livide, nemo tibi, yea the volume it self
begins already to serve for wast paper in Grocers shops, and to vanish in
thuris pipirisve cucullos.

X. Yet considering that it may have come into the hands of diverse, who never
saw, and it may be cannot read or understand the Biblia Polyglotta, or the
Prolegomena, and may simply give credit to what he averres (for though he say
the opinions may be heartily disputed among learned men without danger, yet he
has thought fit to submit and expose them to the judgment of the unlearned,
who cannot judge but may wrest what they understand, not to their own hurt,
wherein either his prudence or piety may justly be called in question, in
bringing a Latin tract upon an English stage) and withal lest he might
complain that he was neglected, or brag amongst his ignorant Proselites that he
could not be answered, and further seeing that there is as S. Ambr. de ossic.
1. c. 3. says, otiosum silentium, as well as otiosum verbum, and I would be
loath to be guilty of the one, as my adversary is of the other, and withal
because he threatens in many places, p. 152, 153. 193. 201, 305. 320. 345. a
further search, and to make more discoveries of great matters: I thought it not
altogether unfit (though I want not other employments wherein to spend my
hours) both in right to my self, and this work of the Bible, and to all those
Reverend and worthy persons, whose approbations have commended it to the
public, as also of all those great and learned Divines and others, some of
which I have now mentioned, who are involved in the same cause, to take a brief
view of these Considerations, and to examine the grounds of those consequences
which he would infer, and to show how unjustly and uncharitably he has dealt,
that so the Prolegomena, Appendix, and several Translations may be vindicated
from his false aspersions, the true use of the Work maintained for the public
good of the Church, the truth asserted against his Sophismes and Declamations,
the Reader disabused, their judgments rectified, who may be misled by a
popular Pamphlet ^itted for vulgar capacities not for Scholasticall judgments,
and all further error and misconstruction prevented, in what shall be hereafter
offered by him or others upon this account, so that he or whoever shall proceed
in this virulent way of censuring may be without excuse. For as Juo. Ep. 219.
quia falsitas praecessit, oportet ut veritas subsequatur, quae latrocinia
noctis detegat. Not that I intend to follow him in all his confused mazes,
extravagancies and cautologies, but only to insist upon the chief and most
material points, which being rightly stated, and the truth proved or
vindicated, I shall submit all to the judicious and indifferent Reader.

CHAP. II.
I The occasion and motives of publishing the Considerations. II. The adversary
begins with an untruth. III. His sinister ends, writing in English against a
Latin Treatise, and yet in the same book writing in Latin against the
Quakers. IV. His love of the truth, candid and sincere dealing. V. His
dangerous assertions against the miracles wrought for confirmation of the
Doctrine of the Bible, attested by the Catholic Tradition of the Church of
Christ. His affirming that the Alcoran may vie miracles and traditions with the
Scripture, rejecting all arguments for the authority of Scripture, save its own
light. VI, VII. No private or new opinions in the Prolegomena or Appendix.
VIII. The just grounds which the publisher had to speak of the things excepted
against. IX. The groundless fears and jealousies of the adversary X. His
profession of no great skill in this learning. XI. That he knows not the
Authors of this Edition. XII His commending the Work, and the authors of it.
XIII. His consequences charged upon the Work, and not upon the Workmen, as he
pretends. XIV. The true cause of the quarrel is against the Workmen. XV. The
approbation of the Work by foreign Divines, Buxtorss testimony of it.

I. BEfore we descend to particulars, it will be needful to take notice First
of the occasion and motives of publishing these Considerations, and of their
scope and end, concerning which the author tells us. Cap. 1. sect. 1, 2, 3.
etc. That he had written a Treatise of the Divine original of the Scriptures,
their authority, and self evidencing light, and of the providence of God in
their preservation, which being ready for the Press, the Prolegomena and
Appendix of the Bible came to his hands, wherein the great bulk of various
readings, and some opinions maintained in the Prolegomena, did in his
apprehension much weaken the arguments by him insisted upon in that Treatise,
and therefore a necessity was incumbent upon him, either to desist from
publishing it, or else of giving an account of those things in the Prolegomena,
and Appendix, which tended to the disadvantage of that great truth which he had
pleaded for. After he tells us of his fears and jealousies of dangerous
consequences, etc. and gives some reasons to free himself from any suspicion of
malice or envy against the Biblia Polyglotta, or any that had a hand in
publishing of it, and calls the searcher of all hearts to witness, how clear
he was from any sinister ends, etc. and professes how heartily he will proceed
for the sake, and in the pursuit of truth, with a mind free from prejudice and
disquieting affections, etc.

II. Concerning all which, I shall observe, first, that it is ominous to
stumble at the threshold, as our Author here does, what fair dealing may we
expect in his ensuing Discourse, when he begins with a palpable untruth? he
says the Prolegomena and Appendix came to his hands after he had finished his
Treatise of the Scripture, and was ready to give it to the Stationer, which was
the occasion of these additional Considerations, when as yet it appears that he
had read the Prolegomena and Appendix, before he had written the first Chapter
of his Treatise; for in that Chapter he writes, p. 16. that Capellus his
pernicious opinion about the uncertainty of Scripture, is since approved and
taken up by others, quoting in the margent Prolegomena ad Biblia Polyglotta,
and p. 20. he says that (...), is reckoned amongst the various Readings,
gathered out of Grotius, in the Appendix of the Biblia Polyglotta, by which it
is evident that he had seen and read the Prolegomena and Appendix before he
wrote that Treatise, and therefore that the publishing of the Prolegomena and
Appendix after his Treatise was finished, could not be the cause of writing
these Considerations in vindication of that Treatise; here it seems his memory
failed him, to say no worse, and hereby it plainly appears, that some other
motives set him on work, and not the vindication of his Treatise; and though he
protests the contrary, yet protestatio contraria facto is not to be admitted
nor regarded; for it is known that such Protestations with men who make no
scruple of affirming untruths, arises often from the consciousnesse of the
guilt of that against which they protest. Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam?
What are his Considerations, but a clear confutation of his protestation?

III. If he had no sinister ends, Why are they written in English, the Opinions
which he opposes, being written in that Language wherein Learned men debate
such things, as are not fit for popular judgments? There could be no other end
in this, then to expose the Bib. Polyglot. and Publishers of it to popular
hatred. If his fears and jealousies were so great, that these opinions should
gain credit, and be received, why did he not write against them in the same
Language, which is generally known in Europe, whereby an Antidote might have
been ready wheresoever they came; whereas to write in English, cannot hinder
the spreading of them abroad, nor was there any great cause to fear that his
English readers could be infected by them, when they understood them not, till
he informed them. This was not the true motive, or else he took not the right
course to prevent the mischief he seemed to fear. But to confute a Latin
Treatise in English, and in the same Book to add a Latin Discourse against
the Quakers, who abhor all Learning, and account that Language, the Language of
the Beast, will, notwithstanding his weak Apology, be judged a Soloecisme.

IV. Besides, if the truth, and love of the truth, set him on work, why does he
fasten upon his adversary, things manifestly untrue, charging him with opinions
in one place, which in another he clears him from. His perverting his
adversaries tenets, propounding his Arguments and Answers by halfs, cutting
them short, as Procrustes (in Plut) did his prisoners, that they might be fit
for his bed, are proofs of his candid and sincere dealing, but chiefly his
urging the Consequences of Papists, Atheists, Antiscripturists, etc. whose
Advocate he makes himself, rather then his Adversary shall escape; If he had
not been led by some sinister respects, knowing that Pious and Learned men,
yea, the learned Protestant Divines, and the best skilled in the Eastern
Languages, that are this day, and greatest assertors of the purity and
authority of the original Texts, against the Romish tenets, have maintained
the same, with the Author of the Prolegomena about the Hebrew punctation, and
the various readings, and that himself acknowledges the main thing from which
perverse and wicked men draw their conclusions, (viz. the variety of readings
in the Hebrew and Greek Copies) he would have labored to free those Worthies
from such imputations, and have showed, that no such consectaries could be
logically and rationally deduced from such Premises, as indeed they cannot,
whereas we see in him the clean contrary; for he takes part with Papists,
Atheists, Antiscripturists, etc. and pleads their cause, and labors to prove,
even from such Premises as himself cannot deny, that those wretched
consequences do necessarily follow; which shows plainly, how he was blinded
with Prejudice and Passion, and how far he was from that candor and freedom
from disquieting affections, and from the love of truth, which he pretends to.

V. And though it had been the hard hap of the Prolegomena and Appendix to come
out when his Treatise was ready to be printed, which has procured all this
trouble to himself and the Readers; yet, was there such a necessity of the
publishing his Treatise? Diverse persons of great Learning and Judgment, think
his pains might very well have been spared, and that instead of proving the
Divine Authority of the Scripture, he has much weakened it, and what in him
lies, shaken the very foundation of Religion; while he rejects that main
Argument to prove the Scriptures to be from God, page 103, 104. viz. the
Miracles wrought by Moses and Christ, the Prophets and Apostles to confirm
their doctrine, brought down to us by the undoubted testimony and universal
tradition of the Church of Christ, the most infallible and greatest of all
humane testimonies, and next to that which is immediately Divine, and sticks not
to affirm, that the Alcoran, may, vie miracles and traditions with the
Scipture, p. 105. and that there is no more reason to believe those who have
received that tradition, and plead they have it, before and against them who
profess they have no such report delivered them from their forefathers, p.
108. nor have we more inducement to give credit to their assertions, then to a
like number of men holding out a Tradition utterly to the contrary, that is,
why we should believe the testimony of the whole Christian Church in this
point, before the testimony of Jews, Pagans, and Mahumetanes, to the contrary,
p. 110. And whilst he grounds all upon the inward light of the Scripture it
self, which though it serve to confirm the faith of believers, yet in the
Question, how we come to know the Scriptures to be from God, we know, is by
great and Learned Protestant Divines, not allowed as a convincing argument in
this case; I submit it to the judgment of all men of common reason and
judgment, whether here be not a fair pretense for Atheists and sanaticall
Antiscripturists to reject the Scripture, when they find the argument from the
miracles and universal tradition rejected by some, and that of the inward
light of the Scripture (which is here said to be all the Divine evidence that
God is willing to grant us, or can be granted us, or is any way needful for
us, p. 34. and that there is no need of any further witness or testimony) p.
56. not admitted as sufficient by others; and whether they may not with more
color deduce their conclusions against the Scriptures from these assertions of
his, then from any thing in the Prolegomena or Appendix? For, where they find
him affirming, that there is no way to know the Scriptures to be from God, but
its own light, and find this denied by Learned Divines of all sides, they have
some color to conclude, that there is no way at all to prove their Divine
Original, and so to reject them.

VI. Again, he writes, p. 159. and 160. That in all these things (it is known
to all men) there is no new Opinion coined or maintained by the Prefacer to
these Bibles, but that all have been maintained by sundry Learned men, and
that, if they had been kept in men's private writings, he should not have
thought himself, or his discourse concerned in them; but because they are laid
as the foundation of the usefulness of the Bibl. Polygl. and because, of the
authority which they may gain thereby; and because (as p. 152.) these private
Opinions, (as he calls them) are imposed with too much advantage on the minds
of men, by their constant neighborhood unto Canonical truth, therefore he
must needs appear against them. Here he speaks plainly, what was the true cause
of these Considerations. The Biblia Polyglotta are the Butt against which his
Arrows are aimed, and these Opinions about the Hebrew punctation, and various
Readings, had not been considered nor meddled with, but for that Work to which
they were adjoined, which, because it was always maligned, by himself and some
others of his party, therefore he took occasion to quarrel with these matters,
that so he might bring the more obloquie upon the whole, and make it the more
suspected among the Vulgar.

VII. But whereas he makes them private Opinions, which now being joined with a
public Work, may pretend to public Authority, he is much deceived; or else
seeks to deceive his credulous Reader: for how can they be private, or new
Opinions which have been publicly asserted in Print, before either of us were
born, and have been, and are still maintained by the chiefest and Learned
Divines in Europe, and the best skilled in Oriental Learning that have been,
or are at this day in the Christian World? Such as we have already mentioned,
Cap. 1. Sect. 7. Can these Opinions be counted private, which have been, and
are publicly asserted by men of such eminent worth? or can their being
mentioned before the Biblia Polyglotta, procure them more credit and esteem,
then the venerable Names of such Great and Learned men, with whom the Publisher
of this Bible, and those that assisted him, do not think themselves fit to be
named. And if they might by these and others be defended in Print, and disputed
among Learned men, why might they not be mentioned here? and why might not the
Publisher deliver his opinion in these things, as well as others, especially
writing with that moderation he uses, not magisterially imposing a belief upon
any, but leaving every one to his own liberty, only showing his reasons, why
he judges one opinion more probable then another?

VIII. He conceives he had a fit occasion to speak of these things in the
Prolegomena to this Work, for seeing the Hebrew Text is the foundation of the
whole Fabric, for the Old Testament, what was more proper then to speak of the
Hebrew Tongue, the antiquity, use, excellency, and preservation of it; how the
Text came to be pointed, what the Keri and Ketib are, which appear in most
Hebrew Bibles, and because there are various Readings, both of the Old and New
Testament, noted in most Editions, therefore to speak of various Readings,
whence they came, out of what Copies, and how to be gathered, and to add to
what others have done, out of some ancient and choice MSS. or printed Copies,
and to show that the certainty and authority of Scripture, with the integrity
of the Original Texts, is not impeached or prejudiced thereby, which he
asserts upon such foundations as will hold, and not upon sandy grounds, as his
Adversary does, which will not stand, not argumentis non cogentibus, by which
the truth is more prejudiced than by confessing the invalidity of them; for
when men see the weakness of them, they think we have no better to rely upon,
and so begin to question and doubt the truth of all.

IX. As for his fears and jealousies, I say, that when they are groundless,
they are not to be regarded, and that they are so, shall hereafter appear; we
have sad experience of the fruits of causeless fears and jealousies, which the
more unjust they are, the more violent usually they are, and less capable of
satisfaction. It has been, and is usual with some, who that they may create
fears in the credulous ignorant multitude, and raise clamours against others,
pretend great fears of that which they themselves no more fear then the falling
of the skies, and to cry out, Templum Domini, when they scarce believe Dominum
Templi, nor did the care of the Temple ever enter into their hearts, only by
this artifice they drive on their own Designs, and expose their adversaries to
popular hatred. Those that read the Prolegomena (as he says he has done)
without prejudice, may find satisfaction enough to prevent all fears and
jealousies: As for those that with the Spider suck poison out of the sweetest
flowers from which the Be gets honey, I shall not trouble my self to give them
any more satisfaction, they shall bear their own guilt; I know the difference
between Scandalum datum, and acceptum, and shall say of such, as Christ did of
the Pharisees that were offended at his Doctrine, Let them alone, they are
blind, leaders of the blind. Truth must not be concealed, though weak men be
offended at it, or wicked men wrest it to their own hurt.

X. But he says further, p. 150. What is there that could possibly infect him
with this leaven, viz. of envy or malice; for, first, he neither professes any
deep skill in the learning used in this Work, nor is ever like to be engaged in
any thing that should be set up in competition with it: nor secondly, does he
know the Authors and Contrivers of the Work, nor did he ever know that there
was such a person as the chief Author of this Edition but by it; nor, thirdly,
shall he fail upon all occasions, to commend the usefulness of the Work. With
the learning, pains, and diligence of those worthy persons that brought it
forth. To all which I answer, First, for his skill in this kind of Learning, I
shall say nothing, but leave others to judge to whom he is better known then to
my self, he is one whom I never saw, nor, till of late years, ever heard of,
and till now, he was, mihi nec beneficio nec male ficio notus, but the less
his skill is in this kind of learning, I think the less will his censure be
regarded among wisemen, and I shall have the less cause to fear it. The
Apostle taxes some who would be teachers of the law, not knowing what they
said, or whereof they affirmed: I will not apply this to our Author, but
himself tells us, p. 324. that it is the way of Sciolists when they have
obtained a little skill in any language or science to persuade the world, that
all worth lies therein. Whether this may agree to himself or no, I will not
determine, but leave every man to judge as he sees cause, but sure I am, and
experience makes it good, that those who have attained a little smattering
knowledge in any Science, especially in the Hebrew, are usually more puffed up
with that little umbratill knowledge, though weak men otherwise, and of little
judgment in any real or rational learning, then those who have attained a
far greater measure, and that they are more apt to censure and condemn others.
I have known some Citizens, yea women in London, who having learned to read
Hebrew, were so conceited of themselves, that they have despised the ablest
Divines about the City, and have almost doubted of the salvation of all persons
that could not read Hebrew; and I remember that Schickard, a very learned
Hebrician tells us, that it is the guise of many, as soon as they understand
three words of Hebrew, presently they are so conceited of their own abilities,
that they betake themselves to the writing of Grammars, and condemns himself
for his folly in that kind when he was but a novice, attemptting that of which
he was afterward ashamed; He was then also as earnest a Patron of the Antiquity
of Hebrew points, as our Author can be, yet afterward when he came to riper
judgment, he could not believe that any learned man could in good earnest
maintain that opinion, but that some did it merely to show their wit. This is
therefore no argument of our Adversaries freedom from sinister ends and
motives, that his skill is not great in the languages, but rather proves the
contrary, especially when he knows that men of the greatest eminency in this
learning that the world ever had or has at present, have said the same with
the Author of the Prolegomena, and that the chiefest of our own Nation in that
learning have had some hand in, or have at least approved this Edition, and
those things which he so much mislikes. It might have been fit for him, and no
way unbecoming his greatness to have forborne a while, and waited to see what
those who are known to be of great judgment in these matters, of which this
Nation has more then ever heretofore, would have said, and what their
judgment had been, then for him, I (who I think will not think himself fit to
be paralleled with many) presently to engage with such violence and to condemn
opinions, which as appears by his Discourse, he either did not thoroughly weigh,
or does not fu^ly understand. But he that looks through a green glass, judges
every thing green which he sees, when only that is green through which he
looks.

XI. As for his not knowing the authors and contrivers of the work. Though they
were not known to him, yet they were known to be Sons of the Church of England,
and such as have not Apostatized from their former profession, either by
Heresy or Schism.

XII. For his commending the Work, and the Authors of it, which he promises
upon all occasions; his whole Discourse shows what his commendations are, when
he charges the Work with setting up Atheism, Popery, phanatical
Antiscripturisme, Mahumetanisme, p. 147. with bringing in utter uncertainty in
and about all sacred truth, Epist. p. 25. so that nothing remains, but that we
must either turn Papists or Atheists. When he inveighs against all the ancient
translations, as set up in competitions with the Text, Epist. p. 9. to correct
the word of God, 180. to correct the Scripture, p. 344. That they will be found
upon trial to be such as many will be ready to question the foundation of all.
p. 206. when he tells us, of such dreadful distempers as will prove mortal to
the sacred truth of the Scriptures, p. 314. of horrible and outrageous violence
offered to the sacred Hebrew verity, p. 315. and rather wishes that this and
all other works of this nature were out of the world, than one of these should
be admitted. p. 221. Is this to commend the worth and usefulness of it, and
the pains of the contrivers? what more bitter reviling speeches could be
uttered against the most profane Atheistical Pamphlets which this age has
produced against Hobs his Leviathan, and the like? What is this but to cast
dirt in ones face, and yet to persuade him that he did it not to disgrace him.
Bern. in Cant. 2. speaks of the slanderer, that when he intends the most
disgrace against any, begins first to commend him, which kind of slander is
says he tanto plausibilior, quanto creditur ab iis qui audiunt, cord invito,
and condolentis affectu proferri, when it serves but as a foyl to what follows,
and as a shoeing horn to draw on some disgraceful aspersion the better, and
make the crime be thought the greater, Saint Cyprian Epist. 2. compares such to
wrastlers, qui antagonistas luctantes altius tollunt, quo vehementius illidant,
who lift their antagonist the higher, that they may give him the greater fall.
And therefore S. Hierome ad Pammach. and Ocean. says, that such commendation
is honorifica contumelia, an honorable reproach. It is callidum nocendi
artificium, as another calls it, a crafty kind of artifi^e to do mischief. In
the mean time it is some comfort when ne inimici quidem vituperare possunt,
nisi simul laudent, as Plin. lib. 3. Ep. 12. when our very enemies, must make
our praises a preface to their slanders. If these be his commendations, let him
keep them to himself.

XIII. But he says, p. 161. that these consequences are not charged upon the
Workmen, but upon the Work. But I say, if upon the Work then upon the Workmen.
The Work and the Workmen are so nearly related, that what is said against the
one must of necessity reflect upon the other. If one should publish in Print,
that himself in his Treatise, by rejecting what is by all Christians
acknowledged for a main ground of their believing the Scriptures to be from
God, viz. miracles, and the uninterrupted Tradition of the Church, by equalling
the Tradition of the Mahumetan^, for their Alcoran, with the tradition of the
Church for the Scriptures, and laying all upon the light and power of the word
it self, does thereby make way for Atheists, and phanatick persons, etc. and
should think to salve all with this distinction, that he charges not the
Author, but the Book with these inferences, would not he think himself
concerned in the Charge, and the distinction to be a mere mockery?

XIV. The truth therefore is, whatsoever is by him pretended, and so it is
generally known and believed by all that know either him or those that had a
hand in publishing this Work, That his quarrel is chiefly with the persons, and
with the Work for their sakes, and that he therefore seeks to depresse the
worth of the Book, because such men have had the honor to bring it forth.
Whereas had himself and those of his judgment been the Publishers, it would
have been free from all these imputations, and cried up as the greatest
monument of Religion and learning; which any age has produced. Nor is it
unlike, but that there was some mixture of ambition with envy, which pricked
him forward, he thought to raise his own credit upon the ruin of this Work,
and thereby to gain some reputation amongst his disciples, that so from the
luster of this Work he might be better known and admired. Nothing is more
evident then that he has studiously labored to scrape together, whatsoever
might with any color be objected against it, and when he wanted real grounds
for his calumnies, to feign whatsoever he thought might render either it or the
Publisher obnoxious to popular hatred, so that whatever motives he had, it
could not be the love of the truth that stirred him up.

XV. Whatsoever his ends or aims were, the Work has had approbation from all
ranks of men both at home and abroad, who are best able to judge of it, so that
it need not fear his censures, but will remain impregnable against the assaults
and batteries of all malignant spirits. If this tree had not born good fruit,
there had been no stones thrown at it, for as Plut. ubi nullum lumen, ibi nulla
umbra, ubi nulla felicitas ibi nulla invidia. I could produce the judgment of
the best learned in Europe, expressed by several letters out of France, Germany,
the low Countries, Flanders, Italy and other places concerning this work, that
one styles it opus plusquam Regium, another opus Divinum, another opus
Heroicum, etc. but I will content my self at this time with the testimony of D.
Buxtorfe now Hebrew Professor at Basil, a man inferior to none for his great
skill in Hebrew learning, and one with whom for diverse years I have had
intercourse by letters, and fair correspondence, notwithstanding our difference
in judgment about the Hebrew punctation, etc. one whose testimony our
adversary cannot suspect. Thus he writes in one of his Letters: Ad opus vestrum
Biblicum quod attinet, quotquot vident mirantur, nihil in hoc genere simile,
ars Typographica hactenus excudit -- Nitida sunt omnia, and quantum
deprehendere possum correcta. Ita captus sum sanctissimi pariter and
elegantissimi operis aspectu, ut si quid ad illud exornandum consilii and
auxilii confer possum, id non solum prompte sim facturus, sed honori quoque
mihi ducturus. In another, of March, 28. 1658. St. N. Quanta cum voluptate ego
sanctissimos and incredibiles vestros labores inspexerim quanto cum gaudio eos
exceperim, illi testabuntur, quibus ego opus vestrum ostendi and commendavi,
etc. This, and more to his purpose, writes this great Hebrician, whose
judgment is enough in the opinion of all knowing men to preponderate, all the
light and frivolous cavils of many Considerators.

CHAP. III.
I. The particulars of the Charge many, the principal are about various
Readings, and the Hebrew points. II. The general Charge of depressing the
esteem of the Hebrew Copies proved false. III. Ten particular Charges in the
Considerations, proved to be false, the words of the Prolegomena set opposite
to them. The Prolegomena affirm the direct contrary to what is charged. The
Adversaries candor and love of the truth, etc.

I. WE come now to the particular Charges and Criminations of the Considerator.
We find them several times mustered up: first in the Epistle, p. 9. then in
the Consideration, page 157, 158. and again, p. 205, 206. in all which places,
though many particulars are enumerated to make the greater show, yet in his
Discourse, he chiefly insists upon two things, viz. The various readings of the
Original Texts, and the novelty of the Hebrew punctation, and in the same
Epist. p. 25. he reduces all to those two heads from which he deduces the
uncertainty of the Scriptures, The corruption of the Originalls, and those
other consequences which he would fasten upon the Biblia Polyglotta. For our
more orderly proceeding, we shall first lay down the several particulars
charged upon the Prolegomena, as they are exhibited in the Considerations, and
then what it is which is asserted or maintained in the Prolegomena, and after we
shall proceed to the examination of the particulars.

II. But before we enter upon the several heads, we must consider one general
Charge, mentioned, p. 205 and which includes most of the rest, viz. That
excepting that figment of the Jews corrupting the Bible, out of hatred to the
Christians, and the Thesis prefering this or that translation in general above
the original, there is no Opinion that he knows of, that was ever ventilated
among Christians, tending to the depression of the Worth, or impairing the
esteem of the Hebrew Copies, which is not directly, or by just consequence,
owned in these Prolegomina. This will appear to be most untrue in the
severalls, by him mentioned, when we shall come to them, where we shall make it
appear, that the Hebrew Copies are not at all impeached by any thing maintained
in the Prolegomena, unless he mean that some Cabalisticall mysteres, (or
rather fopperies) from whence strange observations are drawn, to the depraving
and perverting of the Scripture, and exposing the Hebrew Text to scorn and
contempt are not owned. Such Rabbinicall fancies taken up by some Christians,
it is true, are rejected and condemned, for the Publisher does not believe,
that the esteem and worth of the Hebrew Text is advanced by any untruth, or by
the vain and groundless conceits of such idle pretenders, but rather impaired
and lessened; but as for the due honor and integrity of the Original Texts,
and preserving the true esteem of them to Posterity, he doubts not, but that it
will be acknowledged by all unprejudiced persons, that he has done more then
has been hitherto done by any.

III. After this general Calumny, our Author instances in diverse particulars
to make good his general Charge, which are reckoned up in diverse places: In
the Epist. page 9. and 25. afterward in the Considerations, p. 151. 158, etc.
and again, p 205, 206. and in diverse other places. These we shall collect as
they are scattered and dispersed in these Considerations, and that the truth or
falsehood of them may the better appear, we shall withal set down the several
tenets, as they are asserted in the Prolegomena, parallel with them.

Considerations:
1. That the Original Copies of the Scripture are corrupt, yea, have gross
corruptions in them, so that they are no ground for faith to rest upon, p. 147,
158, 159, 206, 314, 345, and Epist. p. 9. 10, 21.

2. That there were other Copies of the Original Hebrew and Greek, differing
from those we now enjoy, which are quite lost, p. 206. 311, 312. Epist. p. 10.

3. That the same sat has attended the Scripture in its transcription, as
has done other Books; Gods providence watching no more over this, then other
Books, p. 173. 206.

4. That it is lawful to collect various readings, and to correct the text,
upon mere conjectures, p. 151. and 206.

5 That the Keri and Keti^ are various readings, and gathered by some Judaicall
Rabbis out of ancient Copies, partly their creticall amendments, or
conjectures, p. 157. 206.

6. That the end of printing ancient translations in this Bible, is by them, to
correct the Original Text, though there be no diversity in the Copies, p. 158.
206. 311. 314. Epist. p. 21. 25. to set them in competition with the text, p.
174. 311. 315. Ep. p. 9. to correct the word of God. p. 180. to correct the
Scripture, p. 344.

7. That the Hebrew points or vowells and accents, are a novel invention of
some Judaicall Rabbis, about 500. or 600. years after the giving out of the
Gospel, p. 157. Epist. p. 9.

8. That the vowels and accents are the arbitrary invention of the Masorites,
who fixed them to the text as they pleased, p. 208. c. 4, in the Contents, and
p. 117, 218

9. That it is lawful for us to change the vowells and accents at our
pleasure, p. 250. and p. 217. 218. 258.

10. That the whole credit of our reading and interpretation of Sripture, as
far as regulated by the present punctation, depends only on the faithfulness
and skill of those Jews, whose invention this work is asserted to be, p. 157.

Prolegomena.
1. That the Original texts are not corrupted either by Jews or others, either
bebefore Christ, or since, but are pure, entire, authentic, and of supreme
Authority in all matters of faith, and the rule whereby to try all
Translations, Proleg. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. proved at large.

2. That the Copies we now have, are the true transcripts of the (...) of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the very same, proved, Prolegom. 7. Sect. 16.

3. That the Scripture has been subject to casual mistakes of Transcribers
and Printers, in small matters, of no moment, which by comparing of other
Copies, and by other means, may be rectified and amended, and that in this it
has had the same fate with other books often transcribed; yet the special
care and providence of God has so watched over it, that in all things which
concern faith and good life, and in all matters of weight and moment, no error
has befallen it; and that his special providence will preserve it entire
against all endeavor of Heretics or others to the end of the world, Prolegom.
6. Sect. 1. 3, Proleg. 7. Sect 12. 15. Praef. p. 1.

4. That to collect various readings by mere conjectures, (when there is no
difference in the Copies or Translations) is not safe. It would open a window
for busy wits to deprave the Scripture, and to turn it into any sense, etc.
Proleg. 6. Sect. 12.

5. That the Keri and Ketib, are not critical amendments, or conjectures of
the Rabbis, but various Readings, gathered out of Ancient Copies, Proleg. 8
Sect. 25.

6. The end of these ancient Translations is, First, they served as Pipes to
convey those living Waters from the fountains to particular Nations. Secondly,
To confirm our faith, by their consent and harmony among themselves, and with
the Original Texts in all matters of moment. Thirdly, to bear witness to the
purity and integrity of the Original Texts, by their consent and agreement
therewith, and to prevent all future corruption by Sectaries, Heretics, or
negligence of Scribes. Fourthly, To explain the true sense and meaning of the
Text, as it was understood in the first and purest times, etc. Proleg. 5. Sect.
1. 2, 3.

7. That the Hebrew Tongue consists of vowels and consonants, and always had
vowels, as all other Languages have, viz. (...) to which some add (...) and
(...) all which anciently by Joseph. St. Hierom. Orig. etc. were called vowels,
and served for vowels, as in other Eastern Tongues: The Sir. Chald. Arab. etc.
By their 22. Letters of which these are part, the Hebrews might, and did
express all their words, as well as all other nations, who had their letters
and alphabets, with the names and order of them from the Hebrew long before the
invention of points. They had also the accents, though not expressed by any
points, as other Languages, Sir. Arab. Latin, English, etc. which have accents
observed in pronuntiation, though not fixed by notes to every syllable, Proleg.
3. Sect. 49 47. 53.

8. That the Masorites, when they ivented the Modern points, (that is, the
forms or figures now used) did not invent any new sounds or pronunciation, nor
pointed the Text at their pleasure, but according to the received reading then
in use, to facilitate the reading, and take away all ambiguity. This is proved,
Proleg. 3. Sect. 51. according to that reading which was derived to them from
the sacred Penmen, Sect. 53.

9. Though the punctation by the invention of the Masorites, Et humani juris,
quoad apices and figuras, yet that which is signified by the points, viz. the
sound and sense of the words is altogether of Divine authority, and
acknowledges God only for its Author, and ought not to be altered at any man's
pleasure, Prolegomena 3. Section 51.

10. That our reading depends not upon the Masorites, nor is it therefore true,
because it is from them, but because they express in their punctation the true
sense of the Holy Ghost, which was dictated to the holy Penmen, and by them
committed to writing, and preserved, both by Jews and Christians, ibid. Proleg.
3. Sect. 51.

By these particulars, we see the candor of the Adversary, and how much the
love of the truth, (as he says, p. 155.) prevailed with him, when in relating
the Opinions in the Prolegomena, almost every thing is perverted or falsified;
The Prolegomena asserting the clean contrary in most things to what he would
impose upon them, which is an evident sign of a bad Cause; for as the Poet
said, Eurip.

(...)
(...).
The truth is sound, her words are plain,
Falsehood is sick, she needs must feign.
Besides these, there are diverse other things objected against the various
readings exhibited in the Appendix, against collecting various Readings out of
Translations, (though no such be gathered in the Appendix) about the old Hebrew
Character, the Knowledge of the Hebrew drawn from the Translation of the
Seventy, against the several Translations Printed in this Edition of the
Bible, His Consequences on the behalf of Atheists, Papists, etc. in some of
which there is something of truth mixed with many untruths and calumnies, as
shall appear when we come to handle each by it self.

CHAP. IV.
I. The first and main Charge, That the Original Text has gross corruptions.
II Not any words brought out of the Prolegomena to prove this, but Consequences
of his own. The Prolegomena maintain expressly, That the Originalls are not
corrupt, either by Jews or others, either before or since Christ. That casual
mistakes may happen by negligence in matters of no moment, yet there are means
to rectify and amend them when discovered. III. The Prolegomena falsified*
various Readings acknowledged by all, proved out of Bishop Usher, Buxtorf. etc.
Granted by the Adversary often, yet sometimes denied in the Hebrew. VI. Wherein
the Author of the Considerations, and the Author of the Prolegomena differ. The
Adversary calls all various Readings corruptions, and so makes the Originalls
to be corrupt. Various Readings, not properly corruptions proved out of
Buxtorf. VII, VIII. His Arguments against various Readings IX. Answered. They
prove only no wilful corruptions. X. The Talmud sometimes, reads otherwise
then in our Copies, proved by Buxtorf. Of our Saviors silence about these
things. XI. The care of the Church in preserving the Copies of the Bible. XII.
XIII. Whether there be no means of rectifying any error crept in, but only by
revelation. That all Copies in public use, agree in all saving truth revealed,
and in all matters historical, prophetical, etc. of any weight, that other
smaller differences may be rectified. XIV. All revealed truth comes under our
care. XV. No one Copy can pretend to be a standard for all others. No vulgar
Copy was in possession over all the world before Printing or since. XVI. The
uncertainty of the Adversaries rule, viz. That every tittle of revealed truth,
is in one Copy or other. Impossible to examine all the Copies in the world.

I. WE shall begin first with the main Charge, viz. That the Original Texts
are corrupted, yea have gross corruptions befallen them. This he propounds
sometimes doubtfully, p 147. He says, the various Readings at the first view
seem to intimate that corruptions have befallen the Originalls, and p. 159.
This voluminous bulk of various lections, as nakedly exhibited, seems
sufficient to beget scruples and doubts about the preservation of the Scripture
by the care and providence of God. Now if they do only intimate, and seem to
intimate corruptions, and only seem sufficient to beget scruples, then they do
not certainly infer any such Charge, and if they seem so, only at the first
view, then upon a further view, it may be that they will not seem to intimate
corruptions. But though he speak thus modestly sometime, yet in other places he
charges home. p. 158. It is declared (in the Prolegomena) that when gross
faults or corruptions are befallen the Originalls, men may by their faculty of
critical conjectures amend them and restore the native lections that were
lost. p. 206. That where gross faults are crept into the Hebrew Text, men may
by their own conjectures find out various Readings, etc. Epist. p. 21. Their
Principle is, that there are sundry corruptions crept into the Originalls, etc.
and this receives countenance from these Prolegomena: So p. 311. 325. and in
many other places he disputes against this Position, as asserted in the Biblia
Polyglotta, That the Original Texts are corrupted.

II. But how is this Charge proved? Here we may observe, that neither in this
nor any other of his Charges does he relate any of the words of the
Prolegomena, which if he had done, the falsehood had been discovered, but
supposing that the ordinary Reader would not trouble himself to look into the
Prolegomena, but take all upon his word, he substitutes in the place of his
Adversaries opinion, some of his own consectaries, which to him seemed to
follow upon it, which he falls upon with great violence, which kind of dealing
is very unjust, to charge an Adversary with consequences, as his proper tenets,
when he denies such consequences, especially, when as he directly and not by
consequence affirms, and maintains the contrary to what is charged, yet this is
our case here. What the Author of the Prolegomena delivered concerning the
purity and authority of the Original Texts, is to be seen Proleg. 7. de
Textuum Originalium integritate and auctoritate, and Proleg. 6. de variis
lectionibus, whither I must refer the Reader for full satisfaction. The sum is
this (as has been touched in part already). 1. That the Hebrew Text is not
corrupted by the Jews either before or after Christ. This is proved by sundry
Reasons, and amongst others by these, That is were against the providence of
God to permit the Scriptures to be corrupted, and against the fidelity of the
Church, to whose care the sacred Oracles are committed. That the Jews neither
did, nor could falsify the Hebrew Text, but that the fraud would have been
presently discovered. That it is incredible (as Saint Augustine says, De
Civit. l. 13. c. 13. ipsos voluisse codicibus suis eripere veritatem, ut nobis
eriperent auctoritatem, vel in totum orbem dispersos potuisse in hoc conspirare
nullo contradicente. This is at large proved Proleg. 6. sect. 1. 12. and the
Arguments to the contrary answered. 2. That neither the Hebrew nor Greek Texts
of the Old or New Testament are corrupted by Heretics or others, but that they
remain pure and entire, and that they always were and still are the authentic
rule in all matters of faith and Religion, and that by them all, translations
are to be tried and examined, to which end many arguments are produced, among
others, That God at the first delivered to the Church, not Translations, but
Original Texts, and those pure and free from all corruption, and therefore
those that say they are corrupt must prove them so to be, and show when and how
they came to be corrupted, and how they came to lose that authority which they
once had, otherwise they are to be presumed to be pure and authentic, as being
in possession of their authority: Nor can any general corruption be proved
from a few particular instances, but only the casual errors of the
Transcribers, which may well consist with the purity of the fountains. Proleg.
7. Sect. 15, 16. 18. 22, 23. etc. 3. That though by the negligence or
inadvertency of Transcribers some casual mistakes or involuntary errors may
creep into the Text, from whence various Readings have risen both in the Old
and New Testament* yet the Original Text romans pure and authentic because
those varieties are not in matters of any moment, whereby any point of faith or
salvation is prejudiced in the least, nor are there means wanting whereby such
erros may be amended, and the true Reading established. That it was not
possible that any error should have risen in matters of weight, but it would
presently have been discovered, there being so many thousands of Copies
dispersed all the world over, which were daily read, expounded and considered
of, and every word weighed and examined, either in public or private by
learned men and others in all ages, who esteemed these books as the Records of
their salvation, and the grand Charter of their inheritance in heaven; And for
other mistakes, there are means to rectify them when they are discovered, as
the Analogy of faith, the Writings and Comments of the Ancients, Collation of
ancient Copies, Consulting ancient Translations, especially the Scripture it
self, the Comparing of parallel places, considering Antecedents and
consequents, etc That these various Readings seldom change the sense, or if
they do, yet both are agreeable to the Analogy of faith, and if,
notwithstanding these means, both Readings seem equally balanced, there can be
no danger, to follow which we will. These things are handled, Proleg. 6. Sect.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. and Proleg. 7. Sect. 15, 16, etc.

III. By this it appears what the Author of the Prolegomena holds about the
purity and authority of the Original Texts. Now seeing he is charged to
deliver the contrary, it may well be expected, that evident proof be brought to
show that he contradicts himself, and what proof is here brought? No words as I
told you before are alleged, only p. 158. he quotes in the Marg. Proleg. 7.
Sect. 12. and Proleg. 6. Sect. 12. In both which places there is not one word
of corruptions in the Original Text, much less of gross corruptions, or of
correcting them by men's own conjectures, unless errata and mendae leviores
signify gross corruptions, and quae aliorum codicum and interpretum
collatione, aliisque mediis (de quibus supra) tolli and emendari possunt) do
signify correcting by men's own conjectures. Its said indeed, Prole. 6. Sect.
12 that various readings may in some cases be gathered out of ancient
Translations, but that this does not infer the corruption of the present Copies
shall be showed when we come to that particular In the mean time, the reader
may please to take notice that in that other place (nor indeed any where else)
there is not one word of corruptions, nor more said then what all men that will
believe their eyes have said before, That there have been casual mistakes by
Transcribers in matters of no concernment, or that there are various Readings
in the Hebrew and Greek Texts. This is proved by the general consent of all,
and by sundry instances, and is by our Author frequently confessed, as we shall
see anon.

IV. For my part I do not know any at this day that is of another opinion. The
greatest Patrons of the purity of the Hebrew Text grant it without any scruple.
The Reverend and learned Usher, Epist. ad Capel. p. 21. writes thus, Sententia
mea haec perpetua fuit, Heb. vet. Test. codicem scribarum erroribus non minus
obnoxium esse quam novi codicem and omnes alios libros, etc* Buxtorf. d^ punct.
antiq. part. ^. c 16. and frequently in his vindiciae Textus Hebr. he affirms
the same. Non dicam quod Sanctus P^gninus olim in Praef Gram suae scripsit and
dixit, Hebraica volumina, nec in una dictione corrupta reperies, neque enim
existimo talia esse, ut in nullo particulari punctulo, apiculo, aut litera a
primis Mosis and Prophetarum autographis apographum unquam decesserint, aut
nullum ^mnino vitium vel levissimum in ea irrep erit, nam ne ipsi quidem Judaei
hoc asserunt, qui and antiquitus jam exemplaria corrupta, sed ab Esd^a iterum
correcta, and restituta fuisse and posterioribus temporibus cum inter celebres
auctores tum inter exemplaria varia dissensiones and discrepantes quasaam
lectiones not^^t. Tales sunt praeter notas (...) Keri uketif, dissensiones de
quarund^m vocum lectione inter Judaeos Oriental^^ and Occidentales, and inter
Ben Ascher and Ben Naphtali. sic memorant aliquando nec dissimula^t varietates
nonnullas ex libris quibusdam MSS. celeherimis and magnae auctoritatis, ut E.
g. librorum Hierosolymitanorum, Babylonicorum, Hispaniensium, Ex^mplar^^
Hill^l^ani, Pentateu^^^ cujusdam Hiericuntini, Sinaitici etc. mentionem etiam
faciunt punctat^rum* cum in genere, tum nominatim quorundam in specie. R. Moses
Londinates* Rabbi Gersom Parisiensis, etc. and dicunt quod unus sen liber seu
punctator vocem hanc sio, alius aliter punctet, monuerunt etiam librorum
correctorum, and per consequens minus correctorum Redarguunt etiam saepe
exemplaria quaedam diserte erroris, sed an p^opter istas varietates in dubium
vocant auctor^t ^^em totius codicis Hebraici, and omnium Apographorum? aut an
propterea aliqua cum sp^cie, aut aliquo cum fundamento id fieri po^uit?
Nequa^am.

V. Here we see these two learned Patrons of the purity of the Hebrew Text,
affirm as much as is said in the Prolegomena: with them concur all others that
handle this Argument, for though there have been two or three, as Polanus and
Pagnine, and some others that have thought the Jewish Scribes so privileged,
as never to have erred in the least, yet this fancy is generally now exploded
by all. Nor shall I need to bring any more witnesses, when the Au^hor of these
Considerations frequently confesses the same. For though sometimes when he was
in have, as p 180. or in passion, he denies any various Readings in the Hebrew
Tex^ but grants them in the New Testament, as Epist. p. 27. Why I pray is this
so ridiculous? to grant that there are corruptions and various Readings in the
Greek and Latin Copies of the Scripture, but deny it as to the Hebrew) it is
founded on no less ^table bottom then this experience, that whereas we
evidently find various lections in the Greek Copies which we enjoy, and so
grant that which ocular inspection evinces to be true, yet they are none of
them able to show out of any Copies yet extant in the world, or that they can
make appear ever to have been extant; that ever there were any such various
lections in the Originalls of the old Testament: yet in other places
(contradicting himself, which is not unusual) he frequently grants various
Readings both in the Old and New, p. 13. It is no doubt, but that in the Copies
we now enjoy of the old Testament there are diverse Readings. The Keri and
Ketib the various lections of Ben Ascher and Ben Naphtali, of the Eastern and
Western Jews, which we have collected at the end of the Bible evince it p. 178.
Notwithstanding we grant that there are, and have been various lections in the
old Testament and the new. The Keri and Ketib, the various Readings of Ben
Ascher, and Ben Naphtali, the Oriental and Occidentall Jews: And if any other
can be gathered, or shall hereafter out of any ancient Copies of credit and
esteem, where no mistake can be discovered as their cause, they des^rve to be
considered. p. 190. That there are in some Copies of the New Testament, and
those some of them of good antiquity diverse Readings in things or words of
less importance is acknowledged. Again p. 296. It is known it is granted that
failinos have been among them (the Transcribers) and that various Readings are
from thence risen, and p* 191. That so many Transcriptions -- should be made
without some variation is (...), etc. Not to add more Epist p. 13. God by his
providence preserving the whole entire suffered this less variety to fall out
in or among the Copies we have, for the quickening and exercising of our
diligence in our search of his Word, which is the same which was said before,
Proleg. 7. Sect. 14. Potuit quidem Deus omens librorum sacrorum scriptores vel
Typographos (...) reddere, si ipsi ita visum fuisset sicut Apostolos and
Prophetas Spiritu suo gubernavit ut in eorum Autographis nullum esset erratum.
At sicut Ecclesiae Doctores omnes erroribus obnoxios esse voluit* licet primos
Ecclesiae proceres ab omni errore immunes reddidit, ut ^cilicetomnes excitaret
ad diligentem usum mediorum quibus veritas Divina conservari posset; sic
dicendum de exemplaribus Apographis, mendis and erroribus levioribus quae fidei
and moribus non officerent obnoxia esse voluit, ut diligentiam nostram in
codicum sacrorum puritate conservanda exerceret; nam vigilantibus and non
dormientibus Deus succurrit, and opera ac ministerio hominum uti decrevit ad
oraculorum suornm conservationem, etc.

VI. Thus we see how our Author affirms the same thing himself, which he finds
fault with in another, neither do I know wherein there is any real difference,
or more said in this matter by the Prolegomena, then is granted in the
Considerations, excepting only in that of collecting various Readings out of
some Translations, from which we shall show in its proper place, that no
corruption of the Original Texts can be inserred. And herein our Au^^hor
differs not only from the Au^hor of the Proleg but from all, or most Divines
and Expositors whatsoever. Those various Readings which the Proleg. affirm may
be sometimes gathered out of Translations, are of the same nature with these
which the Considerator grants may be gathered out of Original Copies, viz. of
no weight, containing nothing repugnant to the Analogy of faith, and further
are not asserted to be of equal authority or certainty with those that are
gathered out of the Hebrew and Greek Texts, and therefore the present reading
of the original Copies, ought not barely upon the different reading of a
Translation, be judged corrupt, as we shall show when we come to that Charge.
But if our Author will needs have all various Readings, though the difference
be never so small, to be corruptions of the Text, he may call them so, if he
pleases, I cannot hinder him; yet he might learn of Buxtorf. whose authority
he has no reason to question, to distinguish between various Readings and
Corruptions, properly so called, Vindic. textus Hebr. Part. 1. c. 4. p. 112.
Porro omnino, ut supra monui differentiam faciendam censeo inter corruptionem,
and variam lectionem; Corruption is properly a wilful falsifying upon design,
as where Heretics wilfully falsified some places of Scripture, which made
against their error, such were quickly discovered, and that no such are in our
Copies is acknowledged, but a various Reading is an involuntary error from
mistake, or inadvertencie, which is always in matters of little moment, and
therefore not so easily at first discerned; and having passed through many
Copies not observed, nor being contrary to the circumstances of the Text, or
repugnant to any other place of Scripture; so that it cannot be clearly proved,
which may be the mistake of the Scribe, it comes to be in the number of various
Readings, for the differences of any Copy, when they can be clearly proved to
have been at first errors of the Scribe, are not properly various Readings, as
is confessed in the Prolegom. 6. Sect. 6. But if our Adversary will needs call
various Readings corruptions, he will give me leave to call such corruptions
various Readings, and the rather, because I do no where in the Prolegomena
grant corruptions, but acknowledge only various Readings; and he must know
withal, that hereby he makes himself guilty of that crime which he would
fasten upon others, and by the Apostles sentence, Romans 2. 1. is unexcusable,
being condemned by himself, by granting the Original texts to be corrupt,
because he grants various Readings as well as others, and upon this account*
all Copies that are, or ever have been, (the Autographa of the sacred Penmen
only excepted) must be said to be corrupt, because no Scribes or Printers ever
had a privilege of not ^rring, and so all other failings, though never so
small, must make the Text corrupt: And as the Originalls, so all versions by
this reason must be corrupt, and so there will be no Scripture in the world,
but what is corrupt and uncertain, and by consequence, unfit for a ground of
faith or obedience; for, as Buxtorf. sait^, Vindi^. Part. 1. c. 4. p. 67.
Facile potuit error unius exemplaris corrigi ex alio meliore and tandem
emendatum satis exemplar cudi, licet non ad extremum utque apicem (istud enim
facile concedo, nec esse, nec fuisse* imo nec esse posse) And Vindic. Part. 2.
c. 12. p. 800. he says, The Scripture is so preserved, ut nulla, vel
paucissima alicujus momenti (...) in iis demonstrare possint. He that says,
there are paucissima alicujus momenti, grants that there are some that are of
moment* which is more then the Prolegomnea do any where affirm; and in the same
place he adds, Libros sacros a Mosis, Prophetarum* and Esdrae temporibus ad
nos usque, sine ulla lectionis varietate pervenisse, quia nullibi asserimus,
nulla etiam ratione probatio a nobis exigi potest; with these learned men
concur, Arnol. Bootius, a fierce defender of the Hebrew Text against Capellus
Epist. ad Vsserium, Sect. 64. and in his Vindic. Hebr cap. 23. p. 221. where he
affirms our present Copies to agree with the first (...), but excepts two
cases, Praeterquam in duobus casibus modo memoratis, ubi, vel de vitio, vel de
varia lectione apertissime constat.

VII. Our Adversary, notwithstanding, proceeds upon this supposed Charge, (of
which himself is most guilty) to prove that which is not denied, nay, which was
before proved to his hand, Prolegom. 7. where also the Arguments to the
contrary are answered. where the Reader, if he please, may find the chief
Arguments used in the Considerations, with some others by him omitted, to prove
that the ^riginall texts are not corrupted; so that I might spare both my own,
and the Readers further trouble, and say nothing more upon the point. But
because they are urged in the Considerations, to prove that there could be no
variations in any Copies, not in the least, and by consequence, that there can
be no various Readings, we will take a brief view of them.

VIII. Chap* 2. p. 168, 169 etc. -- 181. He objects, The special providence of
God. The care and fidelity of the Church, (not the Romish Synagogue) The care
of the first Writers giving out authentic Copies, which made it impossible for
them to be corrupted, either wilfully or by negligence. The public Copies
preserved in the Synagogues, and after in the Churches. The daily reading,
studying, and weighing every word. The weight of every letter in this Book,
which the Translators knew to be the Word of the great God etc The care of Ezra
and his companions. The care of the Masorites and Jewish Rabbis, giving an
account of every word and syllable, The prodigious things related of their
diligence, The consent of all Copies of the World, that not a word in the
Mishna, Gemara, or either Talmud is read otherwise then in our Copies, Our
Saviors silence not reproving the Jews on this account* when he spared them
not for their false glosses, which secures us, that there were no mistakes
voluntarily, or negligently brought into the text before his coming, The
watchfulness of the Jews and Christians over one another, etc. All which, as
they prove the Text not to be wilfully corrupted, and that not any errors of
consequence could creep in by negligence, to which end, the most of these
reasons are brought in the Prolegomena so they do not in the least prove, but
that by the negligence or inadvertency of transcribers some small mistakes of
no moment* might escape undiscerned, (and so are nothing at all to our Authors
purpose) of which we can have no cleerer argument, then the experience of all
ages that notwithstanding all the care and dili^^nce that could be used, yet
various Readings have been still observed in the best Copie^, which must needs
come at first from the negligence, or involuntary error of the Scribe, as is
confessed frequently by this Author himself, and by all others that write of
these things; so that to prove this, were to hold up a candle to the Sun. We
have more Copies of the Bible now, then ever were in any age, and more that
pretend to the knowledge or it: for, as S. Hierom. Epist. ad Paulinum,
Scripturae ars est quam omnes sibi vendicant. And Printing is a surer way to
prevent errors then transcribing by far, and yet have many errors daily escaped
in Printing the Bibles, and those undiscerned, many passing for current, many
years not observed, and some of them altering the sense.

IX. The multitude of Copies, public and private, and of all such that study
and read them, might rather prove the (...) IXX which was in m^re ^requent use
then the H^b^ew both among Jews and Christians, to have been free from all
error, then the Original Texts, and so the Vulgar Latin, the Syriack, and
other Translations, of which were many thousands more Copi^s, and those
studied, and read by thousands more then the Hebrew, yet I know our Author will
not grant that they were Translations free from all error, for he inveighs
against them all as most corrupt, Cap. ult. Our Printers also know as well as
the Transcribers did of old* the weight and worth of what they Print, and yet
we know they are not free from error. The care taken amongst the Jews, from
time to time, to get corrected Copies, by which others were examined, shows
that there were still Copies that needed correction; what needed Ben Ascher, or
Ben-Naphtali, or R. Hillel, or others, have taken such pains, and spent so many
years in the accurate writing of one Copy, if errors had not still crept into
other Copies?

X* That of the Mishna and Gemara, (which are the integrall parts of both the
Talmuds, the one being as the Text, and the other as the Comment, and yet
distinguished here from the Talmuds) that they never read one word otherwise
then they are in our Copies, is utterly void of truth, though repeated, p. 271.
witness Buxtorf. himself (one that I believe, is more versed in the Talmud then
either of us) Vindic l. 2. c 12. p. 808. Public dico and scribo, inveniri
quidem in Talmud. quod Gemara in quibu^dam locis dissentiat a Masora hoc est, a
lectione in nostris codicibus recepta, etc. This cannot stand with our
adversaries rash assertion, nor would have been granted by Buxtorf, to
Capellus, if it had not been certainly true. The Argument from our Saviors
silence was brought Proleg. 7. to prove that the Original Texts were not
corrupted before his coming, the end of whose coming was not to correct every
letter, or word that was mistaken in any Copy of the Bible, but to assert the
true sense against the corrupt glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and to
restore it to its Original integrity, if any wilful corruptions had been, or
errors of any moment, which might have endangered the saving truth, of which
kind we say there are none; nay, so far were our Savior and his Apostles from
observing every casual slip of a Scribe in Hebrew Copies, that they made more
frequent use of the Greek LXX. then the Hebrew, and quoted places out of the
old Testament according to that Translation, even where there seems to be some
difference from the Hebrew, and left that Translation to the Christian Church,
who used it generally for many hundred years, as the Greek Church does to this
day, as is largely showed, Prolegom. 9. de Graecis versionibus, Sect. 38, 39.
etc.

XI. But besides these reasons mentioned, Chap. 2. of the Considerations, we
find some others scattered here and there, which we will briefly examine, p.
168, 169. He finds fault with the arguing from the oscitancy and negligence of
transcribers of Heathen Authors, Homer, Aristotle, etc. to show that errors
might creep into the Original ^exts. This he says, is not tolerable in a
Christian, or any one that has the least sense of the nature and importance of
the Word of God. He urges likewise, the care of the Heathen about their Sybils
verse, p. 171. that the Roman Pontifices would not do it negligently nor
treacherously, etc. Answer, It is not denied, but that the Church of Christ had
a religious care, that the Copies transcribed, for public use especially,
should be free from all errors, as much as could be, and that far more care was
taken about them, then ever was taken by any about the writings of the Heathen,
nor do I know any who affirm the contrary. It is true, this argument is used by
some, that the various Readings in such Authors, in matters of less moment, do
not make all their Philosophy, Histories, etc. uncertain, and therefore the
like various Readings in some Copies of the Scripture, does not make the
Scripture uncertain, or prove it to be corrupt; but what is this to the care
and fidelity of the Church in preserving the Copies of the Scripture, which all
acknowledge to be more then any had, or could have in preserving any humane
Writings, the Sybils verses, or any other of the Heathens pretended Oracles.
But though their care was great, and therefore no wilful errors could pass,
nor mistakes in any matter of concernment, yet that they did never err, not in
the least, needs no other confutation, then the comparing of all Copies MSS. or
Printed, which have had errors of this kind, more or less* according to the
diligence and care of the Sc^ibe or Corrector, as ocular inspection
demonstrates.

XII. Again, page 17, 18, etc. he tells us, the relief provided by Capellus,
and approved in the Prolegomena, against various Lections, viz. That the saving
doctrine of the Scriptures, as to the substance of it, in all things of moment
is preserved in the Copies of the Original, and in the Translations that
remain, is pernicious, and insufficient; because, though it be a great relief
against inconvenience of Translations, that the worst of them contains all
necessary saving fundamental truth yet to depresse the sacred Truth of the
Originalls into such a condition, as wherein it should stand in need of such an
Apology, and that without any color or pretense from dis^repance in the
copies themselves that are exstant, or any tolerable evidence that ever there
were any other in the least differing from these extant in the world, will at
length be found a work unbecoming a Christian Protestant Divine. -- The nature
of this doctrine is such, that there is no other principle or means of
discovery, no other rule or measure of judging and detrmining any thing about
it, but only the writing from whence it is taken, it being wholly of Divine
revelation, which is only expressed in Scripture; so that upon supposall of
any corruption, there is no mean of rectifying it* as there is in correcting a
mistake in any Problem of Euclide, etc. Nor is i^ enough to satisfy us, that
the doctrines above mentioned are preserved entire, every tittle or (...) of
the Word of God must come unde our care and Consideration. He provides us
therefore better security, p. 198. He tells us of a Copy which was a standard
to try all others by. The Vulgar Copy we use, was the public possession of
many generations, and upon the invention of Printing, it was in actual
possession throughout the world. This must pass for a standard, which
confessedly is its right and due. But, p. 173. we are referred to all the
Copies that are remaining; In them all we say, is every letter and title of the
Word of God: These Copies are the rule, standard and touchstone of all
Translations, etc.

XIII. For answer, First, for what Capellus affirms, I am not bound to answer,
he was able enough to answer for himself while he was living, and now he is
dead, every one will trample upon a dead Lion, who durst not look him in the
face while he was alive. But as for the Prolegomena, I do not only say, that
all saving fundamental truth is contained in the Original Copies, but that
all revealed truth is still remaining entire; or, if any error or mistake have
crept in, it is in matters of no concernment, so that not only no matter of
faith, but no considerable point in Historical truth, Prophesies or other
things, is thereby prejudiced, and that there are means left for rectifying any
such mistakes where they are discovered, as has been often said. Secondly, To
say, that upon any corruption in the saving doctrine supposed, there is no
means of rectifying or restoring, is a very strange assertion; may not the
consideration of Antecedents and Consequents, of places parallel, of the
analogy of faith, the testimonies, Expositions and Translations of the
Ancients, etc. help to rectify a corruption crept in, and may we not judge by
one part of revealed truth of what agrees with it, or disagrees from it, as by
any Theoreme of Euclide, what is agreeable with it, or disagreeable, though the
one be by reason, the other by revelation? Is there no use of reason in matters
of faith? or in judging of Divine truths? Vedelius might have spared his labor
of a Rationale, if this be so. It is confessed by all, that various Readings
are found in the Original Texts, which several readings cannot both be from
the sacred Penmen, but the one must needs be false and erroneous, and if in
such smallest things (all being of Divine Revelation, the least as well as the
weightiest) no way can be found to rectify any mistake without a new
Revelation, the Scriptures are in an ill condition; for by this means, no error
once got in, can ever be amended or corrected.

XIV. Nor is it any where said in the Prolegomena, that there is any corruption
in any fundamental truth crept into the Original Copies, or in any saving
doctrine, whereby it may need rectifying or restoring, nay, the contrary is
both maintained and proved; yea, that in no matter of moment there is any
variety in the Copies, and though we grant lesser varieties to appear, (which
is confessed by all) yet we deny not, but that every tittle of the Word, though
never so small, comes under our care, and ought not to be neglected; but for
all the care we can use, such lesser varieties will happen, which being
involuntary and of little or no importance to the sense or matter, neither the
providence of God is there prejudiced, nor the care of the Church to be called
in question.

XV. But what better security gives he against the uncertainty arising from
these varieties? To make one Copy a standard for all others, in which no
mistake in the least can be found, he cannot, no Copy can plead this privilege
since the first (...) were in being, so it is confessed by Buxtorf and Bootius,
his best Authors; nor can he tell us where this copy is to be found to which we
must have recourse, and in which every tittle is entire and perfect; some
Copies there have been more correct then others, which deserve all due regard,
but to find one that is free from all mistakes, even in the least, he will
find a hard task; yea, Buxtorf grants it impossible, as we have seen. What
that Vulgar Copy was, which before Printing was invented, was in possession all
the world over for many generations, and must pass for a standard, I would
gladly know, and where it is to be found, and should very much esteem it, if it
could be showed; but this, I doubt, will prove an Eutopian conceit: For, does
our Adversary think there was no difference in the Copies that were in use
before Printing; the collation of all MSS. Copies shows this to be false, let
him produce any two that are the same in every thing: Or does he think, that
those that first Printed the Hebrew and Greek Text had only one Copy, and did
not collate diverse of the best they could find; or, that there is no
difference in the Printed Copies, I mean, not Typographicall errors, but such
as were in the Copies which they followed. If any such standard were in being,
surely we have it printed in some Edition of the Bible: Is it for the Hebrew
Text, the Venice Edition, and if so, which of those Editions: or Munsters, or
Stephanus, or the Regia, or Plantines, or which of these? And for the Greek,
let him declare whether it be Erasmus his Edition, or the Complutense, or
Stephens, or Bezaes, or which it is, for that there are varieties and
differences among them all, is evident, and cannot be denied, neither let him
say, the differences be of no moment, for this is said in the Prolegomena, with
which he is not satisfied. This therefore which he tells us of a Copy which
must be a standard for all others in every thing, and was in possession all the
world over, is a mere Chimaera, a groundless fancy, and a vain imagination of
that which never was since the (...) were in being.

XVI. But if he fly to his other refuge, and say, that in all the copies
extant, that is in some one or other, every the least iota and tittle is to be
found, then we are left more uncertain, for then we must have all the Copies
that are any where throughout the world, and must compare them all together
before we can find all the entire truth of God, for if we want but one Copy,
there may be something in that which differs from the rest, and so we can have
no certainty in the rest; Now all men know this to be impossible to get
together all Copies whatsoever, and never to be expected, and therefore upon
this ground, it is impossible to attain any certainty about all and every title
of the word of God, or suppose we had all the Copies extant in the world, and
could compare them together, yet where they differ, how shall we by any
directions he gives us, know which Copy is right in this particular, and which
in that. These ways then which he propounds being invalid and insufficient, I
appeal to any whether it be not more satisfactory, to say that we have all
saving truth preserved in the Copies, which are in common and public use in the
Church of Christ, and that they are free from all errors in matters of moment,
and that in other matters there are ways and means to judge of the best
reading, and what is most genuine, wherein our industry is to be used, and if
there be some places wherein both Readings render the sense so, that we cannot
tell which to prefer, (both being agreeable to the Analogy of faith, and
neither of them repugnant to any other place of Scripture) that there is no
danger to choose which we will, and whether there be any such danger in this
assertion as is pretended? Our Author himself confesses, p. 300. that in some
of the Keries and Ketibs there is a difference in the senses, yea that some
have quite contrary significations, as (...) and (...) which occur fourteen or
fifteen times, and yet he salves all with this, that neither of them is
contrary to the analogy of faith. If this be sufficient for some various
readings, why may it not be so for the rest? This, and less then this he
confesses is enough for Translations, and why this, which we have laid down may
not serve for the Originalls I cannot see, seeing the peoples faith is
immediately guided by Translations, and not one of a thousand understands the
Originalls.

CHAP V.
I. The second Charge, that we say, That our present Copies are not the same
with those anciently used. II. The Prolegomena affirm and prove that our Copies
are the same. III. Various Readings gathered out of Translations do not prove
the contrary. IV. That all books whatsoever except the first (...) are subject
to various Readings, yet the same books. V. All differences of a Translation
from the Original, are not various Readings. VI. A third Charge. That the same
fate has attended the Scripture with other books, This a pure Calumny. VII.
Archbishop Usher, Buxtorf, and others, say the same with the Prolegomena. VIII.
The Prolegomena often acknowledged Gods special providence over these books.
IX. A fourth Charge, that we may correct the Original upon Conjectures, proved
a calumny out of the Adversaries words. X. The Prolegomena expressly maintain
the contrary.

I. WE proceed now to his other Charges. The next is, That we say, that our
present Copies are not the same with those anciently used. p. 206. That the old
Translators had other Copies or differing Copies from them which we now enjoy.
p. 311. which did really differ from those we now enjoy and use, and Epist p.
10. which are utterly lost. This though in a manner coincident with the former,
is yet distinctly propounded, and so we shall distinctly handle it. It is
indeed so gross a calumny, that the Author of it confesses p. 312. That he
does not remember that the Prolegomena do any where expressly affirm, that
they of old had other Copies then those we now enjoy, and therefore he would
gather it by consequence for some other Position maintained in the Pr^legomena.
And what is that, viz. the Prolegomena affirm, That various Readings may
sometimes be gathered out of some ancient Translations, which the Adversary
thus expresses very untruly, as we shall show anon, That by the help and use of
Translations conjecturing how they read in their books, either with other words
or leters, consonants or points we may collect various lections, as out of the
Original, which opinion he sees not how upon the matter it differs from that
of Capellus.

II. I answer 1. Not to question how truly he charges Capellus, who no where
that I know affirms this, but rather deprecates it as a Calumny, whereas he
says he could not remember that the Prolegomena do any where expressly say,
that they had other Copies of old, he could not but remember where they
expressly say yea, and prove the contrary. Proleg. 7. Sect. 16. (which p. 146.
he says he has looked through) There, as we have already noted, it is proved
that the Copies we now have are the true true Transcripts of the (...) of the
Prophets and Apostles, and the very same, and therefore here we have another
proof of our Authors candor and sincerity, imposing upon his Adversary as his
proper tenants, his own illogicall consequences, when he knew that his
Adversary directly and not by consequence maintains the contrary. But this is
familiar with him, to deduce any odious consequences from his Adversaries
assertion, which he never goes about to prove, because it cannot be proved, but
takes it for granted, and upon that disputes against his Adversary, when as
indeed he fights with his own shadow.

III. What is held in the Prolegomena about gathering various Readings
sometimes out of Translations shall be discussed in its due place, at present I
do utterly deny his Consequence, for whereas all the various Readings of any
Copies are maintained to be only in matters of no weight or concernment, and
such as were at first casual errors or mistakes of Transcribers, as is already
showed, and that those that may be gathered out of Translations are of the same
nature and quality, if this be sufficient to prove that our Copies are not the
same, then those that are likewise gathered out of the Originalls, or have
been, as the Keri and Ketib, and the like, (which are admitted by our Author)
will likewise prove that we have not the same Copies of the Originalls.

IV. Nay, if this Argument be sufficient, then it will prove that we have no
true Copies of any books in the world, for there were never any yet (except the
holy Penmen) which have been so privileged, that the Transcriber could not
err, or that various Readings, after frequent Transcriptions, might not be
gathered. Then farewell not only Scripture, but all other Monuments, either of
Divine or Humane learning: Then we have no true Copies of the Writings of any
of the Fathers, Commentators, Councels, nor of any Authors of Philosophy, Law,
Physic, Mathematics, History, etc. but all the old and genuine Copies are
lost, and those we have are corrupt, spurious and false, and so the foundation
of all Divine and humane learning is at once quite taken away. Buxtorf, as I
have showed, and others the most rigid defenders of the Hebrew Text, maintain
that our present Copies are the same with the first (...), and yet stick not to
confess that they agree not in every thing, but that there may be some
variation in smaller matters, yea, that they should agree in every tittle,
Buxtorf. says it is impossible. I would fain know what it is, that makes a
Copy not to be the samewith the Original? must there not be some substantial
difference, and that in matters of weight and importance that must make such a
Change? shall every difference of a word or a letter, it may be once in nine or
ten pages work this strange Metamorphosis? Who ever affirmed such Paradoxes? Is
not a man the same individuum, when his hair is cut or his nails pared, that he
was before, nay though his skin be scratched or some blood drawn? Why then is
not a Copy the same with the Original, though there be some small difference
in things not concerning the sum or substance of the Book? are not our
Statute-books and Acts of Parliament, now printed, the same with the Original
Copies, though the Writers or Printers be not infallible, but it may be have in
some words or letters of no concernment, by casual mistake, varied from the
Originalls: Besides this, does not our Adversary grant that errors and casual
mistakes have happened in matters of less moment, from whence various readings
are sprung, which by his own Logic should make the Copies not to be the same.

V. Bu. from whence does he draw this Conclusion. From this, That by the help
and use of Translations conjecturing how they read in their Books either with
other words or letters, Consonants or points, we may collect various Readings,
as out of the Original. But this is most partially and untruly by him
propounded, and no where affirmed in the Prolegomena. For 1. as we have already
said, all differences of a Translation from the Original, are not to be
reckoned among various Readings. Prol. 6. Sect. 8. 11. The mistakes of the
Translator, his Paraphrasticall expositions, adding or omitting some words
which he judged needful or needless to the sense, the errors of the scribe,
etc. must be accurately distinguished from the various Readings, but when no
probable cause can be given why the Translator so rendered some places, save the
ambiguity of some words for want of points, or the affinity of some letters in
form or sound, or transposition of a letter, or the like, (in which cases a
change may easily happen) there we may well gather that the Copies varied, and
that the Translator read he words so in his Copy, as they are by him rendered.
Nor 2. Do we say, that they always read with other letters or words, consonants
or points; for this might infer that all differences of Translations are from
the difference of Copies, because all consist in other letters or words, but
when the letters are alike in figure or sound, or there is only a Metathesis of
the same letters, or ambiguity of a word without points, a mistake might easily
happen in the Copies. Nor 3. Do we say, we may gather the various Readings, as
out of the Originalls, for there is an express difference made between those
gathered out of the Originalls, and those out of Translations, and of these its
said, Proleg. 6. Sect. 8. Non pari certitudinis gradu incedere, they are not of
the same certainty with the other: so that we see herein is nothing true either
in the premises or in the Conclusion. I leave therefore this Consideration,
wishing he would hereafter consider better what he writes.

VI. In the third place, he charges us with saying, That the same fate has
attended the Scripture in its transcription, as has done other Books. p. 173.
and p. 206. That the Books of Scripture have had the fate of other books, by
passing through the hands of many transcribers, for this he refers to Prol. 7.
Se. 12. but never cites the words, and yet adds p. 173. This imagination
asserted upon deliberation seems to me to border upon atheism, surely the
promise of God for preservation of his Word, with his love and care of his
Church, of whose faith and obedience that word is the rule, requires other
thoughts at our hands? In this, we find the like truth and candor as in the
rest: For first, He makes us to speak that of the Scripture in general, which
is only spoken of one particular, wilfully leaving out that (as he knows who
did of old) which would have proved all to be a pure calumny. The words are,
Nam in hisce, sacra volumina idem fatum cum aliis libris subiisse praesertim
antiquis, and saepius descriptis experientia plane testatur. Hoc a nemine hodie
aperte negari video, etc. In hisce, in these things, that is, to be subject to,
errata and mendae leviores, by negligence of Transcribers, that is, to various
Readings; Is this the same, as to say, That Gods Providence extends no more to
the preservation of these Books, then of all others, which the Prolegom* are so
far from affirming, as is here suggested, that the contrary is both in the same
place, and elsewhere frequently maintained.

VII. The words precedent are, Et si textus originarii non sint a Judaeis, vel
aliis studiose corrupti, sed in omnibus quae ad fidem and mores spectant puri
and incorrupti, tamen scribarum incuria, vel temporum injuria in textus
originarios errata quaedam and mendas leviores irrepere potuisse, and
irrepsisse negari non potest, quae aliorum codicum and interpretum collatione,
aliisque mediis (de quibus supra) tolli and emendari possunt. Nam in hisce
sacra volumina idem fatum cum aliis subiisse, etc. What is more said here then
was said by all others before, that have written of various Readings? Buxtorf
Sixtin Amama, and others, whose words are brought in the same, Prolegom. 6. de
variis lectionibus, say the same. It shall suffice, to note the words of the
Reverend and Learned Usher there also quoted, Epist. ad Lud. Capel. p. 21.
Sententia mea haec perpetua fuit. Hebraeum V. Testamenti codicem scribarum
erroribus non minus obnoxium esse quam Novi codicem, and omnes alios libros.
What difference is there between the Prolegomena, and the words of this
Reverend Primate? And does not the Considerator himself say the same thing,
when he grants various Readings in the original Texts, which he also says,
came from the failings and mistakes of the Scribes?

VIII. As for Gods special providence in preservation of these Books, the
denial whereof he says, borders upon Atheism, he might have read in the same
Prolegomena 6. Sect. 15. That though there be such differences in some small
matters of no consequence, Ita tamen invigilavit providentia divina
Ecclesiaeque diligentia, ut in iis quae ad salutem necessariae sunt, and ad
fidem, and mores spectant omnia pura and integra sint. And sect. 3. in the same
Prolegomena, are cited the words of the Learned Bochartus in that admirable
Work of his, Geogr. Sacr. Part. 1. lib. 2. c. 13. who, after he had said the
same, with the Prolegomena of various Readings in the Scripture, as in other
Books, and that they do not infer any uncertainty, as some men fear, adds,
Quamvis exemplum sit valde dispar, nam multo aliter invigilavit providentia
Divina, ut sacros Scripturae codices, praestaret immunes, etc. Thus we see in
the same place, which the Adversary alleges to make good his Charge, the
contrary directly proved, which he could not choose but observe, and therefore
what honesty or fair dealing can be expected from him in other matters, who
has so wilfully erred in this, let the Reader judge I doubt not but that he
has read the Preface to the Bible, there he might have observed the Publishers
words, p. 1. Etsi autem in librorum sacrorum conservatione Ecclesiae opera usus
sit Deus, tamen speciali providentia ita ^is invigilavit, ut ab ipso primo
inspiratos esse admiranda ipsorum conservatione monstravit, dum Divina haec
fidei speique nostrae monumenta tantis munivit praesidiis, ut per tot seculorum
decursus, inter tot imperiorum ruinas tot regnorum mutationes and (...) inter
tot librariorum transcriptiones exemplaribus inter nationes dispersis, tanta
terrae marisque intercapedine disjunctas contra Haereticorum frauds and
Tyrannorum furores, qui ea vel corrumpere, vel abolere conati sunt, sarta tecta
ad nostra tempora conservatae, and ad ultimum temporis articulum permansura
sint. I appeal to all men, even to the Adversary himself, what could be said
more fully concerning Gods admirable preservation of these Books, and whether
he has not abused the Reader and Publisher in this crimination. The Publisher
wrote upon deliberation, and need not retract any thing. I wish his Adversary
had as well considered what he has charged him with, for then the labor of
both might have been spared.

IX. The ninth thing charged upon the Prolegomena, is p. 206. That when gross
faults are crept into the Hebrew Text; men may by their own conjectures, find
out various Readings, and p. 159. It is declared, that where any gross faults
or corruptions are befallen the Originalls, men may by their faculty of
critical conjecturing amend them, and restore the native lections that are
lost, though, in general, without the authority of Copies this be not allowed.
For this he quotes, Prolegom. 7. Sect 12. I see our Author is still semper
idem, a thread of untruth and calumny runs through the whole Book; yet in this,
of gathering various Readings upon mere conjectures he is less excusable then
in some of the rest, not only because this whole charge is plainly rejected
and disproved in Prolegom. 6. Sect. ult. and reasons are given why it cannot be
allowed; but also because the Adversary acquits the Author of the Prolegomena
of it in other places, and acknowledges the same with thanks, for within two
leafs he writes, p. 209. Indeed, I do not find his (Capellus) boldness in
conjecturing approved in the Prolegom. Why do you then charge them with it? you
might have said, you found it rejected and disproved. Again, p. 305. That they
(Keri and Ketib) are most of them critical amendments of the Rabbis, is not
allowed (by the Prolegomena) for which latter part of his determination, we
thank the learned Author p. 307. In the mean time, I cannot but rejoice that
Capellus his fancy about these things (about conjecturing) then which I know
nothing more pernicious to the truth of God, is not allowed. Thus you see we
are accused and acquitted by the same Pen.

X. But yet for proof, he refers us to Prolegomena 7. Sect. 12. where I desire
the Reader to see if there be one word, either of gross faults, or of amending
by conjectures, unless as I said before, errata and mendae leviores do
signify gross faults, and quae ex aliis codicibus aliisque mediis de quibus
supra emendari possunt, do signify the amendment of them by men's own
conjectures. Lastly* in that, p. 159 now cited, it may be observed, that he
confutes his charge in the propounding of it; for he says, this way of
correcting upon conjectures, in general, without the authority of Copies is
not allowed of, which is a plain confutation of it self; for none ever denied,
but that errors in one Copy might be corrected by other Copies, and how then
are they to be found out and corrected by men's own conjectures? But thus he
variously relates the opinion of his Adversary, that either he might make his
opinion hateful to his unwary Reader, who happily might not read both places,
or else that he might have a starting hole, if he should be challenged for
falsifying, saying, that in another place he related all truly, and yet that
relation is no less contradictory to it self, then the other is false; for to
restore a reading by mere conjectures, and to restore it by another Copy, is a
plain contradiction.

CHAP. VI.
I. The fifth Charge, That we may gather various Readings out of Translations,
aggravated by the Adversary and odiously propounded. II. Nothing affirmed inthe
Prolegomena, but what most Protestants Divines and Commentators say. III. Four
uses of Translations expressed in the Prolegomena. IV. The present reading is
in possession of its authority. V. Translations not equalled to the Original,
but subservient to them: of correcting the Word of God. VI. To correct an error
crept into the Original, is not to correct the Original. VII. Translations
useful when any doubt arises about the true reading. The present reading not
to be altered merely upon a various Reading of a Translation. VIII. In what
case a various Readings may be gathered out of a Translation. IX. Such various
Readings not of equal authority with those gathered out of the Originalls. X.
Various Readings out of Translations, are not in matters of weight. XI. That
various Readings may be gathered out of Translations, proved by ancient and
modern Divines, and those great assertors of the purity of the Originals. XII.
The words of Reverend Usher. XIII. Proved by diverse instances undeniable XIV.
and XV. The Adversaries boldness, affirming, there never was any Copy
differing in the least from the present, disproved at large, contradicted by
himself. XVI. The Keri and Ketib, what they are. XVII. The sixth charge, That
Keri and Ketib are critical notes of the Rabbis, showed to be false. XVIII.
What the Prolegemena deliver about the Original, That the most are various
Readings, gathered out of ancient Hebrew Copies. XIX. The Adversary cleers the
Prolegomena from his own Charge. XX. He is not at leisure to prove their divine
Original. XXI. Concerning the notes out of Grotius. XXII. His great worth and
learning. XXIII. The reason of collecting these notes out of him, Not as
specimina of various Readings by conjectures, of which scarce one or two in the
Pentateuch, The most are various Readings out of Greek Copies of the Old
Testment. The Publisher not bound to assert all that is said by him, or any
other in their notes exhibited in the Appendix.

I. THe fifth Charge, which is that Gorgons head, which so much affrighted our
Adversary, as he says, Epist. p. 19. and startled him, p. 146. is, the
gathering of various Readings out of Translations, and that, as he says,
Epist. p. 25. when there is no difference in the Copies. This he frequently
ingeminates, p. 158. and 206. 314. 311. This he makes as pernicious a Principle
as ever was fixed upon by any Learned man, since the foundation of the Church
of Christ, Epist p. 21. excepting those of Rome, And upon this Position, and
that of the novelty of punctation, he must needs cry out, (...), as not seeing
any means of being delivered from utter uncertainty in and about all sacred
truth, p. 25. Hence are those tragical exclamations, fea^full outcries of
correcting the Original by the help of Translations, page 311. Of Printing the
Originalls, and defaming them, gathering up translations of all sorts, and
setting them up in competition with them, Epist. p. 9. of advancing
Translations unto an equallity with the Originalls, and setting them by it, and
with it upon even terms; yea, using them as means of amending and altering the
Originals, which is to set up an Altar of our of own by the Altar of God, and
to eq^all the wisdom, care, skill, and diligence of men, with the wisdom,
care, and providence of Go. p. 174. of horrible and outrageous violence offe^ed
to the sacred Hebrew verity by learned Mountabanks, p. 315. This is to correct
the Scripture, p. 344. To correct the Word of God, p. 180. To amend it at the
pleasure of men, p. 347 Of dreadful distemper, which may prove mortal to the
truth of the Scripture, p. 314, and therefore he wishes, that all Translations
were consumed out of the earth, rather then this one figment should be
admitted, p. 221.

II. One would think that reads these passages, that all Religion lay at the
stake, that some strange new Doctrine were delivered, never heard of before,
which at once would overthrow the whole foundation of Christianity: when as it
will appear upon the matter, that nothing is said in the Prolegomena, more then
what the best and learned Protestant Divines, and in a manner, all
Commentators have said and practiced before, and those the greatest assertors
of the Hebrew verity, and that the gathering of various Readings out of
Translations was never absolutely by any denied before.

III. What the Prolegomena do affirm concerning the use of Translations the
Reader may see, Prolegom 5. De versionibus Scripturae, where it is proved out
of Theodoret, Hierom, Chrysostom, and others, that in the first and pnrest
times of the Church, the Bible was translated into most Vulgar Languages, The
Egyptian, Parsian, Indian, Armenian, Scythian, Syriack, Aethiopick, Gothic,
etc. besides the Greek and Latin. And concerning the use and benefit of
Translations, it is reduced to these heads: First, because all cannot
understand the Original Tongues, therefore Translations serve as so many Pipe^
or Channels to convey those living waters of salvation from the Fountains to
every particular Nation and People, that so all may read and hear the
wonderful works of God in their own Tongue: Secondly, the wonderful consent
of all Translations in all things of moment, though made at several times, and
in several Nations so far distant from one another, joined together, only by
the same common faith, proves these Books to be of Divine Original, and to
have no other Author but God, who so wonderfully preserved them among so many
changes and revolutions, against the fury and malice of Satan, and all his
instruments, persecuting Tyrants and subtle Heretics and Sectaries, who
labored either to corrupt, or abolish the same: Thirdly, they bear witness to
the integrity of the Original Texts, by their consent and harmony therewith,
as is showed in diverse particulars, where some would have them to be corrupted,
as that of Shiloh, Genesis 49. 10. and others: as also to preserve them pure and
entire to after ages, and to prevent the corrupting of them* either by the
fraud of Heretics, or negligence of the Scribes, for no considerable mistakes
could pass in all, and so many Translatious, in all parts of the world, but
they might easily be found and amended by others. Fourthly, they serve as so
many glasses to declare the true sense and meaning of the Scripture, as it was
understood in those times, when they were made, especially as they are
exhibited in this Work, where they may at one view, be all compared together,
for if the Commentaries of particular learned men deserve all due regard, much
more those Translations (which also are often paraphrasticall) which represent
the sense of so many great and famous ancient Churches: especially those in the
Eastern tongues, which because of their nearness and affinity with the
Original, are fittest to express the force and energy of diverse words and
phrases in Scripture, and because of their Antiquity and general use were of
greatest authority among Jews or Christians. This is the sum of what is
delivered concerning Translations in general there, or of any in particular
elsewhere, with which how that agrees with which our Adversary charges the
Prolegomena of correcting the Originalls, yea of correcting the Word of God by
them, may easily appear.

IV. Before we come to his Reasons against various Readings out of
Translations, some things I shall premise, by which the Reader may see both the
untruths in the Charge, and the invalidity of his Reasons. 1. Though we grant,
that various Readings may be sometimes gathered out of Translations, yet we do
not infer, nor does it presently follow, that the present Reading is corrupt or
false, or must forthwith be corrected by the Translation. For though there were
some difference in the Copies, yet it may be, the reading of our present Copies
is the better, and therefore is not to be altered. Nay it is acknowledged and
asserted in the Prolegomena, that the present Reading being in possession of
its authority ought not to be altered, though other Copies have formerly read
otherwise, unless it can be evidently and clearly proved that some fault is
crept into the present Reading, and that we ought not to depart from the usual
Reading upon mere conjectures, unless evident necessity require. Prol. 7.
Sect 23. In omnibus ad Textum Originarium recurrendum est, nisi ubi plane
constet errorem in Textum irrepsisse, ubi vero hoc probari non potest
necessario ad Textum, ut ad normam omnes versiones probandae sunt: nec satis
est cum Bellarmino dicere. Ex fontibus si puri s^nt corrigendae sunt versiones,
hoc enim supponi debet fontes esse puros donec contrarium liquido probetur,
secundum regulam Jurisconsultorum: Quilibet praesumitur esse bonus, donec
constet de contrario. Nec tamen ex quibusdam instantiis probatur generalis
fontium corruption, sed tantum in his locis lapsum esse scribam, quod cum fontis
puritate constare potest. So in the 22. Sect. primo lectionem librorum
Originalium, in vitio cubare clare probandum est, tum error corrigendus, sic
vera lectione restituta Textus Originarius versionum regula and norma fit. To
the same purpose Sect. 25. Etsi versiones antiquae prae^ertim, multum confer
possunt cum erratum in Textum Originarium casu irrepsit ad veram* lectionem
indagandam, and restituendam, tamen generaliter loquendo versiones omnes
secundum Textus Originales corrigi, and examinari debent, Nam cum omnes
versiones tanquam rivuli ex codicibus originariis ut fontibus fluxerint,
necesse est, ut quicquid veritatis in versionibus inveniatur, illud a fontibus
habuerint. Eatenus enim versio vera dici potest quatenus cum Textu originario
concordet; sic enim Greg. de Valent. Translatio vera est eujus sensus a suo
font non deviat, sed sententias reddit easdem and aequales, nec ampliores, nec
restrictiores, etc. Contradictionem itaque plane implicat affirmare simpliciter
fontem ex versione corrigendum, aeque enim absurdum est, ac si quis solis motum
ex horologio corrigere vellet, vel cum Automaton aberrat dicere solemn
irregulariter circumferri potius quam vitium in Automato concedere.

V. By all this it appears, that the Prolegomena do not equal the Translations
with the Text, or make this one end of Translations, thereby to correct the
Text, or as is most invidiously expressed, to correct the Scripture, to correct
the Word of God. For though it be affirmed, that in some cases various Readings
may be gathered out of Translations, yet there is more to be considered, before
any change may be made of the present reading, for it must first be proved that
the present reading contains something false and absurd, and cannot possibly
stand, and then which other things are to be considered, besides the bare
reading of a Translation, the antecedents and consequents, the analogy of
faith, collation of like places, the Commentaries of ancient Writers of the
Church, comparing of other Copies, wherein also respect is to be had to the
antiquity, multitude and goodness of the Copies in the care and exactness of
the Scribe, as appears by the rules given about various Readings. Proleg. 6.
Sect. 6. among which, this also is one, which our Adversary takes notice of,
and seems to carp at or to pervert, which all sober men cannot but like, viz.
That it is not for every private man to alter any thing in the received
Reading, though he seem to have never so strong Reasons, but the public
authority of the Church, either express or implicit is necessary. A recepta
lectione non temere recedendum, sed moderate rations and conjecturae
proponendae sunt, and Ecclesiae judicium, expectandum, etc. which he translates
thus, p. 207. that in correcting the Originalls we must take the consent of the
guides of the Church, how truly let any man judge by what we have said. The
reason is given in the same Prolegomena 6. Sect. 6. That if this were permitted
to every man, Pro norma fidei regulam Lesbiam haberemus, etc. Si enim in
decretis Principum and Regum aliquid immutare laesae Majestatis reum efficit,
quantum erit crimen aliquid pro libitu mutare in sacris hisce scriptis in
quibus ut olim S. Augustinus de Coelo Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium
loquitur.

VI. Besides to correct an error crept into the Original, is not properly to
correct the Original, but to restore the Original to the true Reading, for no
error is part of the Original Text, and therefore when the error can be
demonstrated, the true Reading is restored, not the Original Text corrected,
or the Word of God corrected at man's pleasure, as is no less vainly then fasly
objected in the Considerations; when the Bible is Printed, and the Compositors
have made a Proof, which is corrected by those that attend that Work, can it be
properly said, that they correct the Word of God, when they correct only the
mistakes of the Compositor, and so when the sheet is past the Correctors hand,
and is Printed off; if some by a more exact view shall still find some errors,
which need further correction, may this be objected to him, that he presumes to
correct the Word of God? who would not think this to be ridiculous? yet such is
the reason of our Adversary. What is known and confessed to be the Word of God,
it must be madness and impiety in any to go about to correct it, but when an
error by negligence of the Transcriber or Printer shall have crept in, and it
shall be proved to be an error, must not this be amended or corrected, but
presently we are guilty of correcting the Scripture or Word of God? To correct
the Original by a Translation, is to alter what is the true Reading of the
Original by a Translation, that so it may agree with the Translation, for so
our Author would have his Reader understand it, and an ordinary Reader will
make no other sense of his words; but is this the same with restoring the true
and native Reading, and to say, that not only other Copies, but even
Translations may conduce to this end.

VII. It is one thing to make use of a Translation about the true Reading of a
place, when any doubt arises, another thing to make it equal with the Text; it
may be made use of, when other Copies or pregnant and apparent reasons concur,
but in this case it is not made equal with, but subservient to the Text: To
equal it with the Text, or prefer it, is to correct the Text by it in all
things wherein they differ, as some Romanists say of the vulgar Latin (I say
some, for the learned among them deny it, and of those that affirm it, none
ever yet attempted it) But this had been senceless and absurd in our case, when
there are diverse Translations, and those in some things differing from one
another, for it is impossible to conform the Text to them all, and therefore
could never be by us intended. Here is then no Altar set up by Gods Altar, nor
any preferring of man's care and wisdom before the care and Wisdom of God, but
the preserving of Gods Altar, that it may not be thrust by, or any other set in
its place, and the using of our care and diligence, with that reason which God
has given us, in a subserviencie to his care and Providence. Nor is this to
defame the Text, when we labor to preserve the purity of it, and to restore it
to its Original integrity, when it can appear the Transcribers have failed,
and so to Transmit it to Posterity. By this means we maintain the Honor of the
Text, and do what we can to prevent any mistakes for the future, wherein
whether more be not done in this Edition then has been done hitherto by
others, I appeal to the judgment of all impartial and judicious Readers.

VIII. We never said, That all differences of the Translation from the
Original, are to be reckoned for various Readings; for it is frequently
acknowledged that some variation may be by the mistake of the Translator, or
from Paraphrasticall Expositions, where the sense and not the words are
precisely expressed, where something it may be is added to clear the sense, and
some words left out, as not so necessary for the sense, and some errors may be
from the Transcribers of the Translation, Proleg. 6. Sect. 11. and Proleg. 7.
23. Proleg. 9. Sect. 12. 46. etc. But when no other probable cause can be given
of the difference, save the variation of the Copy, and a plain reason may be
given, why the Translator so rendered it, as because of the ambiguity of words
unpointed, or the Change of letters alike in figure or sound, or transposition
of letters, and the like, in these cases, I see no reason, why we may not
conclude, that the Translator read in his Copy, as he has rendered, and thence
collect a various Reading from a Translation.

IX. We do not say* That these Readings are of equal authority with those that
are gathered out of Original Copies; nay, it is expressed, Proleg. 6. Sect. 8.
that they do not, Pari certitudinis graau incedere, and therefore it must needs
follow, that the present reading of the Original ought not to be altered upon
the bare reading of a Translation, but that other pregnant reasons and
arguments must concur, as we said before.

X. To these also we add, That these different readings out of Translations,
are of the same nature with those gathered out of Original Copies, that is,
they are only in lesser matters, not in things of any moment or concernment,
they are such, whereby our faith and salvation are no way endangered, such as
the Keri and Ketib, etc. Nor do we any where own that rule of Capellus, That
that reading, though by conjecture only, ubi sensus melior fluit, where the
sense and coherence seems to be better, is always to be chosen, for many times
we may conceive a sense, which would better agree with the words, in our
apprehension, which yet the words of the Text will not bear, and the sense
which the present reading has may be maintained, and is followed by more, and
better, and ancienter Copies, and therefore I admit that rule no otherwise,
then Reverend Usher, Epist. ad Capellus, p. 22. Vbi caetera reperiuntur paria
ex variantibus lectionibus, ea praeferenda quae sensum parit commodiorem, atque
antecedentibus and consequentibus cohaerentem.

XI. These things premised, I say, that various Readings, many be gathered out
of Translations, which may conduce to the true sense and reading, and may be
taken into consideration when question shall arise about the reading of some
place in the Original Texts. This is proved at large, Proleg. 6. Sect. 9, 10.
both by consent of the best Divines, and men of greatest skill in the Hebrew,
and greatest Patrons of the integrity of the Hebrew Text, and by apparent
reason, of all which, our Adversary takes no notice, but prudently passes over
in silence (as in other places) what he could not answer. It is showed out of
Hierom, Beza, Casaubone, Drusius, Schindler, De Dieu, Bochartus, Hottinger,
Salmasius, besides Bre^tius, Osiander, Calvin, Musculus, Mercer, etc. how
common it is among Commentators and others, to gather sometimes out of
Translations, how they read in their Copies differing from the present reading.
Nor do I remember any Author of note that generally denied the same, before the
late quarrels of Bootius and Buxtorf against Capellus, who yet, whilst they
grant conjectural various Readings out of Translations, (see Bootius his Vind.
c. 22. p. 225.) do in effect say as much as their Adversary: only our Author,
without any distinction or limitation, absolutely denies all, of what kind or
degree soever they be, which for my part, I know not any before him to have
done. Nay, he tells us, p. 333. That it is impossible to know how any
Translator read in his Copy* when he differs from the common reading. He might
have done well to have given answer to those many instances and reasons to the
contrary, mentioned, Prolegom. 6. and to the testimony of those great Divines
and Linguists, whom he passes by, as not worthy his notice. Were all these,
and many others, no better then Learned Mountabanks, as he is pleased to call
all of this Opinion, p. 315. Surely some of them at least might have deserved
better language from him.

XII. The Reverend Usher, though he would exclude the LXX. (how justly we have
showed, Prolegom. 9.) yet grants that out of other Interpreters, various
Readings may be gathered. Epist. ad Capell. p. 22. he says, Ex quibusdam
veterum Interpretationibus excerpi aliquas Posse variantes Hebraici textus
lectiones: and p. 4. Cujusmodi (...) ob Characterum aut sonorum in vocabulis
praecipue Hebraicis similitudinem, aut levem aliquam a minus attento inspectore
conceptam literarum transpositionem, multo etiam facilius possunt obrepere;
after which he adds, Et ut in multis hujus generis locis, Hebraicum quo
interpres usus est exemplar eandem quam ille reddidit lectionem exhibuerit; de
eorum tamen pluribus, (he says not, de omnibus) nullo nobis constare potest
modo, utrum ipsi interpreti an codici quem prae manibus ille habuit Hebraico
ista accepta referenda fuerit differentia: praesertim si interpres ille ex
Judaizantium fuerit numero. In the next page he says the same of Bootius,
(though Bootius labors, Vindic. c. 23. to wrest the Primates words) Ex ea
tantum versione quae LXX. nomen praefert colligendas eas esse negat, (Bootius)
ex reliquis omnibus interpretibus desumi eas posse libenter concedit. We see
what the Opinion of this Learned Prelate was, and that he says as much as the
Prolegomena; and yet it is well known how great a defender he was of the purity
of the Original Texts.

XIII. But though he, and all others that say the same with him, must pass
with our Author among Learned Mountabanks, and not be thought worthy any
answer, yet with his good leave, I will mind him of some of those places
instanced in the Prolegomena, and appeal to his Conscience, whether he thinks
the Translators did not read in their Copy as they have expressed in their
Translation, Genesis 47. ult. these words, (...) are rendered by the LXX. (...), in
summitatem virgae suae, and so the words are alleged, Heb. 11. 21. and so
rendered by the Syriack, the difference arising only from the various pointing
of (...), which may be rendered either super lectum, or super virgam, lectum,
if we read it (...) mitta, but virgam, if we read it (...) matte. Now, when the
LXX. and the Syriack render virgam, and not lectum, whether may we not conclude
that they read, matte, and not, mitta, the difference being so small, and no
colorable reason to be given or devised otherwise, why they should render it
virgam, and not lectum? Hence there is scarce any Expositor but observes this
various Reading out of this Translation. So Esa. 9. 1. it is observed by
Casaubon, Exerc. 13. n. 21. ad annum 31. n. 32. That the LXX. by the change of
a point, read (...) Hekal for Hakel, because they render it, (...), cito fac,
whereas, according to the present punctation, it signifies (...). sublevari.
Who will not conclude with this Learned Man, that they read Hekal, rather then
Hakel, when their Translation agrees with Hekal, and not with Hakel, and the
difference is only in a point? so Exodus 21. 8. The words, (...) are rendered by
the LXX. and Hierom, Quae sibi desponsata fuit, which, according to the modern
reading, should be, Quae non desponsavit eam. Who will not hence gather, that
the LXX. and Hier. read (...) in their Copy, which signifies sibi, and not
(...) non, as it is now, seeing (...) and (...) are in sound and pronunciation
the same? And that they did, de facto, read so, appears by the Masora, which
puts the different reading, (...) in the Margent under (...) and (...) in the
Text. The like may be observed in Hier. and the LXX. in Jos. 15. 47. Isa 49. 5.
where the Masora also observes both readings: but suppose the Masora had not
observed the differences, had it not been true, that the Copies had differed?
and could not this variety have been gathered from Hierom and the LXX. without
the Masora? Much more is brought to this purpose in the same place, all which
the Adversary passes by: To all which may be further added, Judge. 8. 16. (...)
and with them he taught the men of Succoth. It is clear that the ancient
reading was, (...) and with them he tare, or threshed, etc. as he had
threatened them, verse. 7. (...) then I will tear, or thresh, LXX. (...), as v.
7. (...). Al. (...), as v. 7. (...). Lat. contrivit, as v. 7. conteram; see
also the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic. Jos. 9. 4. (...) and made as if they had
been Ambassadors, (...) and they took victuals, or provision, for their
journey: LXX. (...). Lat. tulerunt sibi cibaria, so the Chaldee, Syriack,
Arabic; so verse. 12. (...) and v. 11. (...). 2 Kin. 20. 13. (...) r. (...)
LXX. (...), Lat. and laetatus est: so the Syriack and Arabic; so our Bishops-
Bible, (and was glad of him) so Is. 39. 2. both in the Hebrew, and all
Translations. Jerem. 15. 14. (...) and I will make thee to pass r. (...) and I
will make thee to serve, LXX. (...). So the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic; so Jer.
17. 4. both in the Hebrew, and in all Translations, Jerem. 31. 32. (...) I was
a husband to them, r. (...) I regarded them not; LXX. (...): So the Syriack and
Arabic; so the Apostle, Heb. 8. 9. Now, let me appeal to any unbyassed man,
yea, to our Adversary himself, whether in these places they do not think in
their consciences, that the LXX. and the other Translators read in their Copies
as we have showed, and if they did, whether it be not evident, that in some
cases, various Readings may be gathered out of Translations?

XIV. What he further writes in his way of declaiming, I shall not need to
trouble my self about, seeing nothing is by him brought that infringes our
assertion in the least, the controversy being rightly stated. Only one thing
I cannot pass by, wherein I cannot but admire his extreme confidence in urging
a thing so palpably untrue, and so often by himself contradicted: p. 317. Let
them prove (says he) that there was ever in the world any other Copy of the
Bible differing in any one word, from those that we now enjoy; Let them produce
one testimony, one Author of credit or reputation, that can or does, or ever
did speak one word to this purpose, let them direct us to any relick, nay
monument, any kind of remembrance of them, and not put us off with weak
conjectures, upon the signification of one or two words, and it shall be of
weight with us: p. 319. The care of God over his truth, and the fidelity of the
Jewish Church will not permit us to entertain the least suspicion that ever
there was in the world any Copy of the Bible, differing in the least from those
we enjoy -- The Authors of this insinuation cannot produce the least testimony
to make it good. This is a strange assertion, such as I think never any man
maintained before, not any Copy that ever was, to differ in one word, nay not
in the least, (which extends to syllables, letters and points) That no
Testimony, no relick, no Author of credit, no monument of antiquity, not the
least testimony can be brought etc. Do not all the various Readings both of the
Old and New Testament proclaim the apparent untruth of this? and does not
himself frequently confess, that there are varieties amongst Copies? p. 173.
That in some Copies, and those of good antiquity, there are diverse Readings, p.
190. That the Keri and Ketib are various Readings, p. 296. That the
Transcribers have had failings, and that various Readings have thence risen. p.
165. so p. 191. 347. etc. What thinks he of those places in the New Testament?
especially that in 1 John 5. 8. where a verse is left out in many ancient
Copies, and appears so to have been by the Fathers that wrote against Arrius.
Is there no Author of credit, no monument of antiquity, that testifies that
some ancient Copies wanted these words, which yet all our modern Copies have?
are not the whole collections of diverse Readings in Erasmus, Stephanus, Beza,
Camerarius, and others, a real confutation of this? He has looked through the
Prolegomena, as he says, especially Proleg. 7. which he so much opposes; he
quotes Sect. 12. and could he not there find many instances and testimonies of
credit to disprove this general assertion? He could not but read there the
testimony of Kimchi, Praef. Com. in Proph. Priores, Viri Synagogae magnae, qui
Legem nobis in pristinum statum restituerunt, invenerunt differentias in
libris, and secuti sunt multitudinem; of Ben Chajim, in the Venice and Basil
Bibles, who notes the difference of some Copies, besides the Keri and Keitb,
which he notes not with a (...) but with (...) that is another Copy. But most
evidently is this showed in Jos. 21. 36, 37. where two verses were left out in
the second Venice Edition and in Jonathans Paraphrase, and in the margent the
Masorethicall note is, that in no ancient and corrected Copies these verses are
to be found, nor in that famous Copy of R. Hillel, yet in some later Copies
they are found; whereupon learned Buxtorf in his Vindic. part. 1. c. 4. p. 105.
106. etc. sticks not to affirm and maintain that they ought not to be put in,
and that the ancient Copies are genuine: yea the number (...) collected by the
Masorites in this chapter agrees if those two be left out, and yet they are now
generally Printed in our Copies, and the Context shows that they ought to be
there. In the same Section is added, that Junius besides the Keri and Ketib
notes a difference of diverse words, differing in sense also, out of an ancient
MS. Hebrew Copy at Heidelberg. in 2 Chronicles. 26. 5. and 35. 3. which he prefers
before the modern Reading.

XV. The like is showed in the next Section out of many places in S. Hierome,
an Author of good credit in these things. Epist. ad Suriam and Fretel. upon
these words, Psalm. 35. 10. Omnia ossa mea dicunt domine, he says se
deprehendisse in Editione, LXX. bis Domine, and after adds, Multa sunt
Exemplaria apud Hebraeos, quae ne semel quidem Dominum habent. But in our
modern Copies it is once. In the same Epistle upon those words of Psalm. 130. 4.
Propter legem tuam sustinuite, Domine, he says, Aquilam legisse, (...) and
vertisse (...) timorem, Theodotionem vero and Symmachum legisse, (...), and
vertisse (...) legem, where he not only grants the Hebrew Copies to have
varied, but also gathers a various Reading out of the Translation of the LXX.
yet neither Reading is in our present Copies, which read (...) timeberis. The
same on Hos. 5. 13. writes, Alii male legunt, (...) per (...) literam quae
transferturin sylvas, pro (...) Jareb, which agrees with our Copies: so on Hab.
2. 19. Sciendum in quibusdam Hebraicis voluminibus, non esse additum omnis sed
absolute spiritum legi. Here we see the word (...) omnis was wanting in some
Hebrew Copies in Hieromes time. Much more might be brought out of Hierome and
others to this purpose. These places, except only the last, our Adversary had
read in the Prolegomena, and yet affirms, there never was any Copy in the
world differed in the least from our present Copies, and that no testimony nor
Author of credit, nor any relick of antiquity could be brought to the contrary.
Was he in a dream, or were his wits a wool gathering when he wrote this? or,
having read these things in the Prolegomena, to which no answer could be given,
did he write the contrary to delude the ignorant Reader? I do not know how to
excuse him. He tells us elsewhere, Ep. p. 17. we must grant (concerning various
Readings in the New Testament) what ocular inspection evinces to be true, but
now it seems we must be hoodwinked, and not believe what we see with our eyes;
and though nothing be more clear, then that there were of old, and still are
differences in the Hebrew and Greek Copies, yet we must believe there never was
any Copy different from our present Copies, not in the least.

XVI. We have done with this which was the main Charge. The next is about the
Keri and Ketib, that is certain marginall notes in the Hebrew Bibles, where the
Keri is the word that must be read, placed in the Margent, with a (...) The
Ketib, or word written in the Text, marked with a little circle or cipher, to
which the points belonging to the Marginall word are put, to intimate, that
this word, though written in the Text, ought not to be read, but that in the
Margent; concerning which I have spoken at large, Proleg. 8. Sect. 18, 19. etc.
ad 27. where is showed what they are, Sect. 18. To what heads they may be
reduced, Sect. 9, 20. That the number is not the same, but much differing, by
two or three hundred in the chief Editions of the Bible, Sect. 21. That the
Authors of them were not the Sacred Penmen, nor Esdras and his fellows, Sect.
22. 23. That the most of them were collected by the post Talmudicall Rabbis,
out of several ancient Copies; and that they left the common reading in the
Text, and put the other which they judged the better, in the Margent; and that
some of them were gathered before the Talmud, Sect. 24. That they were not
Critical Conjectures of the Rabbis, but various Readings, and some few of
another nature, Sect. 25. After which are added some Observations about them,
Sect. 26. I shall not go over the same things again, but refer the Reader to
the Prolegomena. Nor do I know to what purpose our Author goes over them here,
I shall only touch upon what is untruly by him charged on the Prolegomena.

XVII. Page 206. He reckons this among the Paradoxes in the Prolegomena, That
the Keri and Ketib are critical notes, consisting partly of the various
Readings of the Masorites, and late Rabbis: and p. 157. he sets it down thus,
That the (...), of which sort are above 800 in the Hebrew Bibles, are various
lections, partly gathered by some Judaicall Rabbis out of ancient Copies,
partly their Critical amendments: for which he cites in the Margent, Proleg.
8. Sect. 23 etc. Ans. In both there is nothing truly related, but untruth and
nonsense jumbled together: for first he says, They are Critical notes,
consisting partly of various lections, which is a kind of contradiction: for if
they be Critical notes they cannot be either in part or in whole various
lections: Critical notes are such wherein men give their own judgment upon
some Reading, whether it be true or false, or which Reading they like best;
various Readings are the differences of Copies collected and offered to the
Readers judgment. In the other place he makes them all to be various Readings,
but partly collected by some Rabbis out of ancient Copies, and partly their
Critical amendments, that is, some of them are gathered out of Copies others
are gathered without authority of Copies, grounded only upon their Critical
faculty in conjecturing. This may be his meaning, or else I cannot make any
good sense of his words. Howsoever he explain himself, the charge is no less
void of truth then of sense, as the place by him cited will plainly show to any
that shall look into it, (for still he never quotes the words) where it will
appear that there is not one word of Critical Conjectures, or that any part of
the Keri and Ketib are such conjectures: nor is there any mention at all of
conjectures, save that the Author shows his dislike of them.

XVIII. That which is affirmed of them in these Sections is, 1. That Esdras and
his fellows were not the Authors of these notes, but that they were gathered
long after his time, partly before and partly after the Talmund. That they
could not come from Esdras or the Prophets of his times, because these various
Readings (for so they are generally acknowledged, as by most Divines, so by our
Adversary himself) are found in the Writings of Esdras, and the latter
Prophets, as well as in the rest: and it were very absurd to think that they
gathered various Readings out of several Copies of the books they had written,
and to place one Reading in the Margent, and the other in the Text, as if they
knew not which were the true Reading of their own Books: and that any of the
rest should be gathered either by them or any other of the holy Penmen is no
less absurd, both for the same reason, as also because they would have
restored the true Reading (if they had found any difference in Copies) which
they being infallibly guided might have done, and not have left it doubtful
which Reading was to be followed, or what was the true sense of the Holy Ghost,
by noting both the Readings, and so leaving all in suspense. This is altogether
unbefitting the holy Penmen of Scripture: and our Adversary, though he be loath
to yield to the truth, yet confesses he is not able to satisfy himself in the
Original and spring of this variety. 2. It is proved Sect. 24. That some of
these were observed by the Talmudical Rabbis, being mentioned in the Talmud,
as those de vocibus scriptis and non lectis, and de lectis and non scriptis,
and those which they call obsence, for which these chaste Rabbis, who would be
wiser then God, and more pure then the Holy Ghost, pur others which they judged
more modest in the Margent to be read in the Synagogues, according to that in
the Talmud, Megil. c. 3. Omnes voces quae in Lege sunt obscoenae, eas legant
honest. That all the rest (of which there is not a word in the Talmud) were
collected by the Masorites after the Talmud. 3. That question is handled,
whether supposing the Masorites to be the Authors, they gathered them out of
various Copies, or made them out of their own judgments, and Critical
conjectures: where it is concluded, that excepting those which they counted
obscence, of which number are ten, which could not proceed from the difference
of Copies, but from the boldness and superstition of the Rabbis, and
excepting (...) and (...) (which have a peculiar consideration) that all the
rest came from variety of Copies, where they noted the one reading in the
Margent, not daring to change the reading of the Text out of reverence to the
antiquity of their Copies, but left it as it was, only they joined the points
of the Marginall word, to that in the Text, to show that the word of the
Margent was to be read, which they judged the better reading.

XIX. This is the common opinion and judgment of men learned in these matters,
such as Mercer, Drusius, Bertram, Erpenius, Pagett, Piscator, Sixtin Amama,
etc. and of Buxtorf himself. And after all, are related the arguments of
Capellus, who labors to prove, that the Masorites gathered them not out of
diverse Copies, but by their own Critical conjectures; whose opinion is
disliked, and his arguments answered. By all this it appears most clearly, that
our Adversary abuses both his Reader and the Author of the Prolegomena, with
palpable untruths, ascribing that to the Author of the Prolegomena, which he is
so far from holding, that he maintains the clean contrary. For he proves, that
the Keri and Ketib are not Critical amendments of the Rabbis, but various
Readings of ancient Copies, (except those before excepted) which he is so far
from making Critical amendments of the Texts, that he taxes the Rabbis for
their boldness and superstition therein:) yea, the Adversary himself, though
he thus writes, yet in express terms elsewhere, (forgetting what he had
formerly said) acquits the Author of the Prolegomena from this calumny, p. 305.
That they are all or most of them, (Keri and Ketib) critical amendments of the
Rabbis is not allowed, (in the Prolegomena) for which latter part of his
determination we thank the Learned Author. And p. 307. In the mean time, I
cannot but rejoice, that Capellus his fancy, then which I know nothing more
prejudicial to the truth of God, is not allowed. Thus we see, we are still
accused and acquitted by the same pen, as I have already said.

XX. After these, he tells us, that the arguments brought against the divine
original of the notes are capable of an easy solution, which he is not at
leisure as yet to show, although he had told us before that he could not
satisfy himself about the Original of this variety. In the mean time, let him
enjoy his own opinion, and let me enjoy mine: and if he can bring better proofs
for the divine original then I have brought against it, I shall acknowledge my
error; if not, I expect he will retract his, and some other things he has
about the Keri and Ketib, which I shall have occasion to answer in another
place, and therefore pass them by here.

XXI. Before I conclude this Chapter, some thing must be added concerning the
Notes extracted out of Grotius, which the Adversary says, are brought as an
instance of collecting various Readings upon conjectures, or rather of
corrections of the Original, when any gross corruptions have befallen them,
p. 159. 206. 315. Now, though I might well pass over what is here charged, it
being no where acknowledged in the Prolegomena, That the Original Texts are
corrupted, but the contrary maintained; nor that upon mere conjectures various
Readings are to be gathered, (as we have already showed) and therefore, that
these Notes out of Grotius could not possibly be brought for any such end: yet,
because it is the opinion of some Learned men, that these collections out of
Grotius are one main cause of all this stir against the Biblia Polyglotta, I
shall briefly consider what he objects upon this account. This we find
chiefly, p. 313. and 348. In the first place he says, That to make this
evident by instances, we have a great number of such various lections gathered
by Grotius in the Appendix. He wondered at first view, how the Volume should
come under that name. The greatest part give no various lections of the Hebrew
Text, as is pretended, but various interpretations of others from the Hebrew.
But the Prolegomena salves this seeming difficulty. They are not various
lections collected out of any Copies extant, or ever known to have been extant,
but critical conjectures of his own, for the amendment of the Text, or at most
conjectures upon the readings of the words by Translators, especially the LXX.
and Vulgar Latin. In the other place, he says, he shall not much concern
himself therein, they are nothing less then various Readings of that learned
man's own observation, setting aside, first the various lectious of the LXX. the
Vulgar Latin, Symmachus, and Theodotion, wherein we are not concerned.
Secondly, the Keri and Ketib, which we have oftentimes, over and over in this
Volume: Thirdly, the various Readings of the Greek and Occidentall Jews, which
we have also elsewhere: Fourthly, conjectures how the LXX. or Vulgar Latin
read by altring of letters only: Fifthly, conjectures of his own how the Text
may be mended, and a very little room will take up what remains. By the cursory
view he has taken of them, he sees not one word that can pretend to be a
various lection, unless it belong to the Keri and Ketib, or the difference
between the Oriental and Occidentall Jews.

XXII. Answer, I am not ignorant with what an envious eye that incomparably
learned man, the miracle of our times, is looked upon by all our Novellists;
and that his earnest study of the peace of the Church, and endeavor to close
up, rather then to make wider the breaches and wounds of Christendom, has
exposed him to the malice and fury of the turbulent and fiery spirits of all
sides. I shall not need to Apologize for him; what height of Learning, and
dephth of judgment dwelt in him, his Works proclaim to all learned and
moderate men, and will speak to all Posterity; others have with more able Pens
vindicated him from those obloquies and aspersions, which unreasonable men have
cast upon him. A man he was of that eminency in all kinds of learning, divine
and humane, of that exact judgment, prudence, piety, and moderation, that I
believe he has left few equals in the Christian world: In his younger years he
was by Scaliger himself (whose overweening conceit of his own great abilities
would hardly permit him to speak well of any) styled (...), in his Epistles: I
could not therefore but think that an extract out of his learned Annotations
might be fit amongst others to be inserted into this Work, and the rather,
because he was one that did not extrema sectari, but without inclining to any
party or faction, did propose to himself the search of the naked truth for it
self, and therefore I might hope that this pains would be thankfully received
by learned, wise, and moderate men, wherein I know I have not failed of my
ends; as for those violent and heady spirits, Turba gravis paci, etc. I know it
is in vain to think of satisfying them, or to hope that any thing will relish
with them, save what is ^itted to their own distempered palate: for as Espenc.
in Tit. 1. `Quibus os putet, omnia putida sunt, non alimenti, sed oris vitio.

XXIII. I shall not need therefore to Apologize, either for him or for my self,
in publishing this Extract, but shall observe, that our Author will proceed in
his usual way of calumnies. For first, He cannot make it appear by any one
word in the Prolegomena or Appendix, that this was the end of publishing his
Notes, as an instance of gathering various Readings by conjectures, when the
Text is corrupt, but merely because of his great and general learning, which
might make them acceptable to learned and moderate men; for which cause, I
conceived, they might justly deserve a place amongst the collections of other
learned men of the like nature which are here exhibited. Nor secondly, do these
Notes consist only or chiefly upon such conjectures, there are scarce one or
two in the whole Pentateuch, nor does he go merely upon conjectures, but
usually upon some ancient Translations, or Testimony of ancient Writers, and
reasons drawn from the circumstances of the Text: and so for other books of the
Old Testament, the most of them are critical notes about the several
Translations of others, and about the literal sense and reading of the Text,
scarce one or two of the Keri's are mentioned in three or four books, as we
shall show anon; and therefore not served over and over; yea, our Author
himself, p. 348. contradicting what he said, p. 313. and elsewhere, after his
usual manner, says, they are nothing less then various Readings of that
learned man's own observation, and therefore not such conjecturall various
Readings, as he says, are brought for instances in the Appendix. Thirdly, that
those out of the New Testament, which are the far greater part of that Extract,
are various Readings out of several Copies, (not bare conjectures) with his
judgment upon them, and the reasons for it; and therefore our Author may cease
wondering how these few sheets, (which are nothing less then a Volume, as he
calls them) should come under the name of various Readings, seeing the greatest
part? which may give denomination to the whole, consists of various Readings of
the New Testament: and though there be other observations amongst them of great
use and worth, yet the greater part consisting of diverse readings, might well
give the name to the whole: Besides, it is not said in the Title, that they be
all various Readings of the Hebrew, but various Readings in general; and
though there be few of the Hebrew in the Old Testament, yet there are others of
the Greek, Sept. Symmachus, Theodotion, and Aquila, the Vulgar Latin, and
other Translations, besides those of the New Testament; and therefore the
Prolegomena needs no such way as is by him surmized, to salve a difficulty
which is not. Fourthly, the Publisher did never take upon him to defend
whatsoever is said by any in their Notes which are added to the Bible; he is
not bound to maintain all that Nobilius, Lucas Brugensis, Mr. Young, or any
others have said in any of their observations, but thinks it enough that in
general they are of great use, and acceptable to learned men, who know how to
make use of them; and that to satisfy the desires of such, he had just cause
to annex them to this Edition: but if any man shall meet with some things,
which he cannot relish, let him not reject the Gold, because of some dross, or
reject the Wheat, though there be some chaff. The Publisher professes, there
are some things which he cannot wholly subscribe to, yet he is far from
rejecting the whole, or thinking it therefore not fit to be published, he
proposes them to all, let every man judge as he thinks fit, and abound in his
own sense, whether they approve, or reject, more or fewer, it shall be no
offense to him.

CHAP. VII.
I. Diverse Charges upon these various Readings here exhibited in particular.
II. The great bulk of them, that they are served twice or th^ice over. This
calumny answered. All those of the Original Texts may be comprised in two or
three sheets. III. Neither all differences whatsoever, nor those out of all
books printed or written, here collected. The vast untruth of this Charge
showed for the Hebrew. IV. And the Greek. V. The comparing of many Copies
useful. VI. Practiced by others, and commended by Origin, Hierom, Erasmus,
Beza, Camerar. Nobilius, Stephanus, etc. VII. The ^r^at use of collecting
various Readings out of several Copies. VIII. To prevent future mistakes. IX.
Practiced by the Jews. X. Approved by Buxtorf. XI. His Critica Sacra now
Printing at Basil; The Title page sent over. XII. The difference of the Keri
and Ketib, in sundry Editions not by mistake of the Printer. XIII. The
difference of diverse printed Copies showed in some instances. XIV. The great
use of the two Catalogues of the Keri and Ketib, not twice mentioned to
increase the bulk. XV. That the Copies are, some of them, the ancientest in the
world: They are all sufficiently altered* XVI. Of Beza's Copy. XVII. The MS. of
Emanuel College in Cambridge. The Adversaries mistakes: That Morinus is an
aspiring Jesuit: That Been Chajim corrected the impression of Faelix Pratensis,
etc. XVIII. That diverse differences of Copies are omitted: The Publisher not
bound to give a judgment of those exhibited. XIX. In this Edition, together
with the chiefest Translations, are exhibited the best and ancientest Copies:
The MSS. accounted great treasures in private Libraries, now put into every
man's hand.

I. BEsides these Generals, there are diverse things which he finds fault
with, in those particular Readings here exhibited in the last Volume, which we
must consider, before we pass from this head of various Readings. He is
offended with their multitude and great bulk, questions the antiquity and
goodness of the Copies, and the fidelity of the collectors, is angry that they
are barely propounded, and no choice made, nor judgment given on them, of all
which in order. First, for the bulk, he says, he was startled at this bulkie
collection, p. 146. p. 188. What a bulk or heap they are now swelled to, we see
in the Appendix; so p. 206. and 349. a spurious brood that has spawned it self
over the face of so much paper, as p. 192. yea, what ever varying word,
syllable or tittle could be brought to hand, wherein any books, though but of
yesterday, varieth from the common received Copies, though manifestly a
mistake, superfluous or deficient, incon^istent with the sense of the place,
yea, barbarous, is presently imposed upon us as a various Reading, ibid so p.
194. all differences whatsoever, that could be found in any Copies, printed or
otherwise, are equally given out; yea, p. 194. It is manifest that the design
of this Appendix was, to gather every thing of this sort that might by any
means be afforded; and however Satan seems to have exerted the utmost of his
malice, men of former ages the utmost of their negligence of these later ages
of their diligence, the result of all is in this collection of the Appendix,
etc. Nay, to increase the bulk, diverse of the same readings are twice, and
oftener mustered over. The Keri and Ketib are twice served over, to increase
the bulk, and present a face of new variety to the less attentive Reader, p.
158. and 304, 305. yea, a third time in Grotius, p. 348, 349. over and over;
and so those of the New Testament are given over again by Grotius and Luc.
Brugens. The collection of them makes a book bigger then the New Testament it
self, p. 189* etc.

II. For Answer: First our Adversary, by these many reiterated expressions,
would intimate, as if all the last Volume or Appendix consisted of nothing but
various Readings of the Original Texts, when as the whole Volume consists of
above two hundred sheets, of which there are not above two sheets of the Hebrew
various Readings, viz. only the Keri and Ketib, with those of Ben-Ascher, and
Ben Naphtali, the Oriental and Occidental Jews, (which are in diverse other
Editions of the Hebrew Bibles) reckoning in also the Annotations about the Keri
and Ketib, yea, the bare Readings themselves might be reduced into almost one
sheet: and as for those of the New Testament, gathered out of above forty old
Greek MSS. they are all contained in nine sheets, of which the very names of so
many MSS. so often repeated upon necessity upon every difference, with the
present reading of the Text, and the noting down the Chapter and Verse at every
various Reading, takes up the most of those sheets; so that I durst undertake,
that all these differences noted out of those MSS. if they were printed by
themselves, (without any thing else added) might be reduced into one or two
sheets; so that here this great voluminous bulk is shrunk from two hundred
sheets, to two or three. The greatest part of that Volume is spent about the
Greek Sept. wherein are those large notes of Nobilius, that rich Magazine and
Nursery of Learning, so accounted by all Learned men. Master Patrick Youngs
Notes upon Teclaes Sept. The collation of the Venice and Complutense Edition of
the Sept. with the Roman, whereby the Reader has, in a manner, all the
several Editions of the Sept. here presented in one Volume, and may consult
them all at pleasure, with diverse other old MSS. Diverse notes upon the Chaldee,
Syriack, Arabic, Samaritane, Persian, Aethiopick, and Vulgar Latin, of all
which, with the Tables of the Proper names expounded, and an Index of all the
Scripture, is that Volume, in a manner, made up; which things, before they were
printed (the heads of them being published and sent abroad) were much applauded
by all, never disliked, that I could hear of, till now, by any.

III. That all differences whatsoever are here collected out of all books,
printed or written, every varying word, tittle or syllable that could be
brought to hand, is far from truth, as appears by the Readings themselves, and
the Copies out of which they were gathered, which our Author could not be so
blind as not to read, though he was in such have that he could not consider
how the calumny did confute it self, and might be found out by every one that
looks upon the names of the Copies: For first, There is not one Hebrew Copy,
either MS. or Printed, here collated, or any differences collected, save those
of the Keri and Ketib, Ben-Ascher, and Ben-Naphtali, the Eastern and Western
Jews, which our Author himself tells us are in most Editions of the Hebrew
Bibles, only here they are more perfectly enumerated then in any former
Edition, being gathered out of diverse chief Editions of the Bible compared
together, amongst which there is a difference of two or three hundred in some
Editions, which confutes the Opinion of Ar. Mont. and some others, (of whom our
Author seems to be one) that would have the Keri and Ketib to be the same in
all Copies whatsoever; which labor might deserve, as it has found amongst
Learned and Ingenious men, thanks and acceptance, rather then reproach and
contumelies. Other varieties in the Hebrew Copies are not collected, (though
diverse might have been, as we shall see anon;) nor did we want Hebrew MSS. of
good antiquity, one belonging sometimes to Leo Modena, written above three
hundred years ago another more ancient, belonging to Cajus College in
Cambridge, part of which was collated; of which because it seemed to be
negligently written, and for other reasons, I did not think fit to mention the
differences. So here we see how far from truth this Charge is concerning the
Hebrew.

IV. And as far is it from truth concerning the Greek Text of the New
Testament: for (as any may see) here was not one Printed Copy collated (though
there be many differences between the Editions of Erasmus, Beza, the
Complutense, etc. and others, as all know who have collated any) and diverse MS.
Copies we had which were not collated at all, but chose out those that are
exhibited, leaving out the rest. Those various Readings observed out of the
Complutense, are indeed, most of them, noted among the rest, but not by
comparing any printed Copy, but as they are in Stephens various Readings,
gathered out of his sixteen Copies: so that we see how far our Author has
exceeded for the number.

V. But suppose that more Copies MS. and Printed had been collated and
exhibited, was it ever accounted a crime before now? If to consult and compare
ancient Copies has been heretofore always accounted good service, for
preserving the Original Text, or confirming and restoring the true reading, is
their diligence to be condemned that have done more then others before them in
that kind? If it were commendable in some, it cannot justly be blamed in
others. Those that have heretofore labored about any special Editions of the
Old or New Testaments, used to consult with all the ancient Copies they could
get, or others of good note. Thus did Origin in his Hexapla; thus did S. Hier.
as appears frequently in his Works; so did the Complutense Divines, Montanus,
Erasmus, Beza, Nobilius, Heintenius, Lucas Brugensis, the Lovain Divines and
others; thus among the Jews did Ben-Ascher, Ben-Naphtali, R. Hillel. R.
Ben-Chajim, R. Menachem, Ben-Louzano, R. Manasseh Ben-Israel, etc. they
compared diverse Copies, noted the differences, and sometimes gave their
judgment, pitching upon that Reading which they judged to be best; where is
our crime, who do the same now? nay not so much, seeing we do not presume to
alter any thing in the received or common reading, but only propound what we
find, and leave it to others to judge as they shall see cause.

VI. Our Author commends Erasmus, Beza, Camerarius, Stephanus, and others, for
the same thing for which we are reproved; It seems, if this had been done by
others, all had been well. Rob. Stephanus in his Edition of the Vulgar Latin,
anno 1540. names many old Copies he had collated, whose different Readings he
put in the Margent, and in his accurate Edition of the New Testament, he
reckons sixteen Greek Copies, which he collated, and out of them noted 2384.
various Readings, which he thought fit to put in the Margent of his Edition;
nor was he ever blamed by any, but highly approved by all for his pains and
diligence. Lucas Brugensis* a man of great learning and judgment, and a great
defender of the Original Copies, and one who spent most of his time in
collating old Copies of the Hebrew, Greek, Chaldee, Syriack, and Latin, in
that excellent book, his Notationes in loca variantia S. Scripturae, reckons up
above 10^ Copies which he compared and used. Heintenius and the Lovain Divines,
as appears by their Notes, used all the Copies Printed, and MSS. which they
could get, that they might help forward a correct and perfect Edition of the
Vulgar Latin. Erasmus in his Preface to his excellent Annotations on the New
Testament tells us what Copies he compared, and what pains he took about the
several Readings, that no error might pass, but the genuine Reading might be
established. But now it seems the case is altered; the more Copies we use, the
more labor is spent to no purpose: We are told that in gathering these various
Readings, we have the utmost of Satan's malice* the negligence of former times,
and the diligence of later times needlessly, yea to eminent scandal heaped up
together, for the result of them all is in this Appendix.

VII. But could this Aristarchus see nothing useful in the variety of Copies?
Saint Augustine was of another mind* when he wrote thus of the variety of
Translations in his time. Tantum abest ut ea varietate offendi, turbari, and
incertus reddi debeat, pius and Christianus lector, ut ex earum collatione and
examine certior reddatur, quid potissimum sequendum sit, quam si unica duntaxat
versio esset: and why may we not say the same of the various Readings of the
Original. Methinks it shows a special Providence over these books* that
notwithstanding some variety in smaller matters, all do constantly agree in all
matters of weight, whether of faith or life, yea, Historical and Prophetical;
for it will be hard for him or any other to find in all this bulky collection,
any one place which in^renches upon any point of ^aith or Religion, or any
other matter of moment, which must needs show Gods wonderful care in
preserving this rule of our faith and life entire without any danger; and even
in those lesser things he has not left us without means to judge of the best
reading, when any casual error shall appear. Besides, seeing no one Copy now
extant can pretend to be a standard in every thing for all others, and our
Adversary flies to this (as we showed already) that all the revealed truth is
preserved entire in some Copy or other, and seeing it is impossible to consult
all Copies in the world, therefore to have as many as we can, and those of
greatest antiquity, and of the best note, to consult with, is the best means
that can be used, to judge of the true reading, and to preserve it to
posterity. Now in these various Readings we have all the best and choicest
Copies that could be got; which are tendered to every man's view, and therefore
this collection must needs be of great use. Those therefore that have used
their utmost diligence in this kind for preserving the truth, are but ill
requited for their pains, when their diligence in preserving it is compared to
Satan's malice in corrupting it.

VIII. Let me add, that the observing of the varieties is a good means to
preserve the true Reading against future mistakes, when we have so many Copies
at hand to consult with upon all occasions, and among them so many conspiring
in the same Reading in all matters of any moment, so that I may say with Lucas
Brugens. Pr^f. ad lectorem* Out of these Copies, Si non ipsi judicium far,
certe aliis dare, unde aut far possint, aut suo quemque monente Lectionis
varieta^em aestimare -- Non quasi Scriptura sacra erroribus obnoxi^ sit, quae a
prima veritate perfecta veritatis regul^ est, sed quod in codices, sive
apographa ipsa, Graeca maxim and Latina, per frequentem exemplarium in
exemplaria transfusionem, nunc librariorum, nunc lectorum oscitantia, incuria,
inscitia, temeritate, labeculae, errata, depravationesque irrepserint, quae
aliorum codicum, sive apographorum collatione, mutari, corrigi, auferri debent.
And what he says of the Vulgar Latin, I know not but may be said of the
Original Text. Emendate imprimi haud posse videtur, nisi collatis variis
exemplaribus menda deprehensa eliminetur, sincera lectio administretur. For as
follows, haeret animi dubis quid amplectatur donec ex fontibus, aut ex antiquis
aliarum linguarum editionibus, aut ex Trac^atorum Commentariis, aut ex locorum
circumstantiis, aut ex ipsa exemplarium spectata integritate, aut denique ex
his simul omnibus, quod inter exemplaria ipsa discernat, adfer atur. Thus far
this judicious Author, who in a few words answers our authors whole volume of
Considerations, about various Readings.

IX. The Jews themselves, as I have said take this course in their Editions of
the Hebrew Text, They compare diverse Copies, and note the Differences.
Manasses Ben Israel in his late Edition (much approved by diverse) tells us of
four Copies, that were omnium correctissima, which he compared together, and
when any difference offered it self, his refuge was to the Grammar rules, and
the Masora, and adds Correctionem adhibui quam diligentissime, errata tum in
punctis, tum in literis, atque adeo etiam in ipsis locorum aliquorum regulis,
quae in exempl^ribus hactenus editis non pauca reperi, postquam ea diligenter
annotavi, fideliter omnia emendavi. Here we see this great Rabbi found not a
few errors crept in, and differences in the Hebrew Copies, which he corrected
and amended. He might have learned of our Author, that his labor was
needless; there can be no errors in the Text, that this was presumption to
correct the Word of God.

X. To conclude this, let him consult Buxtorf, his Vindic. who will inform him
that there are diverse various Readings in the Hebrew Text in our present
Copies, besides the Keri and the Ketib and the rest above mentioned, some of
which have been collected by others; and that he is so far from blaming those
that collect them, that he wishes that more Copies were compared, and the
various Readings gathered, that a correct Copy might be made out of them all.
Non impedio quo minus codicum Hebraicorum variae lectiones observentur,
colligentur, imo etiam ex illis correctiones instituantur. Vindic. part. 1. c.
4. p. 90. and p. 67. Ex collatione exemplarium emendatum exemplar cudi potest,
licet non ad extremum usque apicem, (illud enim facile concederem, nec esse nec
fuisse, imo nec esse posse.) More we have to the same purpose, Vind. lib. 2. c.
12. p. 834. Quod (plures codices conferendo, discernendo, and dijudicando) ex
Hebraeis aggredi incepit post R. Ben Chajim editorem Bibl. majorum Venetorum R.
Menachem Louzano in prima part libri (...) per Pentateuchum: and optandum
esset ut illius opera per caeteros quoque libros Biblicos continuasset, vel
alius ei succederet. Again, Vindic. part 1. c, 12. p. 202. Optandum esset ut
quae ab eo tempore sunt ab Hebraeis ipsis variae lectiones observatae, ab
aliquo colligerentur, ut Christianis etiam innotescerent, prout illarum multae
extant in Bibliis majoribus Venetis and Basil. Et nuper etiam R. Menachem
Louzano in part prima libri (...) collegit ex multis and probatissimis simul
and antiquissimis libris ^ebraicis quascunque observare potuit in lege varias
lectiones* Imo si alibi in Bibliothecis quoque Regum, Principum, Vrbium,
exemplaria Hebraica extent, facile patior ut conferantur, et si lectiones
varias continerent, meliores eligantur. Here we see this learned Hebrician
acknowledges various Readings among the Hebrew Copies, besides those already
noted, and this without prejudice to the purity of the Text, also wishes that
as many Copies as can be procured were compared, the different Readings
gathered, out of which the best might be chosen, and so a more correct Edition
might be made then any hitherto.

XI. This which he then wished to be done by others, is since done by himself:
he has collected out of all the Copies printed or MSS. which he could procure,
all the various Readings he could find, and has written a full volume of them;
wherein he gives also his judgment of them, which are best, which he offered
once to be Printed in our Bibles, (and if we could have had it in time, I
should willingly have inserted it,) But he is now Printing an Hebrew Bible at
Basil, to which this his Critica sacra is annexed, which if it had not been
stopped by some intervening accident in the vacancy of the Empire had been
finished ere now, as appears by Letters which I lately received from him. The
Title of his Book as it was sent over by himself, for further satisfaction of
the Reader I shall set down.

JOH. BUXTORFII FILII CRITICA SACRA.

Seu Notae in universos veteris Testamenti libros Hebraicos.

Quibus variae eorundem lectiones, quae vel scribarum seu Typographorum, seu
etiam Correctorum imperitorum, and seculorum, culpa hactenus irrepserint,
partim ex probatis codicibus, partim ex Masora, quae vetus est Hebraeorum
Critica, ostensa in plerisque locis genuina lectione dijudicantur.

Opus ad novas Editiones in posterum castigate edendas, and veteres emendendas
utilissimum and necessarium, a nemine Christianorum hactenus tentatum.

Praemittitur Dissertatio D. V. qua Criticae hujus sacrae ^origo, progressus,
forma and modus, totiusque hujus operis ratio, and usus before explicantur.

Accedunt etiam Indices variarum lectionum inter Ben Ascher and Ben Naphtali,
Orientalium and Occidentalium, etc.

XII. To these we might add that the Keri and Ketib are not the same in all
Editions, the number differing by some Hundreds: our Author says they are the
same in all Editions, only in some the number varies by mistake and oversight.
p. 296. Rather himself was mistaken and overseen when he wrote this. No man
that look^ upon them can imagine but that they were purposely so Printed, and
that according to the Copies which the Publishers followed, and not by any
mistake either of the Printer or Publisher. Some Editions have two or three
hundred more then others, and can it be supposed that so many words could be
added in the Margent, with the Keri under them, and as many words marked in the
Text, and to have the points affixed to them, which belong to the marginall
word, and all this done by casual mistake Credat Judaeus Apella, I can hardly
think that our Author himself upon deliberation will avouch it any more. The
difference according to some chief Editions I have seen transcribed out of the
Prolegomena, that the Reader may judge.

In Edit. Venet. 2. In Edit. Plant. Pentat. Ker. 73. Jeth. 1. Ker. 74. Jeth 1.
Chas. 2. Megil. Ker. 51. Jeth. 11. Ker. 43. Jeth 14. Proph. prior. K. 337.
Jeth. 11. Chas. 2. K. 239. Jeth. 24. Proph. poster. K. 348. K. 250. Jeth. 25.
Jeth. 2. Chas. 1. Hugiogr. Ker. 362. K. 187. Jeth. 34. Jeth. 60. Chas. 1. Chas.
1. Bibl. Reg. Eli. Levit. Ker. 69. Jeth. 1. Chas. 1. Ker. 65. K. 48. Jeth. 8.
K. 277. Jeth. 18. Chas. 5. K. 454. K. 347. Jeth. 11. K. 242. Jeth. 20. Chas. 1.
K. 229.

Summa totalis. K. 1171. K. 793. Jeth. 99. K. 983. Jeth. 58. K. 858. Jeth. 85.
Chas 9. Chas 7. Chaser. 3.

XIII. I hope by this our Author will believe there are some differences in the
Hebrew Copies, and yet the Copies are not corrupt. When Buxtorfs Bible comes
out, whereof part is already Printed, this superstitious conceit of the Hebrew
Copies not varying in any thing will clearly vanish. In the mean time he may
look on Capellus his Crit. lib. 3. c. 9. where he may find diverse various
Readings collected besides the Keri and Ketib out of the best Editions, and
that not in points only, but in letters and words, and such as are not errors
of the Printer, but came from the difference of Copies, diverse Translations,
both ancient and Modern, following one Reading, and diverse others, another; As
Prove. 21. 4. Plant. and Steph. have (...) Lucerna impiorum, so read the LXX.
Chald. and vulgar Latin. But Bomberg. and Munst. in quarto read (...) for
(...), and Munst. in fol. has (...) Novale, and so the Tigurin. and Junius;
the last English translates it plowing, and the French laboring. Hos. 13. 6.
the Venice, Steph. Munster in quarto read (...) speculabor. But in Plant. it is
(...) Assyria, and so the LXX. and the vulgar Latin read it. 1. Chron. 1. 6.
Bomb. and Munster in fol. read (...) with daleth, so Mas. par. Kimchi and
Jarchi. But Plant. Steph. and Munst. in quarto read (...) with Resh. So the
LXX. and vulgar Latin. In the same chapter ver. 7. Bamb. reads Rodanim (...)
and the lesser Masora, Kimchi, and Jarchi, say it ought so to be read. But
Plant. Steph. and Munst. in fol. and quarto read (...) with Daleth. 1 Chronicles. 6.
41. Plant. Bomb. and Steph. read, (...), but Munster fol. and quar. omits the
word (...) and so does the LXX. the Tigurin. and Castellio, and the later
French Translations. Jos. 14. 2. Steph. and Munst. fol. and quar. read (...),
so does the Tigur. and Castellio, but Plant. and Bomb. leave out (...) and so
does the LXX. Junius, the French and English. Josh. 22. ult. after (...) Plant.
leaves a void space, and note^ in the Margent, that (...) testis is to be
understood and supplied, and this is followed by Castle. the late English, and
the French But Steph. Bomb. and Arias Montanus omit (...), so does the LXX.
vulgar Latin, and the Tigurin. Those that please may see more in Capellus, in
the place above mentioned; and if they consult Buxtorf his Vindic* they may see
he dislikes not the collecting of such varieties out of Hebrew Copies; nor
thinks that they infer the corruption of the Hebrew Copies.

XIV. What he objects about the same various Readings served twice over, the
Keri and Ketib over and over, etc. still shows his Candor and love of truth.
Could he find no reason why the Keri and Ketib were twice enumerated, but to
increase the bulk, and present the more variety to a less attentive Reader?
read them over and blush. They are first reckoned up according to the order of
the Books and Chapters, as they stand in the Bible, as they are in other
Editions, that so the Reader might know what is in each Book and Chapter, yet
here they are with reference to the several chief Editions of the Bible, which
differ much in the number, which was not done before in any Edition. And is
there nothing in the second Catalogue but a bare enumeration of the same
argument? any eye not blinded with prejudice might have seen some other benefit
arising to the Reader: For whereas they are of diverse sorts and natures, they
are all reduced to their several Heads and Classes, and the number of each
sort examined, and the places quoted together where they are dispersedly
mentioned throughout the Bible, and withal, how many, and which of each sort
are acknowledged by each Edition, and withal some judgment given of most of
them. Thus for example: There are some which are not written in the Text, a
void space being left, or only the points without the letters, which yet are
to be read as in the Marg* of which sort are thirteen which are there
mentioned, and the places mentioned where they are to be ^ound: some again are
written in the Text, but not read, which have no points affixed, of which sort
are ^ive, which are there mentioned with the places where they are to be found.
Again, some are written conjunctim in the Text, as if they were one word, which
as the marginall Keri notes must be read divisim, as two words, of which sort
are eleven, or as the little Masora says, fifteen, which are also all
specified together: Some again are written severally, as if they were diverse
words, which are to be read jointly as one word, as the Keri notes, of which
sort are eight. Again, some words there are which to those chaste Rabbis seemed
obscene, and therefore they put others less offensive in the margent to be
read in their stead in the Synagogues, of which sort are ten, which are all
enumerated, with some about servile, some about radical letters, some by
addition, some by detraction, some by transposition, or change of a letter,
some about words, etc. of all which sorts, how many, and in what places they
are, is distinctly set down, and what difference there is about them in the
chief Editions, or in the Masora, or El. Levita. Now, can our cavilling
Adversary find no use of all this, but only to increase the number? is there
not here much satisfaction to the Reader to know how many there are of each
rank, and where to be found. If he find no benefit, he may forbear to look
upon it, and leave it to others that can, let him find out every difference by
the first Catalogue. Nor was this ordering of them the work of Capellus alone,
though he has labored more then any other therein. The same was done long
before by Elias Lev. and in the Masora, in many, by Schindler, Sixtin. Amama,
whose observations about these things were published long before Capellus his
Critica. That which is added about Grotius, is as void of truth as the rest.
Are they given a third time in Grotius his Notes, where there are scarce one or
two mentioned in the whole Pentateuch, though there are above seventy? So in I.
and II. of Sam. not above two mentioned among an hundred, and so for the rest.
How great a bulk do these make, how is the Volume swelled by them? Neither had
these few been mentioned out of him, but that he gives his judgment of them.
The like may be answered to what he says of those of the New Testament. In the
first collection they are barely named, with the Copies they relate to. In
Grotius and Lucas Brugensis, their several judgments are given of so many as
they took notice of. Now is it no benefit to the Reader, to have the judgment
of such Learned Men upon them, but all must be to increase the bulk?

XV. As he finds fault with the multitude of the various Readings, so he
questions the Copies out of which they are gathered, and the fidelity of the
Collectors. The Copies, few or none are of any considerable antiquity, page 195.
any book though but of yesterday, p. 192. he doubts whether these Readings be
tolerably attested to for various Readings or no, page 191. Beza has
stigmatized his own Copy sent to Cambridge, to be so corrupt in the Gospel of
Saint Luke, that he durst not publish the various Readings of it, for fear of
scandal, p. 195. Besides, in that MS. Copy of Emanuel College, which is only
of the Epistles, many various Readings are quoted, as out of the Gospels and
Acts, with Col. Eman prefigured. And it may be supposed that this mistake goes
not alone; but upon examination of particulars, they will be found not so
clearly attested, etc. He doubts not, but upon search, some of these Copies
will be found no better then that Hebrew MS. of the Psalms, rejected by Arias
Montanus, and therefore he earnestly exhorts some of his University to examine
these various Readings, etc. Here we may observe how little our Considerator
considered what he wrote, but that he vented Quicquid in buccam venerat; for
how could he judge of the Copies and MSS. we used, which he never collated, and
may be scarce ever saw any of them? I am sure they are the choicest, and some
of them of the best Antiquity in England, yea, some the ancientest that are
this day in the world. And I can further aver, that some Copies I said aside,
which seemed to be of no antiquity, or negligently written, so far were we from
taking up all that could be had, though but of yesterday. The greatest part of
those of the New Testament were, as said before, with great labor and charge,
sought out, and collated by the most Reverend Usher, and out of the best
Libraries, public or private in England; and I believe, he was as able to
judge of a Copy as another. What thinks our Author of the Alexandrian MS. of
the New Testament in Greek, preserved in the Kings Library, written in Capital
Letters, without accents, or distinction either of words or sentences, one of
the Noblest MSS. in the world? which kind of writing has been out of use for
above a thousand years, as our best Antiquaries conclude, and therefore this
MS. must needs exceed that age. What of the Codex Claromontanus, and of that
which Beza sent to Cambridge, written in the same manner? Most of the rest are
of great Antiquity. Not to insist upon that Greek MS. of the Chronicles,
brought out of Greece by Theodorus, who was Archbishop of Cant. above a
thousand years ago, which is now in Cambridge Library; nor of that ancient
remnant of Sir Robert Cottons Greek MS. of Genesis, esteemed by Learned Usher
the oldest MS. in the world, because these concern the Greek LXX which is of no
account with our Adversary. But what attestation desires he of the Copies? the
most of them are in public Libraries, and may attest for themselves, he may
exhort whom he will to examine the Copies and the various Readings, if he can
find them unfaithfully collected, let him publish it to the world, and not
spare us. But how this will be done, unless they mean to collate all over
again, I know not, and I doubt it will be found a labor, which neither he, nor
any of his novices will easily undergo.

XVI. But he instances in some Copies. Bezaes is stigmatized by himself: but
where had he this, but out of Bezaes Epistle to the University, which he had
not known if I had not published it? And if I had intended to deceive the
Reader, I might have suppressed it, whereas I have plainly declared my
judgment on that Copy about the Genealogy of Christ, Prolegom. 9. 65. that in
that point it is of no credit: yet why it might not be useful in other matters
I know not; and considering the great antiquity of it, why it might not deserve
to be collated amongst other Copies. Beza frequently makes use of it in his
Notes, and calls it, Exemplar suum venerandae antiquitatis* and those that
please may find it to agree with our Old Alexandrian MS. and other ancient
Copies, and with the reading of diverse ancient Writers of the Church, where our
later Copies do read otherwise, so that the concurrence of it with those
ancient Copies, may confirm the reading that is found in them, and so it may be
of great use. And though Beza says, he found so great discrepance in it from
other Copies in Saint Luke, that to avoid the offense of some (weak persons) he
thought fit rather to preserve it then to publish it, (which is all the
stigmatizing here boasted of) yet he adds, In hac non sententiarum, sed vocum
diversitate, nihil profecto comperi, unde suspicare potu^rim ^ veteribus illis
Haereticis fuisse depravatum. Imo multa mihi videor deprehendisse observatione
digna, quaedam etiam sic a recepta scriptura discrepantia, ut tamen cum veterum
quorundam and Graecorum and Latinorum Patrum scriptis consentiant, quae omnia
pro ingenii mei modulo inter s^ comparata, and cum Syra and Arabica Editione
collata, in majores meas Annotationes a me nuper emendatas, and brevi (Deo
favente) prodituras congessi. Here we see what use Beza made of this Copy, and
how he stigmatizes it. If he had thought so basely of it as our Author, he
would never have thought it worthy to be presented to such an University, nor
they to preserve it as such a rare Monument of Antiquity.

XVII. As for that MS. of St. Paul's Epistles in Emanuel College, though there
was another MS. in the same College, of the Gospels and Acts, whose name was
casually omitted in the Catalogue, yet he can never prove any falsification, or
indirect dealing. Here is no obtruding of any various Readings out of a MS.
which is not. Only the name of that MS. of the Gospels and Acts was not noted
among the rest, and what great matter is this? Is the Reader hereby deceived or
abused with any forgerie or untruth? The occasion of the omission was this,
Those Readings of that MS. came to hand after the rest were finished, and after
the Catalogue of the MSS. was drawn up, ready for the Press, whereby the name
of this MS. was forgotten to be inserted among the rest in the Catalogue. Our
Author himself confesses that in a Work of this variety, it were a miracle
that many things should not escape the eye of the most diligent observer, yet
he cannot forbear to insinuate, that there has not been fair dealing in this
collection, nor to raise suspicions, as if other things of the like nature
might be found upon further search. This omission is not so great, as his
mistake that says, that Morinus (now lately dead) was a Jesuit, a petulant
Jesuit, p. 207. an aspiring Jesuit, p. 299. when any that reads the Title
Page of any of his books, may see he was of the Oratorian Order, which was
founded diverse years after that of the Jesuits: or, that the Oracles of God
were committed to the Jews under the Old Testament, and all the Writings of the
New, as we find, Ep. p. 3. and yet no notice taken of in the Errata; or to
write, as p. 80 that the various Readings of the Eastern and Western Jews
appeared first in the Edition of the Bible by Bombergus, under the care of
Faelix Pratensis, gathered by R. Jacob Ben-Chajim, who corrected that
Impression, which is: as if one should say, that the various Readings of the
New Testament appeared first in Erasmus his Edition of the New Testament,
gathered by Stephanus, who corrected that Impression. Here are many mistakes,
which show that he never looked into any Edition of the Venice Bible: for
Faelix Pratensis, and Ben-Chajim, never joined in one Edition of the Bible, one
was by Faelix Pratensis, another by Ben-Chajim: nor are those various Readings
gathered by Ben-Chajim, but were first published by Faelix Pratensis, as he
might have read in Prolegom. 4. Sect. 14. or if he will not believe me, let him
read Buxtorf his Bibliotheca Babbinica, page 228. etc. or believe his own eyes.
I could instance in more of this kind if I thought it needful, nor should I
have mentioned these, if he had not given me this occasion.

XVIII. He objects, that in these various Readings, There is no choice made, no
judgment used in discerning true from spurious, but all differences
whatsoever, that could be found in any Copies, printed or written, are equally
given out: That the first observation in Lucas Brugensis, printed next to this
Collection, rejects one of these varieties as a corruption, etc. I answer, 1.
That is altogether untrue: for many differences in these Copies were left out,
because they appeared plainly to be errors of the Transcriber; and this I can
certainly affirm, and therefore all differences of Copies are not here noted:
Secondly, yet I deny not but that there may be diverse remaining which may come
into that number, which I thought fit rather to leave to the Readers judgment,
then to leave out every thing which seemed so to me; for that may seem to be a
mistake of the Scribe to one, which happily may be thought none in another
judgment, as appears in that which he says is noted by Lucas Brugensis for a
corruption, which yet he knows Robertus Stephanus reckoned among various
Readings; and Beza thought so well of it, that he preferred it before the
common reading: nor does Lucas Brugensis reject it as a corruption; but taxes
Beza for preferring this Reading upon the authority of one Copy before the
common Reading; but it seems, if one Reading have more reason for it then
another, the other must presently be a corruption in our Adversaries Logic,
and yet it appears, that there are more Copies then one which attest this
Reading; we have four more which concur in it, as appears in our Collection,
and I doubt it would trouble him to answer Beza's reasons for that Reading.
Thirdly, it is declared more then once in the Prolegomena, that every
difference of a Copy is not properly a various Reading. Vide Prolegom. 6. Sect.
8. Scribarum errores de quibus certo constat, inter varias lectiones nequaquam
reforendi; and therefore, (though the major part give the denomination to the
whole, and all differences in a general sense may be called various Readings)
if any who have leisure and abilities, shall survey them, and shall plainly
prove, that some of them are errors of the Transcriber, it shall be no offense
at all to me, so it be not done, animo calumniandi, without magisteriall
imposing their conceits upon others, and so that they leave to others the like
liberty which they assume to themselves. Neither were it incumbent on us, (as
our Author cannot but confess, and therefore answers himself) to give our
judgment upon every Reading, which is the best* we had work enough besides:
and therefore those that have so much leisure to cavil and quarrel at every
thing, may do well to exercise their Critical faculty herein, only I wish they
may have better success then our Author has in that Specimen of his critical
abilities, about (...), 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. page 19. 20, etc. and that they would
not be too forward in determining such to be corruptions, which it may be,
wiser and learneder men judge otherwise of. Fourthly, to give the several
Readings of ancient Copies of note, without passing any judgment of each, is
no new thing. In what Edition of the Hebrew Bibles, does he find any judgment
upon the Keri and Ketib in particular, and those other Hebrew varieties? or
where does he find any thing to this purpose, save what is done by Capellus in
his Critica, or by Buxtorf, in his Bible now Printing. Ar. Mont. brings diverse
Readings of the Greek, Chaldee, and Syriack, which are barely recited, so does
Stephanus in those which he gathered out of his sixteen Copies. Junius, (who is
thought to be the Author of the Frankf. Edition of the Sept.) notes diverse
Readings out of several Copies, but seldom gives any judgment of them. And if
here the Publisher had only selected some choice ones, as seemed good to
himself, he had not left all to the Readers judgment, but subjected all to his
own.

XIX. But our Author might have observed, that the design of the Edition was
not only to exhibit to the Reader all the ancient and chief Translations,
together with the Originals, but also the chief Copies, MS. or others, of both,
that so in this Edition the Reader might have all, or most other Editions, and
the best MSS. which he might consult at pleasure. The particular MSS. belonging
to several Libraries, either in the Universities or Colleges, or of private
persons, who were great gatherers of Monuments of Antiquity, have been justly
accounted great treasures. Who would not set a high esteem upon those Copies
and MSS. here collated, if he had them all in his own keeping; now care is here
taken that every private man may have them, and use them as his own. This pains
I see was ill bestowed upon such as make so ill use of it, as to throw the
Copies like dirt in our faces, and thereby take occasion to calumniate our
Labors. Besides, though some of these differences seem small, yet they may be
of more use hereafter then appears at present, upon the rising of new Errors
and Heresies; which I confess was one reason, why the fewer were left out,
because we could not know, nor foresee what use might be made of them
hereafter, though they seem less useful at present: and therefore it was
resolved to give them as they are; which, considering the many cautions and
rules about them, Prolegom. 6. De variis lectionibus, to stop the mouth of
Calumny, and prevent all just cause of offense, I conceived might be justly
done.

CHAP. VIII.
I. The Consequences inferred by the Adversary from the various Readings, on
the behalf of Atheists, Papists, Fanatic persons, Mahumetanes. II. He proves
none of them. III. The inconsequence showed. IV. The words of Sixth. Amama. V.
Of Bochartus, Lud. De Dieu, etc. VI. Erasmus, The same words used by the Friars
against him, which this Adversary uses against the Biblia Polyglotta. VII. No
error or mistake is capable of cure by his rules. The words of themselves.
VIII. The Adversaries argument retorted upon himself. He pleads for Papists,
Atheists, etc. grants, yea, urges, both the Premises, only denies the
Conclusion. IX. That he is guilty of what he accuses others. X. Various
Readings give no advantage to Papists, Atheists, Antiscripturists, or
Mahumetanes, as is showen in particular.

I. HAving gone over these particulars about various Readings, I might forbear
to say any thing more of that Subject, of which enough is said to satisfy any
rational Reader; but because our Adversary does frequently, from what is said
by us, and confessed by himself, labor to infer certain false and pernicious
Consequences against the certainty and supreme Authority of Scripture on the
behalf of Atheists, Papists, Fanatic Antiscripturists, and M^h^metanes, we
shall briefly consider the force of those Consequences, whether they do justly
follow from any Principle by us acknowledged in the Prolegomena or Appendix.
Our Author sometimes seems not to be resolved of the truth of his Consequence.
p. 147. he says, these various Lections do, at the first view, seem to
intimate that the Originals are corrupt. p. 159. They seem sufficient to beget
scruples, etc. p. 156. These Prolegomena seem to impair the truth. etc. p. 147.
Men of perverse minds may possibly wrest these things: Nay, p. 206. he says,
That the Prefacer does not own those wretched Consequences. Now, if they do but
seem sufficient, and if they be wrested by men of perverse minds, then those
Consequences do not necessarily follow: no genuine Consequence can be said to
be wrested, nor will he, I hope, join with men of perverse minds. And if the
Author of the Prolegomena do not own them, then they ought not to be objected
against him, without sufficient proof of the Consequences, which these
Considerations do no where afford. But in other places he speaks more
positively: p. 205. They are all directed, or by just consequence owned in the
Prolegomena. p. 206. That no sufficient security against the lawful deriving
of them is tendered. p. 161. That they are an engine fitted for the destruction
of that important truth by him pleaded for, and as a fit weapon put into the
hands of Atheistical men, to oppose the whole evidence of truth revealed in
the Scripture, etc. p. 207. Great and wise men, (of which himself is one
without doubt) do suppose them naturally, and necessarily to flow from them.
And therefore, p. 147. he absolutely affirms, They are in brief, the foundation
of Mahumetanisme, the chiefest and principal prop of Popery, the only
pretense of Fanatic Antiscripturists, and the root of much hidden Atheism in
the world.

II. Now we know the Rule is, A^^irmanti incumbit probatio, and therefore our
Adversary ought to prove and make good his Consequences, or else he must be
accounted a false accuser; yet here we do not find that he offers any thing in
this kind, to prove that they do follow from any Principles in the
Prolegomena; but as he substitutes what he pleases, in stead of his Adversaries
tenent; so he infers at random any thing that came into his mind, whereby to
make them odious to Vulgar Readers. The injustice of his Charge may
sufficiently appear by what is already said, and therefore I shall only
recapitulate the sum of what is formerly proved, re-inforcing some
particulars, and then show, that the Charge may be upon himself, as being
deeply guilty, by his own confession, of what he would impute unto another.

III. That no such Inference can be made against the certainty, integrity, and
supreme Authority of Scripture, from any thing affirmed in the Prolegomena, may
appear, because, as is at large showed, The Prolegomena do not affirm the
Original Texts to be corrupt, but to be pure and authentic, of supreme
authority, the rule of faith and life, and of all Translations. The various
Readings of the Original Texts do not infer the corrupting of the Text, but
may well stand with the purity and authority thereof. That our Author affirms
the same with the Prolegomena, about various Readings, which he frequently
confesses to be both in the Old Testament and the New. And as for those
various Readings out of Translations which he would not allow, they are of the
same nature with those which he allows out of the original copies: for the
Prolegomena say they are in matters of no moment, contain nothing repugnant to
the Analogy of says, and such are by himself allowed in the Hebrew and Greek.
That the most learned Protestant Divines, and best skilled in the Oriental
Tongues, and most zealous defenders of the Original Texts, have said the same
with the Prolegomena, and in some things more, such as Luther, Calvin, Beza,
Mercer, Brentius, Oecolampadius, Pelican, Scaliger, De Dieu, Sixtin. Amama,
Archbishop Usher, and in a manner, all others, who would never be so
inconsiderate, as to affirm and deny the same thing, or to give back to their
adversaries with one hand, what they had taken from them with the other, and
though I have both in Prol^g. 6. Sect. 2. and in this answer cited diverse of
their words, yet I shall here add something more, with their reasons against
the Consequences here objected, and those of such men whom he cannot in the
least suspect of inclining to Rome.

IV. Sixtin. Amama, late Hebrew Professor at Froneker, one who our Author in
his Epist. p. 9. joins with Whitaker, Reynolds, Junius, Chamier, Amesius and
others, that have stopped the mouths of Romanists speaking against the Original
Texts, and quenched the fire which they would put to the house of God, as he
expresses it, This man in that excellent book called Antibarbarismus Biblicus,
which is wholly in defense of the Hebrew Text, writes thus lib. 1. Haud negare
ausim, and injuria temporum, and descriptorum incuria, errata quaedam and
sphalmata in Textum Hebraicum irrepsisse. Hoc autem dum admittimus, authoritati
Textus Hebraici nihil detrahimus, manet nihilominus Textus Authenticus, and
omnium versionum norma. Afterward he adds, ex omnibus variantibus lectionibus
pro^eratur una, unde vel Orthodoxae fidei, vel pietati ullum detrimentum
inferri possit. Certe his talibus nullam intervenisse Judaeorum malitiam non
tantum hinc apparet quod nullum ex illis Judaicae perfidiae patrocinium
exsculpi possit, sed and ex eo quod fontes variarum lectionum assignari
possunt, inter quos primarii sunt, affinitas soni vel affinitas figurae
consonantis, vel indifferentia sensus, etc. Quin and illud consideratione
dignum in is it is infirmitatis humanae erratis and (...) non dormitasse vigilem
providentiae divinae oculum, dum cavit diligentissime ne vel minima orthodoxae
fidei particula, vel pietas ex eorum usu detrimentum capiat.

V. To him let us add Bochartus, Minister at Cane in France, a man no less
eminent for his various learning, then for his zeal and piety, in that
admirable Work of his; his Geographia sacra part 1. l. 2. c. 13. part of whose
words I have formerly cited, who writes thus; Licet eandem scribis non tribuam
(...) quam scriptoribus sacris, non tamen inde sequitur, quod nonnulli subinde
oggerunt, actum esse de fide and salutisdoctrina, and in ea nihil esse certi:
Quis enim ferat in aliis sic arguentem? In Lirii and Suetonii scriptis quidam
errores irrepserunt: ergo in Historia Romana nihil est certi; and in iis quae
de Hannibale, aut Julio, aut Augusto leguntur, nutat fides. Aristotelis Graeci
codices alicubi sunt mendosi: ergo quid ille scripscrit de rebus Philosophicis
certo scire hand possumus. Quamvis exemplum sit valde dispar. Nam multo aliter
invigilavit Dei Providentia ut sacrae Scripturae codices praestaret immunes,
saltem in iis quae ad fidem and salutem sunt absolute necessaria: unde est,
quod ut ut Hebraei and Graeci codices variant in minutulis, and Sacri Textus
interpretes saepe in diversa abeunt, tamen in fidei capitibus, and (...), eadem
ubique doctrina occurrat, non jam dicam in (...), sed and in versionibus
corruptissimis. What could be more fully said to show the vanity of our Authors
consequence? The same we may read in Lud. de Dieu, a man of great learning,
especially in the Oriental tongues, as his works proclaim, Praef. in
animadvers. in Evangel. Nec est quod quenquam turbet ea codicum lectionumque
varietas, quasi nihil certi haberet fides Christiana cui inniteretur, nihil
enim deprehendo quod fidei substantiam laederet -- Tantum abest ut Erasmum,
Camerarium, Bezam, viros pietate and eruditione conspicuos, culpare audeam,
quod in suis ad sacros libros not is varias lectiones observarint, ut contra
eos utilem operam navasse credam. Here we see the same Arguments which our
Adversary brings about the uncertainty of Scripture propounded, and the same
answer given which we have given already. They show the inconsequence of his
Argument, and acknowledge the great usefulness of gathering various Readings,
and further (which is to be observed) they do not only allow of various
Readings out of the Original Texts, but also out of Translations, which they
often practice themselves, and sometimes prefer before the common Reading, as
we have showed Proleg. 6. Sect. 9.

VI. I will mention one more, Erasmus, whom our Author names as the first and
chiefest that labored in this kind, p. 189. and Epist. p. 21. whose pains
likewise he tells us were calumniated by some in his time. He wrote indeed a
whole Volume of Apologies for his several Works, and in this particular he was
railed upon most by ignorant Friars, who used the same words, which are now
taken up by this Author against us, for the same thing. He compared diverse
Copies of the new Testament, to make his Edition the more perfect, and several
Translations and expositions of the Ancients, whereupon as appears, Epist. ad
Henr. Bovillum, they cried out, quasi protinus actum esset de Religione
Christiana -- vociferantur, (...), O coelum, O terra, corrigit hic Evangelium.
So here they bring in utter incertainty about all sacred truth, Epist. p. 25.
they correct the Scripture, p. 344. correct the word of God, p. 180. And Annot.
1: in Leum, In answer to Lee, objecting the same thing, he says, Ostendat
nobis suo digito Lens, quae sit illa lectio quam dictavit Sp. S. and hanc u^am
amplexi, quicquid ab hac variat rejiciemus. Quod si ille non potest, ex
collatione linguarum and exemplarium, ex lectione, ex Translationibus celebrium
auctorum nobiscum scrutetur, quae lectio sit maxim probabilis.

VII. If our Adversaries rule had been received, that no errors can befall the
Text, either by malice, or negligence, there had never been any correct Edition
made by any: and if it had been thought unlawful, in any case to question the
common Reading, men might have spared their labor, who from time to time, by
comparing Copies and other helps above mentioned, have endeavored to make Exact
Editions, both of the Hebrew and Greek, which we see yet was at several times
practiced both by Jews and Christians; Ben Ascher, Ben Naphtali, R. Hillel, Ben
Chajim, Manass. Ben Israel, Buxtorf, Arias Montanus, Erasmus, Steven, Beza, and
others, who altered and amended what they found by mistake had crept into the
common or vulgar Copies; and whose labors, either by explicit or tacit
consent of the Church, receiving them without gainsaying, have been approved
and commended: whereas if nothing must be amended, as nothing must upon our
Adversaries supposall, all errors that shall happen are incapable of cure,
because we must suppose there can be none, and so considering that errors will
now and then happen (notwithstanding all possible diligence) as all men, even
himself, do grant, a plain way is opened to the utter corruption and
deprivation of the whole Scripture, and so the case will be the same with the
Roman Church, or the Pope, to whom the Jesuits affix infallibility, whereby
all the errors are become incurable, though never so palpable, because it must
be supposed they are subject to none. I conclude this with that speech of
Heinsius, a great defender of the Original Texts, Proleg. in Nov. Test. serio
responso haud digni sunt, qui aut variasse olim in quibusdam libros, aut ex iis
minus emendatos cum cura restitutos negant. And after. Satis sit ejusmodi
varietates eas esse, ut vel quae necessario credenda sunt, non ever tant, vel
quae non credenda sunt, non doceant.

VIII. But now as I have cleared the Proleg. and Appendix, from these
consequences of the Adversary, so his Argument, like a piece of Ordnance
overchanged, recoils with full strength upon himself; nor can all the Sophistry
in the world free him from the Guilt which he charges upon us. For he not only
grants the same Proposition which we do, concerning various Readings, but also
grants, yea urges the Consequence which Papists, Atheists, etc. would infer
thence, and which not we only, but all sober men utterly deny, only he denies
the Conclusion. For thus the Argument runs, if it be reduced into
Syllogisticall Forms. If there be various Readings in the Original Texts of
Scripture, then the Scripture is uncertain, corrupt and doubtful, and so
cannot be of Supreme authority, whereby way is made for Popery, Atheism, etc.
But there are various Readings in the Original Texts of Scripture: Ergo the
Scripture is uncertain and corrupt, etc. This Conclusion we both deny, as false
and impious, and therefore one or both the Propositions from which it is
inferred, must needs be false. The Minor is granted by the Author of the
Prolegomena, as it is also by the Author of the Considerations in the places
alleged, and by all men that will believe their eyes. But the Major or the
Consequence is denied by the Prolegomena, and by all that have not joined hands
with Papists, Atheists, etc. who do utterly deny that any such inference can be
made from the various Readings, but that the authority and certainty of the
Scripture is still the same, which the Author of the Prolegomena not only
affirms, but proves and gives Reasons for it; and upon this he lays the weight
of the cause, which neither our Adversary, nor all the Atheists, Papists, or
Antiscripturists in the world are able to overthrow. On the other side our
Author not only grants the Minor, because it is evident to sense, but grants
the Major too, yea he urges the consequence all along in these Considerations,
with much earnestness and vehemence, (which all sober Christians abhor and
deny.) Now let all men judge, who is guilty of this wretched Conclusion, he
that grants the Proposition, which is so evident that none can deny it, but
denies the Consequence, and gives Reasons against it, or he that grants both
Major, and Minor, denies only the Conclusion.

IX. If it shall be said, that the Considerations do sometimes deny, that
various Readings infer the uncertainty and corruptions of the Scripture. I
answer, its true, that sometimes he seems to deny any such inference. But when
he is in hot prosecution of his Adversary, he affirms the clean contrary, as
appears by his whole second Chapter of the Considerations, and Chap. 7. Sect.
6. where he denies any difference in Copies, either wilfully or by negligence.
And the third Chapter of his Considerations is wholly spent against the various
Readings of the New Testament, which are only out of Greek MSS. and tells us,
p. 193. that they create a temptation that there is nothing sound and entire in
the word of God p. 206. that the Consequences are lawfully derived. p. 207.
that they do naturally and necessarily flow: so p. 147. 161. etc. All along
throughout his Discourse, he inferres from the various Readings in the Appendix
of the Bible, (which are all out of the Original Texts, not any gathered out
of Translations) that thereby is introduced utter uncertainty about all sacred
truth, so that nothing is more clear then that he makes the Consequence of the
uncertainty and corruption of the Scripture, to be the necessary product of
various Readings, and therefore that he has plainly prevaricated, and betrayed
the cause which he seemed to contend for; and his friends, as he makes them,
Papists, Athiests, and Fanatic persons, have cause to thank him, for disputing
so doughtily on their behalf. And so I conclude with that of Seneca Controv. 3.
l 4. Malo est in loco, qui habet rei fortunam, accusatoris invidiam. He is in
an ill case who accuses another of what himself is guilty; for Guilt, as one
observes, though it be the effect of some error, yet usually it begets a kind
of moderation in men, so a^ not to be violent, in accusing others of that which
may reflect upon themselves, but here we see it is otherwise, and from what
root it proceeds, I leave to every man's judgment.

X. Having showed the no consequence of the uncertainty and corruption of the
Scripture, from various Readings, I shall not need to stand long upon the
Particulars of Popery, Atheism, fanaticall Antiscripturisme and Mahumetanisme*
mentioned by him, p. 147. For Popery he fears the pretended infallible guide
etc. will be found to lie at the door of the Considerations. p. 161. and p.
202. He doubts not but to hear news from Rome concerning these varieties, there
having been no such collections as yet made in the world. Enough they are to
fright poor unstable souls, into the arms of an infallible Judge. And p. 207.
We went from Rome under conduct of the purity of the Originalls, I wish none
have a mind to return thither again, under pretense of their corruption. How
these various Readings should be any prop, much less the principal Pillar of
Popery, I cannot see, nor does our Author prove. His meaning it may be is, that
Papists do hence infer the Scripture to be uncertain, and the Original Texts
to be corrupt, so that they can be no sure ground of faith, and therefore that
all must fly to an infallible Judge, and rely upon the vulgar Latin. But
these grounds we have already taken away, and proved, that notwithstanding such
various Readings, the Scriptures are still the certain rule of faith, and the
Original Texts the authentic rule of all Translations: v. Proleg. 7. Besides,
let our Author show that any of the various Readings, by us collected, contain
any thing against either faith or good life, or make for the Romanists in any
of the Controversies between them and us; let him instance in any if he can. In
that place of 1 John 5. 7. are some words left out in many ancient Copies, but
there is nothing contrary to the Analogy of faith inserted. That point of the
Trinity has ground enough besides in Scripture, though these words had not
been in any copy; and whether they were razed out of some Copies by the
Arrians, as some of the Ancients suppose, or whether left out by casual error
of the Transcriber in some one Copy from which many others were derived, and
that error made use of by the Arrians, yet here is nothing against faith
affirmed in this place, only an omission of some words in some Copies. Besides
how can it be imagined that these various Readings should make way for Popery,
when the first and chief Collectors of them were the chief opposers of Popery?
as this Author affirms, p. 189. where he reckons up Stephanus, Beza,
Camerarius, Drasius, Heinsius, Grotius, de Dieu, Capellus.

XI. If it be said, that Papists mak^ use of these various lections to decry
the Originalls, and to set up the vulgar Latin, or from their uncertainty to
infer the necessity of an infallible Judge. 1. It is true there be some that do
so, but there are some, and those of the most learned among them, who are ^^out
defenders of the purity of the Original Texts, and prefer them before the
vulgar Latin, as Simeon de Mins, Joh. D' Espieres, and others; and many among
them who maintain that the Council of Trent, in declaring the vulgar Latin to
be authentic, did no way derogate from the Hebrew and Greek Text, but only
preferred the vulgar Latin before all other Latin Translations, and meant
only, that it contained nothing contrary to faith and good manners, as Sal^er.
Serrar. Mariana, A^or, Driedo, Vega, and diverse others. 2. Does our Adversary
think that the Papists can justly deduce any such Conclusions from the various
Readings? If he think so, then he pleads their cause, and joins hands with them
against the Original Texts; if no, Why does he urge their deductions against
us? 3. Though some men pervert and abuse the Truth to bad ends, must the Truth
therefore be denied, because a bad use is made of it? There never wanted those
who perverted the Scripture to their own destruction; but is the Scripture the
worse, or must not the lawful use of it be permitted? All truth is from God,
the Author of Truth, he needs not men's policies to defend it, much less can it
be upheld by untruths. Those pious frauds, when discovered, have proved
prejudicial to the Truth for which they were devised.

XII. He confesses, p. 206. That the Prefacer does not own these wretched
Consequences, but he knows full well who think them to be just. It is true, he
knows some Romanists and others think so, and it seems our Author thinks so
too. But this Author knows also, that the Prefacer has clearly proved, both
against the Papist and himself, that the Consequence is false and invalid, and
that neither of them have just cause to think so; and therefore, that this
ought not to be by him objected. It had been a more Christian practice for him
to show the Inconsequence of such Conclusions from such Premises as are
confessed by himself, then to play fast and loose, or to calumniate them, who
granting what cannot be denied, no not by himself, do yet uphold the Authority
of the Scripture, and labor to prove that no such things do follow as are by
such men surmized.

XIII. His uncharitable intimation, as if the design of the Publisher of the
various Readings were to return to Rome again, to an infallible Judge, reflects
upon the chief defenders of the Protestant Profession against the Errors of
Rome, and the Supposition is as true as the Position, in that flower of his
discourse, (twice repeated, p. 161. and 282. (Hoc Ithacus velit) if the rest of
the verse, (magno mercentur Atreidae) be added to it. It is well known, that
the Author of the Prolegomena, when he kept his Act pro Gradu, at Cambridge,
about twenty years ago, maintained this Question; Pontifex Romanus non est
judex infallibilis in controversiis fidei? And he professes himself to be
still of the same Judgment, and to be rather more confirmed in that
persuasion, then any way doubtful of it. And what news can we expect from Rome
concerning these various Readings, when the same thing is not new with them, as
appears by the Notes of Lucas Brugensis, Nobilius, and others, which far exceed
in bulk any thing that we have done, and wherein more MSS. were used: which
labors of theirs have ever been of high esteem among the Learned
Protestants, as well as those of their own party. And how can they justly
object these various Readings against us, when far more have been observed by
themselves in the Vulgar Latin, which yet they will not have to derogate from
its supreme Authority?

XIV. For his Atheists, I wish he had considered better his own doctrine, p.
88. 104. 108. 110. etc. whether the taking away of one chief Argument to
demonstrate the Divine Original of Scripture, against Atheists and
Unbelievers, viz. The miracles wrought for confirmation of the doctrine,
brought down and witnessed to us by the Universal tradition of the Church of
Christ, and the affirming that we have no more reason to believe there were any
such miracles upon the tradition of the Church of Christ, then we have to
believe those who deny they have any such tradition (that is, Jews, Pagans, and
Mahumetanes) and that the Alcoran may upon this ground, vi^ with the Christian
Church. Whether the affirming these things gives not more advantage to
Atheists, then to affirm that there are various Readings in Scripture, in
matters that do not concern Faith or Salvation, nor in any thing of weight, by
the casual mistakes of Transcribers? This I am sure gives no advantage in the
least; and if Atheists will pervert and abuse the truth upon such Principles,
why will our Author, (who would not be reckoned amongst them) put them in mind
of such advantages, and not rather leave the urging of them to Hobbs and his
fellows. Let him remember what Sixth. Amama has written against this, Antibar.
lib. 1. which I know he has read, Prolegom. 6. Sect. 5. Qui ne minimas a Textu
originario variationes dari posse defendunt, in laqueos and nodos
inexplicabiles se involvunt, simulque impiis and prophanis hominibus (quorum
haec aetas feracissima) se ridendos praebent, qui facile observent in libris
Regum and Chronicorum, and alibi, quaedam (...), ut in 2 Reg. 22. 8. collato
cum 2 Chronicles. 22. 3. de aetate Ahaziae filii Joram, unde colligunt nullam esse
in sacris literis certitudine^, nec iisdem fidem adhibendam; Quibus facile as
obstruitur, cum haec ex variante codicum lectione, non ex ipso textu (...)
oriri dicimus, unde consequentia illa nullum habet robur.

XV. The like may be said for his Fanatic Antiscripturists. The certainty and
divine authority of Scripture has been made good notwithstanding such various
Readings, and therefore no just ground can be hence gathered of rejecting the
Scriptures. He tells us of a Treatise written by some body, who upon such
Principles rejects the whole Scriptures as useless. I can say nothing of the
book which I have not seen, nor known, upon what Principles it proceeds; if our
Author think his Arguments to be good, let him produce them, and I doubt not
but they will be quickly answered. In the mean time he may please to consider,
whether he that rejects all other proofs for the Divine Original of Scripture,
and relies only upon its own light and self-evidence, which is denied in this
case to be sufficient by many Learned Protestants, do not give greater occasion
to those, who bragg of their new Lights, and daily increase amongst us, to
reject all Scripture as useless, then he that allows such various Readings in
the Scripture as we have declared? And whether the levelling of all discipline
and order of Government in the Church, and leaving every man to follow his own
fancy, against both Old and New Testament, which tell us, That they should
seek the Law at the Priests mouth, and that they who will not hear the Church,
are to be accounted as Publicans and Heathens, have not made way to those
Antiscripturists, Familists and other Sectaries, which swarm among us, and like
the Locusts that came out of the bottomless pit, have overspread the land, and
darkened the Sun.

XVI. Lastly, for Mahumetanisme; It is true, Mahomet accuses the Jews of
corrupting the Old Testament, and the Christians for corrupting the New, and
says, that he was sent of God to reform all, Surat. 4. 5. 11. and some of his
followers pretend that there was something altered in Joh. 14. about the
Comforter which Christ promised to send, as if there had been something in that
place foretold of Mahomet, which the Christians have razed out and corrupted.
But does our Author believe that any various Readings gathered out of any MSS.
or Printed Copies, or ancient Translations do intimate any such thing of
Mahomet, or favor any part of his impious doctrine? I am sorry to see any man
so transported, as to urge such things, which must reflect upon the most
eminent Divines, and chief Lights of the Church, in this or former ages, yea,
upon himself in a high measure, who affirms the same about various Readings
which those do, against whom he makes this inference.

CHAP. IX.
I. The Occasion pretended, of this invective against the Translators of the
Biblia Polyglotta. II. His mistakes about the Arabic. The Publisher of the
Arabic, the same with the Publisher of the Biblia Polyglotta. III. IV. The
Adversary misreports Mr. Pococks Preface. His contradictions. V. VI The Syriack
vindicated from his aspersions; The antiquity of it proved. VII. His carping at
the Cambridge Copy VIII. The Samaritane Pentateuch, vindicated. IX. X. XI. His
Parodoxes about the Samaritane Pentateuch. XII. Set forms of Liturgy proved
from the Jews after Esdras his time, and from the Samaritanes in imitation of
them. XIII. The Chaldee Paraphrase defended, of Buxtorf, Babylonia. XIV. Of the
Vulgar Latin. XV. The Septuagint; the other Translations not taken from it,
save part of the Arabic. XVI. Of the Original Copy of the Septuagint. XVII.
Of the Aethiopick and Persian. XVIII. The true reason why the Adversary is so
offended with these ancient Translations, they testify for Liturgy,
observation of Festivalls, etc.

I. BEfore we leave this Charge about various Readings, I must say something of
the Translations exhibited in the Bibia Polyglotta; against which our Author
spends his last Chapter, upon pretense, that we assign them another use then he
allows, viz. That they are the rules by which the Original is to be corrected;
for upon this he takes occasion to inveigh against them all, to show how unfit
they are for this end, and further, how unusefull for any other end. Now,
though I might well pass over all that is said upon this supposition, as not
concerned therein, having already declared for what use these Translations are
here Printed, and that though we allow various Readings to be gathered out of
them in some cases, and with some limitations, as is above declared, yet we
neither make them equal with, much less prefer them above the Originalls, but
make them subservient to them, yet, because under color of this, he defames
and asperseth all the Translations, as of no use, nor deserving any esteem, I
shall take a brief view of the most material passages in this invective,
referring the Reader for full satisfaction to the Prolegomena, where the use,
antiquity, and authority of every Translation, and all the questions about any
of them, are at large handled.

II. He prefaces his Invective with an acknowledgement of the usefulness of
them in some cases, and p. 206 calls the Work, a Noble collection of
Translations; but this is, as I said before, only as a Shooing-horn to draw on
the better this aspersion which he casts upon them afterward, and therefore I
account his commendation to be only, as I observed before out of St. Hierom,
Honorifica contumelia, an Honorable reproach. First, he begins with the
Arabic, for the Honor he bears to the Reverendly Learned Publisher of it, as
he affirms (meaning Master Pocock) or rather indeed, because he thought he
might have more colorable pretense to vilify this Translation then some of
the other, otherwise he should rather have passed it over, or said least of it,
if he had so honored the Publisher. But here he shows h^w apt he is to mistake
or to derogate what he can from the Publisher, when he makes that Learned man
the Publisher of the Arabic. I shall not detract from his deserved praise,
whom I do esteem as my much honored friend, but I am sure he will not thank
him for making use of any thing by him said or written, against this or any
other of the translations, nor assume to himself what our Author gives him, to
be the Publisher of the Arabic translation, or any other in this Edition; for
upon the request of the Publisher, he collated the Pentate^ch, not the whole
Translation, with two Copies of Saadias his Translation (which he takes to be
the same with that in the Parisian, and in this ^dition) the one a MS. the
other Printed in the Constantinopolitane Bibles, and noted the differences of
them, which he sent to the Publisher, who after they were reviewed, and
collated over again for a great part, with the Printed Copy of Saadias, which I
had out of Mr. Seldens Library, (for many things were mistaken by some whom he
employed in part of the collation, which himself, being otherwise employed, had
not leisure to review, and therefore desired me that they might be re-examined)
I caused to be Printed and published with the rest. And upon the like request
of the Publisher, that he would make some brief Preface to those Arabic
various Readings or differences of these copies, he sent him that which is now
prefixed to them, in which, though the Publisher did not concur with him that
this Pentateuch is the same with that of Saadias, wherein diverse others of
great Learning and Judgment did concur with the Publisher, nor did his reasons
seem cogent, considering them on the one side, and what was brought by D.
H^ttinger, now Hebrew Professor at Heydelberg on the other side, in his
Analecta, which are further urged in his Smegma Orientale, with other reasons
which offered themselves; and although the Publisher had formerly inclined to
Mr. Pocock^ opinion, swayed by his Authority, which he always did, and does
still very much esteem, and did foresee, and so declared what use might be made
of his words by some persons disaffected to the Work, to the defaming of the
whole, as I now find by experience; yet seeing it was only his particular
judgment, and every man had liberty to judge of his reasons as he saw cause,
(some things also being mollified and altered upon the Publishers Letters, from
the first draught) he chose rather to publish it as it is, then to take upon
him to determine any thing in it, having also said something of this point,
Prolegom. 14. which the Reader may consult, if he please.

III. I shall not therefore go about to discuss or determine that Question,
whether it be the same which Saadias the Jew translated out of Hebrew into
Arabic, yet in Hebrew Characters, (though it seems scarcely credible, that
those Christian Churches in the East should use a Translation made by a Jew in
their public assemblies) yet I cannot but observe how our Adversary does
misreport and wrong the Learned Author of that Preface, in reciting his words
and opinions, whom yet he seems to magnify, and therefore it is the less to
be wondered that he deals so with others, whom he labors what he can to
vilify: for he makes him to write things neither true, nor agreeing to common
sense, but untrue, and contradictory to themselves: For p. 322. he says, That
he, (viz. Mr Pocock) tells us, This Translation is a Cento made up of many ill
suited pieces, there being no Translation in that Language extant of the Old
Testament, which is a plain contradiction; for if there be no Translation in
the Arabic extant, how came this to be extant, and why does he call it an
Arabic Translation, if there be none in that Language? and why does he speak,
page 324. of other Arabic Translations, if there be none at all? Mr. Pocock
indeed says, That it is not all made by one Author, nor all immediately out of
the Hebrew; but some out of the Hebrew, some out of the Syriack, and part out
of the LXX. but he was not so devoid of common sense, as to say there was none
at all. I looked among the Errata, but could not find any Error noted there:
nor can he say, that there is no other Translation in the Arabic but this, and
that this was his meaning, for himself tells us of diverse others Translations:
and he could not but see in the Prolegom. 14. mention made of diverse
Translations made by Christians since they were in subjection to the
Mahumetanes, who propagated the Arabic Tongue where they came, as that by the
Bishop of Sevil in Spain anno 700. and two other famous ones, the Alexandrian
or Egyptian, which Gab. Si^nita published in the Paris Bible, and the
Antiochian, used in that Patriar^h^^^, as was showed out of the Psalter.
Nebiense, and others, of both which MSS. Copies are remaining in the Vatican,
as Cornelius a Lapide informs us, who made use of both. All that Mr. Pocock
says out of Abulfeda is only, that there was no Arabic version out of the
Hebrew before his time in Arabic letters, not denying but that there were
Arabic Translations out of the LXX. and the Syriack long before, and that
there might be also some out of the Hebrew into Arabic but not in Arabic
Characters. Again he makes Mr. P^cock say, that the ancientest part of that
Translation was made about the year 950. which he does no where affirm, but
only says that the Pentateuch, which he ascribes to Saadias, was about that
time, which is not denied, if it be his; but when any of the other parts were
translated, he says nothing.

IV. Further, he makes him say, That this Translation of Saadias was
interpreted, and changed in sundry things, etc. which he no where says. He
says, that it was transcribed out of Hebrew Characters, as we see in the
Constantinopol. Pentateuch (which the Jews used in their Translations) into
Arabic, by one who might change some words. But what is this to a Translation
or Interpretation? Was the Pentateuch translated into Arabic, when the Hebrew
letter was changed into Arabic? Besides he no where makes the Interpreter to
have been a Mahumetane, or Samaritane, as this Author misreports him, but to be
R. Saadias a Jew, but that he who transcribed, or put it into Arabic
Characters, might change some words, to comply the better with Mahumetanes,
under whom those Christians lived. And lastly Mr. Pocock tells us, that these
things he cannot affirm upon certain and undoubted grounds, but only upon
probable reasons. Thus modestly he writes. whereas this Author speaks
confidently of things which he never understood. Now if any desire to know what
use may be of this Arabic version, what Copies we used? what Translations
there are? he may peruse if he please Proleg. 14. where he shall not find any
such use, either of this, or any other Translation as our Adversary feigns,
viz. to Correct the Originalls, or as he elsewhere expresses it, to correct the
Word of God.

V. In the next place he falls upon the Syriack, that noble, ancient, Oriental
treasure, made immediately out of the Hebrew, of which he tells us, he believes
some part of it was made out of the Hebrew, as if the major part were out of
the LXX. or some other Translation, which all that know of it any thing, know
to be utterly untrue. Sometimes it varies in some words (of no importance) from
our modern Hebrew Copies, which shows (as learned Hottinger observes) some
various or different Reading between that Copy and ours, but none ever doubted
that it was out of the Hebrew. Then he questions the Antiquity of it, He knows
not when, where, nor by whom it was made, if he will be ignorant of these
things, who can help it? otherwise he might have learned of those that have
spent more time in the search of these things then himself. That the constant
opinion and tradition of the Eastern Churches is, that it was either made in
the age the Apostles lived in, or not long after, I mean that which they call
the simple Edition (which is by us followed) which alone were enough to prove
the antiquity of it, as Bootius (as great an assertor of the Hebrew Text, as
our Adversary can be) Vindic. c. 19. p. 183. proves, when he says, it were
intolerable boldness, and no less foolish, not to give credit to them in this
business, then if any Syrian or Persian, who never had been in Europe, and were
altogether ignorant of the Latin (as he purposes them to be of the Syriack
tongue who question the antiquity of the Translation) and had never seen or
read any Latin book, should question whether the vulgar Latin Translation of
the New Testament, of which he had never heard but by report, were of that
antiquity, which they of the Latin Church ascribe unto it, and by constant
Tradition have always done, and should affirm it was made many ages after. And
their rashness, as he there adds, is so much the more detestable, because we
have most strong Arguments to prove the great antiquity of it, as that it must
needs be in the third Century at least, because Diodorus Tarsensis, Theodorus
Mopsuestenus, Polychronius, Procopius, Gazaeus, and others, who lived some of
them in the fourth Century, do often mention and commend a Greek Translation
then in use, which was made out of the Syriack. He says further, That there
can be no place for doubting in this matter, because the Syrians have many
Fathers of their own Nation, some since, others long before Diodorus, who wrote
in their own Syriack language, and quote many places out of the Syriack
Translation of the Old Testament, made out of the Hebrew, which agree verbatim
with that which we have, of which he is most certain, by those many instances
which he could give out of that great Syriack MS. called Catena Syriaca in
Evangelia, which he had among many other Syriack books, out of the Library of
that famous and Reverend Usher.

VI. The great antiquity of this Version is also proved Proleg. 13. out of the
ancient Writers which mention it, Saint Basil, Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Ambrose, Saint Augustine, Eusebius, and others, mentioned in the ancient Greek
Scholiast, besides Jacobus Syrus, (who was present at the Nicene Council) and
Ephraim Magnus, who do both mention this Syriack Translation, and commented
upon it in Syriack. Besides it must needs be of great antiquity, when that
other and later Syriack Translation was made out of the LXX. above a thousand
years ago, as appears by Masius in Jos. who had some Syriack books of that
Translation written before that time, and some Syriack Copies of the New
Testament are now remaining in the Duke of Florences Library (as I had from one
residing there, who perused the same MSS.) which appear to have been written
above a thousand years ago, of which with other Arguments, those that please
may read Prolegomena 13. The Adversary further tells us, That in many places it
evidently followed another corrupt Translation, and that it passed through the
hands of men ignorant and suspicious, against whose frauds and folly by reason
of the paucity of Copies we have no relief: but for proof of all we have not a
word, nor any testimony, nor any instance of any Translation it followed at
all, much less of any corruption, but all this you must take upon his word,
against the judgment of all learned men, who have some of them spent more
years in this Translation, then he ever spent days, and therefore what credit
his bare ipse dixit may have, let any wise man judge.

VII. Lastly, having nothing to say against this Translation in particular, he
falls upon the Scribe of that Cambridge MS. which we compared with the rest,
for desiring the prayers of the Saints for him, and that God would hear them on
his behalf, as if the credit of an ancient Translation depended upon any
addition made by a Transcriber, who lived, it may be, a thousand years after:
by which reason he might reject the Greek Text of the New Testament, because in
some old MSS. some such prayers and ejaculations may be found added by the
Scribes of those Copies.

VIII. Thirdly, He falls foul upon the Samaritane Pentateuch and Version, p.
327. and 260. He labors first to prove what no body denies, That their
Pentateuch cannot vie with the Hebrew Text, p. 329. when as he could not but
read Proleg. 11. that it is there expressly affirmed, that their Pentateuch is
not authentic, and that there are some wilful corruptions in it, as that
about mount Gerazim, and that it cannot stand in competition with the Hebrew.
Then he proceeds and tells us, that all is uncertain about them and their
Pentateuch, that it were no hard task to manifest the uncertainty of what is
fixed upon the Original of this Pentateuch in the Prolegom. or to enforce
those conjectures which he opposes, but it is not in his present work, nor
that he knows of ever will be. In the mean time I hope what is said in the
Prolegomena may stand firm, till it be impugned or confuted, which I do not
fear to be done by our Author in have. Yet though I do not love to spend time
about frivolous exceptions; some things there be which I cannot well pass by
without notice.

IX. Page 261. He says, The Samaritanes had not the Book of the Law from the
Priest that was sent unto them by the King of Babylon, because they continued
in their Idolatry, and therefore probably they had it when they were conquered
by Hircanus, after their Temple was destroyed, which had stood two hundred
years, and p. 262. 327. 329. That there are any of them at this day, or have
been these thousand years last, is unknown. That they continued in their
Idolatry till Hircanus his time, who subdued them: That their Pentateuch was
not used by any ancient Christians, etc. all which Paradoxes are visible
untruths, affirmed without any the least proof, yea, against all History,
ancient and modern, and against the judgment of all Learned men who have
written of this subject. That the Priest taught them to fear the Lord, is
expressed, 2 King. 17. 28. How this could be done without the Book of the Jews,
is not imaginable, when as it is said, that before that time, they feared not
the Lord, and then it is said, that they feared the Lord, though withal they
worshipped their Idols. That Manasseh the High Priests brother fled thither in
Esdras his time, and built a Temple on Mount Gerazim, whither diverse Priests
and other Jews also came, and there worshipped God, and offered sacrifices
(though in a Schismatic way) is out of doubt: and how this could be done
without the Book of the Law is not to be conceived. That they continued in
their Iodolary till their Temple was destroyed by Hircanus, is against all
ancient Records, which affirm the contrary, Joseph. lib. 9. cap. ult. says,
Postquam Legem, and Dei colendi rationem ab iis, (Sacerdotibus a Salmanasare
(for so it should be Printed) missis) edocti diligenter Deum colere coeperunt,
moxque cessavit pestilentia, permanentque in ea religione. Epiph Haeres. 3.
says, Illos accepta lege hoc unum studuisse ut Idolorum repudiata
superstitione summum Deum agnoscerent. The same is affirmed by some Rabbis,
produced Prolegom. 11. though out of their innate hatred they forge many
calumnies and untruths against them. But that after their Temple was destroyed
by Hircanus, that they should then, and not before, receive the Pentateuch, is
such a groundless fancy, that I could hardly think our Author hoped that any
would believe it. Can any man imagine, that for two hundred years they should
offer sacrifices, and observe the Law, without any Copy of the Law, and after
their Temple was destroyed, when they had no place to worship in, that they
should then receive it, and that in a strange Character, and only the
Pentateuch, when as if Hircanus had forced the Pentateuch upon them, he would,
without doubt, have forced all the rest of the Jewish Canon upon them, and that
in the Jews Character. Pardon me, good Reader, if thy patience be exercised in
confuting such wild fictions, whose very naming is enough to confute them
among sober and discreet men.

X. Of the same stamp is that which follows: That it is unknown that any of
them are remaining at this day, or have been these thousand years. That their
Pentateuch was never used by any ancient Christians, etc. They were not so few
in the times of Zeno and Justinian, but that they durst rebel against those
potent Emperors; Benjamin in his Itinerary, written about five hundred years
ago, found diverse Synagogues of them at Damascus, Ascaelon, Caesarea,
Palestina, Sychem, etc. Peter du Valle, and others, who lately traveled in the
^ast, have found diverse Synagogues of them still remaining at Sychem,
Jerusalem, Gaza, Cayro and Damascus, and affirm, that there are some Relics
of them still remaining at Cayro, of those Colonies which Ptolemie carried into
Egypt. That their chief Priest resides still at Sychem, on Mount Gerazim,
where he sends circular letters to the rest about their solemn Feasts. Scaliger
had (from Eleazar their High Priest at Sychem, and the Samaritanes at Cayro, to
whom he wrote) a Type of the Calendar and Compute for the year 1589* which he
published both in Samaritane and Hebrew Characters, lib. 7. De emend. See
Gassendus in vita Peirescii, p. 157. and Hotting. Bibliothec. Orient. c. 4. p.
305. I have seen a Samaritane Pentateuch which belonged to one of their Priests
at Damascus, about four hundred years ago, as appears by what he has written
in that Copy. And notwithstanding all this, we must believe there are none of
them remaining, nor known for these thousand years.

XI. That no ancient Christians made use of their Pentateuch, is like the rest.
The Author had read the contrary proved, Prolegom 11. where Sect. 7. 14. etc.
he could not but find, Origin, Eusebius, Africanus, Cyril of Alexand. Diodorus
Tars. Hierom, Eulogius, Procopius, Epiphanius, the Greek Scholiast, and other
ancient Writers quoted, and their testimonies produced to prove the Samaritane
Copy they used to have been the same with this now extant, by the places they
alleged about Chronology, and other controverted Texts, yet all these men
must not be reckoned among ancient Christians, for no ancient Christians made
use of it. It is strange, if any thing can be strange, in such an Adversary,
that he should so boldly affirm such things, which are so easily detected, and
so plainly confuted. He also says, that there is no more in Scaliger or
Morinus discovered about the Samaritanes, then we had formerly from the
Scriptures and Josephus, which no man that has read Scaliger or Morinus will
believe. Those that have read them, or the Prolegomena, will find many things
concerning the Samaritanes and their Pentateuch, which could not be found,
either in the Scripture or Josephus, being matters of fact, done long after
Josephus his time, and after the Canon of the Scripture was finished.

XII. But he is much offended, p. 331. That from the occasional mention of the
Samaritane Liturgy, and the pretended antiquity of it, the Author of the
Prolegomena falls, and not without some bitterness, on those that have laid
aside the English Liturgy, or Service Book, and says, it had not been
imprudently done* to reserve a triumph over the Sectaries to some more
considerable victory then any is to be hoped from the example of the
Samaritanes, a wicked people, forsaken of God, etc. and therefore he could have
wished he had refrained that close of his Discourse. And the Author of the
Prolegomena could have wished that his Adversary could at length learn to
relate things truly, and to forbear calumnies. Let the place be looked on
Proleg. 11. Sect. 23. and let any man see, whether it be not the example of the
Jews, who used set forms of public prayer, from the time of Esdras, and who
were certainly the people of God, to whom the promises were made, from whom the
Argument is drawn against our modern Sectaries, and that the Samaritanes are
mentioned in this, only ut Judaeorum aemuli; so that the example of the
Samaritanes, proves chiefly the practice of the Jews, whose Apes they were in
this and other things, and so may well be brought a^ an Argument against our
Novellists. The words are these: Quam (Liturgiam Samaritanorum) valde antiquam
esse and prope Esdrae tempora in usu fuisse, vel ex ipsis Judaeorum formulis,
quas paulo post reditum a Babylone, ab Esdra, and sociis ejus compositas fuisse
affirmant uno ore omnes Judaei, quasque in hunc usque diem usurpant, colligi
potest. Videantur Capellus in Spicileg. and Seldeni Notae in Eut. Vnde
Sectariorum nostrorum pervicacia, and impietas merito redarguitur, qui spretis
omnibus publicis Orationum et Liturgiarum formulis, per omnes Christi Ecclesias
ab ipsis Ecclesiae Christianae primordiis, and Apostolorum temporibus usitatis,
Liturgia^ Ecclesiae Anglicanae, omnium per orbem Christianum purissimam, and
sanctissimam, damnarunt, and omnibus, etc. Quorum praxis ab ipsis Judaeis
eorumque aemulis Samaritanis erroris and novitatis arguitur: where we see the
Argument is drawn chiefly from the Jews; and from the Samaritanes, only as
imitating the Jews. And let the Samaritanes be what they will, yet their
example in imitation of the Jews, who were then the only visible Church of
Christ, is a strong argument for the use of public set forms of Liturgy, and
will more prevail with sober and pious men, then all the pretenses of factious
Novellists.

XIII. In the fourth place, The Chaldee Paraphrase comes under censure, which
is likewise a Cento made up of diverse pieces; some part supposed, (I say,
proved in the Prolegomena) to be written before Christ, and some part
(acknowledged likewise in the Prolegomena) to be written five hundred years
after Christ. The great use of this Paraphrase, among other things, is largely
showed, Prolegom. 12. Sect. 17, 18, 19. in confirming the integrity of the
Hebrew text, proving sundry main Articles of the Christian Faith against the
Jews, explaining many obscure places, and dark Paraphrases, etc. and our
Adversary cannot but acknowledge it: other things likewise concerning these
Paraphrases, their Authors, Antiquity, etc. are largely handled in the same
Prolegomena, to which I must refer the Reader. He tells us of the bulkie
collections of various Readings in this Paraphrase; but he might have observed
by the Title, that there are not only various Readings, but also Observations,
which take up the greatest part of that collection. And as for Buxtorfs
Babylonia, which he talks of by hearsay, it is true, his Son sent it me to be
Printed among other things in this Bible, with a short Preface of his own, but
it came too late, after our own Notes on that subject were begun, and would
have risen to a greater bulk then the last Volume of the Bible would well bear.
Whereupon I forbore to Print it, but shall willingly communicate it to any that
shall undertake to make it public, and shall further their endeavors therein,
it being a Book very useful, as I conceive, to restore that ancient
Translation to its purity, (though I conceive there is much done already in our
last Volume to that purpose) And I think that Learned Author would never have
taken such pains therein, if he had so slightly esteemed it, as our Adversary
does.

XIV. The Vulgar Latin scapes the lash pretty well, which I thought should
have felt his displeasure most, because so magnified by the Church of Rome. He
esteems it the best in the whole collection, except the Interlineary,
notwithstanding its corruption and Barbarismes. What esteem it deserves, is
declared, Prolegom. 10. Sect. 12. but what he writes in preferring it before
the rest, is I doubt, not so much out of his esteem of the Vulgar Latin, but
thereby to depresse the worth of the rest, which the Vulgar Reader must needs
think to be very bad, when this, which Vulgar Divines so cry out against, is
preferred before them all. He may enjoy his Opinion, but he must leave others
to judge of them as they see cause, who look upon them without prejudice. What
the Authority, and Use of this Translation is with the several questions
concerning the same, the Reader may find declared and debated at large,
Proleg. 10.

XV. Now comes the Septuagint, which he says, must bear the weight of all; the
most of the rest being taken out of it. Of this Translation we have written at
large, Prolegom. 9. which for its antiquity and hoary hairs, is most opposed by
all Novellists, though it be proved, in the same Prolegomena, That it was
publicly read in the Synagogues for near three hundred years before Christ;
That our Savior and the Apostles used it, and cited it more frequently then
the Hebrew Text, and thereby consecrated it to posterity: That by this
Translation chiefly, (which was by the Apostles left to the Church of Christ)
the Church, especially among the Gentiles, was first gathered, and by it
nourished and built up, and the world subdued to Christ: That for many
Centuries no other Translation but this, and such as were made out of it,
(excepting the Syriack) was used in the Church, nor is any other used in the
Greek Church to this day. That this was that which the Greek and Latin Fathers
expounded, illustrated, out of which they instructed the people, confuted
Heresies, and maintained the Truth: That this which we now have, is the same
for substance with that anciently used, (though in some things, by the injury
of times, and frequent transcriptions vitiated) which, with all the several
questions and controversies about this Translation are at large discussed and
handled, to which I must refer the Reader, where he shall find all the doubts
and questions raised by this Author, or others, resolved, and all their
aspersions cast upon it wiped off. It would be too long to go over the
particulars herein. Those that amongst our Neotericks have been least
favorable to it, have yet highly valued it, as is showed out of Scaliger,
Heinsius, and others. Heinsius says of it: Rarum and incomparabilem thesaurum
esse neminem ignorare posse, nisi qui ab omni eruditione alienus sit,
Aristarch. cap. 15. p. 951. The quarrels and cavills therefore of our Author
against it, I shall not meddle with now; all of them, and a great deal more, is
related and answered in the same Prolegom. 9. only I cannot but observe how he
overlashes still, when he affirms that most of the Versions in the Biblia
Polyglotta are evidently taken out of it, which he cannot with any color
affirm of any but the Arabic, of which yet himself formerly told us, the
Pentateuch was translated out of the Hebrew, and some part out of the Syriack,
as for the rest, viz. the Samaritane Version, the Syriack, Chaldee, and the
Vulgar Latin, they are all out of the Hebrew, except the Psalms in the Vulgar
Latin, which seem to be out of the LXX. Though it may be here and there in
some words they may agree with the LXX. yet this gives not the least color to
affirm that they were taken out of it.

XVI. Besides we may observe upon what weak grounds he goes, when he sticks not
to insist upon that Argument against the Septuagint, that the Original Copy
was burnt in the Library of Alexandria in Caesar's time, to prove that there are
no true Copies now left, which childish argument he knew was answered Proleg.
9. Sect. 49. so as might have made any man of common discretion forbear to urge
it: for it is showed, and on all hands confessed, that there were thousands of
Copies every where extant among the Jews, and read publicly in their
Synagogues all the world over, and so had been for some hundred of years before
the burning of Ptolomies Library, so that the loss of that Original Copy
(though it may be justly doubted whether it perished in that conflagration or
no, as is there showed) can no more prove that succeeding ages have not the
true Copy of it, then it can be inferred that we have no true Copies of the
Hebrew and Greek Texts because the first Originalls have been lost many ages
since, as among other things is there showed.

XVII. The Aethiopick and Persian Translations, which he falls upon in the last
place, are the worst and most corrupt in the world. He can find no use of the
Persian, but only to show that there is such an useless thing in the world.
The Aethiopick is the Novel endeavor of an illiterate person. He knows not
whether some of them be in use now in the world, he is sure that it were well
that they be not; had he not seen them, he could not have imagined any had been
so bad. He thinks some Jews had a hand in one for money. Thus some men shoot
their bolts at random. It is sufficient that learned men, and such as are able
to judge, do acknowledge the use of them, and thankfully receive the publishing
of them. The antiquity and use of both, especially of the Aethiopick, is
declared Proleg. 14. and 15. What is there said and proved, will I doubt not
overbalance what is by him barely affirmed to the contrary. That the Aethiopick
is now used, and has been since the conversion of that Nation, among the
Abyssines, through those large Territories, consisting of many Kingdoms, is
showed by good authority, and sundry reasons, against Scaliger. Our Author
knows not whether it be any where used, but I think there is scarce any besides
himself that doubts it, that does not shut his eyes against the clear light.
Concerning the Persian, it is acknowledged in the Prolegomena not to be that
ancient Translation mentioned by Theodoret and others of the Ancients, of which
it may be doubted whether any part of it be extant: as also that it was made
out of the Syriack, not immediately out of the Greek, yet that it may be
useful, is likewise showed, Proleg. 15. in diverse particulars, and that this
Copy we have Printed, was written three hundred years ago, but how long before
the Translation it self was made, we cannot determine. How the Jews should have
a hand in any of the Translations is a fancy which I think never lodged in any
man's breast but his own, nor can he show any ground for it. It may as well be
said, that Turks and Mahumetanes made all these Translations for the use of
Christians. Because the Transcriber of the Aethiopick, (as it is rendered in
Latin) makes Saint John Bishop of Constantinople (though it be doubtful
whether it may be so rendered, as he might have seen in the Annotations, and the
Aethiopick word is not Constantinople, though the learned Translator of it into
Latin conjectured it migh be there meant) therefore the Aethiopick Translator
must be illiterate, and the Translation novel, when as in the Syriack, our
Author could distinguish between the Scribe and the Translator, and not impute
the error of the one to the other. And as for the antiquity, it is one thing to
say, another thing to prove: let him answer the reasons in the Prolegomena, or
bring better of his own, and we shall believe him, otherwise his bare authority
will not be sufficient to command assent against reason.

XVIII. By this which we have said it appears, that as our Author has ^eigned
to himself an Adversary when he had none, that so he might have some pretense
of depressing the several Translations, so that which is said by him, we might
well have passed by, but that our silence would have been by him interpreted as
an acknowledgement of the truth of his affirmations. And although his
invectives be groundless and vain, yet I have good ground to believe, that
there is something else in the Translations themselves (which he is not willing
to mention) which has caused all this bitterness against them. It appears by
these ancient Translations that what our Sectaries have cried down in the
Church of England, as Popish innovations, viz. Episcopal Government, set forms
of Liturgies, Observation of Festivalls, besides the Lords day, were used (as
they are still) in those Eastern Churches planted by the Apostles and their
Successors in Asia and Africa, from the first times of their conversion, so
that what these men would exterminate as Romish and Antichristian Novelties
have been anciently used by those famous and flourishing Churches, which never
professed subjection to the Sea of Rome. Hinc illae lachrymae: This is that
Cordolium of our Novellists, the practice of the universal Church of Christ
all the world over, which condemns their innovations; which Argument is of more
force with considering men, then all the acute arguments drawn only from
strength of reason. For to condemn the practice of the Church of Christ in all
parts of the world, constantly observed in all ages, is insolentissima insania,
as Saint Augustine long since. These things with some other ancient rites
appear in the Syriack, Arabic, Aethiopick, etc. which I doubt were as great
motes in our Authors eye, which made him so willing to quarrel with the
Translations, and to cavil without a cause: and thus I have briefly run over
his invective against the Translations, entreating the Reader for more full
satisfaction to consult the Prolegomena themselves, and by these Specimina
which we have given of his candor and love of truth, to judge of the rest of
his Discourse. And thus we have done with the main Charge, the principal
Subject of his Book, the Various Readings, and the Corruptions of the
Originalls, which he would thereupon infer. I shall proceed now more briefly to
that other principal Charge, concerning the Punctation of the Hebrew Text;
after which we shall add something about the ancient Hebrew Characters, and of
the use of the Septuagint Translation, toward the Knowledge of the Hebrew
Tongue, and so put an end to the Readers trouble and our own for the present.

CHAP. X.
I. The Controversy of the Hebrew punctation, by whom handled. II. The Charge
against the Prolegomena. III. No new thing delivered in the Prolegomena about
points, nor any thing prejudicial to the certainty and authority of the Hebrew
Text. IV. V. That the Hebrews always had vowels (...) proved. The vowels
excluded from the letters by late Grammarians against reason. VI. The Masorites
did not point the Text as they pleased, but according to the true and common
reading. The true reading depends not upon their authority. VII. VIII. A main
Objection answered: That they might certainly point the Text after the language
ceased to be vulgar. IX. The certain Reading of the Text by diligent practice
and use attainable without points, proved by example. X. In words unpointed
dubious in themselves, the ambiguity is taken away as they are part of a
sentence, and by custom or use, proved by the Talmuds and Rabbinicall Writers.
The new Testament at first had no accents or notes of distinction, etc. The
Chaldee Paraphrase, Syriack, Arabic, had no points at first. XI. What is
affirmed in the Biblia Polyglotta about this Controversy. XII. The first
occasion of this Controversy about points handled. XIII. XIV. Elias Lev. not
the first broacher of the novelty of points. XV. XVI. XVII. Diverse, both Jews
and Christians, held the same opinion long before Elias. XVIII. Elias his
pretended aim. XIX. The seeming advantage given to Papists no ground to
maintain an untruth.

I. COncerning the Points whereby the Hebrew vowels and accents are now
signified and distinguished, whether they be coaeve with the Language it self,
or of the same antiquity and Original with the Text, either affixed by Moses,
as some say, or by Ezra and the great Synagogue, as others; or whether they
were invented by some Rabbis after those times to facilitate the reading, and
prevent the errors which might arise from the ambiguity of some words, has
been long disputed by diverse; by Elias Levita chiefly, among the Jews, among
Protestants also, and Romanists; and amongst the former by Jos. Scaliger,
Drusius, Sixtin. Amama, D. Prideaux, Sect. 12. and others, but most largely by
Buxtorf, both Father and Son; and by Lud. Capellus; by the Father, in his
Hebrew Grammar, and by Capellus in his Arcanum punctationis revelatum, Printed
by Erpenius at Leyden, anno 1614. and by Buxtorf the Son, in his answer to
Capellus. The chief arguments on both sides are collected, and with addition of
some others, presented, Prolegom. 3. Sect. 38. to 56. What is charged in the
Considerations upon the Prolegomena in this matter, we have in part set forth,
Chap. 3. in some particulars, and opposite thereto, what is asserted in the
Prolegomena. We shall now more fully discuss, what is charged or objected in
the one, and what is granted or denied in the other; not that I intend to
handle the Controversy at large, which would be actum agere, and make this
short reply swell into a great Volume, but as our Author says, he would,
(...), briefly consider the heads of things, so I shall briefly take notice of
his Considerations.

II. In his Epist. page 19. he says, That the solemn Espousall of the opinion
of the novelty of the Hebrew punctation in the Biblia Polyglotta, was one
chief occasion of this Consideration. The opinion which he opposes, is by him
in several places declared, page 157. That the Hebrew points or vowels, and
accents, are a novell invention of some Judaicall Rabbis, about five or six
hundred years after the giving out of the Gospel: and p. 205. That the points
or vowels and accents are a late invention of the Tiberian Masorites, long
after sundry Translations were extant in the world. Their arbitrary invention,
p. 208. c. 4. in the contents, and p. 217, 218. p. 293. the arbitrary
inventions of some Jews, and that it is lawful for us to change them at
pleasure, p. 250. 258. 217, 218. Hence he deduces these Consequences, page 157.
That the agreement of those Translations before the supposed invention of the
points, with the Original, cannot by just consequence be tried by the present
Text, as now pointed and accented. And, that the whole credit of our reading
and interpretation of the Sripture, as far as regulated by the present
punctation, depends solely on the faithfulness and skill of those Jews, whose
invention this is asserted to be. This is one of those two Principles, which
being granted, there is no other way to be delivered from utter incertainty in
and about all sacred truth. Epist. p. 25. That all things are hereby made
doubtful in Scripture, so that no certain truth can be learned from the
Scriptures: p. 211. yea, they not only make doubtful the Authority of the
Scriptures, but wholly pluck it up by the roots: page 213. And therefore he had
rather that this Work of the Biblia Polyglotta, and all Works of the like
kidne, were out of the world, then that this one opinion should be received
with the Consequences that unavoydably attend it. Those Consequences are,
Epist. page 9. We must either turn Papists or Atheists. page 19. He dare not
mention the desperate Consequences that attend this imagination: page 161.
Either the pretended infallible Judge, or the depth of Atheism will be found
to lie at the door of these Considerations, etc.

III. One would think by these passages, that the Prolegomena had delivered
some strange and dangerous opinion, never heard of before, which overthrows all
certainty, and by Consequence all Authority of Scripture, whereas it is there
proved, and shall now be made appear, that the same doctrine of the Original
of points was delivered by the greatest Reformers, the most Eminent Protestant
Divines, both at the beginning of the Reformation, and since, and the best
skilled in Eastern Learning, which then were, or at this day are in the
Christian world, and the greatest Patrons of the integrity of the Hebrew Text.
And that as the same is by the Prolegomena maintained, there is no prejudice at
all arising to the certainty of the Hebrew Text. For we neither affirm that the
vowels and accents were invented by the Masorites, but that the Hebrew Tongue
did always consist of vowels and consonants. Aleph, Vau, and Jod, were the
vowels before the points were invented, as they were also in the Syriack,
Arabic, and other Eastern Tongues: nor that these points which are now used
for vowels and accents, were the arbitrary invention of the Masorites, but that
they pointed the Text according to the true and received Reading, and not as
they pleased; nor that it is lawful for any to reject their Reading at
pleasure, but that all are tied to it, unless some error, or better reading
can be clearly proved; nor that the Authority of the reading depends upon the
Masorites, but that they pointed it according to the received Reading, which
expressed the true sense of the Holy Ghost; so that the Controversy is only
about the present points, in regard of their forms, not of their force and
signification, which D. Prideaux well expresses. Sect. 12. Sect. 4.
Controversia non est de vocalium sono, se^ signis, an ista fuerint ab initio
qualia nunc habemus; and Sect. 3. De sonis, sive rebus substractis, lis non
est, sed de figuris and characteribus, etc. In which it is true, the Author of
the Prolegomena denies the Antiquity or Divine Original of the present points;
wherein, as I said, he has the concurrent judgment of the Learned
Protestant Divines, and ablest Linguists; and maintains that they were long
after the time of Esdras, yea, about five hundred years after Christ; yet
herein he writes with that moderation, that he leaves every man liberty to
judge as he pleases, only propounds what seemed to him most probable.

IV. First then, for the true stating of the Controversy, which our Author
wholly neglects, we must distinguish between the vowels and accents, in regard
of their sound and signification, and the points and figures whereby they are
now signified or expressed: for it is frequently acknowledged in the
Prolegomena, that the Hebrew, as all other Languages consists of consonants and
vowels, and that it has its accents or tones, though not always noted by
points in every word as they are now. Thus Drusius, de recta lectione Linguae
sanctae, cap. 4. distinguishes; Vocalium soni literis coaevi sunt, figurae vero
posteriores, and post Hieronymi aetatem. So does Chamier. Panstrat. lib. 12.
cap. 4. n. 5. where he writes, Vocales quoad sonos semper fuisse, de picturis
vero se nolle cum ullo contendere, number posse concedi codices antiquitus non
fuisse punctatos: so also D. Prideaux in the place now alleged, Sect. 12. as
most term it, vowels do, as it were, animate all words, and are as the soul to
the body, whereupon they are called vocales, a voce, because by the help of
vowels articulate words are pronounced. This is largely proved, Prolegom. 3.
Sect. 49. etc. where it is also showed that the ancient Hebrew vowels were the
same before the invention of points, which are in all other Eastern Tongues, as
the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic etc. viz. (...) which are yet commonly called
matres lectionis, because they direct the reading in Books not pointed, to
which some add (...), and St. Hierom (...)* The Grammarians indeed make them
all consonants, and exclude the vowels out of the number of letters, that they
may make way for the points, but against all reason and common sense: For the
Hebrews have as many letters as other Nations, (for as is showed, Prolegom. 2.
Other Nations, as the Assyrians, Greeks, etc. received their letters originally
from them, as by their names and order of the Alphabet appears) and therefore I
see no reason why the Hebrews could not express all their words by these twenty
two letters, as well as other Nations. Certainly, the Hebrew Alphabet must be
very defective, if it have no vowels, which are the chief letters, without
which, no letters can be pronounced; This would make an Alphabet of such
letters as could not at all be pronounced, which were most absurd; for as
Morinus says, quod est sua natura vocalissimum, and per quod caetera redduntur
vocalia esset mutum. By the help of these letters Origin expressed all the Hebrew
Text in Greek letters in his Hexapla: The like has St. Hierome and diverse
others of the Ancients done, when they express some Hebrew words or verses in
Greek or Latin letters; and why could not Moses and the Prophets do the
like, as the Jews do at this day, when they express the words of other
Nations, Latin, Italian, Spanish, etc. in Hebr. letters without points.

V. Out of Origin we have some relics left in that ancient Greek MS. of
Cardinal Barberines of the Minor Prophets; which, collated with the Roman LXX.
I have printed in the Appendix, and have produced some verses, viz. Hos. 3. 2.
and 11. 1. In Proleg. 3. sect. 49. as a specimen how Orig. expressed the Heb.
Text in Greek letters, by which it appears; that Jod served for ((...))
sometimes for ((...)) Aleph for ((...)) Vau for ((...)) and ((...)) and
sometimes for ((...)) Ain for ((...)) and sometimes for ((...)). Josephus l. 6.
de bello Jud. calls the letters of the name (...), four vowels: for by (...) he
understands vowels in opposition to consonants called (...). So St. Hier.
frequently, as is observed by Gerhard. Vossius de Art Gram. l. 1. c. 27. and
others. Verum est quidem hodie vocales in iis quiescere, at olim pro vocalibus
fuisse testatur Hieron. qui ^as vocales appellat. Epist. 145. Docet pro
Hosianna dici Hosanna, media vocali illisa, quia ab Aleph excluditur Jod. Here
it is evident he reckons Aleph and Jod among vowels. And Epist. ad Evagr.
Refer negat utrum dicamus salim (which is written (...) with Jod) an salem,
(which is written (...) without Jod) and hanc causam reddit, quod vocalibus in
medio literis raro utuntur Judaei. Here it is plain he calls Jod a vowell. Idem
tradit Heb. Genesis 13. dicit (...) cum (...) scribi, and (...) ablata (...)
litera, quae apud Hebraeos pro ((...)) legitur. More to this purpose is
alleged in the same place, to which I know not what can be answered; it being
as clear as if it were written by a beam of the Sun, that Hierome reckoned
(...) for vowels. So Zuinglius (misprinted Zuinger in the Proleg.) praef. in
Esaiam, Vocalibus nunquam caruit illa lingua. (...) enim a (...) e (...) i
(...) o and u, nunquam eis defuerunt, etc. Beza de recta ling. Graec. pronunc.
non dubito quin ante puncta vocalia ab Hebraeis Grammaticis divinissimo certe
invento excogitata (quod post Hieron. aetatem contigit) Aleph idem prorsus
illis atque caeteris gentibus sonuerit. This and a great deal more, those that
please may read in those Proleg. all which our Author well knew, but was
pleased to pass over in silence, as knowing it would overthrow one part of the
foundation, whereupon that fabulous opinion of the antiquity of Points is
built, and therefore for information of the Reader I have here transcribed. In
the same place the reason is given, why the Hebrews more frequently omit the
vowels in the midst of words, then in the beginning or end, Vnde haec
consuetudo Hebraeis vocales in mediis vocibus omittendi, plerumque, cum initio
and fine sapius (not semper, as it is misprinted) adhibeantur, which the Reader
may find Proleg. 3. sect. 50. Notwithstanding all this (which our Author had
read in the Prolegomena) he sticks not to bring the same words (which we have
mentioned out of Hierome) to prove that pointed vowels were known to Hierom.
Epist. 126. Nec refert utrum salem an salim nominetur, cum vocalibus in medio
literis perraro utantur Hebraei; whence he observes, p. 285. that the Hebrews
had the use of vowels, or else he cannot understand his words; for if they did
it perraro, they did it sometimes. He did not, or rather he would not
understand his words; for he could not but know, that by vowels, Hierome meant
not the modern points, but the ancient vowels then in use. I would gladly know
of him how salim and salem are written in Hebrew, whether salim be not with
Jod, and salem without it: and then whether in that place Hierome could mean
any thing but Jod by vocalis media. For the vowels which the Hebrews used in
St. Hieroms time, they used perraro very seldom in the middle of words, and
most frequently in the beginning and end. And so its true, they used those
vocales literae, which were the matres lectionis; but the puncta vocalia, the
vowels now used in our Bibles, are used more frequently in the middle, seldom
in the end, and never in the beginning of a word, no nor of a syllable; for,
consona semper syllabam inchoat. Therefore not the puncta vocalia, but the
literae vocales, were the only vowels in St. Hieroms time. And consequently
our Considerator by his own confession cannot understand St. Hieroms words.
Besides if our present points had been then in use, there had been then no
place left for different pronunciation, either pro voluntate lectorum, or pro
varietate regionum, as Hierome affirms of those vowels he meant in the same
place.

VI. It is also to be noted, which is often in the Proleg. asserted, that when
we say the Masorites were the authors of the points, that they affixed them not
pro arbitrio, as they pleased, or made what reading they thought fit, but that
they pointed them generally according to the true and accustomed reading, which
they had received as the true sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, from their
Ancestors continued from Moses and the Prophets. I say generally; for as
appears in the precedent Section, in the words cited out of Origens Hexapla,
which also may appear out of the LXX. Hierome, and others that were before the
Masorites, they pronounced some letters and vowels otherwise then the Masorites
have now pointed them: See Hier. ad Euagr. transcribing Genesis 14. 18, 19, 20.
into Latin letters, where we may find some of them differing from the present
pronunciation. The letters Begadchephat were not pronounced according to our
present rules* as is clearly proved out of Hierome and the LXX. in the Proleg.
Yet though the sound and pronunciation did sometimes differ, the signification
of the words, and the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost ought to be the same,
as in those places out of Origin and Hierome. Or if the sense be differing, yet
there want not rules to try which is the best reading, mentioned Proleg. 6.
However, the pointing was not arbitrary, nor does the true reading depend upon
the Masorites. For as it is said, Proleg. 3. Sect. 51. Notandum Masorethas dum
puncta invenerunt non novos vocalium sonos, vel pronunciationem novam
induxisse, sed juxta consuetudinem sibi traditam libros sacros punctasse,
ideoque lectionem non ab iis pendere licet ipsi apices excogitarint, nec ideo
lectionem esse veram quia est a Masorethis sed quia verum Sp. S. sensum
exprimit, quemque Scriptoribus sacris dictavit and per eos literis consignavit.
Non enim punctarunt codices pro arbitrio, sed secundum veram and receptam
lectionem, quam diligenter poterant, puncta apposuere, etc. And this our Author
himself grants, pa. 250. where he says that Elias Levita, who makes the
Tyberian Masorites the authors of the points, ties all as strictly to the
reading by points, as if they had been by Ezra, and left it not to be altered
at every man's pleasure. All which is said in the Proleg. which deny that the
Masorites at pleasure pointed the Text, and which necessarily follows, that
it is lawful for any whatsoever to alter the reading at pleasure; which as it
proves the charge of our Author to be groundless, so it takes away his maine
arguments against the novelty of the points, viz. That the reading would depend
upon the authority of the Rabbis, and that it would be altogether uncertain,
and so the authority of the Scriptures would be taken away. For both these are
altogether vain and groundless, supposing that the Masorites did not point
the words pro arbitrio, but were tied to the common received reading which they
expressed by their punctation, for the Text was generally so read by the
Christian Church as it is now, as appears both by the Hebrew Copies among them,
and by the Comments and Expositions and Translations of the ancient Writers of
the Church. The reading and Expositions therefore of Christians are not
regulated by the Masorites, or depend upon their skill and diligence in
punctation; for if their punctation had never been, the reading had been the
same it is: Nor do these rely upon the Masorites, but upon the Text it self,
and the true reading of it continued and preserved in the Church of Christ;
which because the Masorites had well expressed by their points, the Christian
Church received their punctation, not upon their authority, but as I said,
because it expressed the true sense received in the Church of God: and withal,
because they saw it conduced much to the more easy reading of the Text.

VII. Against this we have a maine objection, page 292, 293. That while the
Hebrew language was the vulgar tongue of that Nation, and was spoken by every
one uniformaly every where, it had been possibly upon a supposition that there
were no points, that men without infallible guidance and direction might affix
notes and figures which might with some exactness answer the common
pronunciation of that language, and so consequently exhibit the true and proper
sense and meaning of the words themselves. But when there had been an
interruption of 1000 years in the vulgar use of that language, and being
preserved only pure in our books, to suppose that the true and exact
pronunciation of every letter, tittle and syllable was preserved alive by orall
Tradition, not written any where, nor commonly spoken, is to build Castles in
the air -- After he says, that the relief is insufficient, to say the
Masorites affixed not the present punctation arbitrarily, but according to the
tradition they had received. What weight is to be laid upon such a tradition
for near 1000. years (above, according to Morinus) is easy to be imagined?
Nor let men please themselves with the pretended facility of learning the
Hebrew Language without points and accents, and not only the Language, but the
true and proper reading and distinction of the Bible, let the points and
accents be wholly removed, and the restraint and distinction of the words as
now pointed, and then turn in the drove of the learned Critics of this age
upon the noted Consonants, and we shall quickly see what woeful work, yea
havoc of the sacred Truth will be made among them, were they shut up in
several Cells, I should hardly expect that harmony and agreement among them,
which is fabulously reported to have been among the LXX. in the like case.

VIII. To this we answer. 1. That though the Language ceased to be Vulgar for
1000. years, yet there was still a succession of Priests and Scribes and other
learned men, who continued the knowledge of the Language, and the true reading
and pronunciation of the Text, and do to this day, with whom the Language was
the same as it was when the common people spoke it, and their study and
profession was to write out copies of the Law, and likewise to read and expound
it, or to teach the reading and true pronnnciation of it to others, which they
did successively from age to age (as we see in the Greek and Latin, which have
a long time ceased to be vulgar, and yet the knowledge of the tongues, and the
true reading and pronunciation is the same among learned men, as it was when
they were vulgar.) This was a great part of the Jewish learning, the true
reading of the Text; and they who were most accurate and exact therein, were
honored most among them, and had their Schools, and their Scholars, and
Disciples, whom they instructed from time to time, till at length in regard of
their many dispersions and banishments, that the true reading might not be lost
with the language, they began to affix points to the Text, as well to
facilitate the reading, as to preserve it the better from any alteration or
change. And therefore it was all one to them who still preserved the true
reading and sense of the Scripture to point and accent it as it was, whilst the
common people spoke and understood it as well as they; and therefore upon this
concession, that whilst the Language was vulgar, the points and accents might
have been affixed with certainty, it follows undeniably, that even in the time
of the Tiberian Masorites, the Rabbis and learned men among the Jews might
point the Bible as well as their Predecessors might have done whilst the
Language was common. This is a clear truth to any common understanding, and not
to build Castles in the air. 2. The true reading was not continued by orall or
unwritten Tradition after the tongue ceased to be vulgar, but by the Written
Text, which was always preserved entire among them; and the reading depended
not upon Tradition otherwise then the reading of all Books in other Languages,
which depends upon the orall instruction of Masters and Teachers, without which
continued from hand to hand, how could any know that such a letter or character
stands for such a sound, or that such a word has such a signification. The
Samaritane Pentateuch, Chaldean Paraphrase of the Pentateuch and Prophets, and
the Syriack Translation of the Bible, continued above a thousand years before
they were pointed (and the Samaritan is not yet pointed, as is certainly known
and confessed by all) which shows plainly how the Hebr. Text might be continued,
and the true reading preserved without pointing, unless our Author can show any
difference as to this matter, between the Languages: For they have the same
letters, the same vowels, Aleph, Vau, Jod, with the Hebrew, and the reading in
every respect subject to as much ambiguity and uncertainty as is pretented to
be in the Hebrew unpointed. And that the true reading might be preserved above
a thousand years is not against all reason, but very reasonable to suppose,
since we see the ^ame done in the Samaritane, Syriack, and Chaldee for a longer
time, and the same may be said of the Arabic, though not for so long a time
after the Alcoran was written.

IX. 3. The certain reading of the Text by diligent practice and use may be
attained without points, though with more difficulty then if it were pointed,
as has been heretofore showed by Martinius, Capellus and others. One that is
wholly ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, having some Translations, as the LXX. or
vulgar Latin, may by labor and industry, and comparing the Translation with
the Text, and observing the Antecedents and Consequents, find out the
signification of each word by it self, and the proper sense and meaning in
connection with others, and may by degrees find out where the Translator varied
from the Text, and where he was mistaken. Thus among others Clenard learned the
Arabic without any Mr. or Instructor, when that Language was scarce known in
Europe, by the Nubiense Psalter, where the Arabic is without any pointed
vowels, by comparing it with other Translations in that Psalter. And so
Erpenius, the great Writer of the Arabic in these parts, professes of
himself, that proprio mart, he first got the knowledge of the Arabic tongue
without any Teacher, out of Arab. books not pointed, such as the Arabic
Gospells printed at Rome, the Nubiense Psalter, Avicen, and other Authors; and
if they were done in the Arab. I know no reason why it may not be done in the
Hebrew; In the Chaldee and Syriack (which seem to be dialects of the Heb.) the
same was done before points for them were devised. Elias Lev. Galatinus,
Scaliger, and others testify of their knowledge, that children are taught to
read H^brew, Chaldee, Arabic, Turkish and Persian books without points, and
that they have seen them read very readily. It Is true, it is more difficulty to
read without points* but yet attainable; for our Author is much mistaken when
he says that men may please themselves with a pretended facility of reading
the Hebrew without points, I know none that thinks it so very easy: Nay, it is
freely acknowledged that it was with more difficulty attained before the points
were devised, and thereupon the faculty of true and distinct reading was
accounted no ordinary matter among the Rabbines, who counted it a great part of
their learning: Yet the analogy of Grammar being agreed upon, and known, it is
not difficult for one that is but reasonably skilled in the Language
(especially with the help of a Translation or the like) to read without
points. Now the Analogy of Grammar was always the same, or else not only the
figures of the points, but the sounds also are of a late invention. And
therefore I doubt not but that if points and accents were taken away; yet by
the help of some Translations, and by diligent care and study one might as
well attain to the true reading of the Hebrew, as Clenard and Erpenius did of
the Arabic: And that if diverse did follow the same study upon the same Text,
their harmony and agreement would demonstrate the possibility, and would be
better in both the reading and sense of the Scriptures, then is to be found
among some congregations at this day, whose Harmony in expounding the
Scripture, is little better then that of the builders of Babel, when their
Tongues were divided.

X. Thirdly, it is to be observed, that although the reading of diverse words
unpointed, considered by themselves, might be dubious and subject to diverse
readings, yet this ambiguity is taken away by the antecedents and consequents,
so that in the Context, as they are parts of a sentence, the reading which is
in it self ambiguous, is determined to one sense and meaning; This is showed
at large in Proleg. 13. Sect. 50, 51. where an instance is given Sect. 51. out
of Exodus 18. 15. where the words unpointed are ambiguous, and capable of
diverse senses taken severally: but in the Context all ambiguity is taken away;
and this is proved against Morinus and other Romanists, with whom our Author
seems to join hands, who from the ambiguity of some words unpointed would
prove the Text to be ambiguous; He instances in (...), which unpointed is
capable of 8. significations, which is fully answered, Proleg. 87. Sect. 24.
But if notwithstanding the antecedents and consequents, some words do still
remain doubtful, as it is in the Greek, and in all languages, yet the use and
custom received in the Church takes away all further ambiguity. The most of
those that stand for the antiquity of the points, ascribe the first beginning
of them to Esdras, as Buxtorf and others. Now if the Text might be read
certainly, and without ambiguity, though without points, from the time of Moses
to Esdras, why might it not likewise be continued and preserved as well after
Esdras his time as it was before? Experience, as I have said, shows it in
other Tongues, as the Chaldee, Syriack, Arabic, etc. which had no points at
first, yet were read without ambiguity. The Talmuds, and other Rabbinicall
Writings are daily read both by Jews and Christians without points. Punctation
facilitates the reading. He that understands not the Hebrew, may read it with
points; he that is excercised in the Tongue may read it without them. There is
no color why the Chaldee Paraphrase, the Syriack Bible, the Alcoran, might be
read, and the true sense certainly known before they were pointed, and why the
Hebrew Text cannot, but must be subject to such uncertainty. The New Testament
was not at first written with accents, notes of aspiration, distinction, by
Comma and Colon, etc. as is showed, Proleg. 3. Sect. 45. and appears by ancient
MSS. Our Alexandrian and others and is granted generally; whereupon in the
Complutense Edition, it is Printed without accents, that it might better
represent the (...) of the Apostles and Evangelists, as the Authors of that
Edition in one of their Prefaces affirm: and it is known that some Greek words
unaccented, are doubtful, and capable of diverse senses, and that the
distinctions do sometimes alter the sense, and yet none of the Ancients accuse
the Greek Text of ambiguity, but the reading was certain, and so continued,
till accents and distinctions were invented. If the want of these did not
hinder the certainty of the New Testament, why should the want of the points
hinder the certainty of the Old? Therefore D. Prideaux, Lect. 12. Sect. 17.
says, Lectionis certitudo comparari potest absque punctis ex attenta praxi,
and librata orationis serie. To the same purpose Martinius, Technolog. Incerta
inquis erunt omnia in libris sacris, si desunt puncta. Deum immortalem! quid
audio? Tota Hebraeorum sapientia in scriptis Talmudicis, and Rabbinicis, quae
multa sunt, sine punctis tradita est, sine punctis legitur, and public in
Scholis exponitur, neque quisquam est qui incerta illic omnia conqueratur, and
tu mihi reclamas Hebraea scripta sine punctis incerta esse, neque te protinus
ab ipsa rerum experientia convinci refellique sentias. To these I will only
add what Buxtorf sen. says of the uncertainty of the Chaldee unpointed, which
may be as truly said and applied to the Hebrew unpointed; Thesaur. Gram. Anno
1609. p. 614. Incerta in voce per se extra sententiam posita non in continuata
and perfecta sententia, etc. Arbitrarium est, sed ei qui ignorantiae tenebris
obductus nigrum arbitratur esse album, and pro arbitrio de coloribus judicat.
Non cujuscunque arbitrium, sed conveniens sententiae ratio, sed certa
constansque analogia Grammatica veram lectionem moderatur. These things
considered, most of our Adversaries reasons, especially that which is the
Principal, about the uncertainty of the Text are answered, all which are at
large handled in the Prolegom. 3. but these he prudently passes over, because,
if they had been mentioned by him, the whole fabric of his building had fallen
to the ground.

XI. That which we affirm there about this Controversy, is, First, that the
modern points were not, either from Adam, or affixed by Moses or the Prophets
that were before the Captivity. Nor, secondly, after the Captivity devised,
either by Ezra, or any other before the completing of the Talmud; Thirdly, but
after five hundred years after Christ invented by some Learned Jews, for the
help of those who were ignorant of the Hebrew Tongue, whom they would teach by
this means, to read the Hebrew Text, as distinctly and exactly as themselves,
that so, after they had taken out of the peoples hands, and laid aside the
Greek Translation of the LXX. they might have every where in their Synagogues
men, though unlearned who by this help might be able to read the Text
publicly, which before the invention of those points, could be done only by a
few Learned men: Fourthly, as for other matters, though probably affirmed, I do
not insist much, as who they were, how many, one or more, in what place they
lived (whether at Tiberias, or elsewhere) or where they met about this work,
what the precise and exact time was, when the punctation was made whether the
sixth, seventh, or eighth age after Christ, in which things, because of the
great defect of any certain Historical monuments among the Jews, for those
times, all being involved in great obscurity and darkness, by reason of their
dispersions and banishments, it is hard to determine any thing with certainty,
though it be most probable, that this Work was taken in hand about five hundred
years after Christ, by the Tiberian Masorites.

XII. These things being premised about the State of the Controversy, and the
certainty of the Scriptures without points, it will be needful further to add
something concerning the first occasion of this Controversy, which is briefly
showed, Prolegom. 3. Sect 38. to be this, That though the Controversy be in it
self Grammatical or Logical, yet it had its rise from a question
Theological: For when at the beginning of the reformation, diverse questions
arose about the Scripture and the Church; The Romanists observing that the
punctation of the Hebrew Text was an invention of the Masorites, they thereupon
inferred, that the Text without the points might be taken in diverse senses, and
that none was tied to the reading of the Rabbis, and therefore concluded, that
the Scripture is ambiguous and doubtful without the interpretation and
testimony of the Church, so that all must fly to the authority of the Church,
and depend upon her for the true sense and meaning of the Scripture. On the
other side, some Protestants, fearing that some advantage might be given to the
Romanist by this Concession, and not considering how the certainty of the
Scripture might well be maintained, though the Text were pointed, in stead of
denying the Consequence, which they might well have done, thought sit rather to
deny the Assumption, and to maintain, that the points were of Divine Original,
whereby they involved themselves in extreme labyrinths, engaging themselves in
defense of that which might be easily proved to be false, and thereby wronged
the cause which they seemed to defend. Others therefore of more learning and
judgment, knowing that this Position of the Divine original of the points could
not be made good; and that the Truth needed not the Patronage of an Untruth,
would not engage themselves therein, but granted it to be true, that the points
were invented by the Rabbis, yet denied the Consequence, maintaining,
notwithstanding, that the reading and sense of the Text might be certain
without punctation, and that therefore the Scripture did not at all depend upon
the Authority of the Church: and of this judgment were the chief Protestant
Divines, and greatest Linguists that then were, or have been since in the
Christian world, such as I named before; Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza,
Musculus, Brentius, Pellicane, Oecolampadius, Mercer, Piscator, P^^hagius,
Drusius, Schindler, Martinius, Scaliger, De Dieu, Casaubon, Erpenius, Sixth.
Amama, Jac. and Ludov. Capellus, Grotius, etc. and among our selves, Archbishop
Usher, Bishop Prideaux, Mr. Meade, Mr. Seldom, and innumerable others, whom I
forbear to name, who conceived it would nothing disadvantage the cause, to
yield that Proposition, for that they could still make it good, that the
Scripture was in it self a sufficient and certain rule for says and life, not
depending upon any humane authority to support it.

XIII. Amongst those who undertook to assert the Divine Original of the
points, the chief was Buxtorf. the Father, a man without doubt of very great
skill in the Hebrew, as any in his time and one whose labors conduced much to
the knowledge of that Tongue. This man in his Hebrew Grammar, Edit. 1. brought
diverse arguments to prove his opinion, and said more for it then any others had
done before him, whose authority, grounded upon his great skill in the Hebrew,
drew diverse, who wanted either leisure or ability, to weigh all the reasons on
both sides, to embrace his opinion, and to take it for granted, and the rather,
because it seemed to make more against the Romanists then the other.
Afterward, in the ensuing Editions of his Grammar, this Tract about the points
was left out, whereupon it was conceived by diverse, that he had changed his
judgment: and it appears, that diverse men of great Learning did much oppose
his opinion, as Scaliger, Epist. 243. and others, so that it might well be
thought he began to stagger in it, and therefore thought fit to forbear the
further publishing of it, till he had better considered of the whole matter.
After this, Lud. Capellus, Hebrew Professor at Saumer, a man of great Learning
and worth, as his Writings speak him, published his Arcanum punctationis
revelatum, which was set out by Erpenius at Leyden, an. 1624. Wherein he
largely handles the whole Controversy, answered all Buxtorfs arguments to the
full, and brought such convincing reasons to the contrary, that few who read
this Book without prejudice, but subscribed to his opinion; as Erpenius, Ger.
Vossius, Rivet. Sixth. Amama, Spanhemius, Festus Hommius, Colterius, etc. as
appears by some of their Epistles, Printed in his Defensio Criticae; yea,
diverse that formerly were strongly against his Opinion, being convinced by
evidence in his reasons, joined with them, as Mr. Eyres, late Prebend of Ely, a
man of great skill in this kind of Learning, Arnold. Bootius, a man of great
knowledge in the Hebrew, and a violent opposer of Capellus his Critica, yea, it
was conceived by some, that Buxtorf himself was wavering in his opinion, but
that he was loath to retract what he had formerly in Print affirmed. After his
decease, his Son, D. Buxtorf, who succeeded his Father in the place of Hebrew
Professor at Basil, out of piety to his Father, as is by himself in his Vindic.
ingenuously confessed, undertook to answer Capellus, (who had formery opposed
and confuted his opinion about the ancient Hebrew letters) though not without
more sharpness and animosity then could have been wished to have been between
Divines, and those both Protestants, which he has done in a full Volume,
wherein what he has performed, I leave to every man's judgment; for my own
part, (though he be my worthy and much honored friend, with whom I have for
diverse years had friendly intercourse by Letters, (notwithstanding our
difference of judgment in this and other matters) yet I cannot assent to his
opinion; nor do I find upon perusal of his Book, that he has clearly
answered Capellus his Arguments, but that they stand firm and unshaken, nor
brought any argument for his opinion, which is not answered by Capellus, though
I believe he has said as much out of his Hebrew Learning, (wherein I think he
has not many fellows this day living) as possibly can be alleged. I know that
there are some Learned men of good note, who partly drawn by Buxtorfs
authority, and partly out of fear, lest the Romanists should take advantage by
this concession, and partly by their too much adhering to Rabbinicall Tenets,
and parley, because they never seriously studied the Controversy, nor weighed
the Arguments of both sides in the even balance of an unbyassed judgment, but
taking things upon trust, without examining the grounds, as the generality of
men do in all kind of Learning, have followed Buxtorfs opinion; yet upon
inquiry, it will be found that the most of those of greatest judgment, both in
Divinity and Eastern Learning which this age has produced, are of contrary
opinion: And I must profess, that having occasion by reason of this Work of
the Bible, to be acquainted, or to keep correspondence with those that are most
eminent in this Learning, both at home and abroad, I scarce know of any (a few
excepted) who are versed more then ordinary in these matters that are not of
the same judgment, which I have asserted in the Prolegomena.

XIV. This is the true history of the rise and Original of this controversy,
which though it be mentioned in the Prolegomena, yet our Author takes no notice
of, but tells us another story of it, which we shall briefly consider. He tells
us p. 248. and Epist. p. 15. 16. That Elias Levita, the most learned of the
Jews of that age, was acquainted with many of the first Reformers, and lived
particularly with P. Phagius. That in his Masora Hammat. he broched an opinion
not much heard of before, at least not at all received among the Jews, nor for
ought that yet appears once mentioned by Christians before, namely that the
points or vowels, and accents, were invented by some critical Jews or Masorites
living at Tiberias about five or six hundred years after Christ, and that no
doubt the man's aim was to reduce the world of Christians to a dependence upon
the ancient Rabbis for the whole sense of Scripture. Hinc prima mali labes,
Here lies the first breach in this matter. This fraud being not discovered, and
this opinion being broched and confirmed by the great and almost only Master
of that Language, of that Age, some even of the first Reformers embraced this
fancy, Perhaps Zuinglius had spoken to it before. After a while the poison of
this error beginning to operate, the Papists waiting at the mouth of the
Reformers, like the servants of Benhadad on Ahab to catch at every word that
might fall from them to their advantage, began to make use of it, etc.

XV. In this Discourse, as there are some things true, viz. That Elias was one
of the most learned Jews of his age, That he was acquainted with Phagius, That
he maintained the Tiberian Masorites to have been the Authors of the points,
and proved the same by diverse arguments, That diverse of the first Reformers
were of the same opinion with him, so for all the rest, as it wants all
probability of truth, so it may be as easily rejected, as it is affirmed.

XVI. For that Elias Lev. was the first that held that opinion, and that it was
not mentioned before by any Christians for any thing that yet appears is far
from truth, when as there were sundry Christian Writers (some of which he might
have read named Proleg. 3. Lect. 38.) who lived long before Elias, some 50.
some 100. some 300 years before his name was heard of, who held the same
opinion of the points, as Elias did, as Angelus Politianus, Joh. Picus
Mirandula, that miracle of his time, Lyra, Paulus Burgensis, besides,
Raimundus, the Author of Pugio fidei, who lived about 1200 years after Christ.
Politian thus writes of Pic. Mirand. Miscell. cap. 14. Novitiae sunt istae
notae, quibus nunc pro vocalibus utuntur Hebraei, ut idem and comperit, and
ostendit, Joh. Picus Mirandulanus, unus omnium prorsus ab omni part
beatissimus, in opere singulari and admirando, quo Psalmos a LXX versos, isto
notarum praecipue argumento, docet Hebraicae veritati respondere. Besides there
lived diverse in the same time with Elias, who knew nothing of him, or scarce
had heard of him, as Galatinus, Veltwicus, Zuinglius, Pelican, Luther, and
after him many learned men, who held the same opinion, not moved by Elias his
arguments or authority, but convinced by the evidence of the things, as Calvin,
Mercer, Masius, Boderianus, Jos. Scaliger, Casaubon, Ar. Montanus, Drusius,
etc. so that this is a vain brag, that no Christian held the same opinion with
Elias before his time. Let our Adversary name so many learned men before Elias,
or before the Reformation, that held the points to be of Divine Original. I
doubt it would be hard for him to name any Christian Writer that did absolutely
affirm the same before that time.

XVII. Nor was Elias the only man among the Jews that held this opinion; for
besides the tacit acknowledgement of the whole Nation, showed by their
practice in their Synagogues, using a Copy of the Law, without points, to
represent the (...) of Moses, which was as themselves confess unpointed, and
the Testimony drawn from the ancient Cabbalists, and Talmudists, who draw none
of their Mystical Expositions from any of the points or accents, which without
doubt they would have done, if they had then been in use, as well as they do
from the letters, besides these, some of the chief Rabbis before Elias have
held the same, as is elsewhere showed out of Kimchi, Cozri, Ab. Ezra, Jehuda,
Chiug. and others, who expressly affirm that the whole punctation was the work
of the Tiberian Masorites and upon any doubt in punctation fly to them, and
give this reason of their Readings, that the Tiberian Masorites did so point
and read it.

XVIII. So that Elias broched this opinion, aiming hereby to reduce the world
of Christians to a dependence on the ancient Rabbis, is a mere winter story
without any ground or reason. For Elias held the points to be part of the orall
Law, delivered on Mount Sinai, and continued by Tradition, till the points were
written and affixed to the Text by the Masorites: and therefore our Author
observes elsewhere p. 250. That Elias tied all as strictly to the Reading by
points, as if they had been done by Ezra. Elias therefore did not hold the
Reading and sense of the Scripture, or the matter of the Punctation to depend
upon the Rabbis, but only the present forms and figures, and how could he
imagine to draw Christians to a belief of that which he did not believe
himself, or to a dependence upon the Rabbis for the whole sense of the
Scripture which himself did not hold? And nothing more shows the vanity of this
fancy, then that those Christians that held the same opinion with Elias, do
utterly deny that they depend upon the Rabbis ancient or modern for the sense
of the Scripture. Luther was far from this, who as our Author cites him within
a few lines writes, that the Jews had corrupted the Bible by their points and
distinctions, and Calvin shows how little he esteemed the authority of the
Rabbis on Zach. 11. 7. Let him name any place, or one word out of Elias, or
any other writer, Jew or Christian, that intimates in the least that he had any
such aim, or name one Christian Writer, Romanist or Protestant of this opinion,
that professed to depend upon the Rabbis for the true sense and Reading of the
Scripture. As groundless is that which follows, that this fraud of Elias was
not discovered by the first Reformers, but that they were unawares drawn to
embrace his fancy: as though those wise and learned men were such children and
Idiots, as not to discern the consequence of this opinion, or of such weak
judgments, as to be led by the authority of a Jewish Rabbin.

XIX. It remains therefore, that the true Original of this Question was, as I
have showed, the controversy arising in the beginning of the Reformation about
the authority and certainty of the Scripture, in reference to the Church: and
hence it was that this Question about the points was not ventilated before the
Reformation, and that so few make any mention of it, because the Questions
about the Scripture and the Church were not then raised: And that which begun
the quarrel does still continue it: some out of fear, lest they should yield
any thing disadvantagious to the cause they maintain, holding the points to be
of Divine Original, and among those some embracing that opinion, not because
they knew it to be true, but because they conceive it makes more for our cause
against the Papists, amongst which I may justly reckon our Adversary, who
Epistol. page 18. is offended at Doctor Prideaux, because though he took notice
of the advantage the Papists make of that opinion of the novelty of points, and
of the danger of it, yet which seems most admirable, himself falls in with
them, and maintains the same opinion: as if we must measure the truth of
Doctrine, not by evidence of reason, but by the advantage it brings to our
cause; or must affirm what we know to be false, because it makes against the
Papists. Others therefore who see how groundless those fears are, and knowing
that the truth must not be denied, though some pervert it to a wrong end, grant
what they see cannot be denied about the Original of the points, yet maintain
the same Conclusion about the certainty and authority of Scriptures, upon
better and more solid grounds, and so does Dr. Prideaux in that Lecture, where
he maintains the certainty and authority of the Scripture, and so yields
nothing to the Papists, though he grants the points to be the invention of the
Masorites.

CHAP. XI.
I. The Adversaries candor and ingenuity in reciting the Arguments against the
antiquity of Points, leaving out some of the chief, and perverting the rest.
II. The first Argument past by, which is from the Testimony of the chief
Protestant Divines and Linguists of this age. Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius,
Pelican, Oecolampadius, Beza, Merce^, P. Phagius, Chamier, Vossius, Drusius,
De Dieu, Schindler, Martinius, Scaliger, Grotius, Schichard, Casaubon,
Erpenius, Sixth. Amam Mayer, Bootius, Spanhemius, Rivet. F. Hommius, Archbishop
Usher, Bishop Prideaux, Mede, Eyres, etc. III. The last Argument omitted also
in the Considerations from other Eastern Tongues, Syriack, Chald. Arabic,
Samaritane, Persian, etc. IV. Postellus his Testimony. V. The Argument from the
unpointed Copy used in the Synagogues to represent the (...) of Moses
vindicated. VI. This Argument drew the Reverend Usher and Bootius to this
opinion. VII. The Argument from the LXX. and other ancient Translations
perverted by the Adversary. VIII. The other Arguments briefly recapitulated.
Aben Ezra's words vindicated. IX. The Adversaries new Argument. X. XI.
Answered. XII. XIII. Other new Arguments answered. XIV. Another Argument. XV.
Answered out of his own words. XVI. The Tiberian Masorites denied, and yet
acknowledged by the Adversary.

I. THis Question concerning the Points is handled by our Adversary chiefly,
Chap. 4. and 5. of the Considerations, though also by the by, in some other
places he has some passages about the same, wherein I shall not need to handle
all the Arguments pro and con, having done that already, Proleg. 3. Sect. 38,
39, etc. -- 56. ^o which I must remit the Reader, I shall only reply to what
he answers to the Arguments in the Prolegomena, and briefly examine what he
pretends to be added by himself de novo, to prove this Rabbinicall fancy.
First, let us see how he infringes the Arguments in the Prolegomena, wherein I
must needs say, he deals as in the rest of his Discourse pe^^ima fide, and is
far from that candor and truth which he professes: for he leaves out diverse of
the chief Arguments, to which he could give no colorable answer, and for the
rest, he either propounds them by halfs, leaving out that wherein the force of
the Argument chiefly consists, or perverts the sense, and spoils them in his
rehearsing of them, so that I may say of them, as the Poet did of his verses*

Quem recitas meus est, O Fidentine, libellus,
At male dum recitas, incipit esse tuus.
The Arguments are nine which he pretends to confute; but by his relating them,
he makes them his own; for as he delivers them, I own them not. I shall
therefore desire the Reader to suspend his judgment till he have compared them
as they are laid down in the Considerations, and as they are delivered in the
Prolegomena, and then to judge as he shall see cause: I shall at present
mention some Arguments which he has wholly omitted, and then give a taste of
his candid dealing in the rest.

II. The first Argument Sect. 58. is brought from the testimony of the chiefest
and most Learned Protestant Divines, and Linguists: which this age has known,
whose words I cite, and the places where they are to be found: for such men I
conceive are fittest to judge of these matters. Now of these he takes no notice
at all, but uses a prudent preterition, because he knew their names and
authority would spoil his whole design, and wipe off all his imputations of
making the Scripture uncertain, or introducing of Popery, Atheism, etc. They
are Calvin in Zach. 11. 7. Luther ad finem libri Schem Ham. Zuinglius praef. in
Esaiam, Pelican praef. in Pentat. P. Phagius (whom our Adversary reckons (and
that justly) among the restorers of the Heb. tongue, and calls one of the
Patriarchs and Fathers of that Learning. Epist. p. 15.) ad Targum, Genesis 47. 24.
Mercer, the oracle of his times for Hebrew learning, and one of exact judgment
too in other learning (which two as some observe seldom meet in one subject)
in Genes. 16. 13. and 18. 3. and Job 26. 6. and Amos 2. 12. Annot. in Targ.
Mal. 2. Beza lib. de recta pronunciat. ling. Graec. Edit. an. 1587. Piscator
Schol. ad Genesis 15. 8. Chamier Panstrat. lib. 4. c. 12. n. 15. Voslius de Art
Gram. lib. 1. c. 31. Et. lib. 2. c 8. Drusius ad loca difficil. Pent. c. 25. Et
de recta lect. linguae sanctae c. 4. Martinius Technol. Lud. de Dicu. Gram.
lib. 1. c. 7. Schindler frequently in his Lex. Pentaglot. I will add the words
of some. Jos. Scaliger, a man admired by most, Epist. 243. which is to Buxtorf
the Father, writes thus; De Apicibus vocalibus Hebraeorum, tam mihi constat rem
novam esse, quam eos falli qui natos una cum lingua putant, quo nihil stultius
dici potuit aut cogitari. Quis enim negat Arabismi puncta recens esse inventum,
id est, multis annis post obitum impostoris Mahometis? Hodie tamen pueri
Turcarum, Arabum, Persarum, and omnium denique Mahumedanorum sine punctis
legere disc^nt. Eodem modo, Samaritani and Judaei sine ullis punctis, in
synagogis suis, (...) legunt, etc. The noble Grotius was no whit inferior to
Scaliger in any kind of learning, who writes thus in Matthew. 5. 18. Libros
veteris etiam post Es^ram sine punctis vocalibus scribi solitos, quod ita
perspicuis argumentis^ a viris harum rerum doctissimis demonstratum est, ut id
amplius inficiari non nisi pertinacium sit. Schickard, a man much versed in all
Jewish and Rabbinicall learning, one who was at first a stout defender of the
points, (strenuiu licet primo punctorum patronus, for so the words should be,
Prolegom. 3. Sect. 50.) Yet afterward, when he was of a riper judgment,
speaking of the points and accents, lib. 2. de jure Regio Hebraeorum, p. 41.
says, Quod nil tale uspiam appareat in antiquis libris Judaeorum, and valde
miratur superesse qui vocalium antiquitatem serio credunt. For he thinks, non
serio, sed ad ostendendam eruditionem Rabbinicam, vel aciem ingenii, vel
contradicendi studio ita scripsisse, etc. We see these Learned men do not speak
doubtfully in this point, but peremptorily, as if the matter were now so
cleared, that there is no further place for contradiction. To these I may add,
Is. Casaubon, Erpenius, Sixtin. Amama, Mayer, Arnold. Bootius, a bitter enemy
of Capellus his Critica, Spanhemius, Rivet. Festus Hommius, Colterius, etc. as
appears by their Epistles to Capellus. Amongst our selves, I could name those
of chief account for Eastern Learning, now living, public Professors, and
others, whose names I forbear, lest the Adversary in his next Invective should
fall upon them as rudely as he has done upon the Author of the Prolegomena,
yet some I shall not conceal, (who are out of his reach) the Reverend and
Learned Usher, and Mr. Seldom, both whom I have often heard declare themselves
for this Opinion. D. Prideaux, Lect. 12. in Vesper. Commit. 1627. who mentions
also three more sometimes of that University, Sect. 4. qui in istis studiis
versatissimi, Rob. Wakefieldus, Jacobus Capellus, and Sixtin. ab Amama, qui
tres ultimi (says he) superiores duas sententias (de punctorum antiquitate)
summa cum ^ruditione and acumine conati sunt refellere. I might add others, as
M. Mead, M* Eyres, late Prebend of Ely, etc. This Argument, though
inartificiall, yet of great weight, our Author touches not, because he would
have it believed that the Opinion is singular, and maintained by a few, and
that the generality of Learned men in these matters, are not infected (as he
says) with this leaven.

III. As he leaves out the first, so he wholly omits the last, and yet he would
have you believe, that he propounds and answers all the Arguments in the
Prolegomena, p. 260. Of what weight it is, and whether it admits any answer,
let the Reader judge. It is laid down, Sect. 48. And it is taken from the other
Oriental Tongues, which have greatest affinity with the Hebrew, as the Arabic,
Chaldee, Syriack, Samaritane, etc. none of which at first had points, nor has
the Samaritane any yet. The Alcoran was at first written without points, as is
proved by Golius, and others the chief Professors of that Language. The like is
confessed of the Syriack, Chaldee Paraphrase, and is so clear for the
Samaritane, that scarce any but our Author will affirm the contrary. The
Persians have scarce got the use of points as yet, though some of late have
begun to make rules of punctation for that Language. In all these Languages
they have the same letters which of old stood for vowels in the Hebrew; nor
have they in the Arabic, that copious Language, since the invention of points,
any more then three, which serve for all vowels. Phatha, Damma, and Kesra, by
which, with a few general rules, and use, they read distinctly, and pronounce
all the five vowels. By those three letters which answer to Aleph* Jod, and
Vau, before any points were used in any of the Languages, they could distinctly
read and understand their Translations of the Bible, and their other books, and
attain the sense without ambiguity and uncertainty; and none ever doubted but
that the Chaldee Paraphrase of Onkelus and Jonathan, written about our Saviors
time, the ancient Translation of the Syriack, written in the first or second
Century after Christ; as also the Alcoran among the Mahumetanes, were read at
first, as they are now, (though not with so much facility) and yet it is
certain that the points were added to them all after the invention of the
Hebrew points, yea, though points be now added to them all, except the
Samaritane, yet neither that nor the Arabic or Syriack, have yet any notes at
all of accents; and yet those that are skilled in those Languages, know where
the accent ought to be in every word and syllable, though no note be affixed,
as we see in the Latin, and in all other Vulgar Languages, English, Dutch,
French, etc. And in the Greek it is further showed, Sect. 45. out of ancient
MSS. as also out of Aristotle, St. Hierome, and old inscriptions, that the
Greek anciently had no accents Angel. Politian. Miscel. c. 58. and 80. mentions
some verses of the Sibyls, and the Hymns of Callimachus, written without
accents. Our Alex. MS. of the LXX. That New Testament of Beza in Cambridge
Library, that of the Vatican, and other old MSS. are without accents, and the
Authors of the Complutense Edition give this reason why they pointed the New
Testament without accents, because the (...) was so written: yet we know how
useful accents are to distinguish words of Ambiguous sense, which differ only
in the accents; From all which we infer, that if the right reading and
pronunciation might be attained and preserved in those Tongues without any
pointed vowels, and is now, though a^ yet they have no accents, some of them,
then the same might be done in the Hebrew, by the help of the same Letters,
Aleph, Jod, and Vau, those matres lectionis. I could not yet find in any of
the Patrons of points any satisfactory answer to this Argument; and if our
Author could have given any, I suppose he would not have past it over without
answer more then the rest.

IV. He tells us out of Postellus, that in Hieroms time the Samaritanes had
points, because he says* That the Samaritane and Hebrew letters differ only
figuris and apicibus, Prolegom, in lib. Reg. But he might have also read in
Postellus, that the Hebrews had no points, though in his dotage, when he was
infatuated with Rabbinicall and Cabalisticall fancy, and sell into diverse
Fanaticall and Heretical errors, among other things, he began to make the
points to be part of the Oral Law delivered on Mount Sinai, and continued by
Oral Tradition: and his proof out of Hierom for the Samritane points, is as
much to the purpose as our Authors proof out of the same Hierom for the Hebrew
points, because he speaks of vowels, and says, vocalibus in medio perraro
utuntur: when as it is as clear as the Sun (as is already showed) to any that
reads Hieroms words, and is so proved, Prolegom. 3. Sect. 49. that by the
Apices he means, Literarum ductus and summitates, as when he says, that (...)
and (...) apice tantum differunt, and in the same place by vowels he means
Aleph, Vau, and ^od, which he expressly calls vowels, and says they are not so
frequently used in the middle of words, as in the beginning and end.

V. We see what Arguments he wholly omits, let us now see how he deals with the
rest, and how faithfully he propounds them. I will instance but in one or two:
Consider. Chap. 5. Sect. 5. page 267. he there propounds the Argument urged,
Prolegom. 3. Sect. 41. The constant practice of the Jews in preserving in their
Synagogue one Book, which they almost adore, without points, is also alleged
to the same purpose; for what do they else hereby, but tacitly acknowledge the
points to have an humane original; Thus our Author: Now let us see how it is
propunded in the Prolegomena. Secundo, ex praxi hodierna Judaeorum in Synagogis
ab ultima antiquitate observata idem evincitur, ubi volumina sacra, quae populo
public praeleguntur, sine punctis, accentibus, vel versuum distinctionibus
exarata sunt, ut secundum morem antiquis temporibus usitatum Mosis ipsum (...)
quod in arca servatum erat, adumbrarent: and after, Hoc volumen non punctatum
volunt ipsum Mosis volumen in arca Dei jussu servatum refer quod (fatentibus
plerisque eorum doctoribus) erat punctis destitutum; imo ponunt qui^am ^orum
Mosis ^vo, extra controversiam figuras vocalium and accentu^^ nondum fuisse,
and hac de causa librum illum in Synagogis hodie sine notis in Mosaici
exemplaris memoriam scribi: In hanc rem Rabbinorum testimonia profert D. Buxt.
etc. Imo probat D. Buxt. ex Ephodaeo and aliis librum legis punctatu^ apud eos
prophanum esse, etiamsi punctationem evaserint, and quod liber in quo versus
per duo puncta distinguuntur prophanus est, etc. To this purpose a great deal
more may be read in the same place, where also all the evasions and shifts used
to avoid the force of that Argument are taken away. Now by this we may see,
that the main force of the Argument lies in this, not that the Jews use a book
in the Synagogue unpointed (which is all our Adversary propounds) but that they
use one special book of the Law unpointed; for this end and purpose, that it
may represent the Original Copy written by Moses, and laid up in the Ark, which
they acknowledge was written without points; and that this book, if it be
pointed, is thereby profaned, and not fit for that use. Let any man of common
reason judge, whether the Argument be truly related by him, and whether there
be not a vast difference between that in the Prolegomena, and this which he
propounds, and whether it be not a convincing strong Argument to prove by the
tacit consent of the Jews, and their ancient practice in their Synagogues, that
the Text at first was not pointed? our Author knew it to be so, and therefore
the answer he gives, does not at all touch that wherein the force of the
Argument lies. Buxtorf is more ingenuous, for he confesses that this Argument
proves that the (...) of Moses was without points, but not that the (...) of
Esra was unpointed, which yet in that Paragraph is further showed, and that
answer taken away, with all the other evasions which our Author brings out of
Buxtorf.

VI. This Argument I have heard the Reverend and Learned Usher affirm, was a
great motive to draw him to this Opinion, and Arnold. Bootius, (of whom I have
spoken before, that he was a great opposer of Capellus his Critica, and
sometimes a stiff defender of the Antiquity of points) yet confesses, that it
does sufficiently prove the novelty of points, Epist. contra Capell. de Text.
Hebr. Auctorit. Sect. 46. I should tire my self and the Reader, if I should go
over the rest of the Arguments, I shall only desire the Reader, who would be
further satisfied, to compare them as they are in the Prolegomena, with our
Authors answer, and if he find any one of them either truly related, or fully
answered, I will publicly recant what I have said. He shifts off many things
with this, That they are fully answered by Buxtorf, but those that shall take
the pains to look over both, will find that there is not one answer made by
Buxtorf which is not taken away in the Prolegomena. To go over all now, would
be actum agere, and would make this short reply, as it was intended, to swell
into a great Volume.

VII. Yet for a further proof of his candor and love of truth, I shall exercise
^he Readers patience with one Specimen more. An Argument Sect. 46. is drawn
from the ancient Translations, the Greek, Chaldee, Syriack* etc. Ex quibus
perspicuum est ob defectum punctorum voces quasdam ambiguitate laborasse, unde
aliter interpretati sunt versionum istarum authors, quam hodie in punctat is
codicibus legimus, qui si olim punctati fuissent, ambiguitas nulla fuisset, nec
aliter legissent illi quam in hodiernis exemplaribus legimus. Hoc passim
observarunt viri docti in Commentariis suis, alii^que scripti^, and multa
exempla ex LXX. aliisque interpretibus colligunt, ubi eaedem literae (sublatis
punctis) tam ipsorum versioni quam lectioni hodiernae inservire possent. Of
this diverse instances are brought. Here we see the Argument ^is, That diverse
words without points were ambiguous, and capable of diverse senses, and that
the same may be read, as the Interpreters render them, if the Copies were not
pointed, whereas they are now read in another sense, as the Copies are now
pointed, there being no change at all in the letters, but only in the points.
Now how does our Adversary propound this Argument? p. 281. It is further
pleaded, that the ancient Translations, the Greek, Chaldee, Syri^ck, do
manifest that at the time of their composing, the points were not invented. And
that because it is evident in sundry places that they read otherwise, or the
words with other points (I mean as to the force and sound, not figure of them)
then those now affixed. Thus he propounds it, and then answers with a scoff,
That the differences would as well prove they had other consonants, that is,
that in their Copies they used, they had other letters and words then ours, as
other vowels. Who sees not here a plain and wilful falsifying of the Argument?
for the Argument is not drawn from all places where the Translators read
otherwise then is now read in the Hebrew Copies, but only from such places
where the same word with the same letters (being unpointed) might be read and
rendered both as they translated it, and as it signifies according to the
present punctation, or that the word consisting of the same letters being
without points was ambiguous, or capable of two significations, of which the
one was followed by the Translator the other by the Punctators. Now our Author
never mentions that wherein the Argument consists, that the word being unpointed
is ambiguous and capable both of the signification given in the Translation,
and of that which agrees to the modern punctation, when as if it had been
pointed, the ambiguity had been taken away, and they must have read it as they
are now read in the pointed Bibles: but tells us of words read with other
points differing from those we have now, and thereupon makes his pleasant
inference: That we might as well prove by this, that they had other letters and
consonants, as vowels and points; It is true indeed, if the Argument had been
such as he makes it, taken from all words wherein they difer from the present
pointed Copies, but not when only the words unpointed agree with their
rendering it, by reason of the ambiguity without points. Buxtorf confesses, this
argument seemed to be invincible, Achilleum, but as our Adversary propounds it,
it is stramineum, and merely ridiculous; for it is well known and granted
often, that these Translations, especially that of the LXX. differ in many
places, where the reason cannot be given from the ambiguity of the word
destitute of points, but that it is from other causes, of which we have spoken
before.

VIII. I will not insist upon the other Arguments, as that from the Samaritanes
who never had any pointed Copies, nor have to this day, but by the help of
these three letters (...) have kept the true Reading of their books, by which
means they are now also read of others, which is not only said, but proved,
though the Adversary answers it with a scoff, Pergula pictoris. That of the
silence of all the Ancients, Hier. Origin, Eusebius, Epiphanius, Josephus, all
skilled in Hebrew antiquities, who never mention the name of any point or
accent, though they had often occasion to mention them, as is proved by
instances in Hierom, to which no answer is given, but a bare denial of what is
proved, viz. that they had no occasion. The silence of both the Talmuds in all
those vast volumes, where there is not one word or tittle of any pointed vowell
or accent, (as is acknowledged by Buxtorf himself) though there was occasion,
yea a necessity to have mentioned them in some places which are there instanced
in, if there had been any then known, to which no answer is given, but a bold
general denial that they had no occasion. That before the age of the Tiberian
Masorites, there is no mention of any points, by any Writer, Jew or Christian,
as is largely showed, and that the antiquity of those books where they are
mentioned, as the book Zohar, etc. is acknowledged by Buxtorf to be forged, and
antedated a thousand years, and so proved by Scaliger and others. That the
ancient Cabalists draw all their Allegories and Mysteries from the letters (as
they are called) not one from the points, which if they had been known in their
times, would have yielded them matter enough, yea more then the letters, for
their mystical Expositions, as we see in the later Cabbalists which have been
since the invention of points (which argument also is quite omitted by the
Adversary) that the Keri and Ketib which are confessed by all to be for the most
part various Readings gathered out of ancient Hebrew Copies, are all about the
letters only, not any about the points, which yet if the points had then been
in use* had been more subject to mistakes of the Scribes then the letters, and
so more various Readings might have been gathered out of them, then from the
difference of the letters, that in the same Keries and Ketibs, the vowels or
points belonging to the Marginall word or the Keri, are put under the word in
the Text, or the Ketib, to admonish the Reader, that the word in the Margent
must be read, and not the word in the Text, and diverse other the like things,
which were most absurd to ascribe to the sacred Penmen, who if they had been
the Authors of the points, would have put the true Reading, (which they could
not be ignorant of) into the Text, with its own proper points, and not to have
placed it in the Margent without points, or have put the points under another
word to which they did not belong, with which it cannot be read. Such things
(of which diverse are observed in the punctation) are altogether unworthy to be
ascribed to the spirit of God. That the names of the points and accents are all
of a late Original, all Chaldee, not any Hebrew, to which nothing is answered,
but that the names were invented by the late Grammarians. As if before that
time they were without names, or could be continued in public use, for above a
thousand years without names to distinguish them. That the number and use of
them all is uncertain, and not yet agreed upon among the Grammarians, diverse
of them apparently superfluous, and yet in this plenty, diverse notes are
deficient which are used in other languages. These things are largely deduced
and handled in the same Prolegomena, which I do only here name for brevities
sake, yet I cannot but take notice once more of our Authors sincere dealing in
relating our Arguments. Aben Ezra's words, to prove the punctation by the
Tiberian Masorites are brought, Proleg 3. Sect. 4. In his Comment on Exodus 25.
31. He says, that some of the first Pointed Copies, pointed by the Tiberian
Masorites were extant in his time. Vidi ego libros quos examinaverint sapientes
Tiberiades, and de quibus juraverunt quindecim ex senioribus ^orum quod
diligenter considerarent omnem dictionem, omnem punctationem, and unamquamque
vocem, plenam and defectivam; Et ecce scriptum erat Jod in dictione (...) sed
non sic inveni in libris Hispaniae and Galliae, nec in ultra marinis. These
words he recites thus. p. 270. Nothing can be spoken more directly contrary to
what is intended, then that which is urged out of Aben Ezra in Ex. 25, 31.
Where he affirms that he saw some books examined in all the letters and the
whole punctation by the wise men of Tiberias, namely to try whether it were
done exactly according to the pattern they had. Here we see he adds that which
makes the words seem to contradict that they were brought for, (namely whether
it were done according to the pattern they had) of which words not one is in
Aben Ezra, nor in the Prolegomena, for the meaning of Aben Ezra is plain, that
they examined every word* letter, and point, whether all were rightly pointed
according to the true and common pronunciation or Reading, which our Adversary
makes to be, according to some former pointed Copy, which is utterly contrary
to Aben Ezra's meaning and words, and yet they might re-examine their own
Copy, after it was finished, as we know it is usual for those that are
careful and exact in writing, to review what they have written, that they may
amend such errors and faults as have escaped them before they make it public.
If he may be allowed thus to add and detract and change what he pleases, he
may easily make any Argument worth nothing, and to prove the contrary to what
it is brought. Thus he falsifies the words of Aben Ezra, and the Argument drawn
from them in the Prolegomena.

IX. Leaving his answers to our Argument against the Points, let us see what
Arguments he brings for their Divine Original. Here he referres us to Buxtorf,
and I do likewise refer ^he Reader to Scaliger, Sixtin. Amama, Dr. Prideaux,
Vossius and others, especially to Capellus his Punctationis Arcanum, and also
to the Prolegomena, where, whether Buxtorfs Arguments be all answered, let the
Reader judge. Something more our Author pretends to add, which has been
omitted by others, p. 252. etc. The Argument though somewhat intricate and
obscure, as he propounds it, seems to be this. That all Grammars must be made
after the language, and gathered by observations out of the language, which are
reduced to rules of art, and what is anomalous or irregular is excepted from
the rest, and that if the points and accents were invented, and added to the
Text, being no part of the language, then there must be some general rules of
art constituted and made before they could be added to the Text, according to
which they were fixed and added, and so there must be some Grammar or art
according to which they were contrived and made. Now that this could not be, he
proves by two reasons. 1. Because there are so many words anomalous,
irregularly pointed, contrary to the Analogy of Grammar, which they might have
made all regular to their own great ease, and advantage of the language,
facilitating the learning of it. 2. Because the Masorites, who curiously have
reckoned up every word in the Scripture, and the irregularity of every letter
and tittle, never mention any of those Catholic rules, by which they or their
Masters proceeded in the fixing of these points, nor do any footsteps of that
art appear in the Masora, or any learned Jew, which was their rule or Canon in
affixing the points* but all the Grammarians, collect their observations and
rules as they could by particular instances out of the punctation already made.

X. This objection, at least in part, was made long since by Buxtorf the elder,
and the answer given long ago by Capellus in his Arcanum, l. 2. c. 10, 11 19,
etc. and lately in the Prolegom. 3. Sect. 54. For the first, about words
anomalous, he may find among other things, this answer given, That they were so
pointed by the Masorites, non consilio, sed c^su, by casual mistake, which if
they had observed, they would have pointed all regularly, and that in such a
long Work, this might easily happen, that some words might escape their
diligence, which the succeding Masorites, supposing out of reverence to their
Predecessors, whose diligence and learning they so admired, that no Error could
befall them, gathered and noted, conceiving that some great mysteries lay hid
in these anomalous punctations, like as about some letters, as Mem clausum in
medio, Es. 9. 7. and Nun medium in fine, ^ob. 38. 1. of which, Prolegom. 3. and
8. 7. which were at first, casual mistakes of the Scribes, as is thought by
the Learned Protestant Divines, observations were made by those that came
after; as if they had been purposely so written by ^he sacred Penmen, to
signify some great mysteries. Besides, it may be answered, that the former
Masorites pointed these words irregularly* according to that Reading and
Pronunciation which they were taught by their Masters (whose words they
accounted as Oracles) though against the Analogy of ^rammar, and that the
following Masorites, finding such Anomalous punctation, left all as they found
them, only made observations thereupon: For the Masora, as is proved in the
Prolegomena, and is confessed by all, was not written all at one time, nor the
work of one man, or perfected in one age, but done by several persons, at
several times, some distinguishing the Verses by two points, which seems to
have been the first work, others adding points to signify vowels, others
accents, others gathering observations out of what was done by those before
them.

XI. To the second, There are general Grammar Rules in every Tongue, and a
particular Grammar Analogy in each particular Tongue, before it be reduced
into Rules. These, no doubt, were considered by the Masorites in their
punctation, and accordingly they pointed the Text, according to such Rules for
the reading and pronunciation, as they were taught by their Masters, and
invented the names and figures of the vowels and accents, which they have left
to Posterity* though the later Grammarians herein differ from the ancienter
about the names, nature, number, and use. The way and manner how it is most
like they proceeded, is excellently set down by Capell. Arcan. lib. 1. c. 17,
18. Some general Rules, which may be called Grammatical, when they went about
this Work, they devised and agreed upon, which by succeeding Grammarians, were
perfected and reduced into a body. And though it be generally thought that no
Hebrew Grammar was made above five or six hundred years ago, yet Maimon,
speaking of diverse Grammarians that were before him, mentions R. Saadias, who
died about the year of Christ, 940. to be the first Gra^marian, which was not
long after the Masorites had completed their Work, as some observe; so that
the Rules which the Masorites observed or made in their punctation, are
expressed in the Grammars which were made after their punctation. Besides, If
this Argument were of any force, it might prove the Chaldee Paraphrase, the
Syriack, Arabic, Persian, etc. to have been always pointed, and the points
coeve with the Languages, which yet is denied by all that are skillful in those
Languages, for all their books consisted at first only of consonants, as they
are called, as well as the Hebrew, and the points were added long after, and
Grammars composed after all, and gathered out of pointed Copies. The Chaldee
Paraphrase was not at first pointed, as is proved by Buxtorf in his Chaldee and
Syriack Grammar, and after it was pointed, no Chaldee Grammar was made by any
of a long time. Elias Levita found it so hard a task, that he gave it over
after he had begun, and Munster was the first that reduced that Tongue into
Grammatical Rules; and if it be said that they pointed the Paraphrase
according to the punctation of Ezra and Daniel, which they suppose to have been
always pointed, I deny that those few Chapters could give direction for the
punctation of the Paraphrases, or the whole Chaldee Tongue, (of which a small
part is expressed in those Chapters.) Neither can this be said of the other
Tongues, the Arabic, Syriack, etc. of which Grammars were made long after the
punctation, and yet it is granted, that their points were not coeve with the
Languages. Let our Adversary therefore show how the Grammars of those Tongues
were made after the punctation, and so he may answer his own objection about
the Hebrew.

XII. He objects further, p. 255, 256. That if the punctation had been by the
Masorites, they would have falsified and corrupted the Prophesies of Christ,
which they might easily have done, by placing the points and accents so as to
pervert the sense and coherence of the words as in Es. 53. where, according to
the present punctation, they make incomparably more for the Christian Faith,
then any ancient Translations. This is answered before, where it is showed,
that the Masorites did not point the Text, pro arbitrio, as they pleased, (as
our Author would make us say) but according to the true and accustomed reading,
to which they were tied. This Argument is brought in the Prolegom. 7. to prove
that these Jews did not, de industria, corrupt the Hebrew Text, because then
they would have corrupted those places concerning Christ, or where the chief
mysteries of Christian Religion are mentioned, which we see they have not
meddled with; but it proves not but that the Masorites might fix the points to
the Text, the true reading whereof they could not alter, but would have been
presently discovered by the Christians, nor would they attempt it, the whole
Nation being so zealous for the letter of the Text, that as Joseph. says, they
would rather die a thousand deaths, then wilfully falsify the least tittle.

XIII. Again, page 292. he says, That though the points might be affixed while
the Tongue was common and vulgar, yet after it had ceased to be vulgar for a
thousand years, to think that points could be then fixed to the Text, and the
reading continued so long by tradition, is to buid castles in the air, etc.
But to this we have already answered at large, and showed that the knowledge of
the Tongue and the true reading continued among the Priests and Scribes after
it ceased to be vulgar, who might with as much case point the Text, (it being
the same to them as when it was vulgar) as they might have done whilst it was
commonly spoken by the people, and that it was not continued by orall
tradition; for they had the written Text for their ground, as is already
declared.

XIV. But there is one Argument more which he propounds, and follows at large:
page 225. 226, etc. (for we must find out his reasons, as they are here and
there scattered, without any method) This he is sorry that others out of their
respect to the Rabbis have passed by. It is taken from the consideration of
the persons supposed to be the Authors of the punctation, who were men so unfit
for so Divine and admirable a Work, that of all the fables in the Talmud, he
knows none more incredible then this story, viz. That men: 1. who were no part
of the Church, or people of God, possessors only of the letter, etc. 2. Who
were remote from the right understanding of the Word of God, desperately
engaged against the Truth, -- enemies to the Gospel. 3. Under the special
curse and vengeance of God. 4. Feeding themselves with vain fables, and
mischievous devices against the Gospel, laboring to set up a new Religion,
under the name of the old. 5. Profoundly ignorant in all manner of Learning and
Knowledge. 6. Addicted to monstrous figments, yea, for the most part Idolaters
and Magicians, etc. should be the authors of so great and excellent a Work, of
such unspeakeable usefulness, etc. This Argument he spends near twenty pages
upon, by a fierce invective against the Jews and Rabbis, which he after
contracts to these heads, p. 240, 241. etc. And to strengthen this Argument, he
says, p. 2. 3. That the Masorites, (the supposed inventors of the points)
cannot by any story or other record be made appear, that they ever were in
rerum natura, etc. and p. 304. they came, no man knew whence, and no man knows
when and where*

XV. To which Argument I answer, First, That concerning the usefulness of the
present points, (which is acknowledged) though I am none of them that are
affected with novelties, or delight in changes, yet I am of the opinion of
those Learned men, who do not conceive the present punctation to be so
excellent and complete a Work, but that it might be much bettered and made more
useful; and that there are some things, (especially accents) which might be
omitted, of some of which none can give a full account, and the rest might be
reduced to a smaller number, and be made more facile and useful, some other
things also might be added which are useful in other languages, and wanting in
this, as has been already showed by diverse Learned men: Secondly, That
notwithstanding all this which is said against the Jews and Rabbis, I shall
not need to go further for answer then the Objectors own words, after a few
pages, when his heat was something allayed, p. 251. That yet they were men
still, who were full able to declare what defect they found to be so, and what
they sound to be otherwise, and that it cannot be thought reasonable that so
many men, living in so many several ages, at such vast distance one from
another* who some of them, it may be, never heard of some of the names of
others some of them, should conspire to cousen themselves, and all the world
besides, in a matter of fact, nothing at all to their advantage: I apply it
thus, That notwithstanding all that is said against them, yet they were able to
declare de facto, the Reading of the Text, received and continued amongst them,
and that it cannot be imagined they should devise any other or new Reading,
which should be received by all that lived in so many several ages, and at
such vast distances, and should conspire together to cousen themselves, and all
the world in a matter of fact, tending nothing at all to their advantage. Thus
we see the same hand pulling down in one page what it had set up in another.
For if they might be meet witnesses for the Divine Original of points, as he
affirms, notwithstanding what is said against them, why might they not also be
meet witnesses in testifying and declaring the common and received Reading then
in use, and in expressing it by their punctation.

XVI. I may add, that notwithstanding all that is said of them, they were most
zealous, (in their greatest Apostasy and Infidelity) about the letter of the
Law, and the true reading of it, even to superstition, and so continue: they
did never h^^rere in cortice more then since their rejection by God. And though
generally they be men of no great Learning in other matters, yet about the
reading of the Law, and right pronouncing of it, and the knowledge of every
tittle, they were diligent, even to admiration, and accounted it a great part
of their Learning, that they could so exactly read the Law, and teach others to
read it. Lastly, for the Tiberian Masorites, though it be not much material by
whom, or when the points were fixed, or at what place they lived, so it be
granted, they were not of Divine Original, nor known till after the Talmud;
yet notwithstanding our Authors Declamation, it is most probable that the
Tiberian Masorites were the first Inventers, and more probable then any thing
by him said to the contrary; nay, though he denies that ever there were any
such men in rerum natura* ^s we have seen already, p. 243. yet, forgetting what
he has said, and contradicting himself, as is usual, he tells us, p. 223.
that there was formerly a School of the Jews, and Learned men, famous at
Tiberias, is granted, and, p. 240 The Tiberian Masorites, (the supposed
Inventers of the points) were men living after the finishing of the last
Talmud. And p. 271. he cites, and approves that saying of Azarias, who ascribes
the restoration of the points to their use, after they had been disused, to
the Tiberian Masorites: and page 270. That by receiving the punctation from the
Tiberians, the continuation of it in that School, not the invention of it is
intended by Abenezra; so that it seems, That these Tiberian Masorites, who
never were in rerum natura, and lieved no man knows where, nor when, are found
out at last to have had a School at Tiberias, and to have continued and
restored the punctation there, though they invented it not.

CHAP. XII.
I The Consequences inferred from the novelty of punctation, not proved at all,
but taken as granted by the Adversary. II. His false suppositions. III In stead
of Reasons, his earnest wishes, of taking the points out of the Bible. The
accents, etc. out of the New Testament. IV. The Consequences of the
uncertainty, etc. cannot be proved by the Adversary, nor by any Papists,
Atheists, etc. V. A challenge to them all, to prove their Consequences, from
the novelty of the punctation, as stated in the Prolegomena. VI. The Adversary
proved guilty of the said Consequences.

I. I Should now come to the Consequences which our Author would infer from our
opinion about the points, viz. That if they they were invented and fixed to the
Text, by the Masorites, then the reading and sense of the Scripture becomes
uncertain and arbitrary, and the supreme authority thereof in all matters of
faith and life is quite overthrown, and we must depend either upon the fidelity
and diligence of the Rabbis for the true reading and sense of the Scripture,
or fly to an infallible Judge, and turn Papists, or else turn plain Atheists,
or Fanatic Antiscripturists, by rejecting the Scripture altogether. These are
his inferences, page 147. 161. and Epist. p. 9. and 25. But the invalidity of
this Argument is already showed at large in what we have premised in the
foregoing Chapter, as also Prolegom 3. Sect. 5. 31. for it is proved that the
reading and sense is the same before and after the punctation, and not any way
depending upon the authority of the Rabbis, or of the Church, or of an
infallible Judge. For supposing what we have already proved: 1. That the Hebrew
Tongue never wanted its vowels, (...), which were used as vowels before the
invention of points, as in other Eastern Languages, and that where they were
wanting, the connection of the words, with the antecedents and consequents,
together with the continued custom and use, did determine the sense, and make
the Text as it is now, and free from ambiguity. 2. That the Rabbis did not
point the Text, pro arbitrio, as they pleased, but according as the true and
usual reading continued always among them, and derived from the sacred
Penmen, and that it is not lawful now for any to alter or reject the present
reading at pleasure, unless a better reading can be clearly proved, or that
some Error has crept in, contrary to the ancient reading, all these
Consequences vanish to nothing.

II. Now for proof of these consequences our Author brings nothing, though
affirmanti incumbit probatio, but takes these things for granted, which the
Prolegomena do utterly deny, as altogether false and untrue, viz. 1. That there
are no vowels among the Hebrew twenty two Letters, and so that the Hebrew had
no vowels before the invention of points. 2. That the Masorites did point the
Text, as they pleased, and so that the reading according to the present
punctation depends merely upon the skill and fidelity of those Rabbis. 3. That
it is lawful for any to alter the reading at pleasure, and to accept or reject
the points, as no part of the Text. 4. That it was not possible to continue the
true reading and sense of the Text after the Language ceased to be vulgar,
without the points; all which are so many mistakes, and not only rejected by
the Author of the Prolegomena, but by evident Arguments proved already to be
assertions void of truth; so that these props being taken away, all his
building falls to the ground.

III. Now in stead of reasons which are none, our Adversary tells us of his own
earnest wishes and endeavors, p. 221. That he had rather this Work of the
Bible, and all works of the like kind were out of the world, then that this our
opinion should be received with the Consequences which unavoidably attend it,
and page 244. that he would labor to the utmost to have the punctation taken
out of the Bible, if it were the invention of the Masorites, nor should he (in
its present station) make use of it any more. Thus do violent men run from one
extreme into another: either he must have the punctation to be of Divine
authority, or else he must labor to the utmost to have it out of the Bible.
But these wishes and violent expressions are no proofs with such as will not
swallow his opinions by a blind implicit faith, as Oracles. Our opinion of the
points has been and is already received amongst most of those that excel in
this kind of learning, and among the most eminent and judicious Protestant
Divines, who are best able to judge of things of this nature; nor will it find
the less acceptance among learned and judicious men, because of his hot
passionate declaming against it; for heat and passion are but weak proofs of
the truth of any opinion, they are like water that bears up the lightest
things, and lets the heavyest sink to the bottom, and are indeed no better
aguments then that of him in Scaliger, who would prove that by laying a wager
which he could not make good by sound reason. If he be so earnest to have the
Hebrew points taken away (supposing they be not of Divine Original) why does
he not labor the same for the Accents, notes of aspiration, and distinction of
Sentences in the Greek Text of the New Testament, it being certain that they
were not in use when the New Testament was written, as we have proved proleg.
3. Sect. 45. and in the precedent Chapter, and that the Greek Text is subject
to ambiguity in diverse places by the absence of the accents and notes of
distinction: whether does he like it better to have the New Testament Printed
with accents and distinctions, as it is now, or to have it without any, as it
is in the Complutense Bible, which is so Printed, as I have showed, that it
might the better represent the Original Copies which were written first
without accents?

IV. As for the advantage which Papists, Atheists, etc. make of this, with his
intimation, as if all were looking toward Rome that hold this opinion, I shall
not need to say more then has been said already, when from the various
Readings he would have inferred the same Consequence on the behalf of Papists,
etc. It is enough to show the vanity of this surmise, that the greatest and
learnedest defenders of the Protestant cause, and of the authority of the
Original Texts, have been, and are of this judgment. What some Romanists
infer upon this Principle is nothing, unless it could be proved justly to
follow, which neither they nor this Author are ever able to do. He might have
taken notice that his objection is answered Prolegom. 3. Sect. 51. where this
inference which some of that Church make of the ambiguity of Scripture
unpointed, and that instance of Morinus in the word (...), which without points
may be read eight several ways, and has so many significations, is taken
away. Nor do all those of Rome urge this Consequence; there are not wanting
among them who maintain, that the Text unpointed is certain, and not ambiguous,
as Simeon de Muis, Joh. de Espieres, and others. And although many of them
argue against the Scripture in general, as our Author does, that the Text
unpointed is uncertain, and therefore no fit rule of faith and life, yet I do
not remember that in any particular Controversy between them and us, they urge
any one place of Scripture for their cause, upon the uncertainty of the Reading
without points, which plainly shows that there is no such uncertainty in the
Text unpointed, as is pretended by them and this Author, for they allege all
places according to the common Reading of the Hebrew, or the vulgar Latin. Let
our Adversary therefore name any place in particular where the ambiguity of the
Text without points makes for them or against us, or where they have advantage
upon this ground in any particular case controverted, or else this Consequence
will appear a mere cavil.

V. I do therefore appeal to all rational men, and do challenge our Adversary
with all the rabble of those he mentions, as joining with him in this
Inference, all the Papists, Atheists, fanatic persons, etc. in the world to
make good their Consequence of the uncertainty of Scripture, from that opinion
of the punctation, as it is declared and limited in the Prolegomena, viz. That
if the points were fixed by the Masorites to the Hebrew Text (that is, as the
case is stated) understanding only the forms and figures of the points, not
the force and virtue of the vowels and accents themselves, which is
acknowledged to have always been, and that they did neither point the Text at
pleasure, but according to the true Reading commonly received to which they
were tied; nor that any now may at pleasure reject this Reading by the points.
That upon this Proposition thus stated, it does necessarily follow, That the
Scripture is dubious and uncertain, and cannot be a sure rule for faith and
life. This Consequence if they can prove I will retract my opinion and
acknowledge my error: But if our Adversary cannot prove it, I expect he should
do the like.

VI. But now as it was observed before about the various Readings, so here the
same may be observed about this question of the points, that the Adversary
unawares pleads the cause of them whom he would seem to oppose, and whilst he
would make others guilty of promoting Popery, Atheism, etc. himself is most
deeply guilty by his own Arguments: for he grants the consequence which they
urge, to be necessary and true, as will appear, if it be brought into a
Syllogism, which runs thus. If the points and accents be not of Divine
Original, but affixed by the Masorites to the Text, then the Scripture is
uncertain, capable of diverse senses, and therefore no fit rule for faith and
life, etc. But they were affixed by the Masorites to the Text, and are not of
Divine Original. Ergo.

The Conclusion of the Syllogism we all agree is false and impious, and
therefore one or both Propositions must of necessity be false. I should deny
both, if it could stand with evidence of truth, but granting that which cannot
be denied, and which the ablest and learnedest men that the Protestant cause
ever had grant to be true, I do with the same persons deny the Major or the
Consequence, and lay the weight of the cause upon it, which all the Papists,
Atheists, and Considerators in the world are never able to prove. The Adversary
on the other hand, 1. Denies the Minor, which his opposites may with more
probability make good, then he can the contrary, they having not only the
learned of their own Church, but also the best learned Protestants (as I have
said) affirming the same with many strong reasons, which to any man unbiassed
will seem more concluding then those brought for the other opinion. And 2. He
grants the Consequence, yea proves it as well as he can (which all sober
Christians, and all that have not joined hands with Papists, Atheists, etc.
deny) from which that Conclusion inevitably follows. That the Scripture is
uncertain, and therefore of no authority in matters of faith, and. Let all men
therefore judge who it is that pleades the cause of Papists, etc. He who denies
the Consequence, or he that grants it, and labors to make it good. Thus he is
caught in his own net, and unexcusable before God and man, by betraying the
cause which he pretends to defend, and by doing that himself of which he
unjustly accuses another.

CHAP. XIII.
I. II. The Charge, That all our knowledge of the Hebrew is derived from the
Septuagint. III. Answered. IV. This, if it were true, makes nothing against the
Hebrew Text. V. The last Charge. That the present Hebrew Character was brought
in by Esdras, who used the Assyrian, and left the old Character to the
Samaritanes. The authority of the Hebrew Text the same it was, because Esdr as
did this by Divine authority. The Greek manner of writing changed in the New
Testament since the Apostles times. VI. By whom this question has been
handled. VII. Buxtorf not absolutely for the present Character, though he
argues for it. VIII. His Modesty and the Adversaries Confidence. IX. Arguments
for the antiquity of the Samaritane Character. All that can be brought in a
matter of fact, of such antiquity. Testimonies of ancient writers, Eusebius,
Saint Hierome, Bid. X. Both the Talmuds, diverse Rabbis. XI. The Shekels or
ancient Coyns of the Kings of Israel stamped with Samaritane Characters. XII.
The Exceptions of the Adversary. XIII. Answered. XIV. His fancy, about the
Samaritane letters confuted. XV. The fiction of a twofold Character exploded.
XVI. XVII. His other exceptions answered. XVIII. The true character of the
Considerations. Advice to the Adversary if he thinks fit to reply. XIX. The
Conclusion.

I. WE have gone through the chief Heads of our Adversaries Charge; The various
Readings and the pointing of the Hebrew Text. We shall with more speed pass
over the rest, by which he pretends the worth and esteem of the Hebrew Text is
depressed, as the deriving our knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue from the
Translation of the LXX. and making the Samaritane Characters to be the old
Hebrew letters, of which now we shall speak briefly.

II. For the first, Page 206. He says, That the Author of the Proleg. grants
that all our knowledge of the Hebrew is taken from the Translation of the LXX
as he is quoted to that purpose by Morinus, Praef. ad Opusc. Samarit. The same
is twice mentioned in his Epistle, p. 10. and 26. which he disproves by the
example of Hierom, who had his knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue by the help of
Hebrews, and by the Tiberian Masorites, who pointed the Text acccording to the
tradition of them that spoke the Language in its purity, and could not have the
knowledge of it from the Sept.

III. For answer, First, why does not our Adversary name the place in the
Biblia Polyglotta, where these words are to be found; or if they be not there
any where to be found, (as indeed they are not) why does he put these among the
heinous crimes with which he charges the Prolegomena, affirming elsewhere, p.
l. 52. 160. That had not these Tenets been published with the Biblia
Polyglotta, thereby to gain auctority by that Work, he would not have meddle^
with them. Now, this I am sure is no where in the Prolegomena, or in the Biblia
Polyglotta. And if this be not, why will he upon the words of Morinus, (a
petulant Jesuit, as he will make him) Why, I say, will he accuse any upon such
a man's Testimony as his, whom he calls in his railing Rhetoric, an infamous
person, a barking Dog, etc. Epist. when as he could find no such thing in the
Biblia Polyglotta? But the truth is, Morinus does not say, that this opinion of
Capellus is approved in the Bibia Polyglotta, (which our Adversary very well
knew) but that in dissertation, or preface to an Introduction to the reading of
the Oriental Tongues, he approves that opinion of Capellus. Now what is this
to the Biblia Polyglotta? and yet the Author of the dissertation does neither
in that dissertation, nor any where else, wholly subscribe to Capellus his
opinion, whatsoever Morinus says, which this Author could not be ignorant of:
his words are only these, speaking of the use of the Greek Sept. Exigua esset
absque hac (versione (...)) linguae Hebraeae congnitio. There is some
difference between nulla, and exigua, the former he never said, for he knows,
and frequently affirms, that though the Hebrew ceased to be vulgarly spoken
after the return from Babylon, yet there remained always among the Priests and
Learned of that Nation, the knowledge of the Tongue, which they continued and
taught to their children and posterity: yet for the knowledge of it among
Christians, the greatest part of their knowledge of the Hebrew came by the
Greek Translation of the LXX. that being the only Translation of any Hebrew
book known among either Christians or Jews, and this was made shortly after it
had ceased to be vulgar, and therefore without this exigua foret, amongst
Christians, the knowledge of the Hebrew had been little; for there is no book
extant, written in pure Hebrew, save only the Bible, nor any Translation of it
before Christ, save that of the LXX. and therefore, as Clenard and Erpenius
attained the Arabic by the Translations out of that Tongue in the Nebiense
Psalter, and other Arabic books, so I doubt not, but that out of this
Translation, the Hebrew Tongue might be learned. And therefore for those that
wanted the teaching and instruction of Jewish Masters, their knowledge of the
Hebrew would be little, without this Translation. And no question but Origin in
his Hexapla, and Hierom in his Translation, made great use of that Translation
to this end, though I know very well, that Hierom made use also of diverse
Jewish Rabbis, and amongst others, of some Tiberian Doctors of note, as
himself affirms, who were not long before those Tiberians that pointed the
Hebr. Text.

IV. But now what is this, (supposing all were true what he affirms) to the
depressing of the Hebrew Text, or to prove the uncertainty of the Scripture, or
that the Text is corrupt? I see not any color of such a Consequence, nor does
our adversary bring any reason to prove it. It is true, Arnol. Bootius in his
furious invective against Capellus, takes hold of his words, and would prove
this to be false, but infers no such thing as this Author does, as if hereby
the Heb. Text were endangered, which if he could with any color have made good,
I am sure he would not have omitted.

V. We come now to the last of these things which tend to the depression of the
esteem of the Hebrew Text; which, among others, is reckoned by our Adversary in
the first place. Page 205. viz. That the present* Hebrew Character is not that
used by God himself, and in the Old Church before the Captivity of Babylon, but
it is the Chaldean, the other being left to the Samaritanes. The same is also
mentioned, Epist. p. 7. This question is handled at large, Proleg. 3. Sect. 29.
-- 38. I might forbear to speak any thing more thereof, because it makes
nothing at all against the Hebrew Text, though we make the present Character to
have been the Assyrian, and that the old Hebrew Character was left to the
Samaritanes; for seeing that we make Esdras and his associates the Authors of
this change, when they restored and settled the Canon of the Old Testament, and
it is confessed by all, that what they did, was by Divine Authority: hence it
is evident, that the Authority of the Hebrew Text suffers nothing by this
change of the Character, but that it is in this respect the same it was before:
no more, nor so much as the change of the Greek Character, and of the manner of
writing in capital letters, without accents, spirits, or distinctions of words
or sentences, as the first Copies of the New Testament were written, (as we
have elsewhere showed, Prolegom. 3. Sect. 45. and Chap. 11. of this Treatise)
into that form which is now in use, derogates from the Greek Text of the New
Testament, because this change was not made by any Prophets or men inspired as
the other was; and therefore our Author had no color of reckoning this amongst
those things which derogate from the Hebrew Text, but that he was willing to
catch at any thing which might seem to impair the Esteem of the Biblia
Polyglotta amongst his English Readers, for whose misinformation these
Considerations were contrived, unless he thinks with some superstitious Jews,
that there is some peculiar sanctity in the form or fashion of the Character.
Nevertheless, because he has thought fit to say something of this Argument,
though he touch not the tenth part of what is said in the Prolegomena, because
he would fain seduce the ignorant Reader into an opinion, as if great wrong
were hereby offered to the Hebrew Text, I shall therefore briefly add
something by way of answer.

VI. This Question has been so clearly and fully handled by Scaliger, Drusius,
Vossius, Capellus and others, that I believe there are few that have read and
weighed the arguments of both sides, who think the present Character to be the
old Hebrew letter. It is true, Buxtorf jun. wrote a Tract upon this Subject,
wherein he does not absolutely defend as a certain truth, that the present
Character is that which was used at first, though he brings all the Arguments
he could to this purpose, but only to show, as he says, Sect. 4. that this
opinion is not so absurd, or apparently false, as Scaliger, Drusius, and other
great Hebricians would have it, but that it may be probably defended. To this
Dissertation of his, Capellus wrote an answer, 1645. (which I conceive began
the quarrel between these two learned men, which has been since continued with
two much eagerness about other matters) wherein all his Arguments are
answered, and the contrary reasons urged and defended, with that evidence and
cleernesse, that Buxtorf has not made any reply since that time, that I have
seen, though he has since written against Capellus upon other subjects, being,
it may be, convinced of the Error of that opinion, which he thought formerly
not improbable, which if it be so, as his ingenuity is to be commended, so the
confidence of our Adversary is to be condemned, who is peremptory in a
question, which as it plainly appears, he never seriously considered, not
sticking (after his usual manner) to call this opinion a Fiction, and a mere
Fable, though it be in a manner demonstrated, and has as clear and evident
Arguments for it, as any thing of this nature is capable of, viz. Testimonies,
both of ancient Jews and Christians, both the Talmuds, and the ocular
demonstration of old Jewish coins daily dug up out of the ruins of
Jerusalem, and other places, stamped by the Kings of Israel before the
Captivity; besides reasons and the Authority of most, if not of all the best
skilled in Jewish Antiquities and Hebrew Learning, of later times, as is showed
at large in the same Prolegomena, and appears by the Figures of the Coyns
themselves, which are engraven, and printed in the Apparatus to the Biblia
Polyglotta, in a Tract of the ancient Hebrew coyns.

VII. Buxtorf confesses, Sect. 2. That though both Opinions have their
Patrons, yet the business is brought to that pass, that the Opinion of the
novelty of the present Character, has gotten far more to assert it, and those
of chiefest note for their Learning in this kind, who are some of them so
peremptory in the cause, that they think those that dissent; Nec ferendos, nec
audiendos esse, and that the great fame and esteem of their exquisite Hebrew
Learning, has drawn the most unto that Opinion. He adds withal, Sect. 4.
Equidem cum nemine super hac re acrius contendere, aut disceptare mihi est
propositum: And Sect. 5. confesses ingenuously, that he dares not hope, se hoc
assequuturum, ut omnibus satisfaciat, ultimamque literarum Hebraicarum
antiquitatem, (...) probet ac persuadeat, etc. only he hoped to show that the
other Opinion was not so absurd, as that the defenders of it ought to be
accounted half Divines, or half Men, or Scepticks, that doubt of all things, or
plain Asses, as Scaliger and Drusius had styled them; yet here we have one who
is so confident and peremptory, that he dares style that Opinion which is
generally held by most Learned Antiquaries, a mere Fable, and a Fiction, hereby
verifying that saying, Qui pauca videt, cito judicat; and that men who are rash
and heady in their decisions, are seldom free from great Errors.

VIII. The Arguments of both sides are propounded, Prolegom. 3. which I shall
not need to repeat, but shall refer the Reader thither for fuller satisfaction,
and the rather, because the Adversary brings nothing to the contrary, but his
own conjectures, or bare affirmations without proofs, (what he says of the
Samaritanes is already answered in its proper place) I shall only recapitulate
what is largely handled in the Prolegomena concerning these Characters.

IX. All the Arguments that can be brought to prove a matter of fact,
especially of such Antiquity, can be no other then Testimonies, especially of
ancient and credible Writers, who might best know the truth, the remaining
Relics, and Monuments of such Characters, with the judgment of such of later
times; who have been most versed in things of this nature, and therefore are
best able to judge; all which we have here. Among ancient Writers, we have the
Testimony both of Christians and Jews: Of Christians, Eusebius. Hier. and Bid,
men best skilled of any in their times, in Jewish and other Antiquities, who
affirm it as a thing certainly known, and not to be doubted of, that Esdras
changed the old Character into that we now use, leaving the other to the
Samaritanes, whose testimonies, especially Hieromes is so express, and the
thing so frequently affirmed in his Works, that they admit no evasion, as
appears in the same Prolegomena, where all the subterfuges brought to evade the
force of the words are plainly consuted and taken away. And when we name these,
we name all that among the Ancients have said any thing on this subject; nor is
there any one ancient Writer produced, that has said any thing to the contrary.

X. To the Testimonies of ancient Christians, we have added the Testimonies of
both the Talmuds, which with the Jews are of sacred and unquestionable
Authority. The Babylonish Tract. Sanhedr. Sect. 2. The Jerusalem Tract. Megil.
Sect 1. affirming, that the Law was first given, (...) Scriptura Hebraea, and
afterward, in the days of Esdras, it was written, (...) Scriptura Assyriaca;
as also the testimonies both of ancient and modern Rabbis, who (though some of
them, especially of the later, that they may maintain the antiquity of the
present Character against the Samaritanes feign among other things, that Moses
his (...) was written in the modern Character, which they call Sacred, and that
the rest of the Copies for common use, were written in the common Character,
which is retained by the Samaritanes, and that the use of the sacred Character,
was only restored by Esdras, after it had been long disused,) yet all agree in
this, that the present Samaritane Characters were anciently used among the
Jews, and that some Copies were written in them, which testimony of the Jews,
against themselves, in a matter which they think, tends to the disparagement of
their Character, is an undeniable proof, that only the evidence of truth
forced this confession from them.

XI. But above all, that of the Shekels, or ancient Coyns, heretofore, and
lately dug up about Jerusalem, and other adjacent places, stamped on the one
side with Aarons Rod, and the other with the Pot of Manna, and the inscription
of (...) Jerusalem sancta on the one side, and (...) Siclus Israelis on the
other, if there were no other argument, were enough to demonstrate to all that
do not wilfully shut their eyes, the truth of our assertion, as is there proved
at large: Ar. Montanus, and Postellus, having got some of these Coyns, esteemed
them as great treasures and undoubted proofs of the ancient Jewish Coyns, and
also of their weights. That they were coined by the Samaritanes, cannot be
imagined, because they were never possessed of Jerusalem, nor would have given
the title of Sancta, to that City, which they did abominate, and that they were
before the Captivity, Ar. Mont. Postellus, and others collect from the name of
Israel, which was the common name of all the Tribes before the defection and
carrying away of the Ten Tribes, when they were styled Jews and not before,
from Juda the chief of the remaining Tribes. To this we shall add one thing
more, either the present Hebrew Character is borrowed from the Chaldee, or else
we must hold that of the Eastern Languages, the Syriack and Arabic have each
his distinct proper Character, and the Hebrew, but the Chaldee none at all,
which how probable it is, let any man judge.

XII. Against this what says our Adversary, he says p. 262. That all is a
groundless tradition, and a mere fable. That Eusebius spoke only upon report,
and as for Hierome supposing this to be false, sufficient instances may be
given of the like mistakes in him. The Testimony of the Talmuds is with him of
no weight, unless seconded by very good evidence. To that of the shekels, that
we are in the high rode of forgeries and fables, in nothing has the world been
more cheated. And if it be granted that the pretended coins be truly ancient,
must it needs follow, that because these letters were then known and in use*
that they only were so, or that the Bible was written with them, and those now
in use unknown? Then to salve the credit of the coins, he will answer one
conjecture with another. The Samaritane letters are (if he may so say) plainly
praeternatural, a studied invention in their frame and figure, fit to adorn
when extended, or greatned by way of engraving and embossing any thing that
shall be put upon them, or cut in; that we may think they were invented for
that purpose, namely to engrave on vessels, and stamp on Coins, and so came to
be of some use in writing also, and that their stamp and form promises some
such thing. All which is the more probable, because Clemens tells us of three
sorts of Characters among the Egyptians, one for things of common use,
another, Hierographick, used by the Priests in their sacred Writings, and the
other Hieroglyphick, which was also of two sorts, simple, and symbolicall, and
seeing it was not unusual to have sundry sorts of letters for sundry purposes,
it is not improbable, that it was so also among the Jews.

XIII. To all this I might refer the Reader to the same Prolegomena, where all
this, and a great deal more is fully answered. At present I say, 1. To call
that a groundless Tradition and a mere fable, which is supported with the
testimonies of such grave and learned Authors, both ancient and modern,
confirmed by both Talmuds, and chief Rabbis, and by real monuments, and
ocular demonstrations, which like Memnons statue speak aloud for the truth of
this assertion, and upon such slight conjectures, as are by the Adversary
produced, show a high degree of rashness. Eusebius not only affirms this
change of the Character, but also gives one chief reason why, That the Jews
might have nothing common with the Samaritanes, whom they hated cane pejus and
angue, Hierome, he says, supposing this to be false, might be mistaken: nay, I
say, he was certainly mistaken, supposing this to be false, and so if this
ridiculous kind of arguing may be allowed, our Author supposing all he writes
to be false, was mistaken in every thing. But it is not enough to suppose he
was mistaken, but to prove it; and to infer that because he was mistaken in
some other things, that therefore he was mistaken in this, is the way to decry
all humane testimony at once, all Histories and Records are by this means made
useless, for if they mistake in some things, they must be believed in nothing,
and so our Author, because in his Treatife he mistakes in many things (as I
believe he will not, I am sure he cannot justly deny) therefore he must not be
believed in any thing. I confess he that willingly affirms untruth in some
things, deserves not to believed in any thing: but that he who mistakes in some
things through inadvertency, or involuntary error must be believed in nothing,
is to take away the credit of all histories in matters past, and the ground of
all civil society and commerce among men for present and future times. The
Talmuds are of highest authority with those against whom we chiefly argue, viz.
the modern Jews, and therefore cannot be denied either by them, or by any that
embrace their opinion, nor was their authority ever denied in this point by any
that I have read, either Jews or Christians till now, but some kind of answer,
though absurd and foolish has been found out, rather then they would wholly
deny their authority: and though the Talmuds be full of fables, yet by his own
rule, if that which they affirm be attested by other good evidence, as here it
is, in this case their testimony ought to be of weight. But the same answer
serves for all, Eusebius, Hierome, the Talmuds, the Rabbis are all deceived,
their reports fabulous, and the Shekels are forged and feigned. Here is a ready
way to answer all arguments of this kind, to deny all authority, and to say,
that all is false and fabulous. But this is a sign of a desperate cause to deny
all without show of reason to the contrary, which is to cut the knot when it
cannot be loosed. There are many counterfeit coins I grant, I have seen some
Jewish coins which might easily be discovered to be forged, of which I have
spoken in the place above mentioned, but to infer thence that all are forged,
and that there is no way to distinguish between those that are true, and those
that are counterfeit, is as if one should say, that all the old Roman coins,
which are daily found and dug up among us are counterfeit, because some such
have been counterfeited, see Proleg. 3. Sect. 35.

XIV. But that he may not seem to deny all without some show of reason, he
brings in a conjecture to answer, as he calls it, a conjecture; But 1. the
proof from the coins is not a bare conjecture, but as clear a demonstration, as
in things of this nature can be had. 2. His Conjecture is a groundless fancy,
which none could ever have hit on besides himself, he tells us the letters of
the Sicles are preternaturall, which what it means, I believe himself can
hardly explain. I never heard before of this distinction of letters, into
natural and preternaturall: Are there some letters natural? I thought that
all Characters had been the arbitrary invention of men, not any from the
dictate of nature, else there had not been such variety of them in the world:
It seems then there is an universal Character by nature, and so they might
have spared their pains that have studied so much for the inverting of an
universal Character for the use of all Nations. Preternaturall Characters then
must be such as proceed from some error in nature, as monsters are said to be
praeter intentioonem naturae, productions wherein nature fails, and comes short
of her end. The Samaritane Character then, it seems, is some monstrous
Character, framed besides natures intention: and if so, why may there not be
also some Characters supernatural, used by angels and spirits, notwithstanding
what Duretus writes against them, De linguis totius universi, and Bangus de
literarum Angelicarum vanitate, such it may, as Liber Enochi, in Dr. Dee,
written by direction of his spirits. Here is new Doctrine of letters not heard
of before. These Samaritane letters then upon coins are monstrous letters, but
if they be such, how come they to be a studied invention, and found out to
adorn and embosse vessels and coins, I had thought that preternaturall issues
had been most deformed and ugly, but here it seems, they adorn pots and coins.
But what great ornament is there in these letters upon coins (for I never saw
any upon vessels, nor himself I think) more then in other letters; or what
studied invention is there in them? they seem to me the plainest and rudest
letters of any (an argument of their antiquity) far from any curiosity or
studied artifice, many other Characters are far more curious, intricate, and
difficult, as those may see that shall look over the several Alphabets,
Printed Pr^leg. 2. and that make as fair a show. I have seen Coyns both with
these letters before the Captivity, and others stamped with the modern letter
since the Captivity, and in my poor judgment there is no more adorning in the
one, then in the other. This preternatural Character I doubt will prove nothing
else but the preternaturall issue of a misguided fancy, or of one willing to
frame, and coin any thing, rather then to submit to clear truth.

XV. But yet there might be some other Character besides this, with which the
Bible might be written: Here he brings in that figment of R. Azarias, of a
twofold Character, one sacred with which the Bible was written, and one common
for other uses, and in which the Samaritanes writ their Pentateuch, which he
would confirm by the practice of the Egyptians, that had diverse sorts of
Characters. Of the Egyptian Characters I have spoken at large Proleg. 2. and
that devise of Azarias taken up by some others, the better to uphold their
opinion of the modern letters, is proved to be a groundless conceit. Proleg.
3. That among the Heathens they used some secret Character, which was counted
sacred, thereby to hide their propha^e mysteries from vulgar knowledge is
showed in the same place, lest if the people should know all, they should
contemn and deride them, but that there were any such among the Jews, or people
of God, is a thing merely devised to avoid the force of this Argument, without
any ground either in Scripture, or any ancient Writer, nay against both, and
against clear reason, as is there showed, to which place I refer the Reader,
where the vanity of this twofold Character is sufficienly proved.

XVI. But here comes in another Argument, against this change of Esdras, That
the ground upon which this supposed change was made, shows the thing to be a
mere fancy, viz. that the Jews had forgot their old Character, during the
seventy years captivity, and had learned the Chaldean, when as the same men
were alive at the burning of the first, and the building of the second Temple,
and that the men of the same Generation should forget the use of their own
Letters, is incredible. Besides, they had their Bibles, and that in their own
Character only, whether they had any other Book or no, we know not, and whence
this forgetting of the one, and learning of another Character should arise,
does not appear. Again, the weight of this improbable fiction is laid upon the
testimony whereof the most ancient is six hundred years after the pretended
matter of fact. All this is to as little purpose as the rest. For, first, that
the Jews had forgot their native Language, and learned the Chaldean in that
seventy years, is the unanimous opinion of men versed in these matters, both
the Buxtorfs and all others that I have read of, (Mayerus only excepted, whose
reasons are examined, Proleg. 3.) And this they could not choose but do,
(though they kept the Language for two hundred years in Egypt) because they
lived dispersed over Assyria, under their several Lords and Masters, whose
servants and vassalls they were, and therefore might easily forget their own
Language, and must of necessity learn the Assyrian, where they were born and
brought up, whereas in Egypt they lived all together in one place, not mingled
with the Egyptians. Now, if they forgot their Language, and changed it, why not
the Character too? Or if some of them kept both, yet the Chaldee must needs be
better known to them then the other, as being in daily use among them; yet it
is not denied, but that as the knowledge of the Hebrew Tongue, so of the
Character too, did continue among the Priests and Scribes, and among some few
of the old men, who might remember the standing of the old Temple; but what
were these to the multitude of the common people, who understood only the
Tongue where they were born and bred, and so could have little knowledge of any
other Character then that in common use where they lived, and hence it was,
that when the Law was read; the Levites were fain to expound it in the Chaldee
Tongue, that the people might understand it, and hence came that custom of
reading the verse first in Hebrew, and then in the Chaldee, as I have seen an
old MS. brought from Ormus, so written; First the verse in Hebrew, and then the
same in the Chaldee. Nor was the Canon of the Old Testament perfected before
Esdras, as it is now, and all the Books in one Volume, or the Copies thereof as
common among the people, as the Bible with us, (as our Author imagines) some
Copies of the Law might remain among the Levites and Priests, by which they
instructed the people, but the whole Canon, and all the Books of it, reduced
into one Volume as now, I doubt he will not find before that time; besides the
Copies they had were much depraved, and had suffered much, (as this Author
acknowledges) and so were not fit for use, till they were rectified, else
Esdras and the great Synagogue needed not to have spent so much labor about
restoring the Law and other Books as they did.

XVII. As for the Testimonies produced, I deny that the Eldest is six hundred
years after the matter of fact, the chief evidence and most real testimony, is
from the Coyns which were near five hundred years before this change was made,
and for the written Testimonies, they are of the ancientest that are extant
among the Jews, who have scarce any of unquestionable and undoubted certainty
before the Talmuds, except the Chaldee Paraphrases, or some of the Apocryphal
books, where no occasion was given to mention such things. These among other
things, were preserved among them by Tradition, and had not their dispersions
and banishments over the world, forced the compiling of the Mishna and the
Talmuds; this among their other Traditions had been lost. After all, our Author
concludes, p. 266. seeing the vanity of all that he had said before, that it is
probable that the old Letters being excommunicate by Esdras, with the
Samaritanes, laying aside the old Letters, because of their difficulty, he,
together with the new, introduced also the points to facilitate their reading.
The later part of which speech, as we deny upon grounds formerly showed, so the
other we receive, that Esdras laid aside the old Letters, (not because of their
difficulty, for they appear rather to be easier then the other) but because
the Jews had been more used to the Chaldee, and that they might not seem to
have communion with the Samaritanes (as is elsewhere proved) and that he
brought in the Assyrian, which has since continued, and therefore we need no
more proof in this matter, when we have the confession of our Adversary.

XVIII. Thus I have shortly run over these Considerations, and examined the
most material passages which contained any thing worth the observing,
entreating the Reader, who desires more full satisfaction, to have recourse to
the Prolegomena and Appendix themselves. By what has been now observed,
sufficient warning is given to the Reader, not to be too credulous, or to take
any thing upon trust without examination or trial, and by these, Specimina, of
his candor and love of truth, I desire him to judge of the rest of his
Discourse. If he shall think fit to reply, though I cannot expect he should
retract any thing he has written; for I have known by long experience, that
some men, as if they had an infallible spirit annexed to their Chair, are past
acknowledging any error in whatsoever comes from them, yet if he think fit to
draw this Saw of contention further, or as he threatens in diverse places to
make further discoveries, I shall advise, 1. That he would be careful to state
the controversy truly, and relate the arguments faithfully and entirely, and
not lamely, much less to pervert them, and to that end as Saint Hierome
wished, Advers. errores Joh. Hierosol. ut verbis meis sensum meum loquatur,
that he would deliver my opinion in my own words, (as I have done his) and not
substitute what he pleases, or make his own consectaries, his adversaries
opinions. 2. That he would proceed Scholastically, and keep close to the point
in hand, forbearing extravagant popular declamations. 3. That he would lay
aside all passion and prejudice, for as Aristotel. in Elench. (...), or if he
cannot but write in have and in heat, yet that he would review and weigh his
own conceptions, avoiding rash and-precipitate cemures; And that he would
remember, that as an account must be given for every idle word spoken, so much
more for what is Written or Printed, as being done with more deliberation. 4.
That he would not join promiscuously what is said by other Authors, either
Romanists or Protestants, with what is said in the Proleg. as if all that they
affirm were to be charged upon the Proleg. for by not distinguishing what is
said by each, but by jumbling all together, it is cunningly insinuated to the
unwary Reader, as if all held the same; for I am not to answer for any thing,
but what is said in the Prolegomena.

XIX. These Rules, if he shall observe, I shall promise to deal in like manner
with him, if any rejoinder shall be found needful. But if he shall persist in
the way he has begun, I shall think silence the best answer, having better
employments, wherein to spend my hours; and shall rest in the testimony of my
own conscience, that I have in all my endeavors about this great Work,
proposed no other end, then the Glory of God, in the preserving of his sacred
Truth, both in the Originalls, and ancient Translations, both for the true
reading, and right sense or meaning, pure and entire to posterity, against both
the casual mistakes that may happen in some, and the wilful corruptions and
falsificaons of Sectaries and Heretics, which never more boldly nor in greater
numbers then now, endeavored to deprave or corrupt it, either in the letter or
sense or both. And though these weak endeavors be attended (as it has been the
fate of all public works of this nature) with obloquy in some emulous and
contradicting spirits, yet I shall think it sufficient that I have had the
general approbation of men truly learned, judicious and pious; And for those
that are otherwise, I doubt not but the Work will live in after ages, when
their invectives shall be burned in oblivion: For,

Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit,
Tunc suus ex merito quemque tuetur ^onos.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 16. line. 27. read understand not, p. 28. l. 21. r. have had. p. 33. l.
17. r. produced? p. 37. l. 2. r. raptus, p. 38. l. 1. r. Considerations. l. 30.
Prolegomena. p. 40. l. 12 Proleg. 7. Sect. 1. p. 48. l. 25, Proleg. 7. p. 52.
l. 9. Apographa. p. 58. l. 5. r. their. p. 57. l. 20. he shall. p. 60. l. 3. r.
Transcribers, p 69. l. 2. Utopian, p. 72. l, 7. acknowledge. l. 27, from some.
p. 73. l. 14. say, yea, etc. l, 26. Consequence. p, 91. l. 2. dele which p. 96.
l. 8. Capellus. p. 92. l. 26. dele it. p. 99, l. 24. r, Hakel for Hekal, l. 27.
(...) sublevata est, l. 29, Hakel. ib. Hekel, l, 30. Hakel, ib. Hekal p. 101.
l. 12. any. p. 105. l. 10, of Aq. Theod. and Sym. l. 11. (...) l. 26. Suniam.
p. 117. l, 9. part, p, 119. l. 9. attested. p, 121, l. 29. treasury. p, 123. l.
14, ingenuous. p. 128. l. 15. momento. p, 132. l. 3. Sciolorum. p, 133. l. 22.
have here. p, 136. l. 29. same again. p. 138, l. 3. dele which, ib. some others
are. p. 140, l. 19, was, as is. l. 21. dele and. p, 146. l. 28. was it. p. 149.
l. 14. for themselves, r. Heinsius. p. 150, l. 27. directly, p. 151. l, 28. may
reflect, p. 153. l. 9, Franeker, one whom. p, 157. l. 28. depravation. p. 158.
l. 26. for me. p. 160. l. 3, and denies p. 165. l, 14. Vellet. p. 169. l. 18.
Translations. l. 29. defended. Of Buxtorfs Babylonia, p, 171. l. 10.
renownedly. p. 177. l, 21, Supposes. l. 23. of this. p 178. l. 5. Mopsuestes.
l. 27. dele comma p. 181. l. 23. the law, p. 187. l. 15. phrases. p. 190. l. 6.
here. l. 26. Latin and Aethiopick. p. 197. l. 12. Lect. p. 198. l. 7. these
considerations. p. 200. l. 27. lect. p. 201. l. 30. idem and p. 107. l, 12. p.
102. l. 1. for most term it, r. Sect. 3* p. 203. l. 22. for (^) r. (^) p. 207.
l. 13. might be, p. 209. l. 2. they. l. 16. possible. l: 24, 25. one book. p.
211. l. 21. it. p. 113. l. 22. Nebiense. so l. 30. l. 25. restorer. p. 214. l.
1. if this. l. 11. difficult. p. 216. l. 4. dele 8: p. 220. l. 5. r.
Philologicall. p. 226. l. 6. r. Cotterius. p. 227. l. 13. might be. p. 233, l.
3. mine. p. 239: l. 12. Prolog. p. 238. l. 22. Printed, p. 241. l. 5.
eraserint. p. 247. l, 19. dele to p: 248. l. 14: r. 42. l. 18. Tiberiadis. l.
21. (...) p. 258. l. 4. de facto: l. 9. dele some of. p. 260. l. 20.
uncertainty. p. 261. l. 15: it is. p. 133. and 134, The Columes of the Keries
and Ketiss are misplaced.


