A LETTER from a Citizen of LONDON to his Friend in the COUNTRY.
SIR,
I Must number amongst your underserved Favors, your sending for my thoughts
concerning the Request of the Citizens of London, in Common Hall assembled, to
their Representatives in Parliament. I will not by Excuses, though I might ^ery
justly, unqualify my self for the performance of your Commands. You have so
often shown a sort of Satisfaction in perusing my Scrowls, that it is fitter
for me readily to obey whatsoever you exact, than either to suspect your
Candor, or dispute my own Abilities.

I have not so little sense of Liberty, nor have I so little reflected how it
was preserved under the Roman Commonwealth, by the People's having, of right, a
great share in all things that were there transacted, as to think it improper
for the Common Hall of our Metropolis to interest themselves, as far as by Law
they may, in our Public affairs upon every occasion, that seems to them
important. I know their Wealth, and how considerable many of them are. I
remember likewise that had not the City interposed and invigorated the
Parliament in the late times, notwithstanding that they were so generally well
inclined, they had done but half their Reformation-work; they had never secured
their Rights and Liberties from the Designs of the Malignants of those Days.

But after I have hinted all this in the behalf of those worthy Citizens that
met at Guildhall upon the twenty ninth of the last Month, yet I know that they
themselves will allow that they are capable of being sometimes misguided, that
they are not Infallible in their Conjectures, and that it is possible that
their Zeal may fly at too mean a quarry.

The Assassination was so unnatural to our Climate, so contrary to the innate
Bravery of English minds and so fenced against by our Laws, that all the
Buroughs, ^ities, and Shires of England, as well as the City of London, have
long since expressed their Abhorrence of it.

But when the true Sources of the decay of our Trade and Credit are to be
inquired after, I am much afraid that that inconsiderable Party of Men, the
Non-Jurors, will be found as little able to bring such mighty Mischeifs about,
as all thinking Men are sure they are, by their interest, to bring home their
King. Indeed the Cavaliers formerly were a very Large and Comprehensive Body,
included the whole Church of England, and most of the Nobility and Gentry; but
for the Non-Jurors amongst us, they have not four hundred Clergymen, not ten
Lawyers, nor ten Noblemen; amongst Traders and the Yeomanry scarce any, and but
few amongst the Gentry. They are, if any ever was so, a Sect so small for
number that they need not be feared, nor regarded, and being incapable of all
Places of trust and Power, are thereby incapacitated for doing any great
Mischeifs. They may bring themselves into danger, but cannot us. And therefore
it is to be wished that the Citizens may not be put upon a false Scent. This
Game is not like that of the old Cavaliers and Malignants, and a Man may
therefore Reasonably suspect that the very Men who have been able to embarrasse
things, and who for their own private ends have done it, have underhand
misguided the Zeal of the Common Hall to call them off from the persuit of the
true destroyers of their Country.

I will, Sir, to you recollect some few of those Steps which I have observed
have been taken to destroy us, and in which the Non-Juring handful could have
no part. I don't set them down to purge that sort of Men, but that I may lay
before you the truth of things.

To begin with the nature of our War. Was it not our interest to have had our
part Naval? Would not a Naval War have rather increased than diminished the
number of our Seamen? Would not half our Taxes have built such a Fleet as the
World never saw nor could resist? would not almost all the Expenses of a
Sea-War circulated at home? and consequently could such a War have so exhausted
us in such a space of time? was there any other necessity to give time for, and
prolong, the Insurrections in Ireland, but only that there might be a pretense
to raise Land Forces? would not a good Fleet, and the Militia made (as it might
have been) serviceable, have secured us against the whole World? We ought to
have taken the whole Naval part upon our selves, and not to have transported
one Man, or one Farthing, into Foreign Countries, and had, we warred in this
manner Navally, though the French should have overrun the Dutch upon the
Continent, yet we should not have need to have been afraid of theirs and the
French Fleet joined together. We can never be entirely safe till we are strong
enough for them both at Sea. Had we acted only Navally we should have been so
long before this time, and then we had had no need to be solicitous who has
made, and who are likely to make a separate Peace.

But in the next place let us see how the Fleet we have, is managed. It has
been indeed managed by an amphibious sort of Creatures, called Land-Admirals
chosen rather to look after the House of Commons than our Ships. How have these
Admirals (who have learnt to sail, as the Vertuosi teach Men to swim upon a
Table) managed our Fleet? They have even Manned them as they could; because
they have Officer'd them from Locket's and not from Wapping, amongst the Beaux
and not the Tarpaulins. But to speak the Truth the Admirals, Officers, and
Orders are much alike. The Folly, the Ignorance, the Corruption and Knavery of
that Board has so long appeared gross; that Commission has been so long and so
palpably irreclaimable that honest Mr. Sacheverell, Sir Michael Wharton, Sir
Richard Onslow and others have one after another quitted it. They were too good
Patriots to sit and see the very Walls and Fortifications of this Island, and
their Country, mouldring and tumbling down under their Administration. They
soon saw it was not work for any but such as had been bred up trhough all the
Gradations of the Employment, and yet they found their Fellow-Commissioners
would neither be instructed by, nor make use of, those brave old Men who were
the Seamen of the late times, and offered to serve under this Government. How
few of Mr. Sacheverell's List of Wealthy Captains, that would have served
without pay, were taken in, is a Story that will never be forgotten, nor
perhaps forgiven to the Managers of our Admiralty.

We will now come to our Trade. Have not all Advantages been given to the Dutch
to undermine it? Have not Embargoes been laid upon our Merchants whllst the
Dutch have gone, and filled all Foreign Markets? Have not our Merchants been
unsupplyed with Convoys, and been Huff'd by the Land-Admirals when they have
complained of it, I appeal here to many of those honest Citizens who subscribed
this very Request for the truth of what I say. Was not the Committee of Trade
that the Parliament designed last Sessions opposed and defeated by Arts, and
Men, that it is not so proper to mention? Has not an East India Company been
bestowed, upon Scotland, the Fatality of which can never again be obviated,
unless, as a Quaker Merchant advised the House of Lords, our Land-Admirals be
sent thither to manage their Naval Business?

But I will proceed no farther upon this nice Point. I will not touch upon the
denial of Passes to our Merchants to go into France when their East India Ships
were taken, and when they had made such a Bargain for them, with the French, as
would have made them little or no Loosers. I will not point out who of our
Neighbors bought all the best Commodities of those Ships, nor at what Rate,
nor to whom, they sold them. It is full time to come to our Treasure.

I will not mention those prodigious private Gifts that have exhausted it. I
will omit the Order that was lately sent to pay to the E. of P. three and
Twenty Thousand Pounds in Specie out of mere Bounty. It is not fit to
particularize these things; because the Nation was at that time, and is still,
so distressed for Money. But has it not been by reason of our Land Armies
Abroad that so much of our Coin has, contrary both, to our Interest and our
Laws, been transported? I remember the King desired the Parliament in one of
his Speeches to consider of some way to prevent its Transportation, but I don't
remember that they did much about it. Well! but has it not been with, at least,
the connivance of the Treasury, Custom-House, and the Excise-Office that the
little Money we had left was so adulterated and clipped? Could not those
Gentlemen, of those Commissions at first, by denying to receive it for Taxes
and Custom, have at once stopped the currency of all clipped and mixed Coin? If
our Coin had not been so spoiled could our Trade have had this Stagnation?

I could have enlarged upon these, and run into many more Particulars very
proper for such a Request. I could have exposed the Inconveniences and the
Rogueries of the Bank of England, and the villainous practice of many great
Goldsmiths, and several other sorts of Men who pretend to be Friends to the
Government. I could have put down a Catalogue of precious Men now in Office,
and have showed that Places have made some pretending Patriots worse than those
they complained of in other Reigns, and from these Heads I could yet have
discovered some more of the genuine Causes of our Miseries, but I fear I have
already written as much Truth as the World will bear. I have made it but too
plain that it is in the Court, in the Councills, in the Treasury, at the
Admiralty, the Excise-Office, and at the Custom-House, that these honest
Citizens must find Objects worthy of their noble and well-intended Resentments.
It is the Men in great Places, and they only, who could be, and (upon base,
sinister, and selfish Designs) have been, great and successful Plotters against
our Trade and Credit. Nor have they done it unawares; for many Years ago, when
the Clipping and Embasement of our Money appeared more than usual, they were
forewarned by some honest and understanding Men, both in and out of the House
of Commons, what Calamities would ensue if they did not timely prevent those
Abuses. That Petitions from the City may force a full Reformation in all those
great Posts of Power, and may obtain all the necessary Laws that can strengthen
our Constitution, and that thereby Trade and England may for ever Flourish,
will I am sure be yours as it is the sincere wish of, Sir, Your most Obedient
Humble Servant,

J. W.


