A BRIEF ANSWER TO THE Many CALUMNIES of Dr. HENRY MORE, IN HIS Pretended
ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY.

Showing That no prudent Person can, upon any Rational Ground, be deterred from
Returning to the Communion of. St. Peter's Chair, by any of the Doctors best
and strongest Evidences to the contrary.

Printed in the Year 1672.

Advertisement.
THe Reader may please to take notice, that what is here presented, was written
about two Years since, without any thought or intention as then, for the Press;
only at the request, and for the satisfaction of some worthy friends. But now,
whereas, besides Dr. More, Dr. Stillingfleet has thought it not below his Name
and Abilities to descend to the like foul and injurious calumnies, in his late
Book Concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome; the present
juncture, and concern of the affair, may seem to render discourses of this
nature, no less necessary, than seasonable, for the undeceiving of the many
unfortunately-misguided Souls, whose Leaders (to speak favorably) seem not to
understand, what themselves Object. This I say, because I know no other more
civil construction, or indeed possible vindication (such as it is) of their
many failings. As for Dr. Stillingst et I shall not forestall the intentions of
better and abler Penns, so much as to step aside to any particular digression
against him. Nor indeed do I meet with any thing considerable in him, relating
to this Subject, which may not easily be answered out of this reply to Dr.
More; both of them joining in a like treble charge of Idolatry against the
Adoration of the Eucharist, Invocation of Saints, and the due honor and
veneration of Images.

BRIEF ^NSWER TO THE Many CALUMNIES of Dr. HENRY MORE, IN HIS Pretended
ANTIDOTE AGAINST IDOLATRY.
Showing That no prudent Person can, upon any Rational Ground, be deterred from
Returning to the Communion of St. Peter's Chair, by any of the Doctors best and
strongest Evidences to the contrary.
DOctor Henry More is a Person, whose Learning and Parts have brought Him into
a Name, amongst the Professors of the refined Arts and Sciences. Fame speaks
Him a great Philosopher. And his public works are said to avouch no less. Nay,
some have passed so far in favor of his Character, as to term him, The great
Restorer of the Platonic Cabbala. And truly, if this be so, I conceive the
Gentleman had done himself a great deal of right, if he had still kept to his
own Element; for as much as his late unlucky engaging in Controversial
Disputes, cannot but prove a blot to his former undertakings: for the learned
World must needs acknowledge that Dr. More the Controvertist, is much
degenerated from Dr. More the Philosopher. He has lately set forth an
Exposition of the Seven Epistles, to the Seven Churches of Asia. The whole
Piece is of a pure Romantic strain, wherein the Authors fancy being broken
loose from the command of Reason, and leaping over all boundaries of
Church Authority, and the Faith of his Ancestors, runs on at Elevenscore, as if
he were upon a warm sent, giving chase to some of his Platonic ideas: To this
he has adjoined, a pretended Antidote against Idolatry, with Application to the
Council of Trent, and for the putting a stop (as he phrases it) to the Romish
infection. His most formidable Weapon is that harsh and unmanly Rhetoric,
called railing. His phrase is rough, and clogged with much dirt, which he
throws too bountifully upon Persons, which never deserved it at his hands. His
Objections are bold, uncivil, irreligious; not without a deep tincture of
Geneva. And therefore were it not, that the Opinion of his supposed abilities,
may cast a favorable reflection, upon all that issues from his brain, and gain
credit to his Antidote, amongst his vulgar Zealots, to the irreparable damage
of their Souls, his work might have lain neglected, as without a Reader, so
without an Adversary. But in regard the Doctor has prefixed his Name to the
Book as Author; and that a great Name is a great Argument with some, to evince
the truth of the contents; and that no Doctrine is so absurd, but may spread
under the professed Patronage of a famed Divine; therefore some things must be
said by way of Rejoinder to the Antidote, lest some unwary Readers seeing the
Doctor so full gorged against Popish Idolatry, and repeating his invectives
almost in every Page with endless tautologies, should tamely suffer themselves
to be born down the stream with big words, and think all is Gospel and
well-grounded, that falls with so much noise and confidence from the mouth of a
Doctor. And indeed I am already informed, that some well-meaning Protestants,
who have a great kindness for the Author, and no less a value for the Work,
have called for an Answer to it, with a kind of insulting accent, as conceiving
that no such Answer could be given. They (poor Souls) thinking, that surely the
Doctor would never have been so positive in his assertions, if the strength of
his evidences were not such, as might bear all the stress he lays upon them.
Wherefore seeing the concern of Souls is at stake, whom he seeks by a
pernicious wile to seduce, venting Poison gilded over with the specious title
of an Antidote; the design of these few Pages is, to sum up briefly the
Doctors Arguments, allowing to each a due reflection, and to represent the
nullity and inconclusiveness of all that is material in Him, as to his foul and
odious charge of Idolatry, drawn up against his, and our common Mother Church.

The First Section.
Containing an Answer to his First Chapter.
THere are two ways in general (says the Doctor) of discovering what is, or
ought to be held Idolatry amongst Christians; the one, divine declaration; the
other, clear and perspicuous reason. And accordingly he spends his first
Chapter in explicating what Idolatry is according to divine declaration: And
his second pretends to declare, What Idolatry is according to the determination
of clear and free reason. These are the Titles of the two first Chapters. The
first of which, (to the end he might give us a Treatise, Girt up in the most
close and convictive method that may be; for so speaks his Preface:) he thought
good to divide into ten several Conclusions, as Principles of his ensuing
Discourse: To each of which I shall speak singly by it self, taking them in the
same order they lie.

The first Conclusion tells us, That as in civil Governments it is the right of
the Supreme Power to define and declare, what shall be, or be held to be
treason, and punishable as such: so it is most manifestly the right of God
Almighty, who is also Infinitely good and wise, to define and declare unto his
People, what shall be, or be held to be Idolatry. To this Conclusion, I only
return this brief Remark; That the learned Simile, wherein the Doctor spends
very many words, might well have been dispensed with, without any offense to
Logic, or impeachment to the Authors judgment: For the Simile seems to aim at
the clearing and settling the unquestionable Prerogative of an increated Power,
upon the right of a mere humane Jurisdiction. Which is in effect an unskilful
Piece of Hysteron Proteron; making a truth of the highest rank to truckle-under
an inferior principle; which (considering there is no power but of God, Romans
13.) can have no truth in it, but by presupposing that very truth, which it
pretends to illustrate and establish.

His Second Conclusion would universally beg our belief, That what is declared
Idolatry by God to the Jews, ought to be acknowledged Idolatry by us
Christians. First, Because Christianity being a far more spiritual Religion,
than that of Judaisme, There cannot be the lest relaxation to the most rancid
of all Superstitions, Idolatry. Secondly, Because all kind of Idolatry being
forbidden in the Second Commandment; and the whole Decalogue being Moral,
Christians can plead no exemption from it, any more than Jews. Now that the
whole Decalogue is Moral, he makes some needless attempts to prove, chiefly for
the Second Commandments sake. All which proofs, it is easy to take off by this
single answer. I say then, that as to the Second Commandment (supposing at
present the first Table divided into four Precepts) If he expound that
Commandment so, as only to prohibit the making and worshipping of Idols, or
Images of false Gods, I shall readily grant it to be Moral, and strictly
binding, both as to Jews and Christians. But if he puts any other meaning upon
the Text, he begs the question: And he must excuse me, if I call for his
further proof, not to evidence the Morality of the Decalogue in general, or of
this Commandment in particular, but also as taken in that particular sense,
which he gives it. This I say, because I conceive, the Doctor will not stick to
grant that one and the same Precept of the Decalog, may be (as considered under
a double respect) both Moral and Ceremonial. Secondly, That some, both
Catholic and Protestant Divines own no more than a Ceremonial Precept in the
Second Commandment, if extended to an Universal Prohibition of all Images, and
under that notion given only to the Jews. And to call this a Relaxation to
Idolatry amongst Christians, (as the Doctor does) may prove an Argument of his
mistake, but none to evidence the truth of his Conclusion; no more than the
generally allowed use of servile works upon Saturday, can be called a
Relaxation to the breach of the Sabbath. But, because the Doctor is so positive
in his hitherto-unproved conclusion, I have an instance for him to pause upon,
if he please to accept of it. Some of the learned, grounding themselves upon
the first of Kings, chapter 12. and Chron. 2. 26. are of Opinion, that burning
Incense was a Sacrifice in the old Law, as not being permitted to the Laity,
but tied only to the Priestly Function; and that the Hebrews did Sacrifice in
this sort to the Brazen Serpent. Now, I would gladly know, by what certain
topics the Doctor will evince, either that burning incense was not a Sacrifice
in the old Law, or that it is a Sacrifice and Act of Latria in the New? Unless
he means to draw an Universal Consequence from Deuteronomy to the Gospel, and
so to thrust our Heads under Moses his Girdle, and make us stoop to all the
Legalities of the Old Testament:

The Doctor proceeds to his third conclusion, That whatever was Idolatry in the
Heathen, the same is Idolatry in Us, if we commit it. I doubt much whether the
Doctor understands his own Conclusion: For the assertion, taken as it lies in
its ^are expressions, sounds like one of those Identick Positions, which
surfeit of too much truth: as much as to say, We are guilty of Heathenish
Idolatry, if we commit Heathenish Idolatry: But, if the Doctors meaning be,
that whatever external act of worship was Idolatry in the Heathen, is also
Idolatry in Us, if applied by Us to any other being on this side God; then I
have a case to offer to his second and better thoughts: Suppose then that some
of Saint Paul's new Converts, whom in Christ Jesus he had begotten by the
Gospel, looking upon him as their spiritual Father, had paid him the duty of
the knee, humbly asking his blessing: And that a Heathen of Lycaonia, had at
the same time, upon his knees adored the Apostle for the god Mercury, (as some
of them were ready to do, Acts 14.) is it the Doctor's sense, that this
external act of worship, which in the Heathen would questionless have been
Idolatry, must also be so in the Christian? If so, then his Conclusion is
abundantly confused by the daily and uncontrollable practice of Protestants
themselves, kneeling to their Parents, Godfathers and Godmothers. Whence it
evidently appears, that the same kind of external act, which in a Heathen is
Idolatry, may prove duty in a Christian.

The fourth Conclusion, The Idolatry of the Pagans, says the Doctor, consisted
in this, viz. in that they either took something to be the supreme God, that
was not, and worshipped it for such; or else worshipped the supreme God in an
Image; or gave religious worship, that is to say, erected Altars, Temples and
Images, offered Sacrifice, made Vows to, and invoked such, as they themselves
knew not to be the supreme God, but either the souls of Men departed, or other
demons, or else particular appearances or powers of nature. And concerning
these demons, he adds in his eighth conclusion, That the Pagans demons
exquisitely Answer to the Christian Saints and Angels, in this point; saving
that this spiritual fornication is a rape upon our Saints and Angels, but
single fornication in the Heathen with their impure demons. Thus far the modest
Doctor. But what proof does he give us for all this? Truly he does not so much
as offer at any. And in that, we must not envy him the due commendations of his
discretion: For the best proof of a proofless assertion is silence. Of all the
Doctor's conclusions, there is none more intrinseck and fundamental to the
subject now under debate; nor any that ought to speak more, or does speak less
to the point, than this. For it is most fondly erroneous, and most
disingenuously obtruded upon the easy credulity of the vulgar; That the Pagans
demons exquisitely answer to the Christians Saints and Angels. And no less
proofless and false is it, That they (the Pagans) worshipped the supreme God in
an Image. But on the contrary, (instead of worshipping the supreme God in an
Image,) his conclusion should have added for another branch of Pagan Idolatry;
That they worshipped their very Images for gods: They called them gods; they
took them for gods; they sacrificed to them as gods. And the same is to be said
of those souls of Men departed, demons or other particular appearances, or
powers of nature; all which they took and worshipped for gods: For gods I say;
which, this mincing conclusion seeks most warily to conceal. First then, that
they called their Images, Gods, (to omit other instances) is clear from Dan. 5.
4. They drank Wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of
iron, of wood, and of stone. Secondly, That they took their Images for Gods is
as clear. Why else does the Spirit of God labor so much in Holy Writ, Isa. 46.
to awake and reason the Gentiles out of their folly, Psalm. 115.
by proving that their Images, Habac. 2.
or Idols were not gods, if they did not take them for such? Did not the
Heathen charge S. Paul, that he had persuaded and turned away much People,
saying that they be no gods, Acts 19. 26.
which are made with hands? Therefore sure an easy Logic may conclude they
took them for gods. Does not the learned Arnobius, Venerabar, inquit, o
caecitas, nuper simulacra-in incudibus deos, and ex malleis fabricatos. --
Tanquam inesset vis praesens adulabar, and beneficia poscebam -- Deos esse
credebam ligna, lapides ossa, etc. Arnob. li. 1. contrae Genv.
(once a Heathen himself) bewailing his former blindness in the first of his
Seven Books against the Gentiles, profess to all the World, that he gave divine
worship, and prayed to Images, taking stocks and stones, the works of the Hammer
and Anvil for gods? Thirdly, They sacrificed to their Images, either as gods,
or at lest as Images of false gods. Some, in their images adored devils,
according to that of Psalm. 96. 5. Omnes dii gentium daemonia: Or, as your
Translation reads it, All the gods of the Nations are Idols. And, 1 Cor. 10.
The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to
God. Others, in their images worshipped the souls of Men. See Lactantius l. 1.
c. 14, and 15. S. Austine, l. 8. c. 26. de Civit. Dei.
And it has been fully proved by S. Austine, that diverse of the Pagans gods
were men. Eusebius l. 3. praepar. c 2. S. Austine in Psalm. 113. And lib. 4. de
civit. dei, c. 10 And lib. 7. de Civit. Dei, c. 5.
Others there were, who in their images adored some parts of the material
World; as in the image of Apollo, the Sun; in the image of Neptune, the Sea;
and so of others. Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 3. praepar. And S. Austine ubi supra.
Lastly, there were those, who conceiving the World to be animated, worshipped
the souls of those material parts; as of Sun, Moon, Earth, etc. Is there any
the lest hint here, either from divine or humane Record, of the Pagans
worshipping the supreme God in an image, but rather the contrary; viz. That the
things, which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God.
1 Cor. 10. Can any sober divinity brook such an inference from these premises,
That the Pagans demons exquisitely answer to our Saints and Angels? Do we
worship Saints and Angels for gods? do we call them gods? do we take them for
gods? do we sacrifice to them as gods? far be it, as from our hearts to intend
it, so from an ingenuous adversary to object it.

The next Conclusion that comes in play is the Fifth, That both divine
declaration, and the common consent of Christendom do avouch to Us, that all
the aforesaid Pagan modes of idolatry practiced by them, were in those Pagans
practices of idolatry. All the answer that truth can allow to this Fifth
Conclusion, is Nego suppositum: for the Doctor here supposes that he has
given us a true and adequate division of the Pagan idolatry, in the precedent
conclusion, according both to divine declaration, and the common consent of
Christendom; whereas I have already showed his hypothesis to be false, and laid
open his foul and gross mistakes; ('it is a favor to call them so:) which indeed
are such, as might invite a modest Man to wipe his Pen, and lay it aside, till
he had taught it a more awful regard to ingenuity and truth.

The Sixth Conclusion: That giving religious worship, that is to say; erecting
Temples, building Altars, invoking, making vows, and the like, to what is not
the supreme God, though not as to him, but as to some inferior helpful being,
is manifest Idolatry. This Sixth Conclusion looks back upon the Fifth, and
calls to it for help. But till the Fifth has learned to stand upon its own
legs, it is not in a condition to lend any proof or ^upport to its Neighbors.
And so I might pass over this Sixth Conclusion, as proofless; but only that the
Doctor calls me back to hear a Confirmation of it; saying, That idolatry was
very rare amongst the Nations, especially the Romans, if this mode of idolatry,
be not truly idolatry: And searce any thing will be found idolatry amongst
them, but taking that to be the supreme God, which is not, and adoring it for
such. This Discourse whereby the Doctor confirms his Conclusion, Eusebius. l. 5.
Praepar. c. 15
minds me of a passage in Eusebius, concerning the number of the Pagan gods.
Triginta, inquit, deorum millia in terra esse censet Hesiodus; ego autem multo
plures lapideos, atque ligneos homines creatores esse video. Eusebius here adds
to Hesiod's Thirty Thousand gods, many more of his own observation; amongst
which, one only could be supreme, and the rest must needs sit down with the
title of inferior Deities. Now comes the Doctors Sixth Conclusion, and tells
us that giving religious worship, to what is not the supreme God, though not as
to him, but as to some inferior helpful being, is idolatry. Why so? because,
says the Doctor, unless we grant this, (that is, unless we grant that, the
worshipping of some Thirty Thousand inferior Deities, (for those are his
inferior helpful Beeings:) is Idolatry,) a great and manifest inconvenience
will follow, to wit, That Idolatry was very rare amongst the Nations; and
scarce any thing will be found Idolatry amongst them, but taking that to be the
supreme God, which is not, and worshipping it for such. Which being so profound
a truth, I conceive sew of the most severe and Cynical complexions can pass it
over without a smile. But if the Doctor should chance to reply, that by (an
inferior helpful Being) he means not an inferior helpful Deity, but
something else best known to himself; Then his confirmation is most false, viz.
That scarce any thing will be found Idolatry amongst the Heathens, but taking
that for the supreme God, which is not, and worshipping it for such; when as we
find, they worshipped so many Thousand Deities: So that, whether he understand
by (inferior helpful Being) an inferior Deity, or no, his confirmation is
either false, or ridiculous. Before I proceed to the Seventh Conclusion, let me
entreat the Reader's patience for a brief Parenthesis: Catholics usually
distinguish two sorts of worship: For example, To sacrifice, say they, to erect
Temples and Altars, are acts of Latria, that is, of the highest religious
worship possible, only due to the One Almighty and Everlasting God, the first
Principle and end of all created Beeings. Though none of these acts, neither
sacrifice it self, nor dedication of Temple or Altar, excludes a Secondary
Remembrance, or titular honor of the Saints. There are other acts of an
inferior respect, which the Doctor may at his pleasure, without offending
Catholic Divinity, choose whether he will call a religious worship, or no: As
the honor we give to Saints and their Images, burning Incense or Candles,
bowing the Body, and the like. These acts are of themselves indifferent, and
variously determinable, by the particular tendency of the inward affection,
either to a divine, or only a civil worship. As for instance sake, Abraham with
the same kind of incurvation of Body, did adore God, Genesis 17. worship Angels,
Genesis 18. and Men, Genesis 23. Where we evidently find that the same posture of
bowing the Body, only as intentionally directed by a different application of
the heart, is a divine worship, in respect of God; an inferior kind of worship,
in respect of Angels, and a civil worship as referred to Men. Wherefore he who
will speak distinctly to the Catholic Tenet, must distinguish these several
modes of worship one from another; or else show cause why, he ranks them all,
under one and the same species of Religious worship. Otherwise he will make it
appear, that he loves darkness more than light, and seeks not to cope with his
Adversary like a Scholar. Having premised this Observation. -- The Doctor's
Seventh Conclusion, which speaks thus; (That to sacrifice, or burn Incense, or
make any Religious obeisance, or incurvation to an Image in any wise, as to an
object of this worship, is idolatry by divine declaration.) This conclusion, I
say, will appear to have as much pertinent sense in it, as if a Junto of
Civilians being requested to declare by a common vote, what Murder is; should
give-in their learned answer, with a Resolved upon the question, That to take
away a Man's life wilfully, and without cause; or to cut off a limb, or draw
blood, is Murder. Just such a wild medley of truth and falsehood, is the
Doctor's Conclusion. Sacrificing to an Image, and bowing to an Image, suit not
well together. The first is Idolatry, and the very crime which the Catholic
Church condemns in Carpocrates, and his Adherents. But, that bowing to an Image
of Christ, or his Saints, should be idolatry; rather then bowing to the Ark of
the Covenant; or that honoring the Picture of Jesus, rather than the Name of
Jesus, should be liable to the like exception; this, I say, should have been
more strongly proved than by merely alleging a broken Text of Scripture, Thou
shall not bow to them, nor worship them; which yet is all the Doctor does, save
only an old threadbare gloss upon it, which shall presently be answered. Only
first I observe, that when Protestants read this their Second Commandment, Thou
shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness, that is in Heaven
above, or that is in the water, under the earth; Thou shall not bow down thy
self to them, nor serve them*) and withal are informed that Papists make
Pictures and Images of Christ, place them in their Churches, put off their
Hats, and bow the Knee before them, presently they endite the practice within
their breasts as guilty of idolatry; most inconsiderately, no less than
uncharitably, charging Idolatry upon the practice of the Church, for doing
those self-same things, which God himself commanded the Jews to do, to whom he
gave this very Precept. Exodus 25. 18.
Did not God command Moses to make two Cherubims of gold in the two ends of the
Mercy-Seat? 2 Chronicles. c. 3. v. 7. ibid. v. 10.
Were there not graven Cherubims on the Walls of the Temple? Psalm. 99. 5.
Were not the two Cherubims in the most Holy Place, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.
of Image-Work? Were not the People to pray in the Temple, and commanded to
worship at the Footstool of our Lord, that is, the Ark of the Covenant; over
which were the Cherubims of Image-Work! and could this possibly be done,
without bowing before Images? Behold now what an irrefragable consequence is
drawn from hence. God himself commanded the making of Images, even after he had
given the Second Commandment of the Decalogue: Ergo, Papists can make no
Images, but they are Idolaters. Images were placed in God's own Temple; Ergo,
Papists are Idolaters in placing Images in their Churches. God's People were
commanded to bow down and prostrate themselves where it could not be done,
without bowing before Images: Ergo, Papists, who kneel before an Image are
Idolaters. If Protestants did but reflect how much this mistake of theirs is
against Scripture, as well as against Charity, they would be more sparing of
their censures. Now to the Objection, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them: Of which undoubtedly the sense is, (says the Doctor) They shall
not be in any wise the Object of that worship, which thou performest in a
religious way -- For the Second Commandment certainly is a declaration of the
mind of God touching religious worship. Let us understand one another* that we
may not have any cavil about words. The Catholic Church no where commands us
to call the honor exhibited to Saints and their Images, a religious honor or
worship. But, with the Doctor's good leave, Why may there not be some
intermediate kinds of worship, between a divine, and a mere civil worship? Why
may we not say, that such was the worship, which was given to the Ark? which
Abraham gave to the Angels? and which we are all commanded to give to the Name
of Jesus* Nay, why may we not add, that the honor and respect of the Knee,
which is given to Godfathers, and Godmothers is such, as being not founded
upon any bare relation of blood, or any mere natural, or civil excellency, but
given wholly upon a spiritual account? And how is it proved, that such an
intermediate honor as this, may not securely be given to Saints, and their
Images? Let the Doctor find out a suitable name for it, besides that of
Religious, and we shall not stand upon terms with him, but freely speak his
language. But if nothing will serve his turn, but that religious and divine
worship must be all one. Then we utterly deny that we are in any wise concerned
in his Objection: for we give no such religious worship to the Saints
themselves, much less to their Images. And I shall show in my* Answer to his
Eighth Chapter, how weakly and disingenuously he makes use of the Second
Council of Nice to make out his charge against us.

The Eighth Conclusion, scorning to be behind the Seventh in point of
Scholarship, loudly proclaims, That to erect Temples, Altars, Images, or to
burn incense to Saints and Angels, to invoke them, or make vows to them, and
the like is plain Idolatry. This Conclusion for its proof appeals to the
testimony of four false witnesses, to wit, the Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth
Conclusions; and as such, I justly except against them.

The Ninth; Religious incurvation toward a Crucifix or the Host, or any Image,
as to an object, and not a mere unconsidered accidental circumstance, is
Idolatry. This Conclusion having thus coldly drawn up an enditement against us,
pleads its evidence out of the Seventh and Eighth Conclusions; And so leaning
upon two broken Reeds, falls to the ground, where I am sure, neither Reason or
Authority will ever stoop to take it up.

We are now arrived at the Tenth Conclusion, where we are told, That to use on
set purpose, in religious worship, any figure or image only circumstantially,
not objectively, but so as to bow toward it, or to be upon a Man's knees
before it, with eyes and hands devoutly lifted up toward it. -- Yet this even
taken in its most favorable circumstances, is a most wicked and impious
mocking of God; says the Doctor. And he adds, That if the image be the object
of these postures and incurvations, (as it seems to him plain, and beyond all
questioning that it will be so) then he says it will be idolatry. To this I
return, that I hope the Ethics cannot be offended with me, no more than
divinity can be able to reprove me, if I say, this Conclusion gives God the
lie, and makes Him the approver, commander and rewarder of Sin, even idolatry
it self. For God promised a reward to Prayer made in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 7.
15. Where notwithstanding there were graved Angels or Cherubims upon the walls.
And he commanded his People to adore the Ark, over which were Cherubims or
Angels of Image-work; where the worshipper could not possibly make his
addresses, but he must needs bow at lest circumstantially, though not
objectively toward an Image. And yet Prayer, even thus circumstanced, was
approved, commanded, and declared by God himself rewardable. Now this is the
very posture, both for act and object, which cannot down with the Doctor, but
he must needs have it to be idolatry; and his most charitable gloss upon the
action, can afford it no name, under an impious and wicked mocking of God.
Whence if reason may be allowed to make the inference, the Doctor's Tenth
Conclusion must needs be found guilty of giving God the lie, and making him the
approver, commander, and rewarder of sin, even the sin of idolatry.

Having thus made our way through all the Doctor's Ten Conclusions, the Reader
may please to observe, how far he forgets himself, and over-runs the Title of
his Chapter, insomuch that he scarce ever faces about to it from the beginning
to the end: for whereas the Title promised to deliver, What idolatry is
according to divine declaration; and that he himself makes his boast in the end
of this Chapter; To have abundantly convinced the Church of Rome of
multifarious idolatries; if they will stand, says he, to divine definitions, or
the declarations of holy Scripture in this point; Yet on the contrary it is
evident, there are not even so many Scripture-quotations, in this point, as may
make up so much as a duall number. The only way then for the Doctor to make out
the title of his Chapter, and his vapouring Rodomontado against God's Church,
is to deify his own conceptions; that is, to make his own word pass for the
Word of God, and his Authority for divine. And then truly we have no reason to
be offended at him, for taking upon himself so kindly that very imputation,
which he seeks no less weakly than injuriously to pin upon the doctrine and
practice of the Church.

The Second Section.
In Answer to the Doctor's Second Chapter.
THis Chapter, compared with the former, is but a second part to the same tune:
longer in words, but as weak in performances to the full, as its Predecessor.
The Title promises to declare, What Idolatry is according to the determination
of clear and free reason; and this in 25. several Conclusions.

His first, second, and third Conclusions quite digress from the charge in
hand, showing what a grievous sin idolatry is: which is much more largely and
learnedly declared by our own Authors, and readily granted by us, with this
further allowance, that if he can fix the crime upon us, with any show of
reason, we shall freely acknowledge our guilt to be of a double dye, to what it
was in the Jew or Gentile.

The fourth and fifth, tell us that idolatry necessarily involves in it,
ignorance, or mistake, in the act of worship, or the object. The fifth advances
a step further, and concludes very abruptly, that because all idolatry involves
in it some ignorance or mistake; therefore no ignorance or mistake can excuse
from idolatry: very learnedly: From the Fourth and Fifth, the Doctor makes a
long stride to his One and Twentieth Conclusion, where he peremptorily
concludes, that because mistake does not excuse him from idolatry, by
Conclusion the Fourth and Fifth, therefore the adoration of any object, which
we out of mistake, conceive to be the true God, made visible by hypostatical
union therewith, is manifest idolatry. Thus he. But let us put the case, that
some Christian, contemporary to Christ our Lord, whilst he so journed upon
earth, had through mere mistake, adored some other Person, for Christ: Here the
Query arises, whether this Man's error would have pleaded his excuse, I, or no?
The reformed Churches of France, in their Apology by Daille' declare for the
affirmative. And truly Reason seems clearly to be on their side. For what
reason or equity will condemn a loyal subject, who intending an address to his
Prince, should take Hephestion, for Alexander, a Peer for his Sovereign, and so
make tender of his allegiance to another Person, whom he innocently mistakes
for his Prince? Let us parallel the two cases. As this loyal Subject's address
is intended only to his Prince; so the Christians address in the instance
abovesaid, is directed only to Jesus Christ. In both these cases there
intervenes an error of fact: both the religious and civil worship being
misplaced as to the circumstance, though not as to the object. And why this
error should be imputable, either to treason in the one case, or to Idolatry in
the other? or, why more to idolatry in the one case, then to treason in the
other? is that, which it will concern the Doctor to speak to, if he means to
maintain his conclusion. And till he has done this, he shall never be able to
prove, what he aims at in his 22. Conclusion, that any idolatry is committed
though it should so fall out, through inadvertence, or any other accident, that
an unconsecrated, or untransubstantiated Host, were exposed to the veneration
of the People: for as no adoration is here due, so none is intended, but only
to Jesus Christ, adorable wherever he is.

The 6th. 7th. 8th. 10th. 11th. 12th. 13th. 14th. 15th. 18th. and 24th.
Conclusions talk big against Invocation of Saints. But the best speaks amongst
them are the 8th. 10th. and 12th. The Eighth leads the Van in these terms: Any
actions, gestures, or words, directed to any creature as to an object, which
naturally imply or signify either the incommunicable or incommunicated
eminencies of God, is the giving that worship, that is the right and due of God
alone; to that creature, and that injury against the divine Majesty, which is
termed idolatry. Then follows the Tenth, and in a high and mighty language
speaks thus: An omnipercipient omnipresence, which does hear, and see whatever
is said or transacted in the world, whether considered in the whole, or as
distributed into terrestrial, celestial, and supercelestial; not only all these
omnipercipiences, but any one of them is a certain excellency in God, and for
ought we know, incommunicated to any Creature. The Twelfth brings up the Rear
with an Ergo; If omnipresence or omnipercipience, at lest terrestrial (if not
celestial) be not communicated to Saints and Angels by God, the invocation of
either is palpable idolatry. Behold then the Doctor's Argument. Invocation
implies an incommunicated excellency in the Saints; viz. an omnipercipient
omnipresence, at lest terrestrial, if not celestial; and so communicates that
right to them, that appertains only to God. Ergo invocation of Saints and
Angels is palpable idolatry. Now if we can but acquit our selves handsomely in
a fair return to this Argument, all the rest that is to be found in the
abovesaid 11. Conclusions, will amount to no more than mere empty and
insignificant nothings. We may consider then the state of the Church, with
reference to different circumstances of time. The one wherein it was a question
amongst the Orthodox, whether the Saints entered into Heaven before the Day of
Judgment, or were confined to some other place of rest, excluded from the
beatifick Vision? And this was not fully determined till the Council of
Florence, which Council cleared the Point, defineing that The Souls of the
dead, as soon as cleansed from all sin, are received into Heaven, and see God
clearly, as he is in himself. Now as for those elder Centuries before the
Council of Florence, they held invocation of Saints, for an undoubted truth,
though some of them doubted, whether they heard our Prayers or no; because no
Church-definition had as then ascertained them of their full beatitude. Let
venerable Antiquity speak for it self by the mouth of a Saint Austine, who in
his Book De cura pro mortuis, c. 16. speaks thus. This question exceeds the
reach of my judgment, how the Martyrs relieve those, who are certainly assisted
by them? whether they are pre^ent by themselves, at the same time, in so many
several places where the benefit of their succor is received? or being retired
from the conversation of men, in some place proportioned to their merits* and
there interceding for the relief of those that call upon them, as we pray for
the dead, who are not really present with them; and know not how they are, nor
what they do: God omnipotent and ever present, hearing the Prayers of the
Martyrs, grants to Men by the ministry of Angels, those helps where he will,
when he will, and how he pleases. Thus B. S. Austine. Here we have it from an
undoubted work of this great Saint and Doctor, (owned by himself in his
Retractations) First, That Invocation of Saints was the constant, avowed
practice of those elder and purer days. Secondly, (contrary to the Doctor's
15th. Conclusion, and all his Pharisaical scruples.) Here is a sure and certain
ground of this invocation; to wit, unquestionable, ancient, and immemorial
possession, and the often experienced benefit of it by those, who addressing
themselves to the Holy Martyrs mediation, were (says S. Austine) certainly
assisted by them. Thirdly, That the Saints presence, at the same time in so
many several places, (which is equivalent to the Doctor's terrestrial
Omnipercipient Omnipresence) does not at all in Saint Austine's Opinion, either
imply an impossibility, or entrench upon any of the divine excellencies; for
then he would certainly have rejected it, which yet he does not. Fourthly,
Waving this Omnipercipient Omnipresence, S. Austine renders it easily
intelligible, how the Saints might (even without that, and without their
hearing our Prayers) relieve those that called upon them: Viz. God omnipotent
and ever present hearing the Prayers of the Martyrs, and granting to Men, by
the Ministry of Angels those helps -- when he will, where he will, and how he
pleases. Out of all which, I deduce this inference, which is home to the
point, That, if S. Austine be to be credited before Dr. More, It is good and
profitable to invocate the Saints, though we knew not whether they heard us or
no. And till the Doctor can prove the contrary, his main Hypothesis upon which
he builds, (to wit, that an omnipercipient omnipresence is the only ground of
invocation of Saints) is fundamentally subverted, and all his vapouring
pretenses of idolatry, end in smoke and fancy. This which I have already said,
renders invocation of Saints maintainable, though it were not certain they
heard us; which yet is most certain from their blissful vision of God, not
gainsaid even by Protestants: For if Devils appear, and assist Witches and
Sorcerers upon their invocation, Shall we deny this to the Saints in Glory? The
Saints are as the Angels of God in Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. And of the Angels it is
written: See you despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you,
their Angels in Heaven always see the Face of my Father which is in Heaven:
Mat. 18. 10. And again, There shall be joy in, Heaven upon one sinner that does
penance, Luc. 15. 7. Why therefore cannot the Saints hear our Prayers, as the
Angels see the contempt of one of those little ones, and as those in Heaven see
the repentance of a sinner? The Schools indeed may freely dispute how this is
done, and every one may freely abound in his own sense, and offer their several
modes and ways; and learned Dr. More, may (as he does, p. 23.) in calling them
all extremely ridiculous, render himself no less ridiculous in his weak
censure; and when all this is done, the uncertainty of the manner does not
argue against the certainty of the thing it self: For it is a fixed
uncontrollable Maxim in the Principles of Christianity, that, Potest constare
de re, quando non constat de modo rei; and he who denies this, may with equal
ground except against the mystery of the incarnation, together with the
incomprehensibility of the Unity and Trinity of God.

In the next place follows the Ninth Conclusion, which was left behind, as a
stragler from the rest of the Flock, being owned by none of its next Neighbors
as any thing akin to them, and speaks thus; That the using any of those actions
or gestures, or doing any of those things, that the true and supreme God did
choose and challenge in the setting out the mode of his own Worship, toward or
in reference to any Creature, as to an object, is idolatry. Because such a mode
of worship does thus manifestly appear to be the peculiar right of God, which
none can transfer to another, but God himself. Thus the Doctor. Let us then
state the question, whether any of those exterior actions or gestures, which
God did choose in the setting out the mode of his own Worship, for example,
Incurvation or bowing down the Body may be exhibited to a Creature without
Idolatry? No, replys the Doctor. Let us now take this Conclusion for granted,
and see what will be the Sequel. The using any of those actions, or gestures,
says he, that the true and supreme God did choose and challenge, in the setting
out the mode of his own Worship, toward, or in reference to any Creature, as
to an object, is idolatry. But according to his sixteenth Conclusion,
Incurvation of the Body is one of the actions, or gestures, which God did
choose, in setting out the mode of his own Worship: Ergo, Incurvation toward or
in reference to any Creature, as to an object, is idolatry. Now I subsume: But
Abraham used this incurvation toward Men, and Angels, Genesis 18. and 23. And the
beloved Disciple of Jesus reiterated the like incurvation toward an Angel,
Apoc. 22. 9. I shall leave the (ergo) to the Doctor: for the premises being
his, I shall not envy him the glory of the Conclusion, which makes Abraham, and
Saint John Idolaters.

The 16th. 17th. 19th. and 20th. talk much of a symbolical presence, and
incurvation toward it. Whereof the 16th. refers to the Ninth, and has its
Answer there. The 17th. That the Pagans worshipping their demons, though not as
the supreme God, by symbolical presences, etc. Become Ipso Facto Idolaters. To
this I have already answered, showing that the Pagans gave the worship and
title of Deities to their demons, and therefore became Ipso Facto Idolaters.
The 19th. defines magisterially; That incurvation in way of Religion toward an
open or bare symbolical presence, be it whatever Figure or Image, as to an
object, is flat Idolatry. Here I would gladly know of the Doctor, why he calls
a Figure, or Image a symbolical presence, but only because the Image is a sign
or token, signifying or representing the Person, whose image it is? Then I
enquire further, whether (for the same reason) the Name of a Person, be not a
symbolical presence in its kind, as well as the image? forasmuch as both of
them are signs or tokens representing the same thing, with this only
difference, that the Image represents it to the eye, the Name to the ear? And
why then, may we not bow to the Image of Jesus, as well as to the Name of
Jesus? or how can the one be condemned of idolatry, but the other must incur
the like brand? The 20th. Harping still upon the same string of a symbolical
presence, will needs maintain, That religious incurvation toward a bare
symbolical presence, wittingly and conscientiously directed thither, though
with a mental reserve, that they intend to use it merely as a circumstance of
worship, is notwithstanding real idolatry. To me this Conclusion seems big with
a spirit of contradiction, as being manifestly against Scripture, against the
practice of the Church of England, and lastly against Dr. More himself. That it
is clearly against Scripture, (besides what I have said in my answer to the
last Conclusion of the first Chapter) is sufficiently evidenced from the
incurvation the Scripture commands to the Name of Jesus; which is as much a
religious incurvation, as any we give to those symbolical presences, called
Images. That it is against the practice of the Church of England, and proves
that all Protestants, who kneel at the Eucharist are Idolaters, I conceive to
be no less manifest: for Protestants in their Communion acknowledge [See the
Protestant Rubric after Communion.] no corporal and real, but a bare
figurative and symbolical presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood. And
religious incurvation toward a symbolical presence, being real idolatry,
according to the Doctor: What follows by a clear sequel, but that all
Protestants, who bow the knee at the Eucharist, are Idolaters? And if the
Protestant-Communicant, in his vindication, chance to fly to a mental reserve,
and allege for his excuse, that he uses it merely as a circumstance of worship;
and that his intention terminates not in the symbolical presence, but looks up
to the Person of Jesus Christ; the Doctor will smilingly tell him, (for they
are his own words in the like case* Concl. 19.) That direction of our intention
here is but a Jesuitical juggle, and that the using it merely as a circumstance
of worship, is idolatry; and so he cuts him off from that plea, and leaves him
without all excuse. Thirdly, That it is against the Doctor, I appeal to the
Doctor himself, by bringing his 16th. and his 20th. Conclusions face to face.
The 16th. openly avoucheth, That the erecting of a symbolical presence with
incurvation thither ward, was declared by the supreme God, the God of Israel,
one of the manners of worship due to him. The 20th. runs counter, and stiffly
presses, That religious incurvation toward a symbolical presence (without
exception of any) wittingly and conscientiously directed thither, is real
idolatry. These two Conclusions, as I conceive, do thwart each other no less,
than if he had said in direct terms: All religious incurvation toward a
symbolical presence, is idolatry: Not all religious incurvation toward a
symbolical presence, is idolatry: For the 20th. is a Universal affirmative, and
maintains the first; The 16th. implies no less, than what is asserted in the
second. The 22th. and 23th. Conclusions weakly cavil at the adoration of the
Host, as idolatrous either in Catholics or Protestants. But these petty
niblers at the most blessed and ever adorable Sacrament shall have their answer
in the next Chapter, where the Doctor treats this Subject Ex professo: Only
here I add, that for Protestants indeed to adore the Sacrament, who believe no
corporal presence of Christ there; but that the Sacramental Bread and Wine
remain still in their natural substances (so speaks their abovesaid Rubric:)
would be the like crime, as for an unconverted Jew to adore Jesus Christ, in
whom he believes not. But what is this to the Doctor's purpose? Both the Jew
and the Protestant lie under the prejudice of an erroneous persuasion, which
upon application to rational and sound motives, may and ought to be deposed.

In the 25th. and last Conclusion, the Doctor starts a pretended Objection
against his charge of idolatry in the adoration of the Eucharist, and overflows
whole Pages in answer to it. But the Catholic Church makes no such Reply, nor
stands in need of any such vindication of her doctrine and practice. And
therefore I leave the Doctor to the pleasure of his own thoughts, raising his
Aerie Castle with one hand, and beating it down with the other. And so I pass on
to the Third Section.

The Third Section.
Which answers to the Doctors Third Chapter.
THe Title of this Chapter delivers it self in these terms; That the Romanists
worship the Host with the highest kind of worship, even that of Latria,
according to the injunction of the Council of Trent, and that it is most gross
idolatry so to do. It had been ingenuous in the Doctor, whilst he states
Catholic Doctrine, to speak Catholic language. The Council of Trent (even
as quoted by himself) mentions not the Host, but only the adoration of the
Blessed Sacrament, or (which is the same) of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament.
Which is a quite different thing from that uncatholique expression of
worshipping the Host: For Catholic Principles own nothing of the Host to
remain after consecration, but the species or symbols. Nor does the Council
enjoin the worship of Latria to the symbols, but to Jesus Christ veiled with
the symbols. In this Chapter, the Doctor pretends to undeniable demonstration;
which, if we take it summed up briefly, and girt up in his close and convictive
method, gives us this brisk assault. Transubstantiation is a mere figment and
enormous falsehood (so he speaks, p. 49.) Ergo the adoration of the Eucharist is
palpable idolatry. The greatest part of the Chapter is spent in proof of his
Antecedent. The consequence he conceives no less then evident: because if the
doctrine of Transubstantiation be false, then the Cultus Latriae is exhibited
to a mere Creature: And Costerus the Jesuit sticks not to grant the sequel;
Viz. that if our Church be mistaken in the doctrine of Transubstantiation, we
Ipso Facto stand guilty of such a piece of idolatry, as never was before seen
or known in this World. I answer: First, as to Costerus, the Doctor deals not
fair^y with him; for Costerus does not so much as name Transubstantiation in
that place. Secondly, The Doctor, both here and elsewhere boasts much of
Costerus his concession, but wholly mistakes the ground of it. Costerus argues
thus; Costerus in Enchirid. c. 8 de Sanct. mo. sacramto. n. 10
If in the Sacrament of the Eucharist the true Body of Christ be not contained,
Christ has dealt unworthily with his Church, as having abandoned, and permitted
her to fall, and continue for Fifteen Hundred Years together, in such error and
idolatry, the like to which was never seen nor heard of, and all this, by
occasion of his own words. Here is the ground of Costerus his concession: If
the true Body of Christ be not in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Christ had
dealt unworthily with his Church; and by consequence would not be the true
Christ; and therefore the adoration of the Eucharist, would be, not only a
mistake, as to the circumstance, but also as to the, object; there being no
such adorable object in the World, as a true Christ, according to this
supposition, and so the Cultus Latria would be exhibited to a mere creature.
Wherefore, to gratify the Doctor, if he can but prove his Antecedent, that
Transubstantiation is a mere figment, and enormous falsehood, I shall not at all
dispute his consequence with him, but willingly grant as much as Costerus to
the full. He begins then, and undertakes to evince by undeniable demonstration,
that the doctrine of Transubstantiation is false. For, says he, Thus the Body of
Christ will be in God knows how many Thousand places at once, and how many
Thousand Miles distant one from another. Whereas Amphitruo (says the Doctor)
expostulates with his servant Sosia, and rates him for a Madman or Impostor,
that he would make him believe, that he could be in two places at once. This
indeed is a fair demonstration that Dr. More is acquainted with Plautus his
Comedies, and can (when he pleases) descend from the divinity chair to a piece
of unseasonable mirth and stage-drollery. But let this pass, as a pleasant
skirmish before the main charge. In the next place he musters up all the Arts
and Sciences, Logic, Physics, Metaphysics, and Mathematics, against us, to
prove that one Body cannot be in two places at once. His first evidence is
drawn from the Physics. It is a principle, says he, of Physics, that that
internal space, that a Body occupies at one time, is equal to the Body that
occupies it. Now let us suppose one and the same Body occupy two such internal
places or spaces at once. This Body is therefore equal to those two spaces,
which are double to one single space; wherefore the Body is double to that Body
in one single space; and therefore one and the same Body double to it self;
which is an enormous contradiction. To this objection, I answer: Respicientes
ad pauca facile definiunt. The Doctor reckons here without his Host. You say,
Mr. Doctor, It Is a Principle in Physics, that the space which a Body occupies,
must be equal to the Body that occupies it. But what Physics tell you, that a
Body in one place, occupying a space equal to it self, cannot possibly at the
same time be elsewhere, without occupying there any place at all; (that is) be
present there, without a local presence? And if this can possibly be, your
Physics are quite struck dumb, and your Demonstration blown up from its very
foundation. Now that this supposition is more than merely possible, is clear
from the common opinion of the learned, who maintain that actually the supreme
Heaven occupies no place. Secondly, Allowing the Doctor his own supposition;
That one and the same Body, at the same time occupies two different places,
equal to it self. What follows? Therefore First, (replies the Doctor) This Body
is equal to those two spaces, which are double to one single space. Therefore
2dly, The Body is double to that body in one single space. And therefore 3dly,
One and the same body is double to it self. I deny all these three Therefores;
which are no more than mere empty Paralogismes. Let us examine the first
inference (of which the two others depend) concluding from the bodies being in
two places at once, that the said body is equal to those two spaces. What needs
that, Mr. Doctor? It is enough that in each of those two spaces, it be only
equal or commensurate to that determinate place it there occupies (suppose of
six Cubits;) and in neither of them, equal or commensurate to a space of 12.
Cubits. But yet further, admit the body were made equal to those two spaces,
which are double to one single space. How does it follow from hence, that the
body is double to it self? Let us suppose a body of one Cubit, rarefied to its
double dimension of two Cubits. Will Philosophy allow this inference for
current? Viz. This body is now equal to two places, which are double to a place
of one single Cubit. Therefore the body is double to that body, in the place of
one single Cubit; Therefore double to it self. What answer you give to this
instance, will serve for an Answer to your own Argument. Again, let us take a
rational soul, informing a body a span in length: Then let us suppose the same
body grown up to two spans, and still informed by the same soul. Behold now
another parallel of the Doctor's Argument. This Soul is co-extended and
commensurate to two spans, which are double to one single span; therefore the
soul is double to that soul, which was under one span; therefore double to it
self. Is not this rare divinity? Let the Doctor show a material disparity in
these two cases, or else acknowledge the inconclusiveness of his own objection.
But he may please to remember, that the places being continued, or
discontinued, in one or the other case, will nothing avail him, unless he can
demonstrate, that which the Schools will not easily subscribe unto; to wit,
that each subject ows its unity, to the unity of place; and not to its own
intrinsic essence. Thus much in Answer to his Physics.

In his Second Objection, the Metaphisicks are up in arms against us, in
defense of their great Maxim; That the notion of Unum, is to be Indivisum a
se, as well as Divisum a quolibet alio. The first part of which Maxim seems to
be manifestly infringed by us, putting a possibility of one Bodies being in
more places at once: For in this case, the body will be Divisum a se, and both
Unum and Multa. Thus the Doctor. And I shall crave the favor to return my
Answer in the same Language the Objection speaks. To the first then, I reply
thus: It will be Divisum a se secundum substantiam; I deny it. It will be
Divisum a se quoad locum; transeat. Then Secondly, I deny, that it will be Unum
and multa; but only Unum in multis: One and the same in many places. Secondly,
I answer to the Objection, that the Doctor here rowles the same Stone, and
relapses into the same error, which was reproved in the former Objection, as
building upon a false and ruinous bottom; for he supposes that essential unity
is derived from the unity of Local presence, and not from the intrinsic
Principles of the Subject: For unless we grant this supposition, it will not
follow, that the same body being in diverse places at once is divided from it
self, any more than it is divided from its intrinsic Principles, which it can
never be by plurality of local presence, they being wholly extrinsecal to the
subject. Thirdly, I answer, that both this, and the precedent Objection are of
pernicious consequence, as putting arms into the hands of Infidels, to attempt
against the mystery of the ever adorable Trinity. For, as the Doctor argues,
that if one body can be in two places at once, it will follow that the said
Body is double to it self: So it may be concluded with 'greater plausibility by
the Antitrinitarian, that if one and the same divine nature, can be in three
distinct Persons at once, it will follow that the same nature will be treble to
it self. And as he objects that from the hypothesis of one Bodies being in
diverse places at once, the sequel will be, that the same body will be Divisum a
se, contrary to one piece of a Metaphysical Principle; of the notion of Unum,
being Indivisum a se: So may the Antitrinitarian object with a more close
Logic, that from the hypothesis of one nature being in three distinct Persons,
the sequel will be, that the same nature will be Divisa a se, and also not
Divisa ab aliis (because really identified with three distinct Persons) which
is contrary to the whole Metaphysical Principle of the notion of Unum, being
Indivisum a se, and divisum a quolibet alio. And if there be any disparity in
the case, it is wholly on the Antitrinitarians side, and to his advantage.

The Doctor's Third Objection is from the Mathematics. I shall give it
Verbatim from his own Pen. The Council of Trent saying, that in the separation
of the parts of the species (that which bears the outward show of Bread and
Wine) that from this division, there is a parting of the whole, divided into so
many entire bodies of Christ, the body of Christ being always at the same time
equal to it self, it follows that a part of the division is equal to the whole,
against that common notion in Euclid, that the whole is bigger than the part.
The Reader may please to take notice that the Doctor here gives us his own
Paraphrase for the words of the Council. Now to the Objection. Surely the
Mathematics, which lent the Doctor this notion, never gave him commission to
abuse his borrowed Principle by so unskilful a misapplication: For his Argument
is this: It follows from the Council's doctrine, that a part of the division is
equal to the whole, contrary to the generally established notion of the
Mathematics, that the Whole is bigger than the Part. I answer: The Argument is
mere Cobweb stuff; half an Eye is enough to look through it: For these words of
the Doctors (That a part of the division is equal to the whole) either refer to
the species (and then it is false that a part of the division is equal to the
whole) or they point at the Body of Christ (and then the words are De subjecto
non supponente:) for there is no division of any part of Christ's Body from the
whole.

His Fourth Objection is from Logic. In Logic (says the Doctor) it is a
Maxim, that the parts agree indeed with the whole, but disagree one with
another. But in the abovesaid division of the Host or Sacrament, the parts do
so well agree, that they are entirely the very same individual thing. And
whereas any division, whether Logical or Physical, is the division of some one
into many, this is but the division of one into one, and it self. My answer to
this is, that I may with much more reason say, that this and the precedent
Objection is but the division of one into one and it self. For this is the same
in effect with the former, and requires no new Answer. Because these his
trifling expressions, if applied to the separated species, are false; if to
Christ's body, then they proceed upon a false supposition; as has been declared
in my Answer to the Third Objection. And therefore Logic has great reason to
take it ill at the Doctor's hands, for making her instrumental to such an
illogical discourse.

But the Doctor distrusting the strength of his Logic, calls in his
Metaphysics again to her relief, and gives us a Fifth and mixed Objection from
Logic and Metaphysics. Transubstantiation, says he, implies that the same
thing is, and is not at the same time. For that individual thing, that can be,
and is to be made of any thing, is not. Now the individual body of Christ is to
be made of the Wafer consecrated, for it is turned into his individual body.
But his individual body was before the Consecration. Wherefore it was, and it
was not at the same time. Which is against that Fundamental Principle in Logic
and Metaphysics, that both parts of a contradiction cannot be true: Or that
the same thing cannot both be, and not be at once. Thus far the Doctor in his
own expressions. Now before I answer his Objection; there are two or three
particulars deserve a cursory reflection. And first a knowing Reader cannot
choose but smile to see, (Can be) or a capacity of being brought in for a piece
of an Argument to prove that a thing is not: That individual thing that can be
(says the Doctor) and is to be made of any thing, is not. Secondly, It is here
observable, how fondly the Doctor plays the confident Dogmatizer, asserting as
evident (for in this Chapter he professedly pretends to evidence an undeniable
demonstration.) That that individual thing that can be and is to be made of any
thing, is not. As if forsooth it were evidently demonstrable, that that
individual thing, which is to day actually in being, could not possibly be
destroyed, and made anew again to morrow by a second generation. For if this be
absolutely possible, it will be false to day to utter this Proposition: (That
individual thing that can be, and is to be made of any thing, is not.) And is
not this rashly to fetter God's Omnipotency, and to go about to wrest a power
out of his Almighty Hand, which he may have, for any thing the Doctor knows to
the contrary. Thirdly, It is pity to observe his words in the next
Proposition. The individual body of Christ, says he, is to be made of the Wafer
consecrated. Which implies as much as if the Water were the material cause of
Christ's body. What Philosopher ever spoke thus unphilosophically? Yet to make
amends, he immediately contradicts himself, and adds, That the Wafer is turned
(or converted) into his individual body. Which is a much different thing from
being made of the Wafer. But the particle (for) goes beyond wonder. The
individual body of Christ is made of the Wafer consecrated (mark the word) for
it is turned into his individual body. Which is a piece of as learned nonsense,
as if he said in open terms, Because the Wafer is turned into Christ's body, by
a total Conversion, which excludes a material cause; therefore his Body is made
of the Wafer by generation, which requires a material cause. Thus unfortunate
are the Acts and Sciences, when they engage against GOD's Church. I come now to
his Argument. Transubstantiation, says he, implies that the same thing is, and
is not, at the same time. This I deny. First, Because Physics have rendered it
probable, that a thing which actually is, may be reproduced, without losing its
actual existence. And if we should say, that Christ's body is thus reproduced in
the Sacrament, it will not follow, that the Body of Christ is, and is not at
once: to wit, before the Consecration: but only that it is by a first
production, and is not by a second production, till after the Consecration.
Secondly, I will assign the Doctor another way, whereby to evade his
contradiction: for as in nutrition and augmentation, when new matter is added
to the body, (by conversion of our food and sustenance into flesh) the Soul
presently begins to inform this new matter. And there is no need of producing a
new Soul, which was not before; but only the Soul begins to be, where it was
not before: So when the Host is converted into the Body of Christ, no necessity
enforces us to grant the production of a new body, which was not before, but
only that the body begins to be, where it was not before.

Let the impartial Reader now judge what great cause the Doctor had to cry
Victory before his time, and so manfully to word us down, and conclude
Hectorlike, as he does; That nothing could be more fully and entirely
contradictious, and repugnant to all sense and reason, to all indubitable
Principles of all Art and Science, then this figment of Transubstantiation: so
that any one (says he) that is not a mere Bigot, may be as assured that
Transubstantiation is a mere figment, or enormous falsehood, as of any thing
else in the whole World. I wonder whether they be not as mere Bigots, with the
Doctor, whoever believe the mystery of the Holy Trinity. For let him but
compare the mysteries of Transubstantiation and Trinity together, and then he
shall be to me more than a great Apollo, if he can show that there is any thing
more fully and entirely contradictious, and repugnant to all sense and reason,
to all indubitable Principles of all Art and Science, in the first mystery,
then in the later. And that any one who is not a mere Bigot may be more
assured, that Transubstantiation is a mere figment or enormous falsehood, then
Trinity. And I desire him to instance in particular by what Argument he has
attempted to conclude the impossibility of one Bodies being in diverse places at
once, which is not emboldened from hence to lift up its head much more
plausibly against the Unity and Trinity of God, to evince the impossibility of
one divine nature in three distinct Persons, really identified with each
Person, and yet most strictly one in essence, undistinguished and undivided
from it self.

If Dr. More would proceed as every good and well-grounded Christian ought to
do, he should rather make the seeming impossibility of these two mysteries an
argument of their being true and divinely inspired doctrines: For so we may
rightly say in respect of both; The more incredible, the more credible. That
is, by how much the more incredible these mysteries are, if we only consult our
senses, and the bare sentiments of the natural man; by so much the more
credible it is, that there lies a divine revelation at the bottom; and that no
art, persuasion, force, or any thing else in the whole World, but a divine
Authority, could ever have wrought so firm and general a belief in the hearts
of men of such high and transcendent objects.

The Fourth Section.
Containing an Answer to the Fourth Fifth and Sixth Chapters.
IN the entrance of the Fourth Chapter the Doctor falls foul upon the Council
of Trent, for teaching, That the Saints reigning with Christ offer up their
Prayers for Men; and that it is good and profitable humbly to invocate them,
and to fly to their mediation, aid and succor, for the obtaining of God's
blessings, through Jesus Christ his Son. This the Doctor terms making the
Saints the more exactly like the Pagans Dii Medioxumi, and the Demons that
negotiated the affairs of Men with the highest Deities. Now to prove that this
kind of invocation of Saints is down right Idolatry, and by consequence that we
are worshippers of false Gods, he conjures up a spirit, which for its many
names, and bad qualities, may well be termed Legion: Viz. the 3d. 4th. 5th.
6th. and 8th. Conclusions of the first Chapter. As also the 5th. 7th. 8th.
10th. 11th. 12th. 13th. 14th. 15th. and 24th. Conclusions of the Second
Chapter. But I hope my answer to these Conclusions, in the first and second
Section of this Discourse, will prove exorcism enough to lay this foul unclean
Spirit of Calumny, and silence its impertinencies.

In the rest of this fourth, and the two ensuing Chapters, the Doctor acts a
new Person: For laying aside his former Conclusions and Demonstrations,
Protestants Translate it, Doting about Questions.
he trades now wholly in Quotations, languishing about Questions and strife of
words. I shall not be so discourteous as to give Him the Apostles Text after
the Protestant Translation. Amongst these Quotations we are to meet with a
great dearth of reason: Three entire Chapters having much ado to furnish out
matter for one Argument, and that a poor one too, God knows. His business is to
lay down, and amuse his Reader with a number of set forms of Invocation of
Saints, which he pretends to be egregiously idolatrous. Yet scarce ever
mentioning the Churches Public Prayers, as her Liturgys, Litany, Canonical
Hours, Pontifical or Ritual; he plays at small game and serves in the gleanings
of his own observation, picked up here and there, out of several Books of
devotion; as the Rosary of our Lady, the Mary Psalter, and others: importing
(as he glosseth upon his Text) that the Romanists in their Prayers to Saints
(especially to the Blessed Virgin) ask of them such things as are only in the
power of our great Savior and Redeemer Christ to grant: Such as are, to
protect us from all evil, and from all the frauds of the Devil; To grant us
strength, courage, and patience; spiritual illumination of the Soul, and
purgation thereof from the filth of Sin; To comfort and support us in the agony
of death, and to conduct us hence into Eternal Life. Lastly, He recounts some
particular addresses to the Blessed Virgin Mary, under the Title of Saluatrix,
as begging salvation of her, with a Domina salvum me fac: O Blessed Lady, save
me. From whence he deduceth these consequences, as the bounteous overflowings
of his Pen. That we ask such thing; of her, as are in the power of none but of
Jesus Christ as he is God, to grant: That we make the Eternal Godhead as
hypostatically united with the Virgin, as with Christ Himself: That we make Her
a She Christ, and the Daughter of God, in as high a sense, as Christ is his
Son. As to the fidelity of his Quotations (having not the Books at hand to
examine them) I can neither accuse nor acquit him. But I shall allow him all
the fair play in the World, by supposing, his allegations to be true, and
freely taking them upon trust; Though his carriage hitherto gives us no great
cause to suspect him guilty of too much candor in that kind. Let us then single
out one of the most harsh-sounding forms of Invocation, that is to be found
throughout all the three Chapters: and if that, which is seemingly the
unsoundest (nay virtually includes all the rest) and grates upon a Christian
ear with the greatest show of offense of all others, may yet admit of an
Orthodox sense, and this by clear warrant from Holy Scripture; then I hope the
rest, which are not so seemingly injustifiable as this, may in all reason be
excused from that odious Epithet of Idolatrous, and I from the labor of all
further apology in their behalf. And there is no form of invocation produced by
the Doctor of a higher or harsher strain than this, whereby salvation seems to
be begged of our Lady, saying, Domina salvum me fac. Blessed Lady save me. But,
why must this form needs be idolatrous? Must the flower which yields a
wholesome juice to the industrious Be, needs be bad, because the venomous
Spider turns it into poison? Honey soit qui mal y pense, is an useful piece of
morality in things of ambiguous construction: For in this case, the evil is
only to him, that evil thinks. And it is very possible that he who makes this
form of Invocation a piece of his Litany; Domina salvum me fac. Blessed Lady
save me. May think no more evil in it, nor be in any more danger of committing
idolatry thereby, than Saint Paul was, when writing to the Romans (Romans 11.
14.) he uttered these words: If by any means I may provoke to emulation, them
which are my flesh, and might save some of them. Or, when he speaks to the
Corinthians in this sort (1 Cor. 9. 22.) I am made all things to all Men, that
I might SAVE all: or, as you read, That by all means I might SAVE some: which
is all one, as to our present purpose. Conceive now that some humble and well
meaning suppliant had made his applications to the Apostle in this very form of
Prayer; Holy Apostle SAVE me. What idolatry had it been to Petition Saint Paul
for a favor, which he professed himself both ready and able to grant? for here
the Apostle clearly supposes in himself not only the will, but the power of
saving Souls. But in what sense? not in the quality of a God, but as
instrumental to their salvation by his Prayers and Preaching. So that (Holy
Apostle SAVE me:) had signified no more, then, Holy Apostle teach me the way of
salvation: or, Holy Apostle pray for my salvation. Say now the same in our
case; that as Saint Paul had upon Earth, so the Virgin has in Heaven the like,
or a greater power of SAVING Souls, by her Patronage, Prayers, and Mediation:
Her dignity and place (as Mother of God) affording her a nearer access to the
Throne of Grace, And if the words of the abovesaid Invocation be expounded in
this manner (as taking our measures from the Apostles own words and meaning) it
will be one and the same kind of address, to say; Blessed Lady save me: or,
Blessed Lady pray for my salvation. And so all the forms of Prayer assigned by
the Doctor taken in the sense of the Apostle, will amount to no more than a
mere Ora pro nobis. Now whereas the Doctor was pleased to discharge his Vollies
of calumnies against us, upon the account of this, and the like forms of
Invocation; let him turn his Paper-pellets against the Apostle, and discharge
the overflowing of his gall upon him, as assuming to himself a Soul-saving
Power in the Texts abovesaid; and he may please to tell him; That hereby he
takes upon him to do such a thing, as is in the power of none but Jesus Christ,
as he is God, to do; That he makes the Eternal God Head as hypostatically
united to himself, as with Christ; and so makes himself a second Christ, and
the Son of God, in as high a sense, as Christ is his Son. The inference is
equally concluding, either in both cases or neither: And therefore it shall be
at the Doctor's choice, either to clear us, or condemn the Apostle, with whom
we shall not fear to stand, or fall.

The Fifth Section.
Which is, in Answer to the Three next Chapters.
IN the beginning of the Seventh Chapter the Doctor lays down the doctrine of
the Council of Trent in these terms. That the Images of Christ, of the blessed
Virgin, and other Saints are to be had and retained in Churches, and that due
honor and reverence is to be done to them. Here the Doctor gives us a learned
antithesis, between the Commandment of God, and the decree of this Council.
Thus much, says he, as the Council of Trent has declared touching Images is
plain and open idolatry by the Seventh Conclusien of the first Chapter, and
expressly against the Commandment of God, who forbids us to make a^^ graven
Image to bow down to, or worship. But the Council of Trent says, yes, ye may
make graven Images of the Saints, and set them up in their Temples, and give
them their due honor and worship; nay, ye ought to do so; and instances in the
very act of bowing, or kneeling and prostrating our selves before them. The
like Rhetorical flourish he uses against the Second Council of Nice in the next
Chapter. But how weak, frivolous, and Pharisaical this Antithesis is, I have
sufficiently declared in my Answer to the Second, and Seventh Conclusions of
the first Chapter. He goes on, saying, That this definition of the Council is
so palpably against the Commandment of God, that they are fain to leave the
second Commandment out of the Decalogue, that the People may not discern how
grossly they go against the express Precepts of God, in their so frequent
practices of idolatry. This charge from the Pen of a divine looks something
more than strange; having been so often answered, and yet no notice taken of
the answer, nor any reply made to it. That the Commandments are Ten, we have
Scripture for it, Exodus 34. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. But that any part of the
Decalogue, which our Catechismes leave out, is One of the Ten, the Scripture is
not yet in being, by which it can be made out. The Scripture indeed delivers
the Decalogue unto us in the Twentieth Chapter of Exodus, (which we own to a
tittle) but does not divide and parcel it out so punctually unto us, but that
Orthodox Divines (even Saint Austine and Saint Hierome) have been divided
amongst themselves about the division of it. As for these words; Thou shall not
make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or that is in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water under the
Earth: Thou shall not bow down thy self to them; nor serve them. These words I
say according to our Schoolmen (following herein the opinion of Saint Austine)
do make but one with the first of not worshipping other gods. Hereupon diverse
of our Catechismes, as being abbreviations of Christian doctrine, fitted to the
weaker memories of the vulgar, leave out the abovesaid words, together with
diverse others which follow in the fffth and sixth Verse; as also others
belonging to the Commandment of keeping the Sabbath, in the Ninth, Tenth, and
Eleventh Verse. Now as our Catechismes leaving out these last words, through
mere condescendence to the capacities of the ignorant, are not, nor cannot
justly be censured by Protestants, as omitting any one Commandment of the
Decalogue: so, before the Doctor could rightly charge us with leaving out the
Second Commandment, he ought at lest to have gone about to prove, that that
which he calls the Second, is really a distinct Commandment from the first:
and that the understanding is not the same, whether we divide the Precepts of
the first Table into three, or into four Commandments. This he absolutely
omitting to do, his charge proves a mere calumny, and bearing false witness
against his Neighbor. And so whilst he pleads for his Second, he very
uncharitably breaks his Ninth Commandment.

Thus far the Doctor having discharged his passion against the Council's
doctrine, his next exception is against the ground, or reason of the said
doctrine: for whereas the Council declares, that due honor and reverence is to
be done to Images, because the honor done to the Image is referred to the
Prototype, or thing represented. Against this, the Doctor argues in this sort.
This reference, says he, is either in virtue of that similitude the images have
with those Persons they represent: Or else this reference (without any regard
to personal similitude) is from the direction of the intention of the
devotionist. Then he supposing that neither of these ways are maintainable, he
infers that by no means, can the honor done to the image be referred to the
Prototype, or thing represented. Now that this reference is not in virtue of
the similitude the images have with those Persons they represent, he proves,
First, Because it is oftentimes uncertain, whether there be any such similitude
of figure betwixt the Image and the Prototype. Secondly, It may so happen, that
the Image may be more like something else, then it is to the Prototype: For
example, the Image of a Saint, may possibly be like some sinner, in which case
this wicked Person will intercept the honor due to the same. Thirdly, No
Images can be like the Saints, who are now separated Souls. Fourthly, What
terrestrial Image (says the Doctor) can possibly represent him, that is truly
(...), God-Man, and is not the object of our adoration, but as he is this
divine Complexum, as well of the divinity, as of the humanity.

To the Argument I answer, that this reference is in virtue of that similitude,
which the Image has with the Prototype, as including the direction of the
intention of the Devotionist, Ipso Facto, that he is supposed to be a rational
Agent. And therefore the Doctor's disjunctive Dilemma is very vain and
defective. To the first of the four proofs, my Answer is, that the honor done
to the Image may be referred to the Prototype, though there be no personal
similitude of figure betwixt the Image and the Person it represents. For
besides the similitude of figure, there is another similitude, which the
Doctor, if he please may call a similitude of signification; the Image
signifying the dignity, quality, or other perfections of the Prototype: Thus,
though there be no personal similitude of figure, betwixt God and man, yet man
was made after the Image and likeness of God, Genesis 1. 26. And he who honors
man, as he is the Image of God, honors God in his Image. And therefore, if
where there is no similitude of figure, surely much more where there is a
specifical similitude of figure, the honor done to the image, may be referred
to the Prototype; as it happens in the case of the Images of Christ, and his
Saints. To the Second I answer, that the case the Doctor puts is more than
possible: For it did actually so fall out in the images of the Angels or
Cherubims over the Ark, which (if we regard personal similitude of figure and
feature) were more like some material and terrestrial Beeings, then those
incorporeal intelligences; and yet the honor done to them was referred to the
Prototypes. Whence it appears that it is the similitude of signification, more
than the similitude of figure and feature, which draws the honor after it. My
Answer to the Third is, that our Images pretend not to represent the Saints, as
divested of their Bodies, but only according to their former state under the
Church militant, with some additional marks of a Crown, or Laurel, or some such
significative representatives of their triumphant state in Glory. Yet, under
favor, why may not an image be like a separated Soul, as well as like an Angel
or Cherubim? If any one reply, that according to the Principles of the late
revived Platonic Philosophy, Angels have their Bodies, and why may not those
Bodies have their Images? Such a Replyer may please to reflect, that (besides
that no one ever yet got a sight of those Angelical Bodies) See the ingenuous
Author of Lux Orientalis, or the Pre-existence of Souls, (a happy Pen, and
worthy of a better Subject) and a great honourer of Dr. More.
The same Principles allow unto Souls separated and discharged from these gross
terrestrial Elements, the like Aerial or Aetherial Vehicles with Angels; and
therefore under this notion, either both, or neither of them, are capable of an
imagery representation. To the fourth, I answer, that the Doctor's question,
either comes to nothing, or to something worse than nothing, which is at lest
indirect blasphemy: for, if a terrestrial Image can possibly represent that
Person, who is (...) God-Man, then the Doctor's Query falls to nothing. But if
a terrestrial Image cannot, then neither can a terrestrial eye represent that
Person, who is truly (...) God-Man; and so the Apostles, whilst living, did
never see that Person, who was (...), God-Man; which is no less than blasphemy,
and so worse than nothing: implying that that Person, called Jesus Christ, whom
the Apostles daily beheld with their eyes, was not (...) God-Man.

Having done with the Council of Trent, the Doctor begins to pick quarrels with
the Second Council of Nice, pretending the doctrine of this Council touching
the worship of Images to be grossly idolatrous; and to this purpose he produces
diverse Objections, which it were a sin against Logic to call proofs; so little
there is of manly reason in them. But because he gives us not the Councils own
words, but contents himself with instancing in one or two weak arguments of his
own molding, which he would gladly father upon the Council, we shall not wrong
him so much, as to rob him of the child of his own brain, till he pleases to
take the pains to prove it to be none of his own. Nor does he end here, but
whereas the Council relates some miracles in favor of the due honor given to
the images of Christ and his Saints, these he most profoundly confutes by an
unanswerable laughter: From laughing, he immediately falls a louring; and the
reason is, because this Council declares that it is lawful to burn Candles,
Incense, and Perfumes in honor of the Saints before their Images, which he in
an angry mood concludes to smell rankly of idolatry, even (says he) by the
authority of Grotius himself upon the Decalogue. Good Doctor, deceive not your
self. Grotius was no Papist, as you seem to imagine. And if you will not
believe me, take it upon trust from your good friend Doctor Pierce against
Baxter. As for us, we have nothing to do with such amphibious heads, such
self-divided Humorists, halting on both sides, as Grotius; As if Grotius his
single word were of weight to counterballance the Authority of a general
Council. After this he produces the Collections of Photius in Justellus, and
adds that according to these; One would think that they meant (the fathers of
this Second Council of Nice) the Cultus Latriae to the Image of Christ; they
using the word (...), as if that worship, which was done to the Image passed
through to Christ himself, which would not be suitable to him, if it were not
divine worship. Here is a discourse indeed, wherein all conformable Sons of the
Church of England are concerned: For if an intelligent Protestant be asked,
whether, when they bow the Knee at the Eucharist, (which to them is a bare
figure, or symbolical presence) the Church of England intends this act of
worship to terminate in the figure, or to (...), and pass on to Christ? If it
be answered, that this worship is absolute, and rests in the bare figure, then
Doctor More's Twentieth Conclusion of his Second Chapter concludes them
absolute Idolaters. But if they profess their worship in this case not to be
absolute, in respect of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, but relative, and to
(...) and pass on to Christ, then the Doctor may please to address his
abovesaid argument to them, in his own terms, and say; One would think that
they (that is, all conformable Protestants kneeling at the Eucharist) meant the
Cultus Latriae to the Figure, or symbolical presence, they using the word (or
at lest the sense of) (...), as if that worship which is done to the figure or
symbolical presence passed through to Christ himself, which could not be
suitable to him, unless it were divine worship. Let him, I say, turn this
Argument against his own Brethren; and I leave it to him and them to debate the
Point. His next pretense is to prove positively by the testimony of Photius,
that this Council gives the worship of Latria, to the Image of Christ; and such
a kind of worship to the Images of the Virgin Mary, and the rest of the Saints,
as that while we adhere to their Images or Statues, we are declared to be made
fit for, and to be vouchsafed a tactual union with God Himself. This done, he
insultingly tapers up, and tours himself over us, with a double interrogatory.
Can any thing, says he, more inflame the Souls of Men with that mystical lust
after Idols, then the doctrine of this Nicene Synod? What Philtrum more
effectual to raise up that Idolomania, that being mad and lovesick after
images and idols, then this? Thus the high-flown Doctor walks in wonders above
himself. But why all this lavish of a passionate Rhetorique? The Doctor had
played his Master-prize if he had given us all this rabble in the Councils own
words. But instead of that, he feeds upon reversions at second hand, takes his
quotations from Photius (a Person of as much credit, as himself) and makes
Photius the Paraphrast and Interpreter of the Councils meaning. But what if the
Council say no such thing? Nay, what if the Council deliver the quite contrary
doctrine? How blank then will the Doctor's charge look, upon the discovery of
such disingenuity? And truly had the Doctor but taken so much as a cursory
survey of Catholic Authors on this Subject, he might have found them
frequently and truly quoting this very Council, act. 7. to prove that the Image
of Christ is not to be honored with the worship of Latria: but that such
honor and reverence is due to images in general, as is to the Books of the
Gospel, and the holy Utensils of the Altar. Now therefore whereas the Doctor
was pleased to ask; What Philtrum more effectual to raise up that Idolomania,
that being mad and lovesick after images, then this? We shall give him leave
to take to himself this Idolomania and lovesick humor after the images of his
own fond conceptions, and the idol of his own fancy: for therein, and in
nothing else consists the main of his charge against us.

Next follows the Ninth Chapter, the Title whereof looks big, and speaks thus.
The meaning of the doctrine of the Council of Trent, touching the worshipping
of images more determinately illustrated, from the general practice of the
Roman Church, and suffrage of their Popes, whereby it is deprehended to be still
more coursely and Paganically idolatrous. It cannot be denied, but here is a
fair flourish of words. But the question is; Quid dignum tanto tulit hic
promissor hiatii? Mark the words; (from the general practice of the Roman
Church.) And yet instead of the said general practice of the Roman Church, He
begins with the particular and generally rejected speculation of Saint Thomas
and Saint Bonaventure, both of them declaring (as the Doctor words it) that the
Image of Christ is to be worshipped with the worship of Latria. Good Doctor,
there is a great difference between is, and may be. The one implies an
obligation, the other a bare permission: and you produce no proof of any such
obligation asserted by these holy Doctors; each of which was too much a Divine
to be ignorant what Idolatry is, and too much a Christian to commit it. Now
indeed that the Image of Christ may be worshipped with the worship of Latria
(though expressly contrary to the doctrine of the Second Council of Nice) is the
commonly supposed Opinion of Saint Thomas, and Saint Bonaventure. Who, as they
never mention, so in all likelihood they never saw the said Council, nor the
eighth General Synod, both of which lay concealed from the World a long time,
and we owe the publishing of them, only to the later and more inquisitive
discoveries of the precedent Age. It is hard to say what was the meaning of
these two Doctors: for when they come to unfold their assertion, they wind
about, and enter into such nice distinctions, as requires a long acquaintance
with, and deep insight into the Schools, only to understand, much more to foil,
and confute them. Wherein Dr. More might very much oblige the World, if he
pleased to engage upon such a task, as a noble essay of his speculative faculty.

After Saint Thomas, and Saint Bonaventure, comes in Azorius the Jesuit, he
also affirming (as the Doctor pretends) that it is the constant Opinion of the
Theologers, (so the Doctor calls them) that the image is to be honored and
worshipped with the same honor and worship, that he is, whose Image it is.
Which (says the Doctor) is not unlike that of the Council of Nice, (...), in
the foregoing citation. Here is a proofless accusation, which the learned call
a calumny, whereby Azorius is made the Author of a great untruth, without any
the least allegation to evidence the charge. As to the Tenet, which the Doctor
speaks of, it is far from being the constant Opinion of our Theologers; whereas
it is now generally rejected by them, unless limited by that restriction and
qualifying distinction of (...), which the Doctor either forgot, or purposely
omitted, in his long translation out of Photius, in the last Chapter, though it
was the only material word in the whole citation: For diverse indeed (taking
this restriction along with them) teach that the Image may be honored and
worshipped with the same honor and worship with the Prototype; not univocally
but analogically, as the Schools speak; which comes to a mere verbal contest,
and in reality imports a much inferior kind of honor done to the Image, than
what is due to him in his own Person, whose Image it is. I shall briefly open
the distiction. As a Man and a Lion differ specifically: so a painted Man, and
a painted Lion differ no less. Whence it is, that the painted Man is reduced
analogically to the species of Man, and not to that of a Lion: no more than the
painted Lion, to the species of Man, so that a Man, and a painted Man are
(though not univocally) yet analogically the same. Now, says our Doctors, look
what proportion the painted Man holds with the Man himself; the like comparison
is to be made between the honor exhibited to the painted Man, and the Man
himself, or to the Picture, and the Prototype. And therefore as the Man, and
the painted Man, are analogically the same: So the honor done to the painted
Man, and the Man himself, or to the Picture and the Prototype, are (not
univocally but) analogically the same. Thus do Gabriel, and some others
interpret Saint Thomas, and Saint Bonaventure. If the Doctor understand the
distinction, and like it not, he has his Christian liberty to impugn it. If
he understand it not, he may do well to lay down the Cudgels, and leave these
great Divines to themselves and their speculations, and not to obtrude their
Schoolniceties upon us, as part of our Churches Faith, or practice; whereas he
himself acknowledges in the beginning of this Chapter, that the Council of
Trent never mentions any such worship of Latria due to the Image of Christ. And
two General Councils, the Seventh and Eighth, Council. 7m. actio. 7. Conc. 8m.
actio. ult. can. 3.
declare definitively for the contrary to what the Doctor pretends: For,
speaking of the Veneration which is to be given to Images, they compare it only
with that reverence which is due to the Books of the Gospel, and the Utensils
of the Altar. Which are both of them to be honored with due Veneration; the
one, as signifying holy things; the other, as consecrated to holy uses; both
which considerations jointly concur in the images of Christ and his Saints.

Secondly, The Doctor pretends, That the Consecration and Worship of Images
makes them perfectly as the Idol-gods of the Heathen, as Octavius jearingly
speaks of the Heathen-gods, in Minucius felix: ecce funditur, fabricatur,
scalpitur, nondum est Deus. -- Ecce ornatur, consecratur, oratur, tunc postremo
Deus est. Behold it is clothed, or adorned, it is consecrated and prayed unto,
then at length it becomes a god. And if this will do it, the Church of Rome's
Images will prove as good Idol gods, as any of them all. Here is a calumny
indeed of the first magnitude, most uncharitably implying that the Roman Church
prays to Images, as the Heathens did to their Idol-gods. The best excuse for so
foul a charge is the palpable grossness of it, whereby it may possibly be
hoped, that no Person, that is but one remove from a fool, can either believe
the Doctor, or think that he believes himself.

Thirdly, He inveighs against two particular forms of consecrating Pictures,
which he does not profess to have seen himself. But, says he, Chemnitius
recites them out of the Pontifical he had read. Here is a third proofless
accusation, called a Calumny: For Chemnitius his word is no proof with us, who
is a known Sinon, a Person of that tried integrity, as that he who never trusts
him, shall be sure never to be deceived by him.

Fourthly, He brings a form of consecration of Images, out of the Roman
Rituall: Grant, O God, that whosoever before this Image shall diligently and
humbly upon his Knees worship, and honor thy only begotten Son, or the Blessed
Virgin, or this glorious Apostle or Martyr, Confessor, or Virgin, etc. That he
may obtain, by his, or her merits and intercession, grace in this present life,
and eternal glory hereafter. Upon this Prayer, the Doctor descants after this
manner. So that, says he, The Virgin and other Saints are fellow-distributers
of grace and glory with Christ himself to their Supplicants before their
Images; and that upon their own merits; and for the service done to them in
kneeling and pouring out their Prayers before their statues or symbolical
presence. Thus far is the Doctor's charge who might have done well to have lent
us his Optics, or else to have set down in Capital Letters that sentence,
word, or single syllable in the aforesaid Prayer (which yet differs from that
in the Roman Rituall) whereby he pretends to infer his triple consequence. For,
there is no such expression in the whole Prayer, as Grant O Virgin; or Grant O
Saint: but, Grant O God. How then do we here make the Virgin and other Saints
fellow-distributers of grace and glory with Christ himself? Much less do we
make them fellow-distributers of grace and glory with Christ, upon their own
merits, who have no merits of their own, but such as flow from, and have their
absolute dependence of the merits of Christ. And lest of all are they here made
fellow-distributers of grace, for the service done to them in kneeling and
praying before their statues; there being no such causall as that (for)
specified at all in the Prayer.

Fifthly, His weak Eyesight cannot endure the light of Wax-candles, no more
than his head the smoke of incense burning before the images of Saints; both
which he pretends to be idolatrous. This he confidently affirms, but never
offers to prove, and thereby proves himself guilty of a Fifth Calumny. As for
Temples and Altars, I have already told him we erect Temples and Altars to God
alone, reserving only a secondary honor or remembrance for the Saints. I shall
not foul my Paper with taking notice of such unseemly brothel-language, as
fills up his next Page. It is enough to say, it is more than becomes a modest
Doctor.

Sixthly, He touches at some more gross extravagancies, which, says he, Though
they have connived at, yet they would be loath to own upon public authority:
such as the making images to sweat, their eyes to move, the making them to
smile, to loure, look sad, to feel heavy or light, and the like. The Doctor's
Book would give me the lie, if I should term this any thing less than a
Calumny, for he brings not so much as any one single instance to back his
accusation, charging our Church with connivance at such unchristian impostures
which have ever been the object of her sharpest censures, and most exemplar
severities whenever detected.

Lastly, He quotes a Rhyme to the face of Christ, called the Veronica. But
because this was no part of any Ecclesiastical Office, for which the Church
might be justly thought responsible, he tears a piece of a Hymn out of the
Breviary, which he presents under the Title of a blind devotion. O crux, ave
spes unica, hoc passionis tempore; auge piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam.
Then he runs division upon this Text, in this sort. This, says he, must sound
very wildly and extravagantly to any sensible Ear. And yet the invoking any
Saint before his image, for aid and succor (the image bearing the name and
representation of the Saint) with eyes and hands lift up to it, is as arrant
talking with a senseless stock, or a stone, as this, and as gross a piece of
Idolatry. If you had but added one clause more Mr. Doctor, which is every whit
as well grounded as your own, you had done your deed, and changed your calumny
against us into blasphemy against God: for, as you say, The invoking any Saint
before his Image for aid and succor, (the Image bearing the name and
representation of the Saint) with eyes and hands lift up to it, is as arrant
talking with a senseless stock or stone, as this: So might you have added with
no less color of truth; That invoking Almighty God before the Ark of the
Covenant, (the Ark being but a figure or symbolical presence, and of Wood, and
had in it the Rod of Aaron, and the Tables of the Covenant) with eyes and hands
lift up to it, was as arrant talking with a senseless stock or stone, as this
which you object against the Worship of Images. As for the Churches Hymn, O
crux ave spes unica; I recommend to the Doctor this following Text of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish,
foolishness, but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God. Where the
Cross is figuratively taken for the Person crucified, which is Christ the Power
of God, expressly so called, v. 24. of the same Chapter. Wherefore as those, who
preach the Cross, may by an easy trope be said to Preach Christ crucified: So,
allow but charity for Interpreter, and those who speak to the cross, may
without scruple be supposed to speak figuratively to Christ crucified. So that
the same interpretation which clears the Apostle, will absolve the Church; and
her apostrophe to Christ crucified (under the Title of the Cross) shall pass
for canonical, as long as this, and such like Texts, shall continue in being,
to pattern and patronize the expression. And therefore I end with this parallel
of the Apostle's Text; that as the preaching of the Cross, (so an address to
the Cross) is to them that perish, foolishness; but to us it is the power of
God, and wisdom of God.

The Last Section.
Concluding with an Answer to the Doctor's last Chapter.
THe Doctor concludes his Treatise with a hearty and vehement Exhortation to
all Men, that have any serious regard to their salvation, to beware how they be
drawn into the communion of the Church of Rome. So that this Chapter may be
fitly entitled, Doctor Taylour Revived; or a second Dissuasive from Popery. But
after a different Method: for Doctor Taylour is a Person of a more refined and
plausible insinuation: a smooth tongue and oily expression, cloaking his many
and great disingenuities, with fair glozing words, and an affectate strain of
Scripture Phrase, pretending to the power of godliness. But Dr. More is a
Polemical man of a quite different temper. His fiery zeal wears no mask: His
disputing is open railing; and his Arguments blustering words; not always too
much concerned whether true or false. Witness the Contents of this Chapter;
whereof I shall give my Reader a brief Extract, drawn up in form of a Homily,
yet in the Doctor's own words, and charitable Dialect. Thus then begins the
Dissuasive.

Dearly beloved; It is demonstrated as clear as noon-light in this present
discourse, that the Church of Rome are Idolaters. And therefore come out of her
my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her
plagues. Be not deceived, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 9. neither Fornicators,
nor Idolaters shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And those of the Church of Rome
are bound to continue Idolaters, as long as they live, or else to renounce
their Church; and therefore they are bound to be damned, by adhearing to the
Roman Church, unless they could live in it for ever. But because some
Protestants have declared for the possibility of salvation in the Romish
Church, this piece of charity, in some of our party, they turn to the fencing
off all imputation of idolatry from themselves, arguing thus: That no Idolaters
can be saved: but those in the Romish Church may be saved, according to those
Protestants Opinion^; therefore those in the Romish Church are no Idolaters.
But most assuredly in that some of our Church do say they may be saved, upon a
sincere and hearty implicit repentance of all their sins, (wherein they include
the idolatries and all other miscarriages, which they knew not themselves
guilty of, by reason of the blind misinstructions of their Church) no more is
given them by this, then thus; viz. That they are saved by disowning of, and
dismembring themselves from the Roman Church, as much as it is in their power
so to do, and by bitterly repenting them that they were ever of that Church, as
such; and by being so minded, that if they did know what a corrupt Church it
is, they would forthwith separate from it. -- In which position, if there were
any truth, it will reach the honest-minded Pagans as well. I conclude therefore
with the Spirit of truth in the divine Oracles, declaring the Sea of Rome the
seat Apoc. 2. 13.
of Satan, and their Church Apoc. 3. 9.
his Synagogue; The Pope and his Clergy Apoc. 2. 13, 14.
to be Balaam the Son of Bozor, who loved the wages of Unrighteousness, and who
was the murderer of Christ's faithful Martyr Antipas; To be Apoc. 2. 20.
that Woman Jezabel, who calls her self a Prophetess, but was indeed a
Sorceress, and a murderer of the true Prophets of the Lord. To be also that
false Prophet Apoc. 9. 20.
that is to be taken alive, and cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone. To be
that great City, that spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, Apoc. 11. 8
where our Lord was crucified. To be the Beast that has the Horns of a Lamb
Apoc. 13. 11.
but the voice of a Dragon, decreeing Idolatries and cruel Persecutions against
God's People. To be that Babylon the great Apoc. 17.
the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth. This is mellifluous Dr.
More's sweet harangue, with a long-winded, etc. too tedious to be inserted
here. Now I would gladly know what there is in all this discourse, which an
ingenuous Son of the Church of England will not be heartily ashamed of, and
even blush for the Doctor's sake. Here is, I confess, stout railing,
disingenuity more than is necessary for a Doctor, and an ill-grounded and
schismatical discourse, Mr. Thorndike in his just Weights, and Measures.
even admitting a Protestant Doctor for Umpire in the case. As for our Doctor's
dexterity in the learned Science of railing, I envy it not; nor has the Church
of England any great reason to glory in it: For she may remember but too well,
that in the black days of the late apostasy, when loyalty lay a gasping, and
Religious Rebellion first took possession of the Pulpit, she felt the smart of
this language her self, whilst he was looked upon as the best Man, and the
greatest Servant of the Lord, who knew how to Curse Meroz the loudest; And
there are not wanting in this Nation, those who can find a Rome in England, to
make Meroz of it when they please.

But his great disingenuity, in averring so peremptorily that no Protestants
allow us a possibility of Salvation, but only in case of such a repentance, as
implies an absolute renunciation of our Religion, and its idolatrous doctrines
and practices, by disowning of, and dismembring our selves from the Roman
Church; this I say, will scarce appear pardonable in the eyes of his
Fellow-Doctors: For, First, Archbishop Lawd in his Famed Relation, 35.
expressly grants us this Possibility of Salvation; and to clear himself, and
show that he is not alone, he cites Bishop Abbot, Hall, Hooker, Field, and
others, as concurring with him in the same Opinion; and this without any such
renunciation of our Religion, as the Doctor pretends; or disowning and
dismembring our selves from the Roman Church. I cannot pass by Mr. Hooker's
remarkable expression upon this Subject, in his discourse of Justification, 17.
For my part, says he, I dare not deny the possibility of their salvation, who
have been the chiefest instruments of ours. Secondly, Besides the Archbishop,
and the above mentioned Doctors, Dr. Potter. Dr. Hammond, and others glory much
of the charitable Principles of the Church of England, and object want of
charity to us, for maintaining, that Protestancy unrepented destroys Salvation.
Now if the Objectors should retaliate, and say that Popery unrepented destroys
Salvation, I would willingly be instructed by Dr. More wherein lies the
charity* and moderation they boast of. Thirdly, Nothing is more current amongst
them, when they are pressed with the crime of Schism, then to return the charge
upon us, from other grounds: Saying, that as the Donatists and Luciferians
were, so we are Schismatiques, in cutting off from the Body of Christ, and the
Hope of Salvation, other Churches from which we are divided in Communion.
Whence is evidently inferred, that those who make this Objection, cannot cut us
off from the hope of Salvation, unless they mean to evacuate the force of their
own proof, and fall into the Pit, which they had dug for their Neighbors.
Lastly, Whereas Dr. More makes the pretended Idolatries of the Church of Rome
the ground of his dissuasive from Popery: That this Method of arguing is
absolutely schismatical (even allowing the case to be balanced in Dr.
Thorndike's Just Weights, and ruled according to his Measures) Dr. More may
find abundant satisfaction in the first Chapter of the abovesaid Treatise.

But, in regard I have mentioned so eminent a Person, and Member of the Church
of England, as Dr. Thorndike, I shall make bold to turn him into the l^sts,
against Dr. More. The antithesis of their doctrines is very remarkable; for
they run diametrically opposite one to another. Dr. More affirms the Worship of
the Host in the Papacy to be Idolatry. Dr. Thorndike (chapter 19.) denies the
Worship of the Host in the Papacy to be Idolatry. Dr. More holds that the
placing and reverencing Images i^ Churches, is Idolatry. Dr. Thorndike (chapter
19.) holds that the placing and reverencing Images in Churches, is not
Idolatry. Dr. More will have Invocation of Saints to be inexcusable Idolatry.
Dr. Thorndike (chapter 16.) excuses Invocation of Saints from Idolatry. Lastly, Dr.
More exhorts all Men to separate from the Church of Rome, as Idolaters. But Dr.
Thorndike (chap. 1.) avows to all the World, that those who separate from the
Church of Rome, as Idolaters, are thereby schismatiques before God. When the
two Doctors are fully agreed upon these Points, Dr. More shall hear more from
me, if he desires it. In the mean time* I shall entre^t him to respit my Pen
for some other Employment.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 10. for where read There. page 9. l. ult. for tare r. bare. p.
14. l. 5. f genu. r. gent. p. 17. l. 1. f. scarce, r. scarce. p. 32. l. 9. f.
speaks, r. speakers.


