Happy News from SHERBORN, AND Sherborne Castle: RELATING, THE death of
Colonel Lunsford, the Lord Paulet, and diverse other persons of quality, the
taking of diverse prisoners, and great store of Arms from the CAVALIERS.

Written in a Letter from DORCHESTER to Master Nicholas Skinner a Merchant of
LONDON, declaring the happy success of the Parliaments Forces, against the
Cavaliers betwixt Sherborne and Yeavell.

ALSO, A true Copy of the last Petition, sent by both Houses of PARLIAMENT to
His MAJESTY.

London Printed for F. Cowles. September. 13. 1642.

A Letter written from a Merchant in DORGHESTER to M. Nicholas Skinner a
Merchant of LONDON, declaring the happy success of the Parliaments Forces, in
defeating diverse of the Caveliers near SHERBORNE.
SIR
HEre in the Country we dare not send seven miles abroad, for fear of the
Cavaliers, who lie at Sherborne, pillaging, robbing and killing like so many
Sons of Hell; but they were met withal this week to the purpose, by some
London Troupers, and our Dorchester Troopers.

My L. of Bedford finding the Castle to be a piece of greater strength than he
imagined, and seeing his trained Bands to forsake him; so that of six or seven
thousand he had not above fifteen hundred in three d^yes, not that they
deserted the Cause, but being men who had Wives and Estates, were loath to
hazard their lives in an offensive war. My Lord resolved to raise the siege,
and on Tuesday marched to Yeavell, four miles distant from Sherborne. There
were lost seven or eight men of a side at the siege, as we hear, I am sure no
more on our side. On Wednesday toward Evening, while my LORD of Bedford and the
soldiers were at a Sermon in Yeavell, at the Funeral of some soldiers lately
killed; The Sherborne Lords and Cavaliers, having that day received to their
number a hundred horse and two hundred foot, from M. Rogers, one of our Shire
Knights, insolently triumphing at the departure of my Lord of Bedfords Forces,
and contemning the Parliament, came in a bravado, and pitched themselves in
battellarray with 400 horse, and two hundred Musketeers in ambush on the top
of the Hill, betwixt Yeavell and Sherborne midway: Which the London Troopers
hearing of, two Troops of theirs, and our Dorchester Troop made ready to
assault the Enemy, the other Troops abiding at the ends of the Town of
Yeavell, fearing the Cavaliers would surprise the Town. Our men had about a
hundred Musketeers, and a hundred and forty horse, and marched up the Hill
while Bullets flew as thick as hail about their ears, assaulted the
Cavaliers, and came in to swords point, slashing and cutting without any pity
or mercy, the great Rebels, respecting no person, but the night came on, else
they had killed and taken every man. God cast upon the Cavaliers a spirit of
fearfulness, that they ran like Mice into every hole. The Musketeers threw
down their Arms and fled, so that our men brought above a hundred of their
Muskets into Yeavell, took about twenty men, amongst which were some chief
Commanders, killed many, amongst whom Colonel Lunsford and the Lord Paulet are
certainly slain.

The next morning there was found twenty eight dead bodies of the enemies lying
upon the ground, besides those which were carried away in the night, there were
Lanthornes and Candles searching for dead bodies all the night, most of the
Cavaliers running away (for so they did) they cried out to our men, hold your
hands, you have shed already much noble blood. Of our side were slain five
men, etc. two or three taken prisoners, and diverse lightly wounded, The
Cavaliers were heard to say at their coming home, (as some of our neighbors
which were present heard them say) they had lost half their men, of two
hundred Musketeers there returned but eighteen to the Castle that night; thus
in brief I have related to you the truth, praised be to God for the Victory,
So farewell.

Your loving friend, I. W.
Dorchester September. 9. 1642.
To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
The humble Answer and Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in
PARLIAMENT, unto the Kings last Message, bearing date the fifth of September.
May it please your Majesty,
IF We the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, should repeat all the
ways we have taken, the endeavors we have used, and the Expressions we have
made unto your Majesty, to prevent those distractions and dangers your Majesty
speaks of, likely to fall upon this Kingdom, we should too much enlarge this
reply; therefore as we humbly, so shall we only let your Majesty know, that we
cannot receade from our former answer for the reasons there expressed, for that
you have not taken down your Standard, recalled your Proclamations and
Declarations, whereby you have declared the actions of both Houses of
Parliament to be treasonable, and their Persons traitors, and you have
published this same since the 25. of August, by your late instructions sent to
your Commissioners of Array, which Standard being taken down, and the
Declarations, Proclamations, and instructions recalled, if your Majesty shall
then upon this our humble Petition leaving your Forces, return unto your
Parliament, and receive their faithful advice, your Majesty will find such
expressions of our fidelity and duties, as shall assure you that your safety,
honor, and greatness can only be found in the affections of your people, and
the sincere Counsel of your Parliament, whose constant and discouraged
endeavors and consultations have passed through difficulties unheard of, only
to secure your Kingdoms from the violent mischiefs and dangers now ready to
fall upon them, and every part of them who deserve better of your Majesty, and
can never allow themselves (representing likewise your whole Kingdom) to be
balanced with those persons whose desperate conditions and counsels prevail
still so to interrupt all our endeavors for the relieving of bleeding Ireland,
as we may fear our labors and vaste expenses will be fruitless to that
distressed Kingdom, as your presence is thus desired by us, so it is our hopes
your Majesty will in your reason believe there is no other way then this, to
make your self happy, and your Kingdom safe.

John Brown Cleric. Parliament.


