The Bloody Project, Or a discovery of the New Design, in the present War.

BEING A perfect Narrative of the present proceedings of the several Grandee
Factions, for the prevention of a just Peace, and promoting of a causeless
War, to the destruction of THE KING, PARLIAMENT and PEOPLE.

Whereunto is annexed Several Expedients for an happy Accommodation tending to
the satisfaction of all Parties, without the further effusion of blood.

By W. P. Gent.

Printed in this Year of dissembling, 1648.

The Bloody Project. OR New design in the present War discovered.
IN all undertakings, which may occasion war or bloodshed, men have great need
to be sure that their cause be right, both in respect of themselves and others:
for if they kill men themselves, or cause others to kill, without a just cause,
and upon the extremest necessity, they not only disturb the peace of men, and
familyes, and bring misery and poverty upon a Nation, but are indeed absolute
murderers.

Nor will it in any measure satisfy the Conscience, or Gods justice, to go on
in uncertainties, for in doubtful cases men ought to stand still, and
consider, until certainty do appear, especially when killing and sleying of
men (the most horrid work to Nature and Scripture) is in question.

Far be it from any man hastily to engage in any undertaking, which may
occasion a War, before the cause he is to fight for, be rightly, and plainly
stated, well considered, and thoroughly understood to be just, and of absolute
necessity to be maintained; nothing being more abom^nable in the sight of God
or good men, then such persons who run^e out to shed blood for money, or to
support this or the other Interest, but neither consider the cause for which
they engage, nor ought el^e, but pay, interest, honor, etc. such are they who
so eagerly endeavor to support the interest of a King* by the destruction of
the Peoples Interest, the Interest of the Scots against the Interest of the
English, the Interest of the Independents, by the ruin of the Presbyterians*
and because it best consists with their present honor, profit or humors, make
it their business to pick quarrels, and increase divisions and jealousies, that
so they may fish in the waters which they themselves have troubled.

But let such know, who ever they be, that though they may and do for a while
brave it out, and flourish, yet a time is coming, and draws on apace, when
for all the murders they have caused, and mischiefs they have committed, they
shall come to judgment, and then their Consciences will be as a thousand
witnesses against them.

But especially let men pretending conscience take heed how they either engage
themselves, or persuade others to engage to fight and kill men, for a cause not
rightly stated, or not thoroughly understood to be just, and of necessity to be
maintained; for it is one of the most unreasonable, unchristian, and unnatural
things that can enter into the mind or man, though it be to be feared that more
then a few that have of late both in the City and Country, (and at present)
are active to engage in killing and sleying of men) cannot acquit themselves of
this abomination.

I beseech you, (you that are so forward and active to engage in the defense of
the Kings, Presbyterian, or Independent interest, and yet know no just cause
for either) consider, was it sufficient that the King at first invited you in
general terms to join with him, for the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, his own just Prerogatives, the Privileages of Parliament, and the
Liberty of the Subject; but never declared in particular what that Protestant
Religion was he would have defended, or what Prerogative would please him, what
privileges he would allow the Parliament, or what Freedoms the People?

Or was it sufficient think you now, that the Parliament invited you at first
upon general terms, to fight for the maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion, the Libertyes of the People, and Privileges of Parliament; when
neither themselves knew, for ought is yet seen, nor you, nor any body else,
what they meant by the true Protestant Religion, or what the Liberties of the
People were, or what those Privileges of Parliament were, for which yet
nevertheless thousands of men have been slain, and thousands of Familyes
destroyed?

It is very like that some of you that joined with the King upon his
invitation, thought, that though the King had formerly countenanced Popery, and
Superstition,, had stretched his Prerogative to the oppression and destruction
of his People, by Pattents, Projects, etc. yet for the future he would have
been more zealous for the truth, and more tender of his People, and not have
persisted (notwithstanding his new Protestations) to maintain his old
Principles.

And so likewise many of you that joined with the Parliament, who had formerly
seen, felt, or considered the persecution of godly conscientious people by the
Bishops and their Clergy, with the reproaches cast upon them, and their
grievous and destructive imprisonment, did believe the Parliament under the
notion of Religion, intended to free the Nation from all compulsion in matters
of Religion, and from molestation, or persecution for opinions, or
nonconformity; and that all Laws or Statutes tending thereunto should have
been repealed: But since you find (by killing and destroying their opposers)
you have enbled them to perform all things that might concern your freedom,
or be conducible to the peace of the Kingdom. But do you now find that they do
mean that, or the contrary? And will your consciences give you leave any longer
to fight or engage in the cause of Religion, when already you see what fruits
you and your friends reap thereby.

And no doubt many of you understood by the Liberties of the People, that they
intended to free the Commons in Parliament the peoples Representative, ftom a
Negative voice, in King, or Lords, and would have declared themselves the
highest Authority, and so would have proceeded to have removed the grievances
of the Commonwealth: And when you had seen Pattents, Projects, and Shipmoney
taken away, the High Commission, and Starchamber abolished, did you ever
imagine to have seen men and women examined upon Interrogatories, and questions
against themselves, and imprisoned for refusing to answer? Or to have seen
Commoners frequently sentenced and imprisoned by the Lords? Did you ever dream
that the oppressions of Committees would have exceeded those of the
Councel-table; or that in the place of Pattents and Projects, you should have
seen an Excise established, ten fold surpassing all those, and Shipmoney
together? You thought rather that Tithes would have been esteemed an
oppression, and that Trade would have been made perfectly free, and that
Customs if continued, would have been abated, and not raised, for the support
of domineering factions, and enrichment of four or five great men, as they
have been of late times, to the sorrow and astonishment of all honest men, and
the great prejudice of the Trade of the Nation.

Doubtless you hoped that both Laws and Lawyers, and the proceeding in all
Courts should have been abreviated, and corrected, and that you should never
more have seen a Beggar in England.

You have seen the Commonwealth enslaved for want of Parliaments, and also by
their sudden dissolution, and you rejoiced that this Parliament was not to be
dissolved by the King; but did you conceive it would have sat seavn years to
so little purpose, or that it should ever have come to pass, to be esteemed a
crime to move for the ending thereof? Was the perpetuating of this Parliament,
and the oppressions they have brought upon you and yours, a part of that
Liberty of the People you fought for? Or was it for such a Privilege of
Parliament, that they only might have liberty to oppress at their pleasure,
without any hope of remedy? If all these put together make not up the cause for
which you fought, what was the Cause? What have ye obtained to the People, but
these Libertyes, for they must not be called oppressions? These are the fruits
of all those vast disburstments, and those thousands of lives that have been
spent and destroyed in the late War.

And though the Army seemed to be sensible of these gross juglings, and
declared, and engaged against them, and professed that they took not pains as
a mercenary Army, hired to fight for the Arbitrary ends of a State, but in
judgment and conscience, for the preservation of their own, and the Peoples
just Rights and Libertyes: Yet when they had prevailed against those their
particular opposers, and accomplished the ends by them aimed at, all these
things were forgotten, and those persons that appeared for the Peoples
Freedoms, by them esteemed and proceeded against as Mutineers, or Incendiaries.

In like manner, the present Ruling Party of Presbyterians make a great show of
their apprehensions of the great slavery and servitude brought upon the People,
by the exercise or an Arbitrary power in the Parliament, and by the
jurisdiction of the Sword in the hands of the Army: They tell us that by this
means the Trade of the Nation is destroyed, and that without the removal of
these things, the peace of the Nation cannot be secured: And it is exceeding
true: But I beseech you consider, whether they do not revive the same Play, and
drive the same Design, which was acted by the Parliament at first, and by the
Army the last-Summer.

First, they cry out against the exercise of an arbitrary power in the
Parliament, and yet labor to invest it in the King, nay challenge the exercise
of it by themselves: for what greater arbitrary power can there be in the
world, then that a Priest or two, and a few Lay Elders, under the name of a
Presbytery, should have power to bind or loose, bring in, or cast out, save or
destroy at their pleasure, and enforce all persons within the limits of their
jurisdiction, to believe as they believe, and submit to whatever they command,
or else to be by them delivered over to Satan.

Nay if you look into those of that party of the Magistracy of this City, that
are the great promoters of the present work: do there any men in the wo^ld
exercise a more arbitrary power? Do not many of them act only by the Rule of
will and pleasure, and have they not openly prosessed themselves to be obliged
to observe no other Rule then Discretion.

And though they decry agaitst the power of the Sword in the hands of the
Independents, yet do they not with all their might, labor to get it into the
hands of the Presbyterians? and being there, will they not do that themselves,
which they complain of in others? will they not say that there are gainsayers
whose mouths must be stopped, and with the Sword rather then fail, and though
Royal sts or Independents may not use the Sword to enforce their Principles,
yet Presbyterians may, as if all knowledge of the truth were centred in a
Presbytery, consisting of half Scotch, half English, part Puritan, part
Cavalier, lukewarm christianity, neither hot nor cold zealous for the truth
which they know not, only by hearsay, and only because they love not
Jndependency, that being to pure, nor Episcopacy, that being too profane, they
will be between both, (but not in a golden Mean, for that were well) but more
zealons then either in outward performances, but for the power of godliness. --
I cease to judge, but we say we may know the tree by the fruit, and certain I
am that Thistles never bore Figgs.

But if you shall examine what grounds of freedom they propose in all their
Papers; what equal Rules of justice they offer to be insisted on as a sure
foundation for a lasting peace? Surely if you look bur seriously into the
bottom of their design, you will find that the peace they aim at is only their
own; not the Nations, and that their own ease, honor and dominion, is the only
thing they pursue, and so they could enjoy ease and plenty and stretch
themselves upon Beds of Down, they would never care what the poor Country
should suffer.

To be short, all the quarrel we have at this day in the Kingdom, is no other
then a quarrel of Interests, and Parties, a pulling down of one Tyrant, to set
up another, and in stead of Liberty, heaping upon our selves a greater slavery
then that we fought against: certainly this is the Liberty that is so much
strove for, and for which there are such fresh endeavors to engage men; but if
you have not killed and destroyed men enough for this, go on and destroy, kill
and sley, till your consciences are swollen so full with the blood of the People,
that they burstagen, and upon your deathbeds may you see your selves the most
horrid Murderers that ever lived, since the time that Cain killed his brother
without a just Cause; for where, or what is your cause? Believe it ye have a
heavy reeckoning to make, and must undergo a sad repentance, or it will go ill
with you at the great day, when all the sophistry of your great Reformers will
serve you to little purpose, every man for himself being to give an account
for the things which he has done in the body, whether they be good or evil:
Then it will serve you to little purpose to say, the King, Parliament, Army,
Independents, Presbyterians, such an Officer, Magistrate, or Minister deluded
me* no more then it did Adam, to say the woman whom thou gave, etc. It being
thus decreed in heaven, the soul which sins shall surely dye.

And though what is past cannot be recalled, yet it must be repented of, and
special care taken for the future, that you sin no more in in this kind, and
either stand still or go right for the Future, to which end let these following
directions be your guide.

1. You are to know, that a People living under a Government, as this Nation
has done, and does, cannot lawfully put themselves, into Arms, or engage in
War to kill and sley men, but upon a lawful call and invitation from the
Supreme Authority, or Law-making power.

Now if the Supreme Authority of this Nation were never yet so plainly
declared, as that you understand certainly where it is, and who are invested
therewith, you have then had no Warrant for what you have done, nor have any
Plea in Law for your Indemnity, as some of all Parties have lately found to
their costs*

And that this point of Supreme Authority was ever certainly stated, is
absolutely denied; for according to the common supposition, it is 3. Estates,
which till within these few years were ever taken to b^ 1. Lords Spiritual.
2. Lords Temporal. 3. The Commons in Parliament assembled.

Now if these three were essential and equal, as all former Times seem to
allow; How could the Lords Temporal and the Commons, cast out the Lords
Spiritual? For by the same rule, the Lords Spiritual, and Lords Temporal,
might have cast out the Commons, but the casting out the Bishops has both
answered the question, and ended the controversy.

Since when the supreme Authority is pretended to rest in the King, Lords and
Commons; and if so, when did the King assent to your Proceedings in this War,
which all the art in the world will not persuade him to be for him, but against
him, and to ruin him and his? Or when did the Parliament assent to the
proceedings of you that joined with the King in the late war pretendedly raised
for the defense of Religion, the privileges of Parliament, and Liberty of the
Subject; and if the supreme power reside in all three, King, Lords and Commons,
how can the King justly do any thing without the consent of the Lords and
Commons, or the Lords and Commons without the King? May not the King and Lords
as justly proceed to make Laws, War or Peace, without the Commons as they
without the King? If they are not equal, which of them are supreme, and
declared and proved by convincing reason so to be? If any that you are to
observe? If none, what have you done? what can you lawfully do?

That there should be either three or two distinct Estates equally supreme is
an absurd nullity in government, for admit two of them agree, and not the
third, then there can be no proceedings or determination, and if there be but
two, as is now pretended, in Lords and Commons, whose Ordinances have served
(how justly judge you) to make War and confiscate men's estates: admit they
agree not, then also nothing can be done, which in Government is ridiculous to
imagine, besides it is now a known case that their Ordinances are not pleadable
against the Laws, and give no Indemnity, which were they the known supreme
Authority, could not but be effectual. That the King single and alone is the
supreme Authority himself never pretended to it, claiming only a negative voice
in the Law-making Power, by which rule nothing can be done without him, then
which nothing is more unreasonable: The Lords also never pretended to more then
an equal share with the Commons, which in effect is a negative voice and as
unreasonable as in the King: And when the Commons have been by Petitioners
styled the supreme authority, they have punished the Petitioners, and
disclaimed the supreme Authority: and as two years since, so very lately they
have voted that the Kingdom shall be governed by King, Lords and Commons; which
is a riddle that no man understands; for who knows what appertains to the
King, what to the Lords, or what to the House of Commons? It is all out as
uncertain as at first; and if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself for the battle? If by all your endeavors you cannot prevail to
have the supreme Authority declared and proved, how can you lawfully fight, or
upon what grounds with a good conscience can you engage your selves or persuade
others to engage in killing and slaying of men?

And if you should have the supreme Authority rationally proved and declared to
be in the Commons distinct from any other, as being the sole Representative of
the people; you must note that you are a free people, and are not to be pressed
or enforced to serve in Wars like horses and bruit beasts, but are to use the
understanding God has given you, in judging of the Cause, for defense whereof
they desire you to fight, for it is not sufficient to fight by lawful
authority, but you must be sure to fight for what is just: Lawful authority
being sometimes mistaken, and many times so perverted and corrupted, as to
command the killing and imprisoning men for doing that which is just and
commendable, and for opposing what is unjust and destructive. Therefore as you
are to forbear till you see the supreme Authority distinctly and rationally
stated; so also you are not to engage till the Cause be expressly declared, lest
after your next engagement you are as fa^ to seek of a just cause as now you
are; and after you have prevailed in stead of finding your selves and your
associates freemen, you find your selves more enslaved then you were formerly.
For by experience you now find you may be made slaves as effectually by
Parliament, as by any other kind of Government; why then persist you to divide
and fall into Factions? to kill and slay men for you know not what, to advance
the honor and interest of you know not whom; the King, Parliament, great men in
the City and Army can do nothing without you, to disturb the Peace of the
Nation, upon you therefore both Soldiers and People, who fight, pay and
disburse your estates, is to be charged all the evil that has been done; if
you on all hands had not been and were not so hasty to engage for the
advancement or Interests to the prejudice of the Nation, it is very likely we
had not only escaped those late bloody turmoils that have happened among us,
but also might prevent greater threatened dangers, which like an inundation
begin to break in upon us: And if you now stop not, your Consciences will be
loaded with all that is to come, which threatens far worse then what is past;
Therefore, if ye are either men or Christians, hold your hands till you know
what you fight for, and be sure that you have the truth of Freedom in it, or
never meddle, but desist, and let who will both fight and pay.

Certainly there is none so vile, considering what has been said, that will
again incur the guilt of murderers, and fight before the Cause be plainly
stated and published, and if that were done as it ought to be, possibly it may
be attained without fighting, and might have been all this while, the
difference not being so great as was imagined; Besides, where is the man that
would fight against the supreme Authority, and a just Cause? and certainly
there is none of you (whether Royalists, Presbyterians or Independents) so
wicked as to desire to kill men without exceeding just grounds and upon the
greatest necessity, it being the saddest work in the world.

For the preventing whereof, let us, I beseech you, examine what good things
there are wanting, that are essential to the Peace, Freedom, and happiness of
the Nation, that may not be obtained without fighting.
1. Is there wanting the certain knowledge where the supreme Authority is, and
of right ought to be; It is confessed no one thing is more wanting, nor can the
Nation ever be quiet, or happy without it.

But can it be any where justly and safely but in the House of Commons, who are
chosen and trusted by the People? Certainly did men consider that in opposing
thereof* they renounce and destroy their own freedoms, they would not do it for
any thing in the world.

If the consideration of the manifold evils brought upon us by this House of
Commons, deter them, the next thing that is wanting is, That a set time be
appointed for the ending of this Parliament, and a certainty for future
Parliaments, both for their due elections, meeting, and dissolving: And who
will be so unreasonable as to oppose any of these? certainly the number cannot
be considerable.

Is it also necessary that That Parliaments be abridged the power of impressing
men, to serve as bruit beasts in the Wars, who will be against their being
bounded therein? a good Cause never wanted men, nor an authority that had money
to pay them.

Has it proved destructive in Parliaments to meddle in Religion, and to compel
and restrain in matters of Gods Worship? Are they evidently such things as
cannot be submitto Judgment? Does every man find it so that has a living
Conscience? Who then will be against their binding herein, though they be
entrusted to establish an uncompulsive public way of worship for the Nation?

Is it unreasonable that any person should be exempt from those proceedings of
Law, unto which the generality of the People are to be subject? Who is there
then that will not willingly have all from the highest to the lowest bound
alike?

That Parliaments should have no power to punish any person for doing that
which is not against a known declared Law, or to take away general property, or
to force men to answer to questions against themselves, or to order trials, or
proceed by any other ways then by twelve sworn men, who would not rejoice to
have such boundaries?

Then, that the proceedings it Law might be rectified, and all Laws and the
duty of Magistrates written and published in English: That the Excise might
have a speedy end, and no Taxes but by way of subsidies: That Trade might be
free, and a less burthensom way for the maintenance of Ministers be
established, then that of Tithes; and that work and necessaries be provided for
all kind of poor people. Certainly for the obtaining of these things a man may
justly adventure his life; all these being for a common good, and tend not to
the setting up of any one party or faction of men.

These then are the Causes to be insisted on, or nothing: And if the supreme
Authority adhere to this Cause, they need neither fear Scotch, French, nor
English Enemies; but if they decline this Cause, they are to be declined, the
just freedom and happiness of a Nation, being above all Constitutions, whether
of Kings, Parliaments, or any other.

For shame therefore (Royalists, Presbyterians, Independents,) before you
murder another man hold forth your Cause plainly and expressly; and if any
Adversaries appear either within or without the Land, reason it out with them
if it be possible deal as becomes Christians, argue, persuade, and use all
possible means to prevent another War, and greater bloodshed; your great ones,
[whether the King, Lords, Parliament men, rich Citizens, etc. feel not the
miserable effects thereof, and so cannot be sensible; but you and your poor
friends that depend on Farms, Trades, and small pay, have many an aching heart
when these live in all pleasure and deliciousness: The accursed thing is
accepted by them, wealth and honor, and both comes by the bleeding miserable
distractions of the Commonwealth, and they fear an end of trouble would put an
end to their glory and greatness.

Oh therefore all you Soldiers and People, that have your Consciences alive
about you, put to your strength of Judgment, and all the might you have to
prevent a further effusion of blood; let not the covetous, the proud, the
blood-thirsty man bear sway amongst you; fear not their high looks, give no ear
to their charms, their promises or tears; they have no strength without you,
forsake them and ye will be strong for good, adhere to them, and they will be
strong to evil; for which you must answer, and give an account at the last day.

The King, Parliament, great men in the City and Army, have made you but the
stairs by which they have mounted to Honor, Wealth and Power. The only Quarrel
that has been, and at present is but this, namely, whose slaves the people
shall be: All the power that any has, was but a trust conveyed from you to
them, to be employed by them for your good; they have mis-imployed their power,
and instead of preserving you, have destroyed you: all Power and Authority is
perverted from the King to the Constable, and it is no other but the policy of
Statesmen to keep you divided by creating jealousies and fears among you, to
the end that their Tyranny and Injustice may pass undiscovered and unpunished;
but the peoples safety is the supreme Law; and if a people must not be left
without a means to preserve it self against the King, by the same rule they may
preserve themselves against the Parliament and Army too; if they pervert the
end for which they received their power, to wit the Nations safety; therefore
speedily unite your selves together, and as one man stand up for the defense of
your Freedom, and for the establishment of such equal rules of Government for
the future, as shall lay a firm foundation of peace and happiness to all the
people without partiallity: Let Justice be your breastplate, and you shall need
to fear no enemies, for you shall strike a terror to your now insulting
oppressors, and force all the Nations Peace to fly before you. Prosecute and
prosper. Vale.

Postscript.
CAn there be a more bloody Project then to engage men to kill one another, and
yet no just cause declared? Therefore I advise all men that would be esteemed
Religious or Rational, really to consider what may be done for the future that
is conducible to the Peace of the Nation; If the Peace of the Nation cannot be
secured without the Restoration of the King, let it be done speedily and
honorably, and provide against his misgovernment for the future; let his power
be declared and limited by Law.

If the Peace of the Nation cannot be secured by the continuance of this
Parliament, let a Period be set for the dissolution thereof, but first make
certain provision for the successive calling, electing and sitting of
Parliaments for the future; let their Privileges be declared and power
limited, as to what they are empowred and what not; for doubtless in
Parliaments rightly constituted consists the Freedom of a Nation: And in all
things do as you would be done unto, seek peace with all men.

But above all things, abandon your former actings for a King against a
Parliament, or an Army against both; for the Presbyterians against the
Independents, etc. for in so doing you do but put a Sword into your enemies
hands to destroy you, for hitherto, which of them soever were in power, they
played the Tyrants and oppressed, and so it will ever be, when Parties are
supported: Therefore if you engage at all, do it by Lawful Authority, let your
Cause be declared, and just also and let it be for the good of the whole
Nation, without which you will not only hazard being Slaves, but also contract
upon your selves, and Posterities the guilt of Murderers. vale.

FINIS.

