THE DECLARATION OF THE States of Holland, concerning the King of Scots; With
the choosing of the Duke of York, the Lord Craven, and Maj. Genesis Massey,
Captain-Generals, by the English, French, and Dutch; And the Resolution of
Vantrump concerning the L. of Newport, and the L. Catz; Together with his
Orders and Instructions to all the Court of Admiralties, for the setting forth
all shipping fit for service, and each captain and commander to cut his way
through the English Fleet. Also, a Diurnal of the Dutch Occurrences; and their
making ready all the Sluices.

engraving of lion, placed incorrectly

LONDON: Printed for Geo. Horton, 1653.

The last LETTERS From the NAVY:
SIR,
SInce my last of the 8 instant, We are come to an anchor in the Texel, where
we ride with great safety, offending the enemy, and defending our selves; and
obstructing the passage of all ships from passing either in or out. We have
exchanged many hundreds of great shot, and have allarum'd the whole Country,
especially Holland, Zealand, and West-Friezland. Whereupon their Landforces
are drawing down toward the Seacoast to oppose Us, and we are preparing to
receive them.

Vantrump has sent Orders and Instructions to all the Court of Admiralties,
requiring them forthwith to man out all ships and vessels whatsoever, that are
fit for service; and withal, each Captain to cut his way, and force his
passage through the English Fleet. Yet, notwithstanding, we do not in the least
hear, that his high and mighty Excellency, forsooth, has taken the Sacrament
now, as he did in his former Enterprise, which was, To sweep the Narrow-seas of
all the English, and to burn, and sink all ships whatsoever, belonging to this
Commonwealth, etc. But divine providence frustrated their implacable
Resolutions, and gave us such a mighty Victory against those (who, a few days
before, were lifted up with their success in getting out their Fleets for
Trade, and bringing their ships laden with Merchandise home in safety, and in
their braving it upon our coasts, shooting against our towns and castles in the
absence of our fleet) was a most signal, and every way, a most seasonable mercy.

Since which memorable Defeat, the States General have had sundry
consultations, touching the setting forth another fleet, and withal declared
for the King of Scots Interest, and that his colors should be erected and set
up, etc. Bu, truly, to speak, truth, I humbly conceive, the Gentleman has more
rational Knowledge and Ingenuity, then to repose the least trust upon such a
Rebellious and perfidious people.

Great are their preparations for war throughout all the Netherlands; and
exceedingly exasperated are the Royal Party and Nobility; so that sundry
Declarations have been dispierced and published, inciting the English, French,
and Scots, to a conjunction with the Dutch, which, we hear, is resolved upon,
only one obstacle hangs shrewdly upon the Hinges, in reference to a commander
in chief: the French and Walloons declare for the titular Duke of York; but the
English and Scots declare for the Lord Craven, and Major General Malsey. What
the Result of these Debates will produce, I shall refer you to a more seasonable
Opportunity, and remain

Your assured friend, John Ward,

Another Letter from the Navy, touching their further proceedings against the
Hollanders, etc.
SIR,
THis morning we recived intelligence by a Flemin that came aboard our Admiral,
that about 8000 foot have reinforced the strong towns of Helversluce, Goree,
West-capel, Flushing, Ostent forts, The Ness, Enchusion, Egmont, Limne,
Castricum, Brill, Dort, Brou, Delf, Buss, Middleburgh, Domborch, Scagen,
Egmont, Breerode, Monster, Asemar.


And sundry other places: They have also placed strong Guards at the most
considerable sluices, and are resolved, if they can, to let in the sea, and
destroy us by water, if we attempt to make our inroad into the Country. As for
the Dorps which were said to be burned upon the landing of some of our men, I
have not seen any Express of credence to confirm it; Only thus much we have by
way of Transcript, that it is very certain the common sort of people continue
in a great distraction. The contestation is great betwixt those of the Princes
party, assisted by Vantrump, and the Lords of the States General, who now sigh
after peace, and fain would have an accommodation with England; but the Royal
family declares against them, and by way of impeachment affirms, that during
this exigencie of time great has bin their confederacy with the common enemy,
in obstructing the Maritine and Naval Affairs, by perverting many of the
Captains, and subverting diverse of the soldiers, in an underhand way that they
should not engage against us, and wholly impute the losing of the day to their
private negotiations with the English interest: no less then 37 Articles of
Impeachment and high treason are exhibited, printed, and published, against the
States General, viz The Lord of Hempstead, Lord Catz, Lord of Newport,
And diverse others, who are already written with bloody Characters in the black
book of Inquisition. Thus recommending my self unto you, and the rest of our
cordial brethren, I humbly subscribe my self,

Your most endeared and obliged Servitor, John Williams.

FINIS.

