THE PREPARATIVE FOR LONDON.

Be merciful to your selves.

An hearty and friendly premonition to the City of London, before their meeting
in a Common Hall, which is now to be called, by the good providence of God,
upon Saturday the 24. of June.

Whereby they have, if they neglect it not, a gracious opportunity offered
them to become the happy instruments of their own safety, and the peace and
preservation of these Kingdoms.

By Thomas Warmestry. D. D.

MAT. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers. Printed in the Year, 1648.

The Preparative for London.
SHall the Sword devour for ever? 2 Samuel ^.26.
Know ye not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it
be then, ere ye bid the people return from following their brethren? Oh let me
beseech you to remember the Lord your God! And to take the wasted and bleeding
condition of your poor distressed country into tender consideation. Let the
groans and the sighs of the fatherless and the widows, and the cries of
the oppressed and consumed people of this Land; and of poor distressed Ireland,
enter into your ears and pieree your hearts, that you bring not the guilt of
innocent blood upon your selves. Provoke not the Almighty to give you the dregs
of that Cup, which has been mingled in his fury against the sins of you, and
of these Nations; because you have showed no pity upon your Brethren. Hear
their cries unto you, that the Lord hear not their cries, and the cry of that
blood, that has or shall be shed against you. And let it be in your hearts now
at length to lay aside all thoughts of division and self-seeking; of strife and
debate; of opposition and contention; And to put on bowels of mercy toward
your fellow Christians and Countrymen. Yea, to be so merciful unto your
selves to prevent that impendent ruin and desolation that hangs over your
City, like a flaming Sword or dreadful Comet, and seems every day to draw
nearer and nearer unto you; least when the fire is once kindled amongst you,
you cannot quench that with your fruitless tears which you would not prevent
by your timely endeavors.

Consider that power, that God of his great goodness, of his great goodness
to you in special, if you neglect it not, as well as to these Nations in
general, has yet left remaining in your hands, and in your hands alone, with
his blessing and assistance, which the Lord grant you, to put yet an happy
period unto the great miseries of these Kingdoms.

Consider the great and manifold inducements, both heavenly and earthly, both
politic and oeconomicall. Both public and private, Both in point of duty, in
point of piety, in point of justice and mercy, of honor, of interest, in the
regards of safety, of wealth, of welfare; and of very being and subsistence,
that do now exact it at your hands.

It is the duty that nature in self has taught all men; even the very heathens
themselves, and is much more clearly commended unto us by the rules of
Christian charity: That all men ought to seek the good of that state and body
of which themselves are members. Piety commands us to seek the preservation of
Gods Church, and the recovery and establishment of true Religion amongst us.
Justice engages us to employ our lawful and Christian endeavors for
restoring Law and Justice amongst us, and of wronged and oppressed people unto
their rights. Mercy obliges us to seek the preservation of our selves and
brethren, and to prevent the farther shedding of innocent blood: That the poor
people of this wasted Nation may be no longer worryed by those savage wolves
and bears, that have now for so long a time take their pleasure in the
devouring of their brethren. If regards of honor be of any force with us, what
an honor will it be unto this City to be the moderatours of so bloody a
quarrel, and to procure a reconciliation between the King and His people,
which shall illustrate their names unto all posterity, and endeare them to the
hearts of the people, as the repairers of the breaches of their Country, and
the preservers of their King, and this whole Kingdom under God.

If your interest, wealth, and welfare, or your very being and subsistence be
considerable unto you: all these hang upon the designs of peace, and upon the
restitution of Government amongst us; without this your foreign traffic is
like to be obstructed by the Navy; and if this fail you, the intestine trade is
too shallow to feed the roots of so great a tree, as is this of your City. How
many several callings, manufactures and occupations, that make up a great, and
the most flourishing part of your City will be utterly starved in so great a
strait? Besides that your trading at home does daily, and is like, continually
to decay, by the banishing of a great part of the people from the City; and by
the impoverish-of many thousands more, whereby they are disabled, and others
not suffered to exercise that commerce with you, that should make for the
mutual supply and supportance of you and them; and so your very being is in
question, when your livelihood and supportance is cut off.

Consider the great and providentiall conjuncture of affairs in the present
state and condition of things, that does invite you to the undertaking of this
work.

So great and considerable a part of the Kingdom, going before you with
flaming desires, in the prosecution of the design of Peace: many whereof have
opened the way unto you with their blood, and many more waiting and expecting
your example and encouragement, no doubt, that they may join hands with you in
so happy an undertaking.

Consider the charge that is like to be your part, if the Kingdom be engaged in
another War.

And the poor supplies that are likely to come in, in those abridgments which
you are already under, to enable you to nurce up such a daughter of the
horse-leach, that will ever be crying unto you give, give, without regard either
to your necessities, or possibilities.

Vnde habeas quaeret nemo, sed oportet habere. When the Sword of the Soldier
is once more made drunk with blond, you will find much ado to make it
understand reason.

Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo. Will they leave sucking at your
veins think you, till they have drawn out your very life, and heart blood?

Consider how bloody and violent the prosecution, (you may guess it by a late
paroxisme in Essex) how hazardous and uncertain the event of another War will
be; How you your selves are like to be divided within your selves, by the
several parties which is likely to set you on fire amongst your selves (and
that perhaps in a litterall sense, when want and famine shall become the
dismal nurce of fury and rage amongst you) at the best, it may expose you to a
a City-war, and what confusion is like to attend it?

Consider, if you could be choosers of the success, and in that you would not
agree, but would be at war amongst your selves, about the very event that you
should choose. But, in case you could, as the case now stands with you, that
you have in either part, or in whole displeased all parties at one time or
another: What event can you expect, that will not in probability make the
spoil of your City, (if by that time you shall be extant, or have any thing
left that is worth the plundring) the center of the motion, and the reward and
triumph of the victory?

If the King prevail; it is true, he is gracious, and has learnt no doubt, by
his own sufferings, great lessons of mercy and compassion toward others: But
the sons of Zerviah may be too hard for him, and perhaps he may have much ado
to conquer the rage of his incensed Army, that he may be merciful unto you.

The Scots are hungry, The Army full of fury and offense, and when they are
gotten into power, your cold courtesies will be taken for injuries, what you
have done will be forgotten, and what you have denied, will be remembered. The
Houses have received diverse discontents from you. The Presbyterian Party has
been deserted by you, and many of them chased away, and others imprisoned, by
your admission of the Army; you are a body made up of such variety of
complexions, and have showed your selves so variable in your actions, That you
have left room enough for every side to pick a quarrel, to make advantage of
their power against you; and that Sword that shall be up, will hardly be
disputed with: each of them will find their several enemies amongst you,
which may engage the whole unto disaster; or if they could find none, yet it
is no hard matter for arbitrary Conquerours to make enemies, that they may make
use of their successes. Though you be Guelph, yet your goods will be Gibellines.

No way in the world to secure you in any degree, but a timely peace.

Consider the small number of moments that is allowed you, for the dispatch of
this great business, and the prevention of such important mischiefs, which
calls upon you to delay it no longer; consider the great and horrid impiety
that is now discovered by the great mercy of God, in the design to have
poisoned his Sacred Majesty, which should have been the crown of the rest of
those hellish cruelties, which have been exercised against Him; The God of
Heaven look upon the authors and accomplices, and put it into your hearts to
separate your selves from all compliance with such devilish and atheistical
undertakers, and to seek the deliverance of Him out of their hands.

Consider, I beseech you seriously to consider, that happy oppertunity which
has been heretofore denied you, though many of you have desired it: and now
God by the forelaid plot of his Divine disposition and goodness, has by the
seasonable return and the course of times put into your hands, by the
necessary public meeting of your City at this time, an opportunity which you
should look upon as a call from heaven, to set you about this blessed
business; an opportunity which if you now neglect, the Lord knows whether
ever you shall have the like again: for ought you know it may be the last
offer that ever God will make you, for the procurement of your own
preservation: for ought you know if you shall despise this merciful concession
of the Lord unto you, before another such a season shall return (and you know
how hard it is to procure such a meeting out of course.) The flame of your City
may be the funeral pile of your selves, and your Wives and Children; and the
Ashes thereof may be left as the great trophee, or monument of your stupid
folly and impiety, and of the mine of this whole Nation: The Lord of his mercy
give you wisdom to prevent it.

I know there are variety of opinions amongst you: I know it too well, and I
grieve to think on it. The Lord in his good time make an end of all
differences; He is able to do it, and I hope he will do it, in some good
measure, and in his good time, If we disappoint not our selves of so great a
blessing: But in the mean time, I beseech you let not any difference in
judgment so quite extinguish the flame of Christian Charity, which is a robe
large enough to hide a multitude of errors, as well as fins: as to make us
forget all compassion unto one another; at least not to forget to have
compassion upon our selves; let us repair the breaches in our affections,
which I dare be bold to say, no diversity of judgment whatsoever, has
Commission from God utterly to dissolve, and then we may well hope that God
will take his season, to make up the differences that are in our apprehensions:
since it is his promise to the meek that he will guide them in judgment.
Psalm. 25.9. The unity of our hearts must be the foundation, to set up the
building of our united judgments, for froward thoughts separate from God, and
wisdom is a loving spirit, is canonical truth, though it be in an Apocryphal
book. The want of mutual love puts us out of the school of Christ, since it
is the very livery of his Disciples to love one another, John 13.35. This is
the right method of union, and I wish it were better thought on, and then the
mutual conversation, and peaceable and Christian communion and conference with
one another, might be a great means to unite us in our judgments; but our
Wars and fightings, come from our evil lusts. James 4.1. In the mean time do
not henceforth hold your opinions at so dear a rate, as to make them the
purchase of the ruin and destruction of your selves and these whole Kingdoms,
and Nations. It is a truth wherein nothing can divide you, but inexcusable,
compliance with corruption: that you all ought to join the utmost of your
force and wisdom, to prevent ruin and destruction to that body whereof you
are now Members, and the word of God lays no impediments in your way.

If any carnal interests and engagements do, I am sure they are held at so
high a price, by those that stand upon them at this time, that if they
understood it, they would not think it their interest, to maintain such
interest.

The asserting of private advantage, with the perdition of the public, is as
if a man should pull a board out of the maine bottom, to preserve the beauty
or integrity of a Cabin, which with all its ornament and entirenesse, sinkes
unto the bottom in the drowning of the ship.

The truth is, whatever the Articles be that are proposed, there is inequality
and injustice, in the very capitulation, whenever the public is enforced to
a treaty with private concernments for the preserving of it self: since no
particular goods is at all considerable where it stands in counter to a
public, in the same or a higher kind: And those Members have rather need of
evacuation then nourishment (that I say no more,) that like the spleen in the
body, maintain their growth by the consumption of the whole Body. The
particular motions and inclinations of natural agents, maintain themselves in
their utmost force, whilst their currents run toward the. Ocean, and comply
with the universal good. But as the Tide of the Sea carries back the Rivers,
so when these natural agents receive a prohibition, or supersedeas, from the
superior Court of the general safety. Then Xanthe retro properat versaeque
recurrere lymphae -- Incipiunt: --

Then those streams do loose their force,
And do retreat from wonted course.
The particular element of water will forget its fluidity, and without any
bonds of a frost or ice; will be consistent as wax to preserve the integrity
of the universe; and upon the same terms it will remove its descensive motion,
and ascend upward; and the air will take leave of its lightness and descend
downward, for the prevention of a vacuum, offering the tribute of their single
natures, as it were an homage due unto the security and supportance of the
whole Body of the world. This is the Policy that God has set up in the
creatures; The whole world is a great Corporation, and this is the great and
inviolable law whereunto God has engaged all the parts of that Body, which is
the great ligament of the entirenesse thereof, and keeps out schism from that
great Congregation. There is a public spirit, I was about to say, a kind of
spirit of natural martyredome, and self-denial, that runs through all the
particles of this great fabrique, that makes each parcel thereof ready to
sacrifice it self, its appetite, its force, its kind of life, its very being,
unto the safeguard of the total compact; men I am sure should be of an higher
school. The Philosopher tells us man is (...), A politic living creature,
not made then for himself, but for public Benefit.

God has ordained the good of mankind to hang as it were upon the society of
mankind, and has forbidden man to be happy alone, that he might engage him to
seek after the common security.

Therefore it is, we may well conceive, that God has made him the most
inermous of all the creatures, and the most necessitous of all the creatures
almost: That the very love of himself might bind him to love the public
before himself, as it were, as without whose felicity himself would be but a
kind of damage and burden to himself. This as dark as it was in the now defaced
records of nature, yet it was legible enough unto the very heathens and
produced these savings among them, Homo sum and nihil humanum a me alienum
puto; I am a man, and reckon my self to be no stranger unto any thing within
the bounds of humanity.

And again, Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori;

Sweet is the damage, though it be great; yea it is a noble gain,
To part with life, that Countries good thereby we may maintain.
And answerable to these sayings was the practice of many of them, as you may
read in the stories of those heathen Heroes, Curtius, Regulus, and others;
which however it was perhaps sophisticated with vainglory, and came short of
the true value of genuine and native virtue, for want of the inward soul and
life of it, and of the true guide, which is the knowledge of the true God, yet
they may shame too many that pretend to have better eyes about them.

Christianity is the repairer, and purifier of that corrupt and drossie
humanity which we have received from our degenerated Ancestors. This refines
mankind again, and sets us higher than the mere pitch of humane affection. It
does clear and rectify this public spirit; files it, and fourbisheth it from
the dross of vainglory, and establishes it firm upon the right foundation; it
does set again the dis-joynted bones of humane society which were broken and
dislocated by the fell of Adam, and fastens them together with a stronger
ligament than mean humane regards, even with that great sinew of Christian
charity. This teaches us that we are all fellow members of one another, and
that therefore, as the particular members will dispense with their private
good, for the benefit and preservation of the whole; so ought we to behave cur
selves in the body of the Church and State. The Gangrened member refuses not
to be cut off, that it may secure the life of the rest of the frame: The arm
will not my its own integrity by exposing the head unto a mortal blow, but
will interpose it self, to receive that wound which might otherwise be the
destruction of all, by the maime of a more noble part, upon whole entirenesse
and safety, the safety and welfare of the whole fabrique does depend. And to
this purpose are those sacred laws of the Christian Commonwealth, binding us
to account every man our neighbor to love our neighbor as our selves, which
leaves no room for a mere private affection, but breaks open all enclosures
from about the heart of a Christian, and makes is to be of a public interest;
teaches us that no man ought to seek his own, 1 Cor. 10.24.
but every man a wealth; to have our prayers in common; Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. our wealth in common, though not in Anabaptisticall sense, not to
the destruction of propriety, but the Christian disposing of it; He that has
this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? nay to hold our lives
in common too, we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. 1 Ioh. 3.16.
A true Christian is to reckon of himself, and of his life, and of all his
riches, commodities, and advantages, as none of his own, but the public
interest, 1 Cor. 6.19
Ye are not your own (faith the Apostle) for you are bought with a price. If
we had any right in our selves, any private right, Christ has bought it, and
has given it as it were unto the Church, and to the public, unto pious uses
for the benefit of all. A true Christian is the best Politician in the world,
And Christ's commonwealth is far better than Platoes.

And is it not strange then that against all these rules of nature, of
humanity, and of Christianity, men that would be accounted Christians, and the
chief and only Christians, should yet stand upon their private concernments
and advantages, where the ruin of a whole City, of a whole Church and Kingdom,
nay, of three Kingdoms is in the question? to secure themselves from those
losses which they have wilfully, that I say not wickedly exposed themselves
unto, by the hazard of a total destruction, and desolation? That they should
employ their wits to interrupt and delay those seasonable remedies, which the
pious and Christian inclinations of so many in your City have through the
goodness of God set their hearts upon, together with so great a part of the
whole Kingdom for the recovery of peace, and the prevention of a total and
incurable desolation ready to fall upon themselves and all the people of these
nations? only to secure unto themselves some unwarrantable Bargains and
purchases, that they have made with a flaming coal at the end of them apt to
consume and wast all the rest of their possessions? or to make the innocent
blood of their brethren, the security of those debts wherein the public faith
is engaged unto them? Let me beseech them to be better minded, lest it discover
unto all the world that they are but usurpers of that holy title of Saints and
Christians which they take upon them; when all is done, he is the Christian
that walks according to the rules of Christianity; and that is, to be a
public man, and not to buy our wealth with the destruction of men's lives; and
yet I have two questions to propose unto them, The first, whether when they
have made all their obstructions sure, whereby the work of peace is so
industriously intercepted by them, they can tell how to free themselves from as
much, or a greater hazard of failing in those their selfe-ends that they aim
at, than if they should commit them to the calm gales of peace; or whether
their designs are clearly settled upon so found and unfaileable a botom, that
it is not possible that they and their hopes may sink in those surges which
they intend to hold up; since they have not all the winds nor the tides at
their command, and those that they think they have most on their side, and in
their power, may when they least dream of it split them upon the Rocks? They
may remember that every Gust that they have sailed with, has not brought them
fair weather.

My second Quaere is, if they should be so much masters of their desires, as to
find a Haven unto themselves in every storm that they shall nourish, or yet
farther raise upon this poor tottered vessel; whether all their gain would
countervaile the damage, or that with all that they shall get thereby they
shall be able to make satisfaction to the justice of God, for one of those many
lives that should be lost in that turbulent adventure that they shall yet
farther engage in, or for one the smallest drop of that sea of blood that by
their means shall yet again overwhelme this poor selfe-deserted Kingdom? If
they cannot tell how to answer these questions, I am fully assured they will be
much more unable to answer some others that may be asked them at the day of
judgment. But though golden Asses have long ears, yet they are commonly very
dull of hearing. But I hope this paper may find a more easy passage unto the
hearts of those unto whom this is directed. If it should be otherwise, yet I
despair not of a remedy, whilst I have so fair a promise from so many good
affections, that have showed themselves amorous of the peace of this Kingdom,
in this City, seconded with the happy presage of so general a concurrence of
the several countries, where they are not countermanded by the force of
opposites. And though it may put both you and them unto some cost, yet the
dearest purchase that shall be made of peace, as it is a far better
Merchandise, in all probability, will be as easily bought, as another war is
likely to be maintained, though all the blood that is to be spilt should be
left out of the reckoning, and the layings out will have a far more pleasant
return.

This business is mainely yours, and now it is as it were put into your hands,
if you let it go you let loose a whole flood of mischiefs, an ocean and
deluge of calamities upon your selves and country. This poor weakened Kingdom
is now falling into a relapse, and that may be as dangerous to the body
politic as to the natural. The disease indeed was never perfectly cured, and
now it is broken forth again upon us, and the bloody issue runs afresh amongst
us; and seems to be like a raging fit after a troublesome and unquiet slumber,
which without a remedy may be the Prodromus of death; you if any under Heaven
may be the Physicians with Gods blessing to resist the beginnings of those
recoyling evils. That you may do it, give me leave here humbly to offer my
poor advice, not to prescribe unto your judgments, but to submit it to the
corrections of such better thoughts, which the Lord shall suggest unto your
reasons; if they prove not as wife as they are honest and hearty, yet the very
folly and failings in them, may perhaps administer unto you better
apprehensions; many good things are brought sometimes into our thoughts by
those errors of other men, which we are engaged to correct.

1. That God may be in the whole business, let me desire you to apply your
selves unto him by earnest prayer and supplication, for his special influence
upon you in these your proceedings, for which purpose you have a mite offered
into your treasuryes in a form of prayer set forth for that purpose.

2. Let nothing prevail with you to relinguish the benefit of a Common Hall
which is now due unto you of course, if I mistake not, and is so needful, and
of so great moment at this time, as you have bin well advised by another hand,
which together with the sense of your great concernment therein, may I hope
save me the labor of pressing it upon you.

3. That in the next place (as that which must give life and authority to all
your resolutions,) You desire the liberty of speedy address unto his Majesty,
to be made by some of those whole wisdom and moderation shall present them to
you as the fittest for such an employment, that you may both communicate your
resolutions unto him, and receive his approbation of them, which will no doubt
remove many fears and scruples, which are in the hearts of some among you, by
such ample satisfaction, which his meekness and mercy, and the longing desire
that lives in him after the good of you and all the rest of his good Subject,
would its like long ago have given you, had he not bin deprived of the
freedom of expression of himself unto you; and that his Majesty may come to
Hampton Court or some other place near your City, to that end, and that he may
have a Personal Treaty with the Houses.

4. That some course may be thought on, with his Majesty's consent by the joint
concurrence of the City and Kingdom, for the paying of the debts of the
public faith, and for the reimbursing unto the purchasers that money that they
have laid out in the purchase of Bishops-Lands, or of the Church Revenues, any
other such like; which may be done by the contiunance of a moderate excise, by
the Customs of exportation and importation, and by a public yearly
contribution both of the Laity and Clergy throughout the Kingdom; which will be
much more easily undergon, and much more willingly, by all good men, than that
the whole Kingdom should be ruined; or an happy peace and reconciliation
obstructed for want of it; it will be an honorable and a Christian purchase to
buy the peace of our King and Nation though it is not so honorable in them
that sell it.

6. That his Majesty be desired to grant a free and general pardon unto all,
with an act of perpetual oblivion, and that an oath may be framed by act of
Parliament, to be taken by all Members of succedent Parliaments, never to
revive the memory thereof, nor to call any passages of these times into
question, with such limitations and exceptions only as shall be found
extremely necessary to the preservation of the King and Kingdom, which pardon
to have its full effect, as long as they shall not attempt any new disturbances
otherwise to become void, and the Laws of the Kingdom to proceed against such
as shall be actors therein. And that there may be likewise an act of Parliament
made for the utter abolishment of all odious names, and terms of opposition,
as Cavaliers, Malignants, Roundheads, Committee Men, etc. Under some great
penalty, that the mention thereof may neither preserve nor revive the quarrels
hereafter among us.

6. That out of this pardon only those may be excepted that shall be found to
have had an hand in that late horrid design of poisoning his Majesty.

7. That there may be a set time appointed for the dissolution of this present
Parliament, after the granting of the aforesaid pardon, and the enacting of
those Laws only which shall be found necessary for the present peace; and
that his Majesty may engage himself by such engagements as may satisfy, to
call another free Parliament within two months after the dissolution of this.

8. That all Armies may be speedily disbanded before the dissolution of this
present Parliament, with the payment of some competent portion of their
Arreares. And that the Scots be desired to return, having such satisfaction
given them as may be reasonably desired; and that these and all other such like
payments may be made by the public charge.

That the Militia of the City may be placed in such hands, as his Majesty, the
Parliament, and the city, shall agree on for a time, until the streams maybe
reduced to their former channells.

10. That immediately the Government of the Kingdom may be managed by the
known Laws of the Kingdom, and all illegal powers dissolved, and all
illegal proceedings made void; every man that is not disseized by legal
course being restored unto his own possessions; And the Ministry unto their
livings; and that those Ministers that have left their own livings, and taken
others, may be restored to their own again, upon engagement not to disturb
the peace of the Church and Kingdom.

11. That the Government and service of the Church may stand for the present as
it is established by law, witn such liberty only allowed unto those that are
otherwise minded as shall be found necessary, until upon the calling of
another Parliament, such alterations shall be legally made, as shall stand with
Gods glory, the Truth of his Word, and may conduce to the peace of this Church
and Nation, allowing all that liberty to tender consciences, that do not
encounter these.

12. That His Majesty may be moved to engage himself upon the beginning of the
next Parliament, to call a National Synod, consisting of a convenient number
of the moderatest spirits of all Parties, and that there may be an oath
administered unto them, against partiality, and siding, and all turbulent
designs, and that by a fair and free debate in this Synod, there may be a
reconciliation of judgments attempted; First by declaring their consent in
those things wherein all agree, in terminis, Secondly, by assaying an union in
those things wherein the terms are opposite, by a fair and charitable
interpretation.

And if neither of these courses can end the contentions, That it may be
considered, whether the questions that remain are in the Conclusions of either
part necessary to be stood upon, if not, that the questions themselves may be
abolished and silenced.

And, that where there remains any difference unreconcileable in things
necessary, The judgment of some learned and moderate foreign Divines may be
desired.

Lastly, That his majesty having given such satisfaction to the desires of all
sides as is necessary for the security of a well-grounded Peace; He may be
restored to his royal power, and all his Revenue and state; The Queen, Prince;
and the Duke of York, and the Lady called home, and received with honor and
safety.

And that all may be concluded with a general humiliation to God first for our
sins;

And then a general Thanksgiving for his mercies and deliverances.

FINIS.

