A Brief NARRATION OF THE Plotting, Beginning and Carrying on of that Execrable
REBELLION and BUTCHERIE IN IRELAND.

With the unheard of Devilish-Cruelties and Massacres by the Irish-Rebels,
exercised upon the PROTESTANTS and English there.

Faithfully Collected out of Depositions, taken by Commissioners under the
Great Seal of IRELAND.

Hereunto are added OBSERVATIONS, Discovering the Actions of the late KING; and
manifesting the Concernment of the PROTESTANT-Army now employed in IRELAND.

Published by special Authority.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T. Dunster. And are to be delivered at Bernard
Alsop's house in Grub-street. MDCL.

The Preface.
THe execrable Butchery exercised by the Irish, in eight years last past, upon
the English Protestants, has so filled all good hearts with sorrow and
detestation, that it is impossible to represent it with greater, and more
solemn Agravations, than the bare recital, Now as it was an action so foully
criminal in all, both divine and humane considerations; so has there not any
complied with the Instruments of it, or afforded them the least favor, that
have not either found their ruin, or may not (if their eyes be open) see, they
are a hasting toward it. Whereas those (I means the Parliament of England)
that ever declared their detestation of it; and did ever effectually prosecute
a Revenge, (even in the midst of their danger, and cruel oppositions of the
prevaricating English Court) have found the hand of God so mightily and visibly
assisting them, that they have triumphed over their Opressors, and seen all
their own endeavors crowned with success. Now as the comfort they have reapt
by their integrity, is not small; so (no doubt) will they find it enlarged,
when they have found, that all men are satisfied, both with the justness of
their proceeding, and amazed with the horror of such exquisite wickedness:
Which that it may be known; not only to this Age, but to the Children that are
yet to be born; it is held fit, that such discoveries as have been brought to
them, should clearly and freely be brought to light; and laid open, that all
men might bear witness against those Savages, against whom the blood of so many
innocents cries behind the Altar.

To this end, there is publishing a large volume of Depositions (though far
short of what might have been produced, a great part of that Island being ever
since in the hands of the Rebels) where the Reader may at large satisfy
himself of all the circumstances which may style the Massacre Horrid and
Diabolical. But because that volume is swollen to a great largeness, and
therefore cannot readily expect to pass the Press, it has been thought fit in
the mean time, to publish this small Tract, as an Introduction, or forerunner
(or call it what you please) of the other.

And seeing the other is merely composed of particular Relations, and brings
not any thing to direct the recollection of the affairs of England, there are
added some Observations, by which it may appear, with what Sympathy the
affairs of the English Court and Irish Rebels, were carried on. And with what
impiety Great ones warp from their true and public Interest, to sacrifice to
their private Ambition, by unlawful compliances, and bloody permissions.

This is that (Reader) which in Limine I was to tell you; and I doubt not, but
this small piece will heighten thy expectation of the greater volume, which
with all diligence shall be hastened to thee.

THE HISTORY of the IRISH REBELLION.
THe Rebellion in Ireland, which brake forth in the year 1641. was in its
design so divellisn, in its attempt so sudden, and in its execution so
Sanguinary: That neither that evening which to this day infames Sicilly, nor
the vast profusion of blood, about a Centry of years since, made at Paris, do
by many degrees come near the inhumanity and deaths by this one action, which
is therefore so necessary to be known, as well to those who are not well versed
in the Irish affairs, as also those that are hurried away in the torrent of
false asseverations, or drawn aside by reason of the spetious pretenses of the
Irish Party and their Accomplices, that we can not think we discharge our duty,
if we let not all sober Christians understand by this extract taken from
several depositions, upon oath before the Commissioners in that behalf
authorized by Commission under the great Seal of Ireland. What a meek Religion
it is, how constant to that sweet simplicity and innocence, taught and
practiced by Jesus Christ, and followed in the primitive ages. I say, what a
meek Religion it is, that from its own principles, can naturally and without
force draw such fierce and bloody conclusions, and how fit they are to be
Members of mankind, much less to receive protectionall favor, that implicitly
resign themselves to the perpetration of that which the sowers of such wicked
seed shall propose unto them.

Yet are we not to suppose, that that fatal eruption was so sudden as it
appeared, or so unpremeditated, as not to have been the obstinate and restless
design of many years. Nor yet that the Irish though a people changeable, and
susceptable of commotion) had so much either courage, discretion, and industry,
as to have attempted this without strong influences, serious debates, and
constant quickenings. See all the depositions under the head for the antiquity
of the Plot, being the first head of all.
No it is now 25, or 26 years since Hell first breathed out (by means of the
Romish Clergy) this cruel machination, and inspired them with an expedient how
to destroy Protestantism, first within England, Ireland, and Scotland; and
afterward in what ends of the world soever it, That is to say the sincere word
of Salvation should be taught and professed.

But because in the three lands of England, Scotland, This was confessed by a
Friar to one M. George Stocdale in the County of Dublin, for which see M.
Stoedales second examination in the book of Dublin, he being the 165. depon.
and Ireland, it was most generally and principally observed. It was first
projected and resolved amongst these of the Roman Party, that with the least
noise and suspicion possible, much Arms, Ammunition, Artillery, Shipping, and
great sums of money (the very sinews of War) with strong numbers of Commanders
and Soldiers, should be raised and had in readiness in Spain, and Italy, for
the assaulting and surprising of Ireland.

To the promoting whereof, great sums of money were levied at Rome, and diverse
other parts both of Italy, and Spain, especially amongst their Convents,
Colleges, and Religious houses. And because that foreign power and provision
might be the more prevalent, See also the dep. of M. Roger Holland, Coun.
Monoghan both taken about eight years since.
and transported with the least opposition. It was further projected and agreed
amongst these confederates. That all commotions and sedition possible, should
be raised by the Priests and Friars (too numerous and powerful at that time)
both in England, Scotland, and Ireland, between the Protestants and the
Papists. Whereupon (though too many were there before) yet great swarms of
Priests and Friars flew into the same three lands out of Spain, Italy, France,
Flanders, and other places. Who were so intent, sollicitous, close, and subtle
in their courses, as men long bred and versed therein. That upon their secret
and subtle surmises of danger there threatened by the Puritan party (as they
call them) to the Protestant party, to their (the Romish) Religion, whose (as
they pretended) subversion was their principal aim) much dissension and
differences arose and for a long time boiled and burned in the breasts of great
numbers, some naturally wicked, others (perhaps) only seduced and surprised,
ignorantly following the time and their acquaintances, that on a sudden (after
several years spent in broaching and sowing of these jealousies, and in
preparing of the other provision) while the harmless Protestant thought
least, only hoped to be quiet, there were sent out of Spain a strong fleet of
ships fully manned, with great numbers of Commanders, Soldiers and Mariners,
and as well fraught and furnished with Artilery, Arms, Ammunition, Money and all
other necessaries for War; all which were designed for Ireland: One half to
be landed at Kinsale in the South-west, the other half at Killabegges in the
North. Howbeit a fierce and strong wind carrying them (perforce) past the Coast
of Ireland into the Narrow Sea, the Hollanders fell upon them, and as it is
well known, sunk many, took diverse, yet some escaped.

This plot thus far (by the great Providence) prevented, the Rebellion could
not then begin in Ireland, (as indeed it should have done) had the fleet (as
was intended) landed there.

Whereupon afterward it was further plotted and agreed amongst those
Machivillian Factors, of Spain and Rome, and many other Lay-Papists of England,
Scotland and Ireland, (all sworn to secrecy) and still, (notwithstanding that
their high disaster) as much as they could, keeping their former plot and
resolution on foot.

That in all those three Lands, See the deposition of M. Thomas Crant of the
County of Cavan amongst others.
the Papists should generally rise up in arms upon one set day, and then to
surprise the tower of London in England, the Castle of Edinburgh in Scotland,
and the Castle of Dublin in Ireland, with as many more Castles, Forts, Holds
and places of strength, as they could possibly feaze upon in all the three
Lands. And the better to enable themselves to surprise the Castle and City of
Dublin, it was concluded, that twenty Popish Soldiers out of every County of
the Land, should (the night before the time appointed for the taking of
Dublin,) privately make their addresses to that City, the Suburbs and other
places there about, to be in readiness to assist the taking and spoiling of
the same Castle and City, and to do execution upon the Protestants, which
numbers of men, and many more came thither at the time appointed; a great part
whereof crept into the City and Suburbs, the night before; the residue remained
about the Ditches, Hedges and obscure places there, as fully appeared on the
Greens of that City the next morning, to the great terror of the honest
Citizens. And also because they might not want full strength to perform and
bear out their design, they took occasion to make use of another force raised
there, upon pretense to be sent to foreign service: some of which they
practiced, should be brought up to take shipping at Dublin, and thereabout lie
in readiness, and the rest to lie in other parts near the Port towns of
Ireland; all to countenance and back the business. They taking the advantage
of certain Commissions, (all dated about May 1641 granted by the King to
several Commanders, viz. One to Colonel Garret Barrie, another to Colonel
Tibbot Taaff. (now Lord Taaff) another to Col. John Barrie. another to Sir
Jeames Dillon (all Irish Papists) for raising and levying for each of these
Colonells 1000. menin Ireland, out of those men formerly raised in that land by
the Earl of Strafford, and then lately disbanded. The same Commissions
purporting, that they should be transported for the service of any Foreign
Prince in Amity with the King, the rather to free Ireland of them.

These Commissions were in July afterward, (which was about three months
before the breaking out of the Rebellion) brought over and delivered by these
Colonels to the Lord Justices, and Council of Ireland, whereupon four thousand
of the disbanded soldiers aforesaid were raised, one Regiment whereof under
the command of the said Colonel John Barrie was brought to the parts near
Dublin, the rest to other Ports of Ireland, and there (for a seeming defect of
transportation and provision) they hanckered and stayed for a good time, yet
seeming daily to prepare, but the Irish Popish Knights and other Burgesses of
the Parliament, (finding the Lord Justices and Council forward to send them
away) moved extremely in the Parliament House, that they might not go out of
the Land till the Kings pleasure should be further known.

The Lord Justices and Council being thus extremely importuned by the
Parliament (then grown strong in Irish) were drawn to write into England,
signifying the Parliaments earnest desire therein, yet gave no impediment to
the going of those Regiments, who in truth were sufficiently retarded by the
vehement labor of Priests and Jesuits, and some of the Parliament Papists
amongst those Commanders, so as they continued there (for the most part) till
the Rebellion brake out. And then perceiving their plot for surprising of
Dublin to be prevented, Many Irish and other stangers hovered in England and
London, and the Suburbs the same time, as I have been credibly informed.
they and all those before mentioned, which came out of all the Counties, as
aforesaid, unto, and about Dublin, dispersed, and afterward became dexterous
and ready actors in the ensuing rebellion.

And although by divine providence this Plot were prevented in England, and
Scotland, yet how it began and took effect in Ireland, is too well known to
those many eye witnesses who were inhumanly turned out of their estates, and
exposed to all the miseries of cold, wet, and hunger, if not (for increase of
their miseries) sharply wounded and maimed; and was too well felt by others,
whose lives were torn and rent from them in this day of visitation, appearing
by the numerous examinations.

And before I make mention of the other things which you shall find in the
ensuing tract, give me leave to say somewhat of that, delivered upon Oath by
that Reverend and learned Preacher Henry Jones Doctor in Divinity (as he heard
it expressed and confessed unto him by two Friars) Who relates, See the
examination of Dr. Henry Jones, Com. Dublin 337. dep.
that howsoever the first breaking out of the fire of this rebellion into a
flame began but the 23 of October 1641. yet was it smoking many years before.
God having given many glimpses for the discovery of it, had they been duly
considered or prosecuted, to a discovery.

For first, about three or four years before the Rebellion began to break out
(amongst many prohibited books brought into the City of Limerick from foreign
parts, and seized on by the Reverend man Doctor Web then Bishop there) amongst
the rest one was framed as an addition to the first part, which was printed
containing a discourse of the Friars of the Augustine Order, sometime seated in
the Town of Armagh in Vlster, but by reason of the times, at that present
resident, (as the writing imported) in the City of Limerick in Munster, that
whilst that Convent flourished at Armagh, it was protected and largely
provided for by the then Earl of Tirone; since whose expulsion out of Ireland,
that Convent was also decayed, and driven to those distresses it did for the
present complain to undergo: yet that within three years Ireland should find,
that the said Earl had a son, inheriting his fathers virtues, who should
restore that Kingdom to its former liberty, and that Covent to its first
Luster.

About the same time a Popish Priest at Limerick aforesaid gave out that within
three years there should not be a Protestant in Ireland.

About the same time also one Walter Newgent of Rathaspick in the County of
Mead Gentleman, son to Walter Newgent Esquire (a man of good fortunes)
upbraiding an Irish Protestant who was a Parish Clark, with his Religion, and
both speaking Latin, the said Newgent uttered these words, Infra tres annos
veniunt tempus and potentia in Hibernia quando tu long (likely meaning diu)
pendebis in cruce propter Diabolicam Vestram Religionem. The party to which
this was spoken (fearing the power of the man) durst not speak of it, only in
private, but being examined judicially, deposed the same.

About the same time, near the Naas about 12 miles from Dublin, a Papist Priest
newly arrived out of Flanders, informed the Lord Deputy Strafford of an
intercourse of Letters, between the young Earl of Tirone with others in
Flanders, and the then Popish Primate of Armagh, Rely, concerning an invasion
within a short time intended upon Ireland. The Priest offering (so his person
might be secured) to direct such as should be thereunto appointed to the place,
where the letters lay in the Custody of the said Rely: Rely was thereupon sent
for together with the Popish Vicar general of Armagh, both were committed to
the Castle of Dublin, but soon after released, and the informer dismissed with
ten pounds, a suit of clothes and some other reward. Thus far Doctor Jones.

It appears also by the examinations that many other informations were given
of an intended Rebellion to the said Lord of Strafford, and to Sir George
Radcliffe Knight, several years before it brake out from several parts of
Ireland.

For we find it proved that about April, See Dr. Maxwells dep. Coun. Armagh.
1638. one Priest Mac-Casy, came from Rome with the Popes Bull for the Parish
of Tinon, and being kept out by Sir Phelim o Neal, he talked freely of a
Rebellion plotted and intended by Sir Phelim and others, and told the then Lord
Deputy Strafford thereof at Dublin.

One Mr. Richard Parsons a Minister, See Mr. Richard Parsons dep. Coun. Cavan.
was told by four several persons of credit (which he namelth) three years and
above before the Rebellion, that the plot for the intended Rebellion was
discovered to the then Lord Deputy (which was the Lord of Strafford) by one
that was servant to Sir Phelim o Neal, and that thereupon the Popish titularie
Primate of Ireland, was apprehended and imprisoned at Dublin, but afterward
procured favor to be enlarged, so as he heard no further enquiry made after
it, until the fire thereof brake out into a flame, which otherwise might have
been prevented, and thereby the lives of many poor innocent people saved, that
were murdered and taken away, besides the common calamity, wasting and
depopulating of the Land prevented.

And it is much to be presumed, James Stewart Coun. Cavan.
that the Irish had too much influence from the Lord of Strafford, for that
some of them divulged, that one cause of their insurrection, was the cutting
off of the Lord Lieutenant, protesting that such as were Britanes should pay
for it.

Another instance thereof is, Mr. George Creichtoun Coun. Cavan.
that one Mr. John Bellowe being sent by the house of Commons of Ireland to
prosecute the Earl of Strafford in the Parliament of England, and telling the
business to the Earl of Niddesdale, that Earl mightily diswaded him with these
words, If he be taken away our Ctholique Religion cannot stand, for the case is
so with us now, that if he live, we hope to do well, if he miscarry we are all
undone.

Another instance hereof we have from one Mirs. Champin, Alice Champin Coun.
Fermanagh.
who (having been robbed of a very great estate, and her husband and many
others in her house murdered, the Rebels told her that the Earl of Strafford
was the Plotter of that their rising, and that if the said Earl had been
living, they should not have had so much trouble in vanquishing of Ireland, as
they had.

Another hint we have both of the antiquity of the Plot for the Rebellion, and
of somewhat concerning the Earl of Strafford, and the Lord of Derries knowing
of it, which is this; Roger Holland Coun. Monoghan.


One Mr. Roger Holland an English Gentleman of good value (after he was robbed
of a good estate by the Irish) fled toward Dublin, and coming to the Newry,
and Carlingford, was in both places in company with Colonel Richard Plunket,
Note that this was in the beginning of the Rebellion, 1641.
(a notable active Rebel) who there told him and many others, that the said
plot had been for seventeen years then past in contriving, and that Friar
Melone and himself, and one of the Lord Trimblestons sons (another Friar) with
many others of the Nobility of the Palle, and in the North knew of it a long
time, but that some others of the Nobles knew not of it till of late, and as
for Sir Phelim o Neal, he made no account (as he said) but for all Ireland to
be his own and the others of his party, for that was their intent, and for all
Puritans and Protestants they should all suffer, but such as should go to
Mass, and but few of them should be left, but those that knew of the aforesaid
plot, which was partly the Bishop of Derry, for whom they daily wished, for he
was the only man of the English which they loved best. And that if they had
him, he should take no hurt. And heartily wished that the late Lord Lieutenant
were alive, for if he had lived, they had lived well enough, and would have had
all the strength in the Kingdom. And that he knew very well of their plot,
which was the cause for removing the pieces of Ordnance out of the North.

Some other canses are mentioned for removeing of the Artilerie out of the
North, and other places, which are but foul Symptoms of any care his Lordship
took of the safety of the English there, but for those, I leave you to the
examinations themselves.

I think these instances may satisfy any juditious and impartial man, that
this plot is not of any late conception or contrivance, as the Irish Papists
and some others of their faction, would wrest it unto: Which is, That the
beginning and occasion of it, was but taken from a pretended knowledge, or
feigned information they had; That this present Parliament of England had
decreed to destroy all the Papists, both of England, Scotland and Ireland,
which was and is a pretense as vain, as they shameless in broaching it. But it
is a custom amongst the Disciples of Satan, (no less frequent than subtle)
never to act any thing of high concernment, and specially to put nothing in
execution, without knowing first how to palliate and excuse it, by some seeming
and more than ordinary necessity. And who so fit to contrive a second, when the
first plot and excuse would rather amaze and deter the multitude with home
they were to deal, than engage their faith therein, than that old wily Serpent
and liar from the beginning, and the Romish locusts, his accomplished Artists,
who contrived a way, and in show a cause of necessity for a sudden insurrection
of the Irish against the English and Protestants, as it were for saving of
their own throats from a present pretended conspiracy against them, made by the
English. And therefore not to rely solely upon their own or the foreign
strength they expected to resist it. It was then further resolved and agreed on
amongst them, That howsoever the groundwork of this Rebellion was laid very
many years since, Dr. Henry Jones Com. Dublin.
(as they had done the like in several former ages) yet would they not have it
so to seem. But new occasion must be found as the sole cause of their breaking
out.

The fittest means for this, (as they conceived) was to cast Aspersions upon
the Sat and present government, which (if longer tolerated) would (as they
gave out) prove extremely dangerous, not only to their Religion, but to their
Lives and posterity; For effecting where of reports were cast out, that in the
Parliament of England, the cutting off of all the Papists in Ireland of what
degree soever was concluded on; and the execution of that resolution committed
to the Council of Ireland. Who (say they) appointed a day for this work, being
the 23 of November then next following 1641. That for the better, more sure,
and secret managing of this pretended plot, such of the popish Nobility and
gentry of both houses, as appeared in Parliament at Dublin, should be secured,
(no such thing being so much as thought on by that State) and for the drawing
together the rest, (amongst other pretenses) This is alleged to be one, that
the Kings-Rents were purposely omitted, and not called upon in Easter-Term with
that earnestness as formerly. And that such as made default should be summoned
to appear in Michaelmas Term in Dublin, and there surprised. Whereby such of
them as should then remain in the countries (wanting their Heads) might be (as
they said) easily cut off. They said this present plot was (I know not how)
discovered unto them, so that for the safety of their lives and professions,
they were enforced to stand upon their guard, and to counter-work that day of
the 23 of November, by their declaring and rising themselves in Arms on the 23
of October, a month before. The time drawing near for putting their design in
execution, there was a great meeting appointed, of the heads of the Romish
Clergy, and other Laymen of their faction, at the Abbey of Multifarnam in the
County of Westmeath, where was a Covent of Franciscan Friars. This meeting
happened accordingly, not long before the time of the breaking out of their
Rebelion, where the business then in question was, what course should be taken
with the English, and all others that were found in the whole Kingdom to be
Protestants. The Council was therein divided, some were for their banishment,
without attempting on their lives. Others urged a necessity of cutting off them
and theirs, and that a general Massacre were the safest and readiest way to
free the Kingdom of all fears and dangers; Others moved a mean way, neither to
dismiss nor kill, yet those that most favored them concluded that they should
be all robbed and stripped, and according to this do we find the event and
course of their proceedings. For in some places, they were generally put to the
sword, some restrained their persons, others (after a time) dismissed their
prisoners, first having spoiled them of their goods, and exposed them to cold
and famine, they that way perished by the worst death of all. And because no
necessary thing fit for so gracious a Commonwealth should be left unsettled:
These mighty Counselors (consisting for the most part of ancient English
Papists) discoursed to establish certain rules or laws for the Civil or Martial
government of the Land, concluding that from thenceforth no Protestant at all,
should either rule, or have any being there. They also concluded, that when
they should have settled the Land, they would send thirty thousand men into
England, to join with the Spanish and other forces, and then jointly to fall
upon Scotland, for reducing both those Lands to the obedience of the Pope,
which being finished, they had engaged themselves to the King of Spain, for
assisting him against the Hollanders, and giving their Rebellion (as they term
it) its due correction.

We find also that after these Priests and Friars had laid their first Plot,
they committed and communicated the secrets of it to some of the Nobility, a
good time after to some more of them, last of all to the Popish gentry of best
value, (upon oaths of secresy) and to live and die with them in the quarrel,
and for a long time before the Rebellion, as well the powerful ones (who knew
of the plot) as the rest of the Papists, by command and direction of their
Popish Priests and Friars, were observed in all parts of the Land to keep many
strict Fasts, and many of the meaner sort being asked why they fasted so very
often, their answers were, they knew not, but their holy Fathers told them,
there was a good and great work, for the prosperity whereof, they must use much
fasting and prayer.

One day of their humiliation and praying, being the more remarkable, because
generally performed by them in all places. The public prayer of all their
Priests and Friars then being, that God would give a blessing to the great
design in hand, and drawing near, and that he would vouchsafe ability unto them
thoroughly to effect the same. This drew the Common people into a unanimous
expectation and strong resolution to prosecute the same, when they should
discover to what end their said Ghostly-Fathers had engaged their zeal. And
although the times of their humiliatio^ and prayer were much observed by the
English and Protestants, yet they harbored not the due suspic on which the
demeanors of the other party required, because (indeed) the Protestants
imagined the Papists thereby pointed at, and meant the endeavors of the Irish
Comissioners then in England, in pursuit of those graces and great bounties
they afterward obtained from the King, and brought over with the^. And noted it
is, that this so strict humilliation and praying was not only in Ireland, but
frequently observed by many of the Papists in England. The Popes Nuncio
directed the like fast to be then in England, as appears by the Declaration of
the Parliament.
And yet to the vulgar sort of people thereof was not discovered, only their
Ghostly-Fathers, their Priests, and Friars (to increase and inflame their
devotion) gave them a hint, that strict fasting and diligent fervent prayers,
must be performed by all Romish Catholics (as they call them) for the
prosperity of a great design they had in hand. And here I cannot pass by, but
must tender to your consideration, a Letter found at Preston in Lanca-shire,
written by a Papist to one Mr. Westhy a Doctor in Physic of the same Religion.
Whereby he was not only enjoined alone, but also to stir up the zeal and
affection of others (Papists) to observe a strict constant fast, and praying
for the prosperity of the Queens good intentions, which by the opinions of the
Judicious, was meant nothing else, than the Plot above mentioned.

But lest I should prove deficient in relating some part of the plot of these
incarnate Devils, above mentioned, I shall desire you to take along with you
this known truth. See all the depositions under this Head.
That their design likewise was, not to spare any of the English race, that
were Protestants (as in the several Rebellions before they had likewise
resolved to do.) And that they would deprive of life all irrational creatures
of the English breed, as horses, cattle, sheep, swine, and even very cats and
dogs. They also designed to annull and destroy all the Laws, Customs,
Civillity, Manners and Apparel of the English; to deface and spoil all their
Churches, and all Monuments, Records, Charters, Writings, any way relating
thereto; and either to seize, or deface all Forts, Castles, Holds, Houses,
Towns, and all things whatsoever either erected by, held, or belonging unto the
English and other Protestants, or otherwise tending to civility. And lastly, to
abolish and abjure all English rule, dominion, Magistracy, and government
whatsoever.

But some may say, I stay too long in relating their agreements and damned
confederacy, before I come to their actions. It Is true I do, considering the
worst of their actions are over, otherwise if the execution could not have
taken effect, until I had ended the relation of their plot, I should choose to
be writing thereof, Vsque ad necem.

But the day limited for the beginning their bloody Massacre, viz. the 23 of
October 1641. came, and then upon a sudden, when the innocent hears of the
Protestant English, seemed to assume to themselves full security. These
barbarous people like Lions, or Tigars, generally fell upon them all, in all
the Counties of the Province of Vlster, and in some other Counties of that
Land, as in some parts of the Provinces of Lemster and Connaght, and there
committed the unheard of and savage cruelties mentioned in the same
examinations, some persons only (which indeed are so few, that hardly one of
forty) by strange means or rare convoys, See the dep. under the Head cont
cerning murders crucltie, etc.
escaped to Dublin or other Garrisons there to recount their miseries: From
which small number indeed we gathered the account we have of the miserable
sufferings of themselves and the rest. But howsoever many of the Protestants of
the Province of Vlster and other parts, were murdered or spoiled at the very
first: yet because the Lord Macquire, Mr. Maghan, and the rest of that bloody
crew, had failed in the taking of Dublin City and Castle, (which indeed took
them) by occasion of that happy discovery at the very instant, made by Mr. Owen
Connelly, unto whom many thousands of us (next unto God) stand engaged for no
less than our lives.

Therefore the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of the Papists, of the
Palle (being old English, and as deep in the confederacy as any of the mere
Irish) were astonished, and for the present at a stand. And although they had
strong wills and affections, (according to their bloody Covenant) to second and
join with the Northern Irish in their depredations, spoiling, and massacring of
the English Protestants, yet were they deterred to show themselves in action
with other confederates, until they had gained some further experience, what
the success might be.

In the mean time because they would encroach, and gain (as much as possibly
they could) upon the Lords, Justices, and Privy-Councel of that land, (who then
had not their Loyalties in suspicion, knowing them to be so well settled and
enriched as they were.) They (in a fawning manner apply themselves to that
Counsel, This is and will be justified by all the then Privye Council of
Ireland, and I knew it my self to be true.
seeming much to condole the begun Rebellion, and bloody acts committed by the
Irish, and withal protesting their harboring of great fears, that they
themselves should be spoiled and perish by them, unless the Council would
afford them some Arms and Ammunition. Omitting none of the greatest vows, that
they were loyal and true to the State, and would (as formerly their Ancestors
had done) adventure their fortunes and lives with them and the English
Protestants, and with them either live or perish: upon which carnest
protestations, the Council (being in that tickle time unwilling to stir
jealousies in them) furnished many of the chief of those Palle-men with some
quantities of Arms and Ammunition, for guarding of their houses, and after
assigned them Arms for 300 men, for the guarding and defending of the County of
Dublin, with the like proportion of Arms, to raise men for the defending of
Mead, Lowth, Kildare, and West-Meath, being the five shires of the Palle, and
all inhabited with old English, intending therewith they should resist any
further Northern incursion. But on the contrary, by their underhand bringing in
the Irish, they shortly after cut off some companies of newly banded English,
sent from Dublin toward the relief of Droghedah, which was done in that (ever
accounted) the most civil part of the Palle. Then did the Papists of the Palle
esteem it their time to break all faith and go into open rebellion, wherein
they joined with the mere barbarous bloud-suckers of the North, turning the
Arms, and Ammunition against those, from whom so fraudulently they obtained
them. D. To. Maxwel County Armagh.
And then who more barbarous and sierce than they, for then they told that
bloodthirsty (yet cowardly) Rebel Sir Phelim o Neal, that there was neither
room enough nor safety either for him or them so long as any of the Protestants
were alive.

This wicked force (so united) increasing their pride, malice, and envy; their
rage, and force; out of England, (to repress them) not coming, but being
retarded, they fell upon the remaining Protestants that were not murdered, nor
escaped, and cut off many of them, stripped and robbed all the rest. This also
gave further encouragement to all other Irish and old English Papists of
Connaght, and Munster to prosecute the former design and agreement for spoiling
the English Protestants, within those two Provinces, so as none escaped robbing
and stripping, many extremely tortured, and very many suffered death. And
although you may amongst the Examinations at large (when they are printed) find
out the true relations of numerous, various, and most strange tortures and
murders, such (as I am confident) cannot be paralleled by story, in any former
age or Country, where no manner of provocation can truly be alleged to be
given, but rather all invitations of love: Yet the more to move you to read
the^ at large. I shall give you some short touches of a few of them, as they
stand proved by testimony of witnesses upon oath.

First you may see what vast numbers (after robbing and stripping naked) were
murdered and perished, many by the swo^rd, See all the depositions under the
Head for murders and cruelties.
many by hanging drowning, strangling, burning, in Churches, houses, and other
places, many buried quick, some baited and worried with dogs, some stoned to
death, some thrown into boiling water, some roasted at the fire, some their
bowels gored through their fundaments, some their bellies ripped up and their
bowels pulled out, the skuls of some broken by twisting ropes and withes about
their heads, some having their backs, arms, thighs and legs broken, and cut
off, others most miserably wounded, slashed and gored, and so left to languish,
freez, and starve in their bloods; some hanged up by the hair of their heads;
little Children deprived of fathers and mothers, crying, mourning, and
famishing by their dead bodies; some poor infants rather drawing than sucking
their dead mothers breasts; none helping, none relieving, and none putting them
out of their pain; but as they lay gasping upon the earth, suffering dogs,
swine, and other ravenous creatures, to put an end to their miseries by
devouring of them.

There may you find many, whose backs, legs, or thighs, being broken, and so
disabled to stir, lying in the fields, and having like beasts eaten all the
grass round about them, would after two or three days, desire the Irish
(coming to rejoice and glory over their miseries) to kill and put them out of
their pain; if they granted this courtesy, it was rare, to some it was denied,
only they would change their pasture in carrying them where more grass was,
not so much to feed or relieve them, as to prolong their pining misery. A
cruel mercy!

There you may find the Irish which were servants, insulting, robbing,
torturing, wounding, and reviling their English late Masters, who fed them from
their infancies.

There may you find poor women hanging by their necks, and their children also
about their necks, some at their girdles, and (in scorn) dogs and cats hanging
up with them.

There you may find many poor Christian Protestants forced through holes under
the ice, and there drowned; and many pursued and pricked forward with pikes so
far into the Sea, and others into other waters where that they were also
drowned; and many as they swam to the shore knocked on the heads, and run
through with pikes, and so turned into the water again and drowned.

There you may find the demolished houses, Churches, Castles, and other
buildings lie full of dead-slaughtered bodies of Protestants unburied, and
those that were covered with earth, had (for the most part) old banks pulled
upon them in ditches, others lay stinking above ground infecting the air,
except such as dogs and ravenous creatures devoured.

There may you find poor harmless little children wounded, and then hanged up
by the flesh upon tenter-hooks.

There shall you find a poor Christian Protestant brought in naked laid upon a
board, and the Irish insulting, after dinner drawing their swords, and at every
healths drinking giving him a gash or wound (but not mortal) until his whole
body becomes as it were one general wound, and thereafter they cast him upon
a Dunghill, there to die partly of his wounds and partly of famine, none
daring to relieve him.

There may be found how the savage Irish took a wooden prick or broach, and
thrust it up into the fundament of a Protestant, and then after draw him about
the room with a joint stool to force the broach, until with extreme pain, he
either fainted or gave content to the spectators, by some notable skips and
frisks.

There may you find, a poor Protestant surprised and (after stripping) his
belly ripped up till they came to his small guts, one end whereof they tied to
a branch of a tree, and then forced him to turn round the tree till all his
bowels were pulled out. The cruel Monsters then saying, they would then try,
whether his guts or a dogs were longer.

Other incredible barbarous acts of their graceles Children you may find: As
their going abroad in great troops, armed with long wattles and whips,
wherewith they would beat men's bodies about their privy-members, until they
beat or rather threshed them off. And then returning with great joy to their
Parents, were by them received for such service, as if it were in triumph. And
where they found any slain women being with their faces downward, those they
would turn upon their backs, and in great flocks resort unto them; Censuring
all parts of their bodies but especially such as are not to be named, which
afterward they abused so many ways as chaste ears would by no means hear.

There you may find, their manner of shutting up in houses, and Churches
several great numbers of Protestants: And those being strongly guarded and
kept in, had those Churches and houses burned over their heads, and all they
consumed in the flame.

There you may find, the bloody butchers in a Church dissecting and quartering
the father and the son, and then throwing their quarters at the head of the
much wounded mother.

There you may find some proper Gentlewomen hanged up by the hair of their
heads in a tree a whole night and the next morning cut down, and life being
found in them killed outright.

There you may find three poor Protestant children (whose Parents were
murdered) stripped naked, and turned out of their late fathers house, and
sheltering themselves in an Oven from the cold, fire was put after them, and
there burned by the merciless wretches.

A great bellied woman with her little children, flying away to save their
lives, she by the fright and have was suddenly delivered of a Child, which the
pursuers dogs eat up and devoured, those villains there killing the Woman and
the other Children.

Several Gentlewomens bellies ripped up, when great with Child, their children
ripped up out of their wombs, and in that posture some hanged up.

Some poor Gentlewomen in childbirth drowned their children half born.

Young children tossed upon the Rebels pikes, who gloried in their destruction.

Two Gentlewomen the daughters of a very aged decrepit father (all stripped
naked) enforced to support their said father under each arm, to a bog pit of
water, where they were all drowned together.

The wife enforced to kill the husband, the son the mother, the daughter to
kill the brother, and still the Rebels to kill the last bloud-shedder.

There may you find very many Ministers, some drowned, some their heads and
hands cut off, as they were upon their knees, praying before death, some
hanged, some smothered, some drawn to death at horses tails, some tortured,
famished, put to the sword, and others by various ways of torment cruelly
brought to death.

There you may find, some Protestants (whom the blondy Assassinats found to be
fat and corpulent murdered, and Candles made of their grease.

A good professor of Gods truth was set and rammed upright in the earth all
but the very head, to pine and starve, till Crows and Ravens picked out his
eyes, and ravenous creatures devoured him.

Great numbers buried quick, and one so intumulated, or kept in the earth with
weight of stones and rubbish, that he cried out there a long time, his wife
being lame, wounded and not able to help him out, yet scraped to his face, and
to terminate his dolor (which she could not help) tied a handkerchiff over his
mouth, and so stopped his breath.

Very many good Protestants there were, some of which had the soals of their
feet fried against the-fire, some affrighted with a block and a hatchet, some
drawn in a rope up and down the water, some half hanged and letten down, some
kept in the stocks till they rotted, many others cruelly tortured to confess
their moneys, oftentimes when they had none left.

Many stripped naked and imprisoned, there famished and starved, those that
survived enduring hardship and miseries unspeakable.

In finite numbers of Protestants (after fair quarter promised, and sworn to be
given them) murdered by heaps in most lamentable and inhuman manner.

The carcases and bones of many formerly deceased, worthy Christians, dug
out of their graves, some cast into ditches, some upon dunghils, others upon
hedges, banks, fields and open places, deprived of such burial as was denied
to the late slaughtred English, the Rebels rejoicing to behold the bodies of
the English in that condition, especially the Ministers, and the greatest
professors of Gods truth. Which Carkases (as is here proved) these Barbarians
cast out like Carrion, or as the dead bodies of Dogs, or Swine, thereby
showing what base esteem they had of them. And here this hellish crew do
greatly insult, and rejoice at the deaths of the Lords Witnesses. Expressing
such their joy by sending gifts and presents one to another, as if they had
received some great benefit, or had heard the most comfortable news. The like
things made the Holy Ghost say, The dead bodies of thy servants have they given
to be meat for the fowls of Heaven, and the flesh of the Saints unto the beasts
of the earth.

I have here particularized but a very few of the barbarous cruelties,
tortures, murders and massacres exercised upon the Protestants, and British;
most, because Protestants, some, because British, though Papists. All, because
British. The wicked and causeless quarrel of the present Rebels, being as.
well National, and Personal, as their pretended Religion. But these few may
(I believe) induce you to read over the rest. The which because you may with
the more facility find out, I have drawn several heads of all their Plots,
Designs, and actions, and of the sufferings of the English and other
Protestants, under each of which heads you shall find the names of the several
Deponents or witnesses, proving the particulars of the things contained, and
concerned in the same; together with the places and Counties where those
Witnesses had residence.

The Books of examinations being divided into Counties, and those Counties into
the several Provinces, of Vlster, Lemster, Connaght, and Munster. Wherein, by
the way you may observe, that as this last Plot was chiefly at the first laid
by the Romish Priests and Friars, so they, (after their fury was made visible
to the world) were the main actors, and bloody executioners of most of the
cruelties. As Well admonishing, as administering the Sacrament to the Soldiers,
not to spare, but destroy the English and all Protestants. Amongst which
murders and cruelties, it is to be observed, how the audacious Rebels often
fell into high and threatening terms, sometimes against the High Court of
Parliament in England, at other times against the Lords, Justices, and Council
of Ireland, against all Protestants in general, but principally against the
English, all which they vowed to destroy: and for that purpose to send forces
(after they should have subdued and spoiled them in Ireland) into England, (as
is before mentioned,) with a full resolution, that none should draw breath but
such as should acknowledge the Supremacy of the Pope, and profess the Romish
Religion.

And (which is to be much admired) the ancient English of the Palle (being
Papists) were by the instigation of the Priests and Friars, as much engaged in
the Plot, and little less in the action, than the mere Irish, and every way as
cruel in the execution as they. The truth being, that without their
concurrence and partaking, (which both in number, value, and power far exceed
the mere Irish) those mere Irish (nevertheless their inveterate and scornful
malice, and Brutish insolency) never could nor durst have attempted any such
thing against the English at this time, but all joining in confedracie, it was
resolved that the the English Protestants should be destroyed, and loose the
Land of Ireland; And not so much as any living creature of the latter English
race, permitted to have a being there. Insomuch as some of our witnesses
complain, That the degenerated Palle-English were most cruel amongst the
British Protestants, never being satisfied with their blood, until they had
in a manner seen the last drop thereof.

And the more to engage the inferiors of all these confederates in their
wicked action, both the mere Irish, and the old English Papists showed in very
many places a Parchment Writing with a broad seal thereunto, which they
affirmed was a Commission from the King for disarming and destroying the
Protestants, and for all that which they the Irish did. And because that none
should stand out for want of seeing some authority. The Priests, Friars, and
others in two places (as is proved in imitation) of the said original
Commissions, framed and produced several writings, purporting to be the Kings
Commission, or to that purpose. By occasion whereof, all the rude multitude
took further encouragement to execute their own wills, and wreak their
causeless malice upon whom they pleased. Wherein they had no little assistance
by their women and children. Who (as far as their power extended) were as
active in cruelty as the men. So that the malice, strength, and power of them
all, was dilated to the full, in the destruction and deaths of the Protestant
English, so far, that incredible numbers must needs be cut off. For by the
monthly bills brought in by their Priests (as commanded by Sir Phelim o Neal.
It appears, that betwixt the beginning of the present Rebellion, and March
then next ensuing, there were murdered and missing within the very Province of
Vlster one hundred fifty four thousand of the British Protestants, which being
but one of the four Provinces, what might the numbers of those extend unto of
those destroyed in the whole Land.

All which murders and cruelties the just God will now visit, as has already
in a great measure appeared, (the Lord be praised) both by the great and
wonderful victories heretofore gained by our small Armies at the several
battles, first near Wicklo, after at Swords, Finglasse, Kilsalghan, Kikrush,
Lisnegarvy, Rockonell, Rosse, Trim, Clancurry, Ballentobber, Liscarrol,
Knocknenott, Dunganhill, Dublin, and in several skirmishes in many parts of
the Land, (wherein the Parliaments Armies, in respect of their numerous enemies
were but as handfuls,) besides the taking in and regaining of several strong
Garrisons, by small forces, under the command of that eminent and noble
Colonel, Jones. Many of which, during the time of the unjust Treaty of peace,
betwixt the Marquess of Ormond and the Irish Rebels, were most wilfully (if
not purposely) lost unto, and surprised, by the Irish. And shall we not now
look toward Heaven, bless and praise the Lord of Hosts, for those, and the
late glorious victories, which our noble and now brave army, have obtained
since, under the command of that most honored and heroic spirit, the
Lieutenant General of the Parliaments forces of England; and now the fortunate
Lord Governor of Ireland, how prosperous, how victorious, how prevalent is he,
and all those both Commanders, and Soldiers under his conduct? Witness the
winning of the strong Towers of Droghedah, Dundalk, Trim, Arkloe, Wexford,
Rosse, Kinsale, Cork, Youghall, Carickfergus. etc.

Besides the taking in and regaining of very many strong Garrisons, by the many
skirmishes wherein the Parliaments parties have been still victorious, against
the enemies great multitudes.

In all which the wonderful hand of God has been remarkably seen in
strengthening those his faithful instruments, to execute his just judgments
against that bloody and deceitful generation, in whose skirts are found much
blood of Innocents.

If Jesuitical or Diobolical polices could have prevented the English forces,
or retarded longer their going over with the now Lord Governor of Ireland
(without doubt) it would have been done. All things for that end being
attempted, that either mere man or the Devil could invent: For when all other
shifts evasions, doubts, projects, and wicked inventions could not prevail,
you may take notice what subtle and Sophistical Queres they cast out to
dererre the Soldiers from going thither. Under which they have an inference of
a supposed primary and most ancient right and interest of the mere Irish, to
the Land of Ireland. Thereby (as much as possible) seeming to blemish the true
and lawful interest of the English to that Land; which the most intelligent
men know well enough, originally to have belonged to the British: and the Irish
but a people that came to inhabit there by the permission of the British. But
for the better satisfaction of the ingenious reader in that behalf, I refer him
to the answer and resolution made to those Queres.

I cannot here pass by that Tradition, or rather (as many of the Irish term
it) a Prophecy which they have (and for a long time have had) amongst
themselves, See Mrs. Suzanna Stockdale Com. Dublin her second examination. 146.
deponent.
proved by Mrs. Susanna Stockdale in her deposition, which is, That in the year
1649, the Irish should weep over the English graves, which they had
slaughtered. And that those Irish should all then be banished, saving a few
which should be kept in vassalage by the English. How true this may prove I
know not, nor would I therein engage any man's faith. But sure I am that in all
probability, their actions have merited both from God and man, and put them
into the high ways of absolute destruction, and fiercest vengeance which they
might the more take into fear, did they but seriously receive into their
thoughts what those hideous cries of revenge against their murders and other
fatal meteors, signs, See all the dep. under the head concerning Gods
judgment, etc.
and wonders in the firmament, the water, earth and fire (which have been seen
and known to succeed their bloody cruelties) do portend; and thereby be the
more terrified to expect Gods heavy laying their iniquities on their own heads,
the rather in that they have seen those Articles of peace, made at several
times by the Marquess of Ormond with these Cannibals, See the two several
books of articles made by the Lord of Ormond.
(so distructive to the Protestant sufferers, and their religion) and wherein
such large pardons and concessions are given to the Rebels, have been rendered
fruitless, being justly condemned with suitable Anathames.) One of which
Articles was that all inquiries, indictments, outlaryes, and other proceedings
against these Rebels (whereof those examinations were part) should be vacated
and extinguished: which I am sure had been done accordingly, to these
examinations especially, had they not secretly and on a sudden been convayed
away hither; which could not possibly have been done, had not an honest and
worthy English Merchant (at my request) closely and covertly passed them away
as Merchandise (amongst other of his Goods) at that time, (so full of danger)
when neither such things, nor so much as a man must pass over out upon pain of
death, without special license. Which all men might rest confident, would not
have been granted in that behalf by the then Lieutenant the Earl of Ormond. But
it pleased God they should be transported to be published to the world. Whereby
the justness of the War now undertaken may be mantained, the deep sufferings
of the English and the execrable designs, plots, and actions of the most
inhuman and cruel Irish Rebels, may be manifested and left to posterity, and
the Common wealth of England now on this so pregnant provocation, and
universal conspiracy, resolve (by Gods blessing) to settle a firm assurance to
all those English that shall hereafter adventure to improve the English
interest in Ireland, and at last put it into a case plentifully to retribute to
England, for their moneys, deep expenses of blood and treasure. Whereunto (the
better to iuduce them) it may be taken into consideration. That in all ages
especially, since about the middle of the reign of King Richard the second,
after the old English were degenerated, when they could but obtain the least
opportunity or advantage, they have in every age raised several Rebellions, at
no time repressed, without great trouble and damage to England, and without any
return of profit to England, except what by the late habitation of the English
has been raised. And which is most remarkable, you shall find in all the
stories of those times. That when those unnatural Rebels could no longer stand
out, then who more humble and full of submissive flatteries than they, but once
taken into mercy: which from time to time they obtained from the indulgent
English (expecting their reducement.) They thereby only gained breath, and
more concurrents to invent and act new ways of supplanting, spoiling, and
extirpating those that had the most pity of them. I speak not this that mercy
should be denied to whom may be thought worthy of it, yet sure it is, that if
for the multiplied and itterated Rebellions, and inhuman acts of the Irish, the
long abused English make a great destruction of them, (which God seems to
dictate in the many strange victories) lately granted by him against them. It
will come short of Lex talionis: yea, it will be nothing so much as the Irish
ever resolved to execute against the true undoubted ancient Proprietors of that
Land, the English: which may be the more taken to heart, in that it has been,
and is evident, that there can be no safety in cohabitation with them. And
there is none into whose hand God puts the sword of vengeance, that can without
extreme contumacy and disobedience deny to execute his divine will.

And now lest this Proeme seem too long, I shall lead the worthy Reader, first
to the particular Heads and Charges against these Monsters of men, and to the
Heads of other Occurrences interlaced, with them and then to the Examinations
themselves. Which as is promised before (with all possible speed) must be
Printed.

T. W.

Observations
To what has been said in the precedent leaves as concerning matter of fact,
and true representation of that incomparable Murder, so there is nothing to be
added, and it were but impertinencie and provocation to abuse the Reader with
any further instances, and not give him up to his own resentments and
inductions.

To husband therefore this little room which remains, I cannot fall upon a
Method either more natural or regular, then to take a view of the causes,
concernments and circumstances, of that odious Conjuration, and from thence
descend to some such observations, as cannot (without stupidity) be passed, or
impiety, neglected.

FIrst then, whosoever will take the Irish at the right view, will find them a
root of such a profound sloth, and lethargick Supinitie, that they will say,
they are merely a kind of Reptilia, things creeping on their bellies, and
feeding on the dust of the earth, overborn with their natural frigidity, and
impossible to be excited into any heat, unless it be that fevorish distemper,
which sometimes stirs up the most unworthy minds to violent executions. Add to
this, their Innate and Epidemick Lasinesse which for many ages has been so
inherent to them, that they could never be stirred, neither by their own
necessities or discomdities of life, to that requisite industry, which even the
most barbarous, and the best seated people are forced to make use of; Nor yet
by the conversation and culture of the more polite English, could be shaped
into any adumbration of Civility and tersnesse, but still remain a people so
exquisitely savage, so barbarously lothsom, so monstrously enclyn'd, that they
were as incapable of any impressions of virtue and honor, as they have showed
themselves susceptible of the most bestial lewdness, and consumate impiety.
With these qualifications, they are a people (we may suppose not so fit to bid
defiance to a King entirely possessed with the strength of three kingdoms, and
without visible enemy, although there cannot be denied them so much of a punick
lightness and rash prevarication, as to have staggared into more defections
than any people ever yet heard of. Yet were these defections but flashy
transportations of weak and abject minds, which having once spent their first
vigor, immediately quit them into their former languor, and left thus merely in
a condition of despair and deprecation. Where as this last, what by the
strength of it is first impressions, and heat of it is after influences, what by
the want of resistance (bloudily detained from it) has rather appeared a
formal regular War, then a Spartacryot, and in stead of a short and momentary
continuance, has extended it self to the duration of many years; besides the
irremediable Cowardice of that people, never durst break out into any open
effort, unless it were backed by some strong Foreign assurances, or
assistances, or flattered by our divisions and diversions, or promoted by their
own misconceived oppressions and feigned burdens. But in that posture of
affairs at their Rebellion, there was no such matter, for from Spain which
(partly out of their own ambition, partly out of that detestable zeal to the Sea of Rome, was commonly wont to lend them fuel to every petulant
insurrection) was not now in a condition to do it. For both the fleet under
Oquendo (which was more than conjecturally supposed to have been designed for
Ireland) was discipated in the Downs, and Spain her self was at that time so
beset, and assaulted, that it was visible to any eye, that she could not
afterward drive any considerable assistance to the holy cause of Antichrist,
and innocent conventions of Cannibals. And for other nations, the Irish were
too much disinteressed and disreputed, and we too strong in friends and repute
for them to expect thence any valuable advantage.

For the second, we at home were not then only of one piece, but were as
powerful as we had been for many ages before. Nay, and what was more, we had a
Parliament at that time sitting, such a one as daily satisfied the expectations
and needs of the people by pious reformations and just compliances, so that it
was not to be thought, but that they who were effectively a whole people, could
not be as powerful in their punishments, as they were serious and earnest in
their resentments of such an execrable attempt.

For the third, they were certainly very peevish if they were discontented, for
they had not only a Lord Lieuetennant according to their own hearts
(Strafford) but the severity of the Laws against them as disarmed, or at least
a sleep; they were equally capable of immunities and honors with the English;
And that superstitious and Antic garb of worship was so public, that not
only the severity of the late Lord Chancellor Loftus, and the Earl of Cork in
that matter was eluded, But Paul Harris, Sir Toby Mathews, etc. (many Sticklers
of the Sea of Room) were in sight and favor; nay some (who have had the best
reason and longest time to observe it) have affirmed there have been three Mass
Houses (one at Naas a new built seat for Strafford) open, for one Protestant
Church.

All this set together, must necessarily yield us this result, that there must
be some more secret course than ordinary, or stranger Coyuntura that quickened
the feeds of this horrid Rebellion, and cherisht it into form and shape; for
otherwise how could it be that those men to whom (though Rebellion) have been
so natural and necessary, that (not to mention their revolts from their first
reduction) even in the flourishing times of Queen Elisabeth, they nine times
forsook their obedience, could for forty years, fawn upon the Government they
so much abhorred; if they could have strengthened their inclinations with any
hopes or imaginations of success? Certainly he is not skilled, either in the
use of things, or nature of the people that thinks they could. But those
subtle heads that conducted them, saw that there was nothing to be attemped,
for both our affairs were quiet and settled, and the severity of our discipline
was not utterly lost; so that neither could they with much prudence do any
thing of themselves, or with much assurance attempt the debauching of men in
authority, who did not then appear such absolutely professed Hucksters and
Brokers of their Country, as they might be hoped to be wone to parley, All that
that viperous generation could do, (and these were the Jesuits, or Jesuited)
was with all their diligence and Artifice, to possess these people with a
blind and sottish preoccupation, and then to cast such wild fire into their
passions, that they might be directed to nothing which they should not
presently act, nor act any thing wherein they might not show such brutish and
insatiate cruelty, as might over revenge the greatest Iujuries, secure the
greatest Cowardice, and glut the vilest Inhumanity.

And how effectual all this provision was, and how fit Mirmidons they had to
instruct, was seen in those fatal butcheries which fill the other Pages: For
whether these unnatural monsters (or rather Fiends informing humane carkases)
were not in all numbers perfected in cruelty, perfidy, and licentious impiety.
He has little reason, sense or observation, that cannot judge.

Yet durst not they (as he said) have put this into action, (though they
earnestly waited and thirsted after it) had they not found the Court of England
in a condition to be tampered with, and the same Court also (loaded with its
iniquities, and boading eminent vengeance) willing to strike a league with any
that might underprop them; and from hence (no doubt) began this evil to take
both root and life, and its Mercurial Projectors to put it in agitation; which
wrought so thoroughly upon a Popish gangrened Court, and an Uxorious perverse
King, that it brake forth with that storm and impetuosity, that (had not God
mightily owned his own cause) it was likely to have shaked the foundation of
three Nations.

For why should the naked and raw Irish (that had neither preparation for War
nor intelligence) rush on a design which the most powerful Prince in Europe
would hardly have embarked in? how could all have been so generally engaged,
even to them of the Palle, without some strong allurements or fair Commissions?
What signified those midnight debates of Muskery and Plunket (Principal Actors
after,) with the King, to the amazement and dejection of that honest remnant at
Court? How came these bloody wretches such Patrons of the Kings cause? and
though they abominated his pretended Religion, to agree with him in eodem
tertio against the Parliament? For it appears by Mervin Stewards 8. c.
Depositions, that the Perogative was a main ground of their Rebellion. Nay
their interest and greatest security was involved in it. Nor wanted there on
the Kings side either reasons of interest, or (it may be) great design: for by
the destruction of the Protestants, the Irish were entire, and at leisure for
his service, and so might be assistant to him against the prevailing Puritan
faction (as he called it) in his two other Realms; Or (to put the most moderate
gloss upon so fowl an action) he did suppose that that eruption would only
have struck a terror, and have been soon appeased, and not have brought with it
such a violent and continual storm of mischiefs. Or was it a serious desire to
divert the Parliament, from these prosecutions of liberty, to which he
perceived them earnestly to incline. Howsoever, certainly he that will but
diligently examine Circumstances, must needs find him transcendently guilty,
(for it is no cruelty to the dead, to examine those actions(...) God has so
severely punished and avenged) for if we find him the Author of the Rebellion,
(as we shall bring some shrewd instances) we must needs affirm, that though his
Theatricall piety and high dissimulation, has deceived some of his followers
into Adoration, yet to all men that have not a mist before their eyes, he will
appear a person distained with so much blood, and laden with so many crimes,
that he was equal to all past Tyrants in his iniquities, as he will be
exemplary to all future by his punishment. Or if we find him but an assister or
a complier, (for this is the least we can do, yet less than we ought) let even
his own Devines who could so dexterously Incrustate and opiate his conscience,
themselves be Judges, whether his concurrence with such savage fiends, his
easy forgiveness of so much blood, his compliance with Idolatry, and that
against so many solemn vows and imprecations, were not many provocations of the
Divine vengeance, which so transcendently and exemplarily fell upon him.

To clear up this I know not any better way than by representing his actions,
(and that without either exageration, or imposture) and carriages about the
time and after that fatal violence, which it seems wrought so little upon him,
that many actors in it were shortly seen with him, and his own Cessation with
the Irish declares, he knew how to forget it, and make it to contribute to his
own corrupt ends, which will appear the more manifest, if we take but the pains
to look over those particulars, which even in the midst of their
complementing (to say so) times, the Parliament did not stick to object against
him, with as great assurance, as he declined to answer them with difidence, or
(to speak in the words of servil flattery it self) prudent dissimulation, for
whosoever (to remarke it by the way) shall observe all his Declarations, or
that venomous fraudulent Pamphlet under his name, he must needs see how
unwiling and tender he is, when he comes to touch on this string; but instead
of bringing any probable arguments to avoid it, he Lancheth out whole vollies
of daring curses upon himself and his, or else falls upon contrary
recriminations of the Parliament, that The Irish might allege them for
imitation, whose blame must be the greater, (...). Chap. 12.
by how much Protestant Principles, are more against Rebellion than Papists.
Three lies impudently stufft together.

First, that the Parliament gave example to the Rebels. Next, that they are
more to blame. Thirdly, that Protestantisme puts people into an incapacity to
right themselves, or calling to acount. (This he means by the word Rebellions,
Tyrants!) Will you have any more? for never were falsities so closely and
nicely couched, as in that deceitful Peace,) Many wise men thought that
preposterous rigor and unreasonable severity, blew up those sparks of
discontent. How divelishly is the pious care of Religion in the Parliament made
a cause of so much blood and mise ries? But hark what he has to say for the
Rebels. Fear of utter exterpation, continuance of oppression, some Principles
of their Religion, Natural desire of liberty, made them endeavor to exempt
themselves from after rigor, threatened by the covetous zeal and uncharitable
fury of some men. See how Satyricall he is on the one side, whilst for the
other he brings arguments so passionate and emphaticall, as the greatest
Advocate might make use of. Nor see I (indeed) how stronger can be brought,
then those he falsely brings in this place, which he makes use of for the Irish
to go on; he sais Next to the sin of those, is theirs, who hindered the speedy
suppressing of it by Domestic disentions, diverting aids. (which we shall
prove he did,) Only you may know whom they would have us mean, and exasperated
the Rebels to desperate resolutions, by threatening extremity on their heads!
Obdurate man given up to thine own blindness and hardness of heart, thou
could not have said any thing fuller of Atheistical spleen, or uncharitable
looseness. Those men must march on the left hand of such Devils, for professing
their zeal and uprightness to the cause of God, which to have handled
luke-warmly, had been sin of a crying nature; to have deserted, had been to
share in the vengeance of those wicked wretches, and to have brought on their
own heads that shame ard vengeance which for the cause fell on them. These are
his latest and dying reflections of that business which we shall now return
into, from the necessary digressions.

Thus there was a predisposition in the Court of England for such designs as
these; we shall need only to remember that in the second year of his reign,
(To indulge Popery, by Christning, Marrying, Suspending proceedings against
Papists, To allow sueing out Liveries and Ousterlemains by the Papists, without
taking the oath of Allegiance. This design which (for a sum of money was to
bring in further tolleration of Religion) was protested against by the Irish
Bishops, by writing under their hands of the 26. of November 1626. and the
Commons of England in their Remonstrance the thrird of Carolus, did inform that
Popery was professed, and Monastries replenished every where, desiring him to
take the advice of themselves and Bishops into consideration. Yet,

In the fourth year of his Reign, those Propositions and Graces with additions
did he grant in consideration of one hundred and twenty thousand pounds, to be
levied upon the Kingdom in general, so that the poor Protestants were
illegally oppressed to gain the Papists Immunities.

Many notorious Papists were created Peers, whereby the Popish votes in the
Lords house increased, and the Papists became more powerful and exemplary in
their Counties.

When the Lord Chancellor Loftus, and the Earl of Cork were Lords-Justices;
and endeavored to put down Mass-houses; and amongst the rest, converted one
(in Backlane in Dublin) to a College, where Lectures were read, (which the
Lords-Justices did to the encouragement of Protestants) yet when Strafford
came, the Scholars were displaced, and it became a Mass-house again.

The Popish Irish Army was kept on foot long after the beginning of the
Parliament, and contrary to their desires, whereby those execrable villains
learned the knowledge of Arms, under the pretense of fighting against Scotland.

And that Lead might not be wanting to the completing of this intended
Rebellion, (I use the very words of that excellent Declaration of the 25. of
July 1643.) as it had been in the last great Rebellion there, the Silver-mynes
of that Kingdom (which afforded great store of Lead) were farmed out by his
Majesty, to two (most pernicious) Papists, Sir Bazill Brook, and Sir George
Hamilton; In whose houses (upon search) diverse barrels of Musquet-bullets were
found.

Before the Rebellion Strafford had (by violent endeavor) entitled his
Majesty by office, to five whole Counties, and a great part of two other,
whereby a way was made to increase Religion, Plantations and Safety: Which the
Committee (sent over for complaint of Grievances) did never complain of, (as
conceiving it distasteful) yet when the King had offered to restore it to the
Proprietors, and the Lords-Justices importuned him to the contrary, and the
then Parliament had discovered much of the Irish Counsels, then (subtilties no
longer serving them) was new projected and allowed this hideous Rebellion,
(that after fell out) by Gormondston, Muskery, Plunket, Linch and Brown, who
were consulted with, and carrased at Whitehall, had private conference with the
King in the Queens presence; And what agreement was made may easily be
imagined, (for witnesses are not to be expected at a conspiracy, of such
importance) by the Kings giving away five whole Counties (after so great an
endeavor of many years to entitle him to them, accounting it a Masterpiece of
Strafford) and that for the yearly rent of two thousand pounds. When in
searching Records, and measuring the land it had cost the King more than ten
thousand pounds out of his Coffers.

Let any compare the Iudulgence with the Injustice to the Londoners in Derry
and Colrain, (which shows land in Ireland worth owning) when there is no
recompense for parting with it: For the King told the Committee of Ireland,
That since he had parted with so much of his right, he must be recompensed some
other way: And he would soon infer that so large a Donative (especially
considering the bountiful nature of that King) was not sown upon the sand.

And that these blades might not be awanting in the requital of so
considerable a favor, they returned into Ireland, in August after, where how
that they bestirred themselves may appear: For in the three and twentieth of
October following, the Rebelion brake forth in Vlster.

To these violent presumptions, must be added the concurrence of the English
Papists, to this business, as is copiously proved by the Depositions
forementioned, and the repair of Castlehaven, Young, Porter, Endimions own
son, Sir Bazill Brook and Brown the Lawyer into Ireland, where they were
main sticklers in that heinous Rebellion.

Nay in that month of October (fatal for that deluge of blood) the Lord
Dillon Costiloghe (an Irish Rebel) went from Scotland from the King, into
Ireland with his Majesty's letters, (by the Queens means) to be sworn Privy
Councellor, which was no sooner done, but he presents to the Lords Justices and
Council an insolent letter of Remonstrance, of some inhabitants of the County
of Longford, wherein they unreasonably demand Tolleration, repealing of Laws
etc. Nay, and this Lord might by his motion testify that he was alive: For in
the following December, he with the new Lord Taaff, came into England with
instructions in writing from Gormonston and others, to solicit with his
Majesty in their behalf, which (it seems they did so effectually, that they in
his Majesty's name encouraged the Rebels, as may appear by a signal Deposition
of Col. Iepson. Who saw two Letters of theirs sent to Muskery, intimating, That
though it did not stand with the convenience of his Majesty's affairs to give
him public countenance, yet his Majesty was pleased with what he did; and
would in good time give him thanks for it.

This though discovered to the Lord Falkland then Secretary, and though Colonel
Iepson stayed a week after in Oxford, was so coldly entertained, that neither
the Colonel was called to account, nor the Lords lessened of their freedom and
favor.

Nay the said Taaff, was afterward employed with Roch and Brent (two active
Papists) taking with them Colonel Barry one of the same fry, to carry the Kings
letters from Oxford to Dublin. From whence they made away for Kilkeny, where
there was to be (soon after) a general assembly of the Rebels: which Errand
when they had performed, Barry was left Leaguer at Kilkenny, Taaff, returned to
Dublin.

Taaff with diverse of disaffected Privy-Councellours of Ireland, meets at
Ormonds house, to debate the Irish Propositions, and Brent returns to Oxford to
give an account of the Negotiation. By this we may the better conceive what the
King meant by that delusory offer to go into Ireland. Whether it were under
this plausible pretense to get a Guard about him, and by that degree a
considerable force, or when he was once there either to make a Cessation
advantageous to himself, or else to join with them; however, it was a pretense
good enough to decline Signings and Confessions, (advantageous to his subjects
in England) and increase Jealousies at home, and retard the business of the
Parliament (then in full heat and action) whatever it were: Certain it is, that
there lurkt within it somewhat of deep design, and very exquisite mischief;
For, even the very Rebels could without Prospective see it, and without a Devil
foretell it. For, Tirlogh o Neal could (as appears by Master Stewarts
examination, taken the eighth day of July 1643.) tell, that the King was to be
soon in Ireland, and Sir Phelim o Neal could give out, that the troubles of
England would ere long call away Leisley to assist them. Nor is it any wonder
that these people were so perfect in the Kings designs, and so foreseeing of
our troubles, when they were part both of the interest and Plot, that in deed
(if you will take their own words) the Kings cause and theirs, were
fundamentally and really one, though pollitically and spetiously divided. How
else should Tirlogh o Neal, and Roger o Moore (as is in Master Stewarts
mentioned Deposition) say, That Religion, the Lands escheated, and the Kings
Prerogative, were the prime causes of their rising in Arms? That they knew well
the best in England would side with them? That they had good warrant in black
and white for what they did? That when he objected the Power of England would
he brought against them, they replied, That there was little fear of that, for
the troubles in England were but then in beginning, and would not end in haste.
And how else could Rory Maguyre say, That they (the Parliament) invaded the
Kings Prerogative, in which their greatest security reposed? That this great
undertaking, was never an act of one or two giddy silly fellows? They had
their party in England, Scotland, etc. which should soon be as deep in blood as
themselves? That the Plot had been of ancient date, and many times
discontinued, and but lately revived, and prosecuted from Candelmas last past.
(Note the time of Gormanston and the rest procuring the five Counties) before
the Rebellion both in England and Scotland. All is deposed by that Apostate
Awdley Mervin, (whose sister, Maguire married) who heard it from many more (as
himself deposes) of considerable quality; Nay, Why did they of the Palle
declare, to join with the Irish to recover to his Majesty his Royal
Prerogative, wrung from him by the Puritan faction, Why was the Design called
the Queens pious intentions? Decl. 9. March 1641.
Why did Rossetti (the Popes Nuncio) enjoin Fasting and Prayer amongst the
Papists? Why were the Protestants called Rebels to the Queen? How came the
Rebels to assume the Kings Authority, Nay boldly aver they had his Commission:
Insomuch that the Major of Kinsale writes, That they uttered things concerning
the Court of England, which he durst not put to Paper.

And now let any man lay his hand upon his heart, and say whether or no he can
acquit this man of these things. Certainly ignorance in this case could not be
pretended even to people that had but the bare use of common sense; and to be
passive in a business of this nature, must needs be a sin not much less than
violent action: But to give encouragement and groth to such abominable Monsters
(as from what has been laid down, must needs be clear to every dispassioned
Judgment, especially since such uncontrolable presumption may serve in the
works of darkness) is such an offense, that it must needs lead any sober and
searching mind in a clear trace of the Divine vengeance upon it. God indeed is
secret and marvelous in executing his wrath, and many times openly punishes
unknown crimes, and many times dissembles the seeing of crying offenses: But in
this case, both the one and the other were equally visible, and we may without
uncharitableness, affirm, That for these things was this man rooted out of the
Land.

We have now viewed him on the Divels-side of the Meddal, let us now behold him
on the Saintside, and find out one of the most illustrous dissimulations that
ever attested Piety: a dissimulation which a Heathen, under the crepusculous
days of nature, would have started back at; and have immagined it, either
beyond punishment, or else meriting Judgments and Torments severer than any he
knew. A dissimulation by a Protestant King in behalf of Traitorous Papists, and
that to lull and stupifie his own subjects, (and of his own Religion) into
blood and destruction.

The minds of men were not yet so exquisitely debauched, but they were open to
the serious manifestation of their Representatives, nor the Kings business in
such a posture, that he might declare and justify his proceedings, nor his
Innocence such, as he might vindicate himself. And therefore to these
Remonstrative objections of the Parliament, he had nothing to say; but such
whole peals of solemn and dire imprecations, as if he thought Perjury lawful
and essential to his calling: Or else Divinity to be a mere Mormo and staring
Rodomontade. Or else he had utterly forgot what he had designed some months
before; or were asleep to all his present actions or carriages; or had been
informed with a new soul, when he had acted those things which he did
afterward.

For instances, they throng upon us (Reader prepare thy horror) in his speech
to the Committee at Newark the ninth of March 1641. God will discover the
secret of Plots and Treasons. He shall stand right in the eyes of his people.
My fears are greater for the Protestant Relegion than for my own Rights or
safety. God so deal with me and mine, as all my thoughts are upright for the
maintenance of the Protestant Religion and Laws, etc. Thus in his Message of
the eighth of April 1642. He assures them, he will never, upon any pretense
whatsoever, consent to a tolleration of the Popish Religion in Ireland, or
abolition of the Laws in force against the Papists, which how strictly he kept,
look in Ormonds Pacification 1648. Where you may see, the first Article quits
them of the oath of Supreamicy; The second puts into the hand of an Irish
Parliament, to repeal Poinings Act. The 22. (O ridiculous indulgence and
servill compliances) repeals those Acts prohibiting to plow with horses by the
tail, and burn Oats in the straw. The ninth entrusteth them with the Militia,
which the King swore, or (in the Parliaments language) strongly assevered by
God, at Newmarket, he would not trust the Parliament with, for an hour; and
grants, till the performance, an Army of 20000 men. All which put together
signifies the alienation of all Ireland. Or will you hear him when he was about
to die? (for certainly any man that considers the choice of the subjects of the
Black-book cleanly, cannot but acknowledge he writ it in his later time, on
purpose to abuse the people into credulity and favor of his actions, and so
poison them after his death.) If I have desired or delighted in the woeful day
of my Kingdoms Calamities (and yet he was the cause.) If I have not earnestly
studied the preventing of those bloody distractions, then let thy hand be upon
me and my Fathers house, etc. Which, to the great praise of the Divine Justice,
we see accomplished.

You see how he has dared the omniscient ear of Providence, and you have seen
with what event, and no doubt among mankind (at least the better and reasonable
part) his name will also stink when they are thoroughly convinced of his odious
and unkingly Dissimulation; Which besides its own unworthiness, must needs
add a great weight to the presumptions of his guilt.

These detestable Cyclops, had at first from him, their due attributes. There
was no expressions too tart or indignatory for them. In his answer to the
Declaration August 1642. he calls it a bloody Massacre. In his speech to them
of Denbigh and Flintshire 1643. he calls it, an horrid bloody and impious
Rebellion.

In his answer to the Petition of the 8 of April 1042. he calls the Irish,
Barbarous Rebels, authors of great calamities and unheard of cruelties, to his
Protestant subjects.

In his message of the eighth of April 1642. He calls them, Wicked and
detestable Rebels, odious to God and all good men.

And yet notwistanding all these smart and home expressions and manifestations,
(and his zealous celerity in prosecuting Scotland) it was long ere (upon desire
of both houses) he could be persuaded to proclaim them Rebels, (notwithstanding
they called themselves the Queens Army) and at last three months after, he
would suffer but forty to be printed, and those warily dispersed. Yet was this
but a faint courtesy to what he did for them other wise, all designs of the
Parliament for their punishment were obviated by him and frustrated; all
succors sent, averted or detained to maintain an unnatural War against his
Portestant Subjects.

Take a few instances, (we could be copious were plenty necessary) he would not
grant a Committee to be sent into Ireland, he deterred the Officers of Lemster
from new subscription (which he thought was a probable way to reducethat
Province without charges,) then in motion in Parl. Nay when some well-affected
had prepared twelve ships and six pinnaces, he would grant no Commission til
they were forced to go by Ordinance of Parliament. When the Lords Justices of
Ireland sent for two pieces of Battery, he by express command hindered any to
be delivered out of the Tower. Floid and Green, he recalled from the Irish
service. Stradling and Kettlesby, he called away from the Irish Coasts, when
they lay there on purpose to prevent the carrying in of Ammunition. Nay, much
provision designed thither, by his forces he plundered, and many of the
Parliaments ships, by his letters of Mart, were seized on; as may largely
appear in the Collection of Declarations p. 250. and subsequentibus. To ad to
all this, his fraudulent delaying and dallying of the Earl of Lecester, as may
appear by the Earls own letter, of the 26. of Sept. 1642: yea when the Irish
were almost starved (though laden with so much guilt and blood) yet could they
procure a Commission to examine their grievances; and at last had a Cessation
granted them, which the King (for sooth) says, was to save the remainder of
his Protestant subjects.

And now Reader, stand still and see the most notorious persidie both in a King
and his Rebels (or to say better) his Confederates that ever was, how God has
punished the one, is as visible as a Sunbeam, since he (as he made up the
iniquities, so he) has found the Tragical Catastrophe (yet by lawful and just
means and pleasing to God) of his predecessors, and remains a terror and
example to all that shall come after him: And for them, he is blind that sees
them not at the brink of the pit, and he is accursed that shall offer to stay
them: and therefore let them into whose hands God has put the sword of his
wrath, take heed lest they use it either coldly, partially, or negligently;
lest God smite them, and raise up others to execute his just vengeance. And
what a sin it will be to be even moderate in a work so pleasing to God, let
their own consciences be Judges. God will not be dallied with, he hates
shedding of innocent blood. Breach of Oaths and Rebellion, which were never
more sublime and horrid than in those people, whom certainly he is resolved to
blow as chafe from the face of the earth. And therefore cannot but severely
punish any luke warmness (for mercy to them is no other) in his instruments.

And indeed it is observable, that as God has mightily punished those sinful
concurrences of the King, and wicked Cessations and compliances of Ormond and
his Accomplices, so has he led our army, as it were by the hand, in giving them
Tredarth, and his almost mediate interpositions of Articles of Surrender at
Wexford. And after those two just and acceptable executions, has more
vigorously protected and gone along with them. The hearts of their enemies
being filled with trembling, and the gates of the City, in a manner, thrown
down before them.

Nor indeed is there any policy (were the other confederations nothing) to
strik a league with such unfaithful, wretched, cruel, savage, accursed people
as they are, unless we should be cumbered with a despicable crew of wretches,
and neglect one of the bravest pieces of Justice that ever was put into the
hands of people. And therefore, we may warantably, and righteously endeavor
the extirpation of them, who by their hellish designs, and accomplished
Parricides, have endeavored, and highly attempted, to make us to be no more a
people.

FINIS.

