AN ESSAY ON GRIEF: With The CAUSES and REMEDIES of It.

Durum: sed levius fit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
Hor. OXFORD; Printed by Leon. Lichfield. An. Dom. 1695.

TO THE HONORED Mrs. M. LAKE.
Madam,
SINCE they who may justly challenge those admired Qualities, which are become
the common Forms of a Dedication, are generally displeased with Addresses of
that nature; I shall omit that undisputed Title you have to such Excellencies,
and beg leave to inform the World, how much it is indebted to you for a just
Example of what Respect we ought to pay to the Memory of our Deceased Friends:
Especially when they were adorned with all those Endowments, which were so
conspicuous in Your Excellent Brother: Who besides those Accomplishments which
commanded an Universal Esteem, joined the Affection of a Friend to that of so
near a Relation: which makes it difficult to determine whether he deserved, or
you expressed the greater Sorrow. It was my frequent Reflection upon this, that
first moved me to this Attempt; which however mean in it self, will have enough
to recommend it, if honored with your Protection: Which I the more confidently
presume upon, since that Relation it bears to you (as you have had the justest
Cause of Grief, have shown the most tender Sense of it, and yet none ever more
religiously Conquered it) makes it wholly yours. I design not, MADAM, by this
Discourse to Accuse you of any Neglect, but only to show what you have
Practiced, and by Copying out your Behavior teach others their Duty. I am
sensible by the Advantage of so Eminent a Pattern, much more might be said upon
the Subject, and that too, much better treated of: But if this rude and
unpolisht Essay may obtain the Happiness of being received as a Testimony of my
Gratitude, for the frequent Obligations both His and Your Favors have laid
upon me, all other Defects will be abundantly supplied, and I shall attain the
chief End and Honor I proposed by it, of being Esteemed

MADAM; Your most Obliged, And humble Servant, R. W.

(...) its Thoughts and Inclinations upon an Object, then it exceeds the Bounds
of Reason, becomes an irregular Passion, and falls into Extremes. If it be long
indulged, it contracts a Habit in us; and will with great Difficulty be
removed, and reduced to the Obedience of Reason.

From hence we may gather the true Notions of the chief of all our Passions,
Joy and Grief; with the Excess and Irregularities of them. For they are always
Innocent when they are modcrated, and are only blameable in their Excess. For
the same reason that permits us to taste and enjoy with Pleasure a Good that we
desire, does not forbid us sorrowing for the loss of it; Provided we neither
disorder our Reason, nor transgress the Bounds of Religion.

I call these the Chief of our Passions, because all the Pleasure or Pain which
we find in the Soul upon any account whatsoever, may be reduced to one of
these. Whether I Love or Hate, Hope or Fear, Envy or Admire, it produces in me
either some inward Satisfaction or Uneasiness, and consequently, I cannot avoid
in some measure either Rejoicing or Sorrowing at it.

Grief in General, is an Uneasiness of the Mind, arising from the Sense of a
Good lost, or a present Evil. The Seat of this passion is in the Soul; for
Reflection and Thought (upon the Evil that we suffer) which are the chief
Action, if not Essence of the Soul, give Life and Being to it. And here again
we may distinguish the true Notion of this Passion from the Vices of it. For to
grieve at a present Evil, which is really such, so as to avoid it for the
future, is Commendable and Praiseworthy; but to Grieve at any thing which my
Opinion only makes to be Evil, which is not really so in itself, carries the
Nature of a great Imperfection, if not of a Sin along with it. As for Instance,
If I have done any thing, either through Ignorance or against my Knowledge,
which my Conscience accuses me of, it is my Duty to be Sincerely grieved at the
Remembrance of it, and endeavor by all means possible, to avoid incurring the
same Guilt for the future. But if the Occasion of my Grief be something that
was without my self, as the loss of Honors, Riches, or the like, which are not
in mine own Power, but at the Disposal and Appointment of Providence, then to
Grieve is to exceed the Reason and Nature of it; Because as the Enjoyment of
them was never designed to make us entirely Happy, so neither can the Loss of
them make us really Miserable.

But in this case also, Grief may be so far allowable, as it respects the
Causes of my Misfortunes. If my Extravagance and Prodigality have been the
causes of my Poverty, it is then my Duty to be grieved at the thoughts of those
ill Actions which have brought that upon me. But I must then be very cautious,
lest I should think any thing disrespectfully of Providence; and take care that
my Sorrow be chiefly for my Sin, and not for the Poverty of my Condition. In
short, then is my Grief true and sincere, when it proceeds from the Sense of my
Guilt, and not from that of my Sufferings; When the Cause of my Unhappiness,
not the Unhappiness it self, is the Object of it.

I would not be thought to say, That we ought to abandon all our Passions as to
External Objects, so as to use all with the same Indifference: For we cannot
help being delighted with Some more than Others: but only, that we should not
discover so great a Concern for any of them, as to suffer our Happiness or
Misery to depend upon the Enjoyment or Loss of them. And herein that Notion of
Virtue's consisting between two Extremes, may be applied to the Passions. For
as they ought not to show too great fondness of Sensible Objects, so neither
ought they to use them with Contempt. A moderation toward all outward
Enjoyments is very necessary to our Happiness. If we are always careful, not to
be Excessive in our Pleasure and Delights, we shall never be dejected with our
Misfortune. For he that keeps not his Passions within Bounds on the one Hand,
will upon any Disappointment, fall into Extremes on the Other.

I speak now of Passions only as they are conversant about Objects of Sense.
For when they are fixed on Divine Objects, they cannot properly be said, to run
into Excess; for 'twould be very absurd to say, we could love GOD too much. And
although there are some mistaken ways and modes of Worship which carry Men into
Superstition, yet it is not the height of Love or Affection that is the Cause
of it. For Passion is no longer true and regular than it is guided by Reason
and Revelation.

But not with standing all the Nice speculative Notions that we conceive of the
Passions; yet the Best of Men have been overtaken by Irregular Motions: either
carried away by a sudden Transport of Joy, or dejected with the Surprise of an
unexpected Calamity. Though this cannot properly be said to be the Nature of the
Passions, but only the Imperfection of our present State, because as they are
acts of the Mind, and have their chief Power from thence, so they can have no
separate Interest from it, nor be really delighted with the Objects of Sense,
which can bring no true Satisfaction to the Mind: yet so long as we are
confined to this Mortal State, and the Soul acts conjunctly with the Body, it
can never acquire such an Absolute Authority over it, as not to comply, and
share with it, in some of its Delights, and Calamities.

But although we cannot free our selves from the Objects of Sense; yet however
we ought by all means to endeavor, to be as little subject to them as
possible, and to raise our Passions above the reach of their Temptations. For
as the Causes of Passions are generally from without, so Nature has fortified
us with sufficient Power within, to resist the strongest Assault they can make
upon us.

And here again we may observe that the true Use and Nature of this Passion of
Grief, as of all the rest consists in its Obedience to the Dictates and
Prescription of Reason; considered either in its Natural Light, or assisted by
the advantage of Revelation. The first can convince us of our Errors, but cannot
reform them; the other not only discovers to us the Disorders and Imperfections
of our Natural State, but gives us Power and Strength to rectify them.

But besides, that we may not be deceived in Judging of our Passions, whether
they are agreeable to Reason or not, it will be necessary to consider whether
they are fixed upon their due Object. We must not look so much upon the
Passions that we find in Good Men, as the causes of them. Anger, Sorrow, and
Fear may proceed from just Occasions, and may be designed to very great Ends.
To be angry with a Sinner, so as to correct and reform him; To grieve with
those in Misery and Affliction, out of a Design to relieve and comfort them;
and to be afraid for those in danger, so as to hinder them from perishing; are
all so far from being Crimes, that they deserve to be numbered amongst the
chiefest of Virtues.

In the next place, we must consider whether our Passions are proportionable to
the Object, and whether we do not esteem things more or less than they deserve,
whether we do not pursue things indifferent, with greater Ardency and Affection
than we do those which are of greatest Concern and Importance to us. By these
Methods we may judge of the Conformity of our Passions to the true Nature and
Designs of them. And we may hence also observe what Progress we make in Virtue
and Religion, by considering, of what Value and Esteem they are to us, and
whether They, or the things of Sense have the First or chief place in our
Affections.

Nature has disposed the Parts of Man in a due Subordination to each Other, and
has subjected the Inferior, as the Sensitive Appetite, to the superior Faculty
of the Understanding. And if this Harmony is not justly observed, the Whole
becomes disordered.

Thus when our Passions of Joy or Grief are carried away by outward Objects,
and rely only upon the Judgment of Sense, without consulting the Precepts of
Reason, then is that Correspondence of the Faculties dissolved, and that Union
which ought to be between them wholly destroyed. Hence arises that Notion of
dividing the Passions into Sensitive and Rational. This depends upon Reason,
the other refuses its Conduct, and denies its Authority.

Though our Passions are so far Regular, as they are governed by Reasons yet
herein also they may be disorderly, unless we take care to inform our Reason
aright. Prejudice may have got the Ascendant over our Reason: or else some wild
extravagant Notions may have obscured it, or led it Captive by an appearance of
Truth. And therefore we have a Rule to measure Reason by, that it may not be
disordered in it self, or give occasion to the Inferior Faculties to run into
Confusion. And to this End, (as I before intimated) Providence has took care of
us, and revealed to us the Will and Council of Heaven it self, to discover to
us the difference of those things which ought to be the Objects of our
Passions, from those of our Indifference, which we should not be much concerned
for.

But to return. This Passion of Grief depends in some, upon the Constitution,
Frame, or Habit of their Bodies. And as these are disposed, so is their Passion
more or less strong and violent, and the first Object it meets with, produces
some Alteration or Motion in them. They are generally hurried on to the
Aversion of an Object, without any Thought or Deliberation, and are often
disturbed at Shadows and Trifles. These are very Unhappy who are almost ever
disquieted; and therefore want the greatest Attention and Observance tomanage
themselves rightly, and have as much need of outward, as inward Medicines to be
applied to them.

Some are more apt to be passionate than Others, and what will not move One, is
perhaps the cause of Misery to another. Some, again, are more Thoughtful than
Others, and upon such Persons, unless their Thoughts are fixed upon higher
Objects that divert them, Sorrow commonly falls more heavy, and is more
difficultly removed. Their Spirits are generally low, and consequently more
easily oppressed, and where they have once fixed their thoughts, they become
Obstinate and almost Immovable. For their Mind by long custom is reduced
almost to the same habit with their Body, and till this be cured, and brought
to the right use of the Senses, it will be difficult to reduce the Mind to its
power of Reason.

But of all the different kinds of Grief, that is strongest, and most violent,
which flatters it self with Reason to defend it. For where the Mind thinks it
may with Honor and Virtue engage its Affections to an Object, as is apparent
in Friendship, it is apt to conclude that it may by the same reason lament the
Loss of that which so happily cemented it: and that it cannot be too immoderate
in lamenting its being deprived of that Happiness, which Virtue and Religion so
much approved of.

From this mistake it is that a great many People indulge themselves in Sorrow,
who have in all other Misfortunes of Life, Reason and Religion enough to
support them. But how groundless this Opinion is, may appear, by considering,
that there are several Objects, which we may highly esteem and admire, while
they are in our Possession, which we ought patiently and submissively to
resign, when Providence thinks it convenient, to require them of us. For even
Life it self, which ought to be most Dear to us, is to be no longer the subject
of our Desires, than Providence orders the Continuance and Preservation of it.
And if any End or Service of Religion commands our Resignment of it, we ought
to do it with the same Readiness, that GOD Commands the Duty.

But although the Joys of the Mind are confessedly greater than those of the
Body, yet while they are thus united, they must always partake together in the
Enjoyment of an Object that is Dear to them, because their Joy can never be
complete or satisfying, unless they both agree in the same Inclinations, (as is
apparent in a great many sensual Delights, which are attended with stings and
gripes of Conscience, because the Inward Dictates of Reason and Religion
contradict them, and whisper to us their unlawfulness) so neither can they
separate their common Sorrow, for the loss of that which was an equal
Satisfaction to Both. And hereupon it is, that Joy and Sorrow are sometimes so
very Affecting, that there are several who have fainted and sunk away under
Both. They are no better able to bear a sudden Surprise of Joy, than they can
moderate their Passions under an unlookt for Calamity; Both overpower their
Spirits, and they prove too weak to bear up against them.

All which seem to concur in the Convincing us, that the Soul is capable of
Greater Joy and Sorrow, than the Body is able to bear, since this often faints
away, with an Excess of either: and may also be of use to demonstrate to us,
that our Souls were designed for another State besides this, since the Body, in
that Frame especially which it now is, cannot come up to that Perfection, which
the Soul is endued with.

Thus have I shown what Grief is, and wherein it consists. I shall now search
into the different Causes that produce it in the Minds of Men. And then I shall
endeavor to offer some Preservatives and Helps against it, whereby we may be
able to regulate it, prevent the Excesses of it, and confine it within the
limits of Reason and Religion. If we take these for our Guides in all our
Actions, we shall be patient and content in all Conditions; we shall neither
ground our Hopes, or Fears, Joys or Sorrows on Uncertainties, but shall at last
find to our unspeakable Satisfactions, that they will both conspire together,
in Leading us to the same End, the Perfection of our Nature, and the full and
entire Possession of all Happiness.

But here it may be Objected, that there are so many Miseries of Life, such
frequent and unthought of Dangers and Calamities, which are continually
thronging in upon us, and which make this State uneasy and uncomfortable to us,
that it would be a Vain Attempt to think of Obtaining an absolute Conquest over
them, and preventing their being an Impediment to us in our Way to Happiness.

To this it may be answered, That'tis our Weakness and Cowardice in resisting,
that makes these Enemies so formidable to us. A vigorous Opposition would soon
make them appear less Terrible The greatest Danger and Difficulty is in the
first Encounter; If we can withstand that Courageously, the Event must
necessarily prove successful to us. For all the Forces that these Enemies have,
are purely owing to our own Opinion, and as that changes, so will those
disappear. The Victory depends upon our own Will and Pleasure, and if we have
Resolution enough to Conquer, we shall never want Force and Strength to do it.
And certainly, that Happiness which this Victory will make us Masters of, ought
to engage us in the pursuit after it, notwithstanding all the Dangers that may
threaten us in the way to it. Methinks a Comfortable and Contented Life, such
as every Reflection upon may create new Pleasure and Delight in us; and at last
a peaceable, serene, and cheerful Death, with a joyful Prospect of another
Life, is a Happiness that ought to be purchased at any Rate; though at the
first there may appear some Difficulties to encounter, Miseries to undergo, and
Evils to suffer, before we can arrive at the Possession of it.

But besides it may be Objected, that there are some that never feel Miseries,
and have no Disappointmeents to grieve at: and therefore Grief is not so
General as we Imagine; or at least, the only Preservative against it is, to
follow the Examples of these Men who are never sensible of it.

To this, I can only say; That this Treatise was not designed for such. For it
would be a vain Endeavor to go about to persuade the Senceless, Stupid, and
Unthinking, that there is such a thing as Sorrow. These know no Happiness
beyond themselves, their Thoughts are few, and confined to a very narrow
Compass. They have no Joy or Sorrow, but what some sudden, and undesign'd
change of Countenance draws from them, and this perhaps without their own
Knowledge or Observation. To such as these it would be in vain to talk of
Reason, unless we could first make them understand what it is to-be Men. But if
any One shall still urge, that these are Happy; I can only answer, that
Happiness would be a very mean Enjoyment, if we should not be sensible of it.
For I think a rational Being can partake of no real Happiness, but what by just
and unprejudiced Reason it finds to be so. I suppose I may therefore pass on to
show the Causes of Grief, and seek out wiser Methods for securing our selves
against it, than these Men take up with.

OF The CAUSES of GRIEF.
THe shortness of Man's Life in General, as well as the Deaths of those, who
are most Dear to us, is become the subject of our daily Complaint. And yet was
Man to live here for ever, and be liable to the same Calamities, Troubles and
Vexations which even the Best of Men now labor under, we should esteem it the
Greatest of Miseries. Every day brings some disquiet along with it, and if we
are so happy as to get rid of that, we yet find still more Troubles that
oppress us, and a new succession of Grievances to complain of.

Every little Disappointment disturbs us, and we can scarce get one minute of
Ease, before innumerable unthought of Calamities come thronging in upon us. We
can promise our selves Security in nothing that we Enjoy, nor Certainty in any
thing that we hope for. When we imagine we are surrounded with nothing but the
Comforts and Pleasures of Life, a little Enlargment of Thought discovers to us,
that our Joys are not without a great mixture of Uneasiness. We find our selves
encompassed with Dangers and Disturbances, which we must always be afraid of,
obnoxious to Infirmities, which we can neither prevent, nor redress, subject to
Wants which we cannot supply, and liable to Fears which we are unable to
provide against.

Jealousies, Cares, and Anxieties, are the necessary Companions of all that we
can here call our own. Whilst we promise our selves an Age of Happiness in the
fruition of something that is Dear to us, the Fears that we find in our selves
left we should be deprived of it, will be often interrupting our Delights, and
so far prevail upon our Thoughts, as to sink our Spirits and pall even our
sweetest Pleasures in the very Enjoyment.

Had we nothing but the satisfaction this Life can give us, to depend upon,
every thing in it would soon become nauseous to us. The more we taste of it, the
more we discover how insufficient it is for Our Happiness; and how vain we are
in our Hopes and Desires, of a great many things, which are not in our power to
obtain, and yet if we should obtain them, they are not able to satisfy us. We
are always complaining of Want, yet know not what it is that will content us.
We are uneasy in such a Condition, and therefore extend our Wishes to something
else, which when Possessed, we find we still want something more to desire, and
that we have not found an End, but only a Change of our Miseries.

We are soon surfeited with our own Happiness, and what was one moment the
Object of our Admiration, is the next that of our Contempt. We are always
longing for a Change, and our best Delights so quickly cloy us, that we are
uneasy till they are relieved with a new Scene of Pleasures; yet when we have
enjoyed these, we are still as uneasy as before, and turn our Thoughts and
Wishes upon something else, which in the end proves as little satisfactory as
the former. Thus our Life is only an eager pursuit after something New; As
though our whole Happiness consisted in nothing else but Variety and Novelty.

This is the State and Condition of Man's Life in General, always desiring
something that he wants, or endeavoring to ease himself of something that is
troublesome to him. Both these are the Causes of his Sorrow, and will always be
disquieting him, while he courts an Imaginary Happiness, which slips away, when
he thinks he has the fastest hold of it.

These ought to be the subject of our daily Considerations. For if we take care
to inform our selves aright, of the Miseries and Troubles we ought to expect,
we shall be able to prevent the dismal Effects of them: we shall keep our
Reason firm and unshaken by all their Force and Violence; and though they may
hinder us from being perfectly Happy, yet they can never makes us Miserable.

If we consider Man through the different Stages and Passages of Life, we shall
find that his Expectations of true Happiness, and Satisfaction here Below are
only vain and unreasonable. Dangers and Difficulties, Troubles and
Disappointments, are so nearly interwoven with our Nature, more than any other
art of the Creation, that a arrow search into our Constitution, would almost
make us acknowledge, that Man alone was designed to Suffer and be made
miserable. As it were, on purpose to show us, that the right exercise of
Reason, was designed for higher and nobler Ends, than to be employed on the
Objects of Sense: and that the Imperfections of our Natural State, would make
us desire and seek after One more perfect: would make us acknowledge, that our
dependence is wholly upon Him, who alone can give us that Happiness, which we
here in vain seek to find: and how great a Folly and Madness it is, to set our
Minds upon Trifles, especially to the neglect of the most serious, and
necessary Duties of our Lives, and the most important End of our Being. And as
Nature has supplied all other Beings with what is necessary for their Security
and Preservation, and has provided them means for their own Support, almost as
soon as Born, whereby they seem not to have so much need of a Deity: so is Man
taught by those Natural Defects he comes into the World with, and by those
continual wants which he is not able to supply, to acknowledge himself more
peculiarly the Care of Providence, and beg its assistance and support under all
the Miseries and Afflictions of Life.

Let us suppose Man just come into the World; we shall find him neither Master
of himself, nor any thing besides: Helpless, and destitute of means for his own
Preservation; a Slave to the Miseries and Inconveniences of Life Tears,
Weakness, and Infirmities continually attending on him, defective in the use
both of Body and Reason. Yet it is an Age that in this is more Happy and Perfect
than any other part of Man's Life, that it has neither Sense to perceive, nor
Reason to reflect on its miserable Condition.

After Infancy and Childhood, follows Youth, hurried on by violent Heats, and
unruly Passions: without either Judgment to discern what is Praise worthy, or
Prudence to guide its Actions, or correct its Follies. Toward Superiors Tull.
de Consolat.
Proud and Contemptuous, Fierce and Savage toward its Equals, and toward its
Inferiors, Insolent and Arrogant. Despising whatsoever is Laudable and
Virtuous, and eagerly pursuing Vanities and false Pleasures. Easily drawn aside
by Lust and Envy, without making the least Opposition against them. Seldom
harkening to the Commands of Virtue or Reason, and wholly impatient of Reproof
and Instruction. In a word, Man is then Inconsiderate, Light and Inconstant in
all his Actions, always following the Bent of his present Inclinations: without
either sense of Duty, Friendship or Gratitude. As careless of his own, as of
others Reputation. Ever coveting what he admires in Others, and yet Extravagant
and Profuse of what he has himself. Prodigal of what he enjoys at present,
careless and Improvident of what may happen for the future. From all which, at
length proceed innumerable Troubles, Contumelies and Contentions. Infamy and
Obloquy fall upon him from without: and serious Reflections upon his past
Follies raise as great Disturbances within.

These are the Evils and Mischiefs which these unthinking Years are most liable
to; and though there are some, who have early imbibed the Principles of Virtue
and Generosity, and whom and Happy Education has prevented from falling into
those Ill Habits and vicious Courses, which Others have enslaved themselves to;
yet cannot we therefore conclude that Youth is less obnoxious to those Evils and
Inconveniences, since there are but very few who have so far Conquered the
Violence of their Passions, as not to be captivated by their Irregular motions.
And those too who are most secure are not exempted from infinite Dangers* and
Misfortunes. Envy, Malice, and Detraction threaten and assault them from
abroad; and their own Passions of Love, Fear, Grief, or the like, will
notwithstanding all their care and caution, so far get the Ascendant over their
Reason, as often to disturb if not wholly oppress them. Love is a Passion so
strongly rooted in our Nature, and especially apt to be most violent in our
Youth, that whatsoever we make the Object of it, we cannot forego the Loss of
it, without great Dissatisfaction, Reluctance, and Uneasyness.

Nor do our Miseries leave us with our Youth, as Age increases, so our Troubles
too. And when we are grown up, our longer Experience of Life only leads us to a
wider Prospect, and a more severe trial of the most dangerous Evils and
Mischiefs that attend it. Hurry, and Business, public and private Cares are
continually distracting us: and Reason which should now more especially be the
guide and measure of our Thoughts and Actions* seems to have the least share in
them. We suffer our Thoughts to soar high, and are strongly bent upon Desires,
beyond our Reach, and out of our Power to obtain; neither considering the Folly
of our Wishes, nor the Pain and Uneasiness, that our violent and restless
Desires necessarily bring upon us. We admire every thing at a distance, but
when we have a nearer View of it, it falls short of our Expectations, and the
Enjoyment of it proves unsatisfactory.

Avarice and Ambition are Vices all of us in some measure are corrupted with,
and though we cannot but be sensible of the Fears, Cares, and Troubles; the
Envy, Hatred and Malice, they unavoidably expose us to, yet still we are as
eager in the pursuit of our Designs, as though we expected a Real Happiness
from them. How miserable, says Seneca, as well as short is their Life, that
compass with great Labor, what they possess with greater, and hold with
Anxiety, what they acquire with Trouble. Our aims are at being Great, and all
our Arts and Methods are directed to that One end, which at the best, is a
State of Life the most slippery and uncertain of all others. For the higher we
rise, we still make no addition to our Happiness, unless it be by directing us
to the Search after it; I mean, by discovering to us the Weakness and
Imperfection of our Nature, the Extravagance of its Desires, the Uncertainty of
its Enjoyments, and the Impossibility of finding a solid or lasting
Satisfaction in them. And by teaching us that the most Perfect, and Real
Happiness of this Life, depends upon the certain Hopes and Expectations of a
Better.

But above all, our State is never more dangerous and deplorable, than when we
delude our selves, and cover our Vices, under the plausible Pretenses of
Virtue. And make use of our Affections to the flattering and betraying our
Understanding and Will. We use all means possible to heap up Wealth, out of a
pretense of doing good to Others, and sacrifice the Ease and Quiet of our Life,
to some cold Designs of Charity, which we can never put in Execution, while our
desires of Riches increase, which seldom end but with our Lives. We imagine
that Greatness is the only thing Honored and Reverenced in the World, and that
Riches alone are the Causes of it, that those who are Mean in the World can
have no Reputation, but are buried in Obscurity. That Poverty is Infamous, and
despised by all, and that it is a Punishment inflicted upon the worst and most
undeserving part of Mankind. Thus we flatter our selves to our own Ruin, and
blind our Reason to gratify our Passions. I don't say but a Good Man may have
interest in the Prosperities and Blessings of this Life, and use them with
Innocence. Since it is not the Things themselves but the Abuse of them, that is
Unlawful. A Good Man. says Seneca, does not contemn Temporal Blessings, so as
to drive them away, but if they come they are welcome, if not he will never break
his Heart for the want of them. He takes them into his House, not into his
Soul, and makes use of them, only as a Matter for his Virtue to work upon.
There is no doubt, but he may show himself better in Riches than in Poverty,
that is to say his Temperance, his Liberality, his Magnificence, Providence and
Prudence will be then more Conspicuous.

Riches are indeed in some measure subservient to a Man's Well-being in this
World; yet as the Enjoyment of them, cannot make us Happy, because uncertain and
insecure, so neither can the Want of them make those Unhappy, however they may
appear to Others, whose Disires and Ambition never soared after them, but who
contained themselves within those Limits which Providence had set them. That a
moderate desire of the Necessaries and Comforts of Life is not only Lawful but
Commendable, I do suppose it universally granted, but then we must take care
that we make them only as Instruments and helps to Happiness, but not Happiness
it self: and that they be as Companions to us, but not Guides in our way to
Happiness. There is this difference in Riches, that they are the Servants of
Good Men, whereas they are the Masters of the Bad, and of those who set their
Minds upon them. From the One, says Seneca, if they depart they carry away
nothing but themselves, but from the Other, they take away the very Heart and
Peace of the Possessor along with them. It is true that if I might have my
Choice, I would have Health and Strength, and yet if I come to be visited with
Pain or Sickness, I will endeavor to improve them to my Advantage by making a
Righteous Judgment of them; as I ought to do of all the Appointments of
Providence. So that as they are not Good in themselves, neither are they Evil;
but matter of Exercise for our Virtues; of Temperance, on the One hand, and of
Resignation, on the Other.

Those who make Riches their utmost care and concern, find Disappointments in
that kind very insupportable to them. For whatsoever Opinion a Man has of
Happiness, and whatever he places it in, if he chance to fall short of it,
whilst he continues in that Opinion, he must unavoidably be Miserable. And
therefore those who extend their Hopes and Desires to things out of their own
Power, and fix their Happiness upon them, cannot possibly avoid being so,
because they must frequently miss of their Desires, may be always disappointed
in their Hopes, and be often overtaken by their Fears: Thus the Ambitious and
Covetous, flatter themselves with Hopes, which they can never attain to; their
Desires increase with their Honors and Riches, and after all, Dissatisfaction
and Discontent prove to be the chief of their Enjoyment.

All the Happiness that this World can promise, is only to be purchased with a
great deal of Pains and Labor, is possessed with continual Cares and Fears, and
ends in Troubles and Vexation of Spirit. Even the Voluptuous Libertines who
make Pleasure their only Happiness, find a great mixture of Uneasiness and
Discontent always attending on it; either things do not fall out according to
their Wish, or else the Enjoyment cannot satisfy them; they either grow weary
of it, or it ends before they would have it; all which is matter of
Dissatisfaction to them.

But besides all this, that Anguish of Mind, that Horror and Remorse of
Conscience, which the Thoughts upon our misspent time, bring upon us,
imbitters all our Pleasures, and makes Life it self only a Burden to us. A
Reflection upon our past time, though it has been spent never so pleasantly,
though every minute of it has been entertained with the most delightful
Gratifications of the Senses, if at last the Mind be dissatisfied, will be so
far from giving us any Pleasure or. Contentment, that it will only serve to
enhaunce our Misery. and though we had formerly persuaded our selves to a
Compliance with the Modes and Humors of the Age, in some unlawful Practices,
that we might not be thought Morose and Uncivil, yet those false Pretenses will
then appear very insufficient to support us under the Terrors and Apprehensions
of a troubled Mind.

I should now come to consider the Miseries and Infirmities of Old Age. But
these are so manifestly Great, so universally Acknowledged, and fall so
commonly under every One's Observation, that a Description of them, would be
only superfluous and unnecessary. If to be Infirm, Feeble, and Helpless, to be
always in Wants, and yet unable to administer to their own Necessities, if to
labor under a continual Conflux of Distempers, without any prospect of Cure,
if to be always in Pain, without any hopes of Remedy, is to be Unhappy, then
certainly these Men above all Others, must be confessed to be so. Yet they have
this Advantage, above any other part of Man's Life to comfort themselves with,
that being Free and at Liberty, from the noise and hurry of Business, and no
way distracted with the tumultuous and troublesome Cares of Life, their Minds
are more at leisure to enjoy themselves with the happy Contemplations of their
Future State. The Pleasures of the Body, are no longer a Snare to them, and
like Men deprived of Sight, who have their Understanding more strong and
vigorous, by abstracting it from the Objects of Sense, their Souls are no
longer in Danger, of being drawn away to the Gratification of the Sensual
Appetite. They have a clearer, and more perspicuous Knowledge of Things, and
their long Experience of the World, has taught them to prize every thing
according to its Just Estimate. There is no Age, says Seneca, better adapted to
Virtue, than that, which comes by many Experiences, and Long-sufferings to the
knowledge of it, for our Lusts are then weak, and our Judgment strong, and
Wisdom is the Effect of Time.

They have learnt that to know themselves is the best Philosophy, that an
Intimate Acquaintance with their own Souls, is the truest Happiness: and as
they have a nearer View of another Life, so are they more ravished with the
Prospect of it, and their Hopes and Expectations grow more lively and affecting.

It must be confessed that where these Supports of a good Conscience are wanting,
there Men are more Miserable in this Age, than in all others; for in other
parts of man's Life, the Fear of Punishment is not so prevalent, because it
seems at a greater distance, and therefore does not so much disturb and torment
the mind in its Sensual Enjoyment, with the thoughts of it; but here the Soul
is in continual Anguish, the Body shaking and tottering, ready every minute to
crumble into Dust, the Soul amazed stands upon a dreadful Precipice, fearing
the next moment to sink into the Bottomless Hell. Now every Reflection that a
Bad man makes is only a new Addition to his misery, and every serious Thought,
is only a fresh Torment to him. All the Outward Pleasures, which he promised
himself Support from, begin to fail him, and he has no Comfort within to flee
to. If he looks backward, he can find nothing that can give him Satisfaction,
and if forward, nothing but Despair. All that he can expect is either to be for
ever miserable, or to become nothing. The Fear of the One persuades him to hope
for the Other: not that he can convince himself by reason to believe it, but
only that he has Reason enough to wish it might be so. For a Prospect of Misery
will put a Man upon a thousand Shifts and Evasions whereby to escape it, and he
is apt to take up with the least shadow or appearance of Reason, if he can
thereby obtain any Interval of Ease. For the Extremity of Fear, as of all other
Passions, puts the Soul into such Disorder and Confusion, that it endeavors by
all means to be released from the Torments of it; and if it can procure one
minute of Ease, it takes not time to consider the Reasonableness of the means
and measures that obtained

But let us suppose a Man had some Rational grounds to believe, that hereafter
he should not Be; yet that Belief could be no real Satisfaction to him; For if
he placed his Pleasures in the things of Sense, and the Enjoyments of them, and
if every Reflection upon them was pleasing to him, it must necessarily follow,
that the Thoughts and Fears of being deprived of them must be very uneasy to
him. For it is natural for us to Grieve at the loss of what we love, or if we
are separated from what we Admire. But if a Man takes no satisfaction in the
things of Life, and is grown weary of them, the Hopes of Annihilation can be no
great Pleasure to him, because they are Out-balanced by the Miseries of Life.
For if they were not, he would endeavor to live long in the Enjoyment of a
Hope and Expectation, which after Death he can no longer be sensible of.

It is certainly more Desirable not to be at all, than to be for ever
Miserable; but it is Rational also to ground my Belief of what shall be
hereafter, upon the most solid and certain Reasons, to consider which is most
likely to be true, and which side its most dangerous to Err on, and to take
care, lest Passion, Prejudice or Interest, should mislead or deceive me with a
naked Appearance instead of Truth.

As the Thoughts upon what is past and to come, are the Causes of Misery to the
Bad; so do they bring great Pleasure and Satisfaction to the Good. Their
Expectation of Happiness to come bears them up under all Afflictions here, and
a Reflection on their former Life, gives them a full assurance, that their
Expectation is firm and certain. Tho they have Imperfections to grieve at, and
many Troubles to encounter with, yet they are fully persuaded, that their
Imperfect State here, will be advanced to a full Completion of Happiness
hereafter.

Had a good Man nothing to expect beyond the Grave, his Condition would be
certainly most Miserable. Not but that there are more Pleasures, and more
lasting Satisfactions in the Practice of Virtue, than that of Vice: yet as they
are greater, so the Thoughts of being for ever deprived of them, would be more
insupportable. The Imperfect State that we are now in, shows that our Nature
desires something more complete. And as a Good Man, who gives himself more
Liberty in the free Exercise of his Reason, and conversing with the Nature of
Things, finds, that Virtue considering the unavoidable Imperfections,
Hindrances, and Infirmities that Life is ensnared with, can never be here
completely perfect, and consequently not its own Reward, so should he be
convinced, that he should be frustrated of those Desires he finds in his Soul
to Immortality, the Remainder of his Life would be uncomfortable, and the
Pleasures of Virtue altogether unsatisfactory. Had I no other Reasons to
convince me, that I shall Exist hereafter (as I think I have innumerable) yet
that very Antipathy which I find in my self to become Nothing, seems to me a
convincing Argument, and gives me sufficient Assurance, that I shall never fall
into it.

But I shall pass on from this Digression to consider some other Causes of
Grief, which every Age of Man that can make use of its Faculty of Reason, is
particularly concerned in. And which the more Thinking part of Mankind, have
always acknowledged as such. And these are the loss of a Man's Reputation, or
the loss of Friends. These of all other Afflictions (except that of a wounded
Conscience) fall most heavy upon us, and make the deepest Impressions upon our
Minds.

Every Man has a Natural Love for himself, and a Desire to be spoken well of by
Others. A good Name, and a fair Reputation not only make a Man's Life pleasant
in the World, but are also so far necessary to our Converse here, that whoever
seems careless or prodigal of them, justly forfeits his Pretensions either to
Honor or Humanity. When a Man has once lost his Credit, he is no longer fit
for Society, he is shunned and avoided by all, as though his very Company was
Infectious. Hence it is that those who are not ashamed to do an Ill Action, are
yet unwilling it should be made Public, lest it should blast their Reputation,
which they are generally more concerned for, than the viciousness of the
Action. For though they inwardly hate the Practice of Virtue, yet they are
ashamed the World should be made acquainted with it.

That Good Men may fall under ill Reports is too evident, and the World has had
too frequent Experiences of the truth of it; which is more to be lamented than
wondered at, since there is so much envy and malice amongst Men. Ill Nature
will always be finding Faults, and where there are none, will take an
opportunity to make them; and it is hard if there are not those who are
Ill-natured enough to believe them. But though the slanders and reproaches of
the Envious and Malicious, can never make a Good man miserable, yet'tis certain
they are a great abatement to his Happiness. As if Providence had permitted
them on purpose, to show us how insecure and slippery our best Foundations are
here, as also to teach us Humility, lest we should be too much in love with
Life, and set too high a Value upon our Selves, and our present Enjoyments.

I come now to consider another great Cause of our Misery and Sorrow, the Loss
of Friends. This of all Others falls heavy upon us, and is so much the greater,
because for ever Irrecoverable. All other Losses, as of Health, Reputation,
Honors, Riches, or the like, may either by Prudence or Diligence, be in some
measure repaired, but this alone can never more be restored to us. This is that
Separation, which makes this State so uneasy and burdensome to us, because it
deprives us of the truest Satisfaction, and Relish of Life. Nature has made us
Sociable Creatures, and all our Study and Endeavors, are designed to qualify
us for that End. And this we are above all things delighted with, because most
agreeable to us.

But thought our Love of Society is natural to us, yet the choice of our
Particular Company, is an Act of Prudence; For Friendship is not to be numbered
amongst the Goods of Chance and Fortune, but amongst those of Virtue. This is
the most charming of all our Delights, and which we are most fond of, and for
whose Sake, we are willing to undergo all the other Troubles and Miseries of
Life. The Enjoyment of this great Blessing, says Seneca, sweetens all our
Cares; dispels our Sorrows, counsels us in all Extremities, and is a sovereign
Antidote against all the Calamities of Life. It gives Comfort to bear us up in
all Adversities, and supplies us with Joy and Happiness, in the midst of the
greatest Afflictions; and so long as we can preserve the Enjoyment of it,
whatever else may befall us, we are sure never to be Miserable.

But not with standing the great Benefit and Advantage of this Blessing to
Mankind, yet it has this Imperfection in it, that it is uncertain; there is no
security against the Loss of it. It Is this we in vain lament, and continually
Grieve at, though we know our Grief can give us no Remedy. Friendship is so much
the Interest of mankind, that not to be sensible of the Loss of it, is either
to be more or less than Men. There are but few that are so much raised above
the Sense of this Calamity, as not to be affected with it. For it is one of the
greatest Trials of our Nature, and has need of the utmost Efforts of Virtue,
patiently to undergo it. Notwithstanding all our care and caution, our
strongest and most vigorous Resolutions prove too weak to withstand it. And we
find it an easier matter at a distance to reason about it, than to act
Prudently when we come to the Trial. And though we frequently imagine, we make
vigorous Preparations against it, yet when it falls upon us, it commonly finds
us Defenseless and Unarmed. We can never so far conquer our Love of Happiness
here, as to be separated from the Dearest part of it, without any Concern or
Reluctance. Nature so far prevails in us, notwithstanding the severest Dictates
of the most exalted Reason, that as it cannot possess its Enjoyments without a
great deal of Satisfaction, so neither can it bear the Losses of them, without
the greatest Regret, and the most passionate Expressions of Sorrow. And if it
falls not into Excess, I suppose there is none so much a Stoic as to condemn
it.

But the Loss of Friends is still more affecting, when we had almost promised
our selves a lasting Enjoyment of them: when the Health and Vigor of a
Constitution, joined with a sweet and obliging Temper, an affable and courteous
Behavior, a concern and tenderness for the Good of Others, an earnest study
and endeavor to promote the Public Happiness and Tranquillity of Mankind,
mixed with the most endearing Charms of Conversation, gave us large Hopes of
such a Happiness, as might withstand all the Designs of Malice and Envy, and
overcome, if possible, all the Uncertainties of Chance and Fortune. Such a
Loss, does certainly deserve our greatest Sense of it, challenges the utmost
Bounds of true Sorrow; and if any thing can, may excuse, at least in some
measure palliate the Excess of it. But although even this may never justify
such immoderate Grief, which abstracts the Mind, as well from the Duties of
Humanity, as those of Religion, yet it may serve to Convince us, how Vain a
thing it is to put our Trust and Confidence in Man, whose Days are few and
uncertain, and therefore to he but little accounted of.

Thus we see every Part, and Condition of Life, leads us only to a new Scene of
Miseries. Our first Entrance into Life is miserable; and the longer Experience
we have of the World, the more Calamities we have still to complain of. We
begin with Tears and Sorrows, and can never get secure of them, till Death
comes at last and pays the Ransom for us. There is no space of time that we
enjoy, with so much Freedom and Satisfaction as to pronounce our selves truly
Happy. We have always something or other either to fear or hope for. We desire
what we have not, and are afraid, lest what we are possessed of, should be
snatched away from us.

Though we know, that true or false Notions of Things, and the regulating of
our Desires, and all our other Passions, are in a great measure in our own
Power, yet we often deceive our selves, and suffer our Irregular Appetites, to
draw us aside against the clearest Convictions of Reason. There are few of us,
that can be persuaded to forego an Enjoyment, which we find no present Trouble
or Inconvenience from, though at the same time we are convinced that'tis a
Crime in us to indulge it, and that hereafter we shall be rewarded with a
severe Punishment, suitable to our Demerit.

If Nature has subjected us to many Troubles and Vexations, we instead of
redressing them, add innumerable Others to them. We live inconsiderately, and
as we are thoughtless of the lesser Misfortunes and miseries of Life, so are we
unprovided for the Greater, whereby it happens that they overwhelm us, and we
frequently sink under the weight of them.

There are several other Causes of our Grief and Disturbance, which every Day's
Experience gives us fresh Instances of, but I have not time to take notice of
them. These which I have mentioned, as I think they are the most Notorious, so
they may serve to convince us in general of the Necessity of looking higher for
Help and Support under them. And may also be of use to inform us, what a poor
indigent Creature Man is, and how much he wants of finding Happiness, while he
expects it from himself, or the Things of this Life. Was Happiness to be
obtained here, certainly after all the Searches that have been made after it,
some One or other would possibly have found it: But at last, all ends in this,
Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. What Profit has a Man of all his Labor,
which he takes under the Sun. Verily Man walks in a vain Shadow and
disquieteth himself in vain.

But though these Afflictions which I have mentioned be common to All, yet are
they terrible to None, but such as depend upon this Life for their Happiness.
Hence it will appear that our false Opinions of Things, and not the Things
themselves, are the Real Causes of our Misfortunes. Nothing is uncertain and
unconstant to him that is prepared against it; Nor does any thing come
unexpected to him that is provided for it. He that is settled and unconcerned at
the smiles or frowns of Fortune, can never meet with Disappointments. For he
that makes use of those Assistances, which the Great Author of Nature has
provided us with, whereby to mitigate, if not wholly to subdue the force of
Afflictions, can never be wholly overcome by them. Though Man, as (Tully
observes) Tull. Fragmen. De Rep.
comes into the World with a Body naked, Frail, and Infirm, with a Mind subject
to Cares and Troubles, dejected by Fears, impatient of Labor, and prone to
Lust; yet there is a Divine Flame of Wit and Understanding, which lies as it
were Obscure, and overwhelmed, which with due Care and Diligence may be so
improved as to fortify us against Troubles, to prevent our Fears, and subdue
our irregular Appetites and rebellious Passions. Had we no Misfortunes to
graple with, no Lusts or Passions to conquer, we should have so little use of
the Exercise of Virtue and Reason, that they would hardly have so much as a
Name amongst us. But how far and by what methods, we may both prevent our
Miseries and remedy our Griefs, will be now my Business to consider.

OF The REMEDY of GRIEF.
FReedom from Pain or Trouble is a Happiness we all aim at, but are most of us
mistaken in our Search after it. We are apt to be-so much concerned for what is
present, as to neglect making Provision for Futurity Could we give our selves
time to consider the extent and reason of Things, we should find little cause
to be excessive in our Enjoyments, or cast down with our Misfortunes, to be
elevated with our Hopes or distracted by our Fears.

Nature that has endued us with Passions, has also provided us with sufficient
Power to Regulate them. And though there are so many different Objects which
are apt to hurry us away, and biass our Inclinations, yet we have a Judgment
given us to distinguish between the Good and the Bad, to fix in our Minds true
notions of Things, and apply them to those proper Uses to which they were
designed.

Man is a Compound of Body and Mind, which have each a different Interest to
manage, and accordingly as either prevails, so the whole Bent of our Passions
and Inclinations turns: were we either all Sense or all Reason, we should have
nothing to mislead us, but should go on, in a direct Tendency to whatsoever was
most suitable to our Nature. The one would want Judgment, to know or value any
Pleasure above that of Sense; and the other could not conform it self to any
Enjoyments below those of the Mind, and the clear Knowledge of its own
Perfections. This is most like the Life of Angels, who have only Spiritual
Conversation to be delighted with; the Other, that of Brutes, who can never
raise themselves beyond the Apprehensions of their Sensitive Nature. Which of
these we ought to follow, either the Dictates of Sense or Reason, I should
think, had we no Prejudices that obscure our Understandings, would be no
difficult matter to decide. If a far nobler Being deserves the Preference to a
more Abject and Ignoble, then must also, the essential Difference of them be
placed in the same Degree of Superiority. But we are generally too much engaged
in the things of Sense, to be at leisure to pass a true Judgment upon them, and
thereupon are inclined to believe that their Enjoyments are Real, and agreeable
to the Dictates of Reason.

And thus we deceive our selves, till some cross Accidents or Misfortunes, some
Bodily Torment or Indisposition, gives us another notion of Things, and renders
all those Pleasures nauseous and distastful to us, which we before thought the
only true Happiness of Life.

And this I think it is, which discovers to us a sufficient difference beween
Good and Evil; that the Pleasure and Satisfaction arising from the one, is
durable and certain, not to be changed by the inconstancy of Fortune, or
impairments of Health and Constitution; whereas the other can be no longer
Enjoyed, or so much as reflected upon with Comfort, then the Body and the
sensible Appetite is qualified and rightly disposed* Was there no real
Distinction between what we call Virtue and Vice, in the foundation of Things,
why should the Reflection upon the One, when we can no longersatisfy our selves
with the Delights of it, cause such Remorse, Terror, and Distraction within us,
and the Other entertain us with such infinite Pleasure, whatsoever State of
Life we happen to fall into. Were all Actions the same, and derived their
Nature only from the Opinions of Men, why did it never happen that some Person
or other should have repented of a Good Action as well as of a Bad one? For the
Reason would be the same, since some Men's Opinions only of Good and Evil,
could never produce such violent Effects in the Minds of Others, especially of
those who Prosess to believe the Contrary.

But to come nearer: it is Afflictions alone which discover to us, the Essential
difference, between the Impressions of Fancy, and those of Reason. These set
things before us in their true Light, and dispel those mists from our Eyes,
which long Prejudice and Unthoughtfulness, had unhappily raised before them. It
is by this means we come to know and confess, that the Pleasures of Sense can
only satisfy the Sense, and that the Mind has no share in them. For if it had,
instead of being dissatisfied, it would please and divert the Body with the
thoughts of them, and when the Body is disabled, it would relieve it with a
grateful Remembrance of its past Enjoyments.

We find in our selves Reason to thank GOD for the Afflictions as well as the
Comforts of Life: when by these we are apt to forget our selves, and the
Relation we bear to another Life, and to fancy our selves already as Happy as
Heaven it self can make us, and unexpected Affliction deprives us of our
Imaginary Happiness, and instead of that, reduces us to the use of Reason,
makes us know our selves, and consider the End and Design of our Being. The
more we are oppressed with the Calamities and Troubles of this Life the more we
are taught to prize and seek after the serene and undisturbed Joys of another.

For if we look into the Soul, and observe the springs of its Motions, we shall
find, that Afflictions are generally the first occasion of Men's conquering
their Inclinations, of ennobling their Minds, of raising them to a due contempt
of the Enjoyments of Sense, and of keeping Humane Nature, with all its Desires,
within the bounds of Reason and Virtue.

We are generally apt to think Afflictions the greatest Misery that could
happen to us. Yet did we consider the Uses we ought to make of them, and apply
our selves to that End, we should at last find cause to acknowledge the
Goodness of Providence therein to us. And though they fall sometimes very
severe upon us, yet thereby we may be taught to live more Considerately, and
better provide ourselves against them, for the time to come. Did we leave all
our Concerns to Providence, and were contented to submit our selves to all its
Dispensations, we should find few Afflictions threatening us, but which we might
easily overcome. But we are so very fond of our present Ease, that we are
unwilling to be at any trouble in providing against a future Evil: And are
generally so careless, that we never regard a Misery that is coming upon us,
till it is too late to apply a Remedy. We are willing to be Happy, but yet would
be at no Pains and Trouble, whereby to make our selves so.

We seldom think of Afflictions till we are oppressed by them, and then we are
not able to resist the Weight of them. If this be our case, when unprovided
against the Calamities of this Life, it well deserves our utmost Care and
Diligence, since we cannot prevent them; to try by what means we may make them
most easy and useful to us, that in the End, we may grow both wiser and better
by them.

In order therefore to the Remedying our Griefs, and the supporting our selves
under all Afflictions, it will be necessary for us in the first place to
consider the Nature of those things which we generally make the Causes of our
Sorrow. In the next place, to fix in our Minds true Notions of Religion. And
lastly it will be our Duty to consider; what Dangers we expose our selves to,
if we indulge our Sorrow, and take no care to correct the Abuses of it. If we
try these Expedients, we shall never be wanting in our Duty either to GOD or
our selves; but shall make our Lives Comfortable and Pleasant as well as
Religious.

First of all then, for the fixing in our Minds the true Notions and Nature of
those things which we have a Concern for, whereby to guide our selves by the
Rules of Wisdom and Prudence, and to keep our Judgments steady and inflexible,
so as not to be drawn aside by the Violence of our corrupt Affections, it will
be necessary to consider whether they are Certain, Durable and Constant, or of
a perishing Nature, and short Continuance; what Relation it is that they bear
to us, whether they are such as we can call our Own, or at the disposal of
Others, and such as we may at any time be deprived of. As also, what is the Use
and End of them. Whether they were given us to be our only Happiness, or lent
us upon Conditions, to see what Improvements we could make of them. And then it
will be our wisest way to value or esteem them accordingly; and set that price
upon them, which we find the Nature of them deserves*

Reason was given us for this End, to form our Judgments a right, and so far to
direct us in our way to Happiness, that we may not make that the Object of it,
which is altogether Insufficient for it; that we may not be deceived with
Shadows, nor mistaken in those things which are of greatest Importance to us.
We can easily pardon and pass by an Error in a small matter both in our selves
and Others; but we ought to he very Careful and Cautions how we fall into
mistakes where the Consequence is dangerous, and when our Peace or Misery
depends upon it.

When we act most Rationally, we generally value Things according to the
Duration and Continuance of them, as well as to the Propriety we have in them.
What is not our own, though we may admire it, yet we cannot dote upon it, nor be
much concerned what becomes of it, because we bear no Relation to it: nor are
we very Sollicitous about any thing that we our selves cannot Enjoy. And though
it be something that we have a Right to, and which we may Enjoy, yet if we are
sure, that it will be only for a very short inconsiderable time, it is little
more Satisfaction to us, than the not Enjoying it at all, since we cannot enjoy
it always Hence we may gather what uncertain things all Worldly Enjoyments are,
and how little there is here Below, that we can call our Own as also what Value
to set upon things which we have no certain or lasting Right to, and how
unbecoming it is to a Rational Being to contract an Eternal Passion, for what
can endure but a moment. Since he cannot avoid being Miserable that fixes his
Happiness on what is not lasting: And it is plain, that since we are not to
Live here always, that no present Enjoyment can be an Essential Happiness to
us, which as soon as we have tasted, we are snatched from, or that from us.

Did we but consider that the best of our outward Enjoyments are not at the
disposal of our own Wills, and that they are such as we could promise our
selves but a short Possession of, and that too very uncertain, it would abate
our Care and Fondness of them; It would teach us to make them so far our
Happpiness, as not to be unhappy or miserable at our being dispossessed of them.
This would lessen our Fears, increase our Cowrage, and put us upon the Practice
of those Virtues which we have most need of, and in which we are generally most
defective, Patience and Contentment of Mind.

But this like all other Duties of Religion, is not a Work to be done on a
sudden, but requires great preparation and fixedness of Mind, strict Attention
of Thought, constant Reflections on Humane Nature, and daily Observations on
the uncertainty and instability of Things. And it is better done before we are
exercised with Afflictions, than deferred till we come to the Trial. This will
look like a Necessity, the other a Virtue. Besides, that will be a very unfit
time for us to begin so necessary a Duty. It is like delaying Repentance to the
last Hour, when the sense of our Guilt, and the misery of our Condition, not
the love of Virtue or Religion, makes us cry out for Mercy, though it can give
us but small hopes of Pardon.

The Distempers of the Mind, as those of the Body are better prevented than
cured. As Temperance is the best Physic, and preservative of the Body; so a
calm and serene Temper of the Mind, a moderation toward all external Things,
keeps us even and free from Prejudice, and gives us leisure to judge rightly of
the Nature of them, whereby we are able to make our selves easy under every
Accident that may happen, and amidst all the Varieties of Fortune, which may
either flatter us on the one Hand, or threaten us on the Other.

It Is our false Opinions of Things that plunge us into most of our Troubles and
Disorders; if we have Prudence enough to rectify these, and settle our
Judgments as well as Desires, upon what is truly Good, we shall be so well
prepared against all Events, and so well fortified against all the Miseries and
Calamities of Life, that they will never be able either to disturb our Peace,
or dispossess our Reason.

But we shall find this further Advantage by considering the Insufficiency of
all things here for our Happiness, that it will necessarily lead us to that
which is alone sufficient for it: If we find Imperfections in our selves, we
must conclude that there is something Perfect; because a Sense of the First
necessarily infers a Belief of the Latter. For we cannot know that we want any
thing, but by comparing our selves with that which has whatsoever we are
defective in; and this by a necessary Train of Consequences directs us to Him,
who is Perfection it self, and out of whose immense and inexhausted Treasure,
all our Wants and Necessities can alone be supplied.

But again, if we form in our Minds certain and firm Judgments of Things,
according to the essential Good or Evil of them, we shall direct all the
Actions of Life according to them. By this means we shall keep our Minds
peaceable and temperate, and prevent the disorders of our Passions and
Affections; whatever it is that we love or hate, we shall presently consider
the Reasons that engage our Affections to it. If we find that it is Mortal and
Uncertain, we shall fix our Minds upon it, as a thing we know we can enjoy but
a short time; and therefore if we should be deprived of it, it will be no more
than what we were always in expectation of, and what we were prepared for. If
we are reduced to Poverty, our Condition of Mind will be still the same. We
know that Riches make themselves Wings and fly away: And therefore as the Great
Emperor Antoninus observes of Socrates; We Shall know how to want and enjoy
those things, in the want whereof other Men, such as the unsettled and
unthinking show themselves Weak, as well as Intemperate in the Fruition.

Until I have fixed in my Mind some Principle to act by, I shall only live at
Random, frustrated by a Thousand Uncertainties, always at a loss in my
Expectations, deluded with Shadows, lost in Errors, Uncertain either what to
hope for, or what to fear, yet continually distracted and hurried on by the
Extremes of Both. My Actions will never be directed to any wise or prudent End;
and if Good results from them, it must be imputed to Time and Chance, and not
to the Rules and Conduct of Prudence. There can be no Virtue, unless our
Actions proceed from Choice and Deliberation. I may give all my Goods to Feed
the Poor, but unless I give them with a Religious Design, out of a pure
Principle of satisfying their Necessities, and doing Good by it, I cannot call
it Charity: For if I am naturally Pitiful and Compassionate, I may give to
gratify my Inclinations, without thinking or proposing any other End by it, and
then it is not so properly Charity, as Goodnature in me.

In short, Our chief Business is to form in our selves true and certain Notions
of Happiness and Tranquillity of Mind, what way it is that leads to them, and
then to determine our selves to the Attainment of them. We are first to know,
and then to practice; and though both our Knowledge and Acquisition of Happiness
here, are but very imperfect, compared with that which will hereafter be
revealed to us, yet they will be sufficient to disperse all our Griefs, to arm
us against Afflictions, and prevent our sinking under the Weight of them.

To propose the quiet and serenity of our Minds, as the end of all our Actions,
is to make a great Progress in our way to Happiness: And will give us sure
Hopes of resisting all Temptations that may hinder us, or give us any stop in
our Search after it: And to this purpose we ought frequently to make a strict
Enquiry into our Condition, whether we are in the direct way that leads to it:
And then it will be necessary to take so far a view of our selves, as to
examine, whether we are not under any mistakes, either in our Notions, or in
the pursuit of them. For a mistake or ignorance in either, will one time or
other unavoidably make us Unhappy.

And here it may be expected, that I should show wherein consists that Peace
and Tranquillity of Mind, that we may be neither deceived in our Notions about
it, nor miscarry in our Endeavors after it.

To obviate all Objections, that may arise from hence, it may be sufficient to
answer in general. That Peace and Satisfaction of Mind depends not upon any of
the external Enjoyments of Life for its Happiness; nor is it liable to be
deprived of it, by any Accidents or Misfortunes. Its Happiness is within its
self, and whatsoever happens from without can neither really add to it, nor
detract from it; its neither sollicitous nor careless about the things of
Sense; it is moderate in its Desires, neither tormented with Fears, nor
impatient in its Hopes, neither anxious about Life, nor afraid of Death. Its
Actions are always one and the same; and the Great measure of them is
Conscience, as it is rightly informed by the Precepts of true Religion. In a
word, Peace of Mind is that, which prudently and cheerfully performs whatever
God commands, and patiently bears whatever Punishments he inflicts. And has
also this great Perfection to persuade our Search after it, that when we can
once Attain it, it is our Own for Ever.

And this leads me to consider in the next place, what are the most proper
Methods we can make use of, to obtain this Peace and Calmness of Mind, which
may support and comfort us under all Afflictions.

And this is what I observed in the Second place, the fixing in our Minds a
true Sense of Religion, joined with a sincere Endeavor of living up to all the
Precepts of it. The main Design of Religion is, to enlarge our Understandings,
to rectify our Wills, to subdue our Lusts and irregular Passions, and to wean
our Thoughts from this World, by proposing the Eternal Happiness of the Next:
that is, It teaches us to walk by Faith and not by Sense: To forego all these
short and imperfect Pleasures, for those perfect and endless Joys, which all
they shall have a full Possession of, who by patient Continuance in Well-doing
seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality. It endeavors to work upon our
Understanding, by convincing us, of the Unreasonableness of being too much
concerned at any thing that may befall us here, since these Afflictions which
are but for a Moment, if we make a good use of them, will work out for us a far
more exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory. It shows us, that what we here call
Felicity, is not able to satisfy us, and therefore persuades and invites us to
set our Affections upon that immense and everlasting Good, where we shall have
nothing more to desire than what we enjoy; or nothing to add to our Happiness,
because it will be perfect.

For true Happiness is that, which when we are once possessed of, there can be
nothing left us to Desire, because that alone is able to satisfy us: For He
that desires any thing above all Others, will make all other things subordinate
to this His chief Happiness; and if he can be secure in his Enjoyment of that,
whatever may befall him, it is impossible he should be miserable. If we could
therefore make God our chief Happiness, and resolve our Actions into a
Conformity to His Will, we may be said to be properly as Happy, as this State
can be capable of: And though hereafter we shall receive large Additions to it,
yet it will be the same Happiness, continued to us in a more full Enjoyment of
the chief Good, which could not so clearly manifest it self to us under this
Veil of Flesh, which in a great measure intercepts that glorious Appearance.

But besides, Religion is not only our greatest Comfort and Support under
Afflictions, by laying before us the Rewards of the next Life, but also the
Happiness of this; it has the Promise of this Life, as well as that which is
to come. Whatever* State we are in, it gives us Peace and Ease under it; it
makes every Condition happy, because it brings Patience and Contentment along
with it: It makes us Enjoy that we have, and keeps us from Craving what we have
not; in a word, Godliness with Contentment is great gain.

How much better is it for us, had we no Prospect of another Life, to live at
Ease and free from Troubles in this, than to be continually vexing and
tormenting our selves at every cross Accident that may befall us, and make our
Condition, miserable enough in it self, still more miserable, by an Addition of
new and unnecessary Sorrows and Troubles. The Best of the Heathens, though they
had very uncertain and obscure Notions of another Life, and were ignorant of
the Rewards, proposed to the Observance of God's Commandments, yet in their
Writings forbid the indulging our Sorrows, upon a Principle of Peace and Quiet
in this Life, and from the Incongruity they found in them to the Actions of
right Reason, and to that Order, Grace and Constancy, that Greatness and
Majesty, which ought to be observed in the exact Practice of Virtue. How much
more ought we, who have larger Degrees of Knowledge, and more sublime Rules to
guide our Lives by, to be constant and watchful in the Duties of that Religion,
in the keeping of which there is great Reward: In this World, true Peace and
Tranquillity of Mind, and in the World to come Eternal Life.

But of all the great Branches of Religion, there is none more necessary, for
the governing of our Lives, and the supporting our weak Nature under all
Afflictions, than these Two: First, The belief and acknowledgment of a
Providence; And Secondly, The Immortality of the Soul.

As to the First, The Belief of a Providence is the main Foundation of all
Religion: And is not only the greatest Encouragement, to a Holy Life, but is
also the true Source and Principle of all our Happiness and Comfort in this
World. That this Universe is governed by Almighty Wisdom and Power, that all
things here are under the especial Care of infinite Goodness and Mercy, that
they are at the immediate Disposal and Order of an Omnipotent Being, and that
Chance and Fortune have no management of any of our Affairs, is the greatest
Blessing and Happiness of Mankind. What an unspeakable Satisfaction must it be
to the Minds of Good Men, to think that Providence is always watching over them,
and that the Malice of the most. Wicked Men, can never do them the least
Injury, without God's order or permission. It is a noble Saying of the Great
Heathen Emperor, M. Aurelius, That if there were no GOD to take Care of Humane
Affairs, He would not desire to Live any longer in the World. All the
Enjoyments of this World would be very unpleasant, as well as uncertain, if
that Harmony which is now observed in all the Divine Acts of Providence, were
changed into Confusion, and Man, now the most exalted of all sublunary Beings,
would become the most helpless and unhappy of all the Creatures.

Troubles and Calamities are unavoidable, and therefore we must expect them.
For Man is born to Trouble as the Sparks fly upward; and therefore it is
necessary that we should seek out for some Support under them, and depend upon
something, that may be at all times a Comfort to us. Now Comfort is nothing
else, but the repelling an Evil that disturbs us, by the Help and Mediation of
what we account a Good. And the greater the Evil is that oppresses us, so is it
necessary that the Good we depend upon for Relief, should be able to deliver us
from it. But that nothing is able to do this but the Chief Good, is evident
because nothing besides is sufficient for our Happiness: Therefore it appears
that it is GOD alone that we ought to depend upon for Succor in all our
Adversities, who both can and will deliver us, and be our Consolation and
Support, amidst all the Adversities of Life, and the Terrors and Pangs of
Death. We are His Creatures, whom He made, not so much to show His Power, as
His Goodness; and whom He formed out of the Dust only to advance to Happiness.
Every Day's Experience gives us fresh assurance of His constant Preservation of
us, is only to give us larger Opportunities of qualifying our selves for a more
Glorious State: He is always waiting to be Gracious, and all that He requires
of us is, that we should believe His Promises, and show our Reliance upon them,
by a cheerful Obedience to all His Commands, a pious Resignation to His Will,
and a certain Expectation of a happy Issue out of all our Afflictions, through
an entire Dependence on His Goodness.

For since the constant and wise Order of Nature gives us undeniable Proofs of
a Providence, and every Day's Experience teaches us, that our Preservation, as
well as our first Being, is wholly owing to its All-wise Goodness and Bounty,
with what cheerful Resignation and Submission of our selves, and all that we
have any Relation to, ought we to acknowledge its Right and Sovereignty over
us; and commit our selves to Him, who cares for us. For in Him, we live, move,
and have our Being.

As it is He that made us, and not we our selves, so do all the Mercies and
Blessings we enjoy, proceed from Him. But these generally slide away
unregarded, because common to us. But when Afflictions or Miseries overtake us,
we are apt either to call His Being or His Justice in question. We claim the
First as our due; and complain when we are oppressed with Evil, that His Ways are
Unequal.

Did we always think it our indispensable Duty, to have a special Regard to GOD
and Providence in all our Actions, to consult what we find most agreeable to
His Will, and always measure our Actions by it: we should find Him a GOD at
Hand to us in all Conditions, and our best Support under all Adversities. We
should then be always mindful, that whatsoever we enjoy is not properly our
Own, but only lent us for a time. And that the same Hand, that bestowed all our
Good things upon us, may withdraw them from us, when he thinks convenient,
without doing us the least Injury That they were granted us upon Conditions,
and not to continue Ours for ever. And that if we set too high a Value upon
them, and forget Him that gave them, we only take a Method, that will some time
or other assuredly make us Miserable. For we are never in greater danger of
being deprived of any Earthly Enjoyment, than when we are too fond of it, and
set our Hearts so much upon it, as to make it our Chief, if not only, Happiness.

For when the Affections are depraved by Sensual Enjoyments, there is a
necessity of meeting with Crosses and Troubles, that the Miseries and
Disappointments that befall us in the very same Instances, may correct and
chastise us for the Excess of Pleasure we formerly took in them. And this
Method Providence often makes use of, as very necessary to convince us of our
Errors in over-valuing the Objects of a misguided Passion.

If I am convinced that GOD Governs the World, and that he has a Right and
Sovereignty over all His Creatures, and may order and dispose of them, as He
thinks best, to answer the Great and Wise Ends of His Providence, it is my Duty
patiently to submit to His Appointment, without questioning either His Wisdom
or Justice. For an Humble submission to all the Methods of Providence, is a
direct Inference from the Belief of it. And to repine at any of its
Dispensations is either to question the Principles of Religion, or the Care of
Providence over us. We came into this World not to Command, but to Obey. And
have these Bounds set us, as well to be the guide of our Actions, as the
subject of our Petitions, Not Our Will, but His be done.

But besides, how much better is it for us, cheerfully and submissively to
resign our selves to all the Appointments of Providence, than to do it by force
or compulsion. Obey we must, whether we are willing or no. There is no
Contending with God; For who can say unto Him, What do Thou? If He speaks
the word, we are Consumed; If He takes away our Breath, we die, and are turned
again to our Dust.

But another great Consideration to persuade us to a willing and cheerful
Submission to all the Appointments of God's Providence is, that whatsoever
Troubles or Afflictions He lays upon us; they are designed for our Good. He
that is All Goodness Himself, does nothing but what tends to promote that Great
End. He is a Tender and Merciful Father as well as a just Judge; and all the
healing Methods of God's Providence are directed to no other purpose, than to
restore the Soul to its primitive Purity, and to invite us to Obedience, and
persuade us to lay hold of his Mercy and Loving Kindness, that we may escape
the severe Effects of his Justice. All the means that He makes use of by His
Providence, are for our Benefit, though the manner of His dispensing of them
may be different: sometimes he invites us with Promises, and if those cannot
awaken us, then he pursues us with Threatenings; sometimes he afflicts us, that
our Virtues may be confirmed by the Use and Exercise of Patience: and at other
times he lays heavy* Crosses upon us, least a too long Course of Felicity
should make us become Remiss and Luxuriant. For did we make a right use of our
Enjoyments, we should never be terrified or dejected with Afflictions; they
would be only as gentle Chastisements, to incite and quicken our Diligence, but
not abate our Courage, or stop us in our way* to Happiness. But the case of
most of us is far different, we forget GOD in our Prosperity, and in our
Adversity complain of him. Did we look back to the Causes of his Anger, and not
only consider the Effects of it, we should see great Reason to acknowledge the
Justice of his Providence, and that we alone have done Wickedly, and that all
His Judgments are Righteous. For if we have not been sufficiently Thankful for
the Goodness of Providence to us, why should we repine if it tries other
Methods to reduce us to Obedience, and an acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty
over us?

How can we say that God has forgotten to be Gracious or that his Mercy is
clean gone for ever; When our Sins are the only Cause of our Sufferings? All
that he designs is to show us, that it is our Interest as well as Duty to
remember him in every Condition of our Lives: and that a Dependence upon him is
the only Support under all Afflictions, and the best Comfort against all the
Apprehensions of Evil for the future. And that he is the only Security against
all the dangers and mischiefs to which the Frailties and Infirmities of our
Nature continually expose us.

What a Happiness is it for us that we have an Allsufficient God to take care
of us, when nothing else can; to relieve us in our greatest Straits and
Exigencies, and to comfort us under our sharpest Sufferings? And all this upon
the easy Condition of our Dependence upon him for every thing that we want, and
our Submission to his Will in the various Dispensations of his Providence,
either in correcting us for the Sins we have Committed, or in punishing us for
some Omission of our Duty.

What is there then, that can shake the Constancy of our Mind, or disturb the
Peace and Tranquillity that will always attend it, if we have Almighty
Goodness, Mercy, and Compassion, to be our Defense and Comfort? If he takes
away any of our Enjoyments, it is only to endear Himself the more to us; and to
show us that he is constantly One and the same, Good and Gracious to us, able
to satisfy* all our Desires, and to supply all our Wants: and how all things
here are Frail and Uncertain, as well as very Imperfect, and altogether
unsatisfying, though they might be enjoyed for ever. If he deprives us of our
dearest Friends and Relations; he does it with a design of being a Friend
Himself to us; and that he may have the first Place in our Affections, who is
always ready to assist and counsel us in all our Adversities, and is as willing
as he is able to do it.

But he is not only desirous of helping us in all our Necessities, but is
always present to us. And whenever we are pressed with any sudden and
unexpected Calamities, if we apply our selves to him, we are certain, either to
have them removed from us, or be endued with sufficient Strength to bear up
against them. His Hand is never shortened, and though he may withdraw some of
our Blessings from us, for some Ends best known to Himself, yet he is still
able to give us Greater. He has always innumerable Mercies in store, his
Goodness can never be exhausted. And he is able to confer Blessings upon us, as
far above what we can conceive, as they are above what we can deserve.

Were the Joys of the next Life mean and inconsiderable, and not to be compared
with those this World affords us, there might be some appearance of Reason, for
the placing our Affections upon the Delights and Entertainments of Sense; and
for the continually lamenting the loss of those, who have been taken from this
to a far worse State. But since they are such, as Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, we ought to engage
our Thoughts there, and let no Worldly Interest withdraw our Minds from the
delightful Contemplations of that Glorious Fruition. For it is an undervaluing
of those Celestial Enjoyments, to suffer any Considerations or Disappointments
from without to alienate our Affections from them. Nor can we more depretiate
the Glory of the other World, than by setting up any other Desires in
competition with it.

How ought we then to acquiesce in all the Acts of his Providence, and not to
distrust his Kindness and Goodness to us, but to endeavor to submit in all
things to his Will and Pleasure, though his Proceedings are never so directly
contrary to the present Bent of our Affections. Though he takes from us those
we had the most tender and sincere Affection for, and strips us of all our
Worldly Enjoyments, If His Will be done, why should We be dissatisfied? Our
Crimes and Offenses against him, have certainly deserved greater Punishments
than those he inflicts upon us. And we have reason not so much to complain of
the severity of our Sufferings, as to be thankful that they are no greater, and
that they are far short of what our Sins deserve.

From all this it appears, that our Afflictions are designed by Providence to
work for Good to us: And that if we take care to submit our selves cheerfully
and patiently to GOD's Will and Pleasure in every Condition of Life, He will
not only support and comfort us under all Afflictions, and give us Strength to
bear them, be they never so heavy upon us; but will also make them an occasion
of greater Good to us, by turning them to our Advantage, in order to promote
our future Happiness, and quicken our Endeavors in the Search after it.

And this brings me to consider in the next place, that other Branch of
Religion, which I mentioned, as very necessary to the supporting us under all
the Sufferings of this Life; The Immortality of the Soul.

This is that Doctrine, that so much endears to us the Practice of Virtue, and
persuades us to forego all the Pleasures of Sense, and resist all the
Temptations which this World offers us, if they stand in Competition with the
Precepts of Virtue. The Belief of this gives Life to all our Religious
Endeavors, encourages us to a vigorous Prosecution of our Duty, and makes the
Reflection upon our past Life pleasant and delightful to us. The certain Hopes
and Expectations of another Life after this, invite us to such an eager pursuit
after it, that we ought to be little concerned for any thing that may befall us
here. Whatever Calamities may threaten us in this World, they can only hurt the
Body, we may keep the Soul free and untoucht: That, after a little time, will
be subject to Mortality, and crumble again into its Primitive Dust; but This
will Live for Ever, and be Eternally Happy or Miserable. Why should we then be
concerned, at the Loss of any of our Friends; For it is the Body only, the worst
Part of them, that is subjected to Mortality; the Soul's returned to God that
gave it. And though it is now separated from us, yet after a Moment we shall
meet again. It is a great Comfort against the Loss of Friends, that they are
not quite taken from us When we have run out that short, inconsiderable space
of time, that is between us and Eternity, we shall arrive together at the same
Place, and be for Ever inseparably Happy.

What Reason have I then to repine at my being now separated from them, whom
after a very few days I shall see again. Why should a short Parting make the
rest of my Days uneasy, which I ought to spend in the delightful Contemplation
of those Joys, which our next Meeting will give us a full and an everlasting
Possession of? Could I confine my Hopes to the next Life, I should be but
little concerned at what may happen to me in this. Should I lose my Friends and
Relations, One of the greatest Supports and Comforts of this Life, yet I should
be fortified against it. I know I must lose Them, or they Me. What matters it
who goes First? We shall at length meet again, and participate together of
those boundless Pleasures, which shall not end, till Eternity if self shall
cease to be.

But besides, we cannot say, that they are hastily snatched from us, who by the
Improvements of their Minds in all the Excellencies of Knowledge, which they
had also copied out in their Practice, had answered all the Ends and Designs of
Living; and who, if we consider them in relation to themselves, had lived here
long enough; though for our own sakes, and the Good of others, we could have
wished them a much longer stay, more to serve our own, than, (which would be
more generous) to consult their Interest. For since we must Die at last, what
does it signify, if we leave this World something sooner, than perhaps in the
Course of Nature we might have done; nay rather, is it not much more preferable
to be delivered out of this troublesome Passage to obtain an immortal Life?

How Happy then will that State be, wherein we can only be said properly to
live: For what we call Life here, says Tully, is only Death; nor does the Mind
truly Live till released from the Clogs and Fetters of the Body, it enjoys
Eternity. We ought not therefore to think Death and Evil, but rather the
greatest of Benefits: Because as it eases us of all those Miseries which Life
brought upon us, so it gives us a perfect and serene Prospect of Joy and Peace
hereafter. If therefore we are born and live Miserable, and die Blessed, who
would not rather choose to be made Happy by being disunited from this Body, than
to live under a constant Oppression of Miseries? We are all of us weary of
Life, why should we be afraid to Die? If Sufferings and Afflictions are uneasy
and burdensome to us, why should we be un willing to welcome that, which is
the best Remedy for them? And that it is designed as a Token of God's Favor
and Kindness to us, seems plain by His frequent calling away the Best soonest
from this to a better State, thereby to free them from all the Evils and
Calamities which this Life is liable to. And also to teach us that stay behind,
to be neither too fond of this Life, nor afraid of Death, which Heaven has
bestowed as a Blessing upon those, who were best prepared for it.

And this shows us that God is not only Just in appointing Death to all Men;
but that his Wisdom and Goodness eminently appear in it, since it is so much
for the Advantage of Mankind, to exchange this Imperfect and Troublesome
Condition, for that most Durable and Perfect, prepared for us in the Heavens.

Hence we may learn the vast Disproportion between this Life and the other; For
was not the next Life infinitely better than this, God would not so soon remove
those to that other State, who have used their best Endeavors to live in
Conformity to all the Divine Precepts in this.

From hence it appears if we have any love for Happiness, how desirable Death
ought to be to us; and if we think it our Interest to desire it as best for our
selves, we ought to esteem it as such for our Friends too. For can we wish
better to our selves, than to those we have the most tender affection for? Or
would we have our selves only Happy and them Miserable? Or are we displeased
that they are blessed by Death, while we are encumbered and troubled with Life?
If we are not, what is it that makes us Impatient at their being delivered from
all those Dangers and Adversities, those Sorrows and Vexations, which they had
here every moment experience of.

If the Story which is told us of some of the Heathens weeping at the Birth of
their Children, and rejoyceing at their Death, as looking upon one the
Beginning and the other the End of their Miseries, may find any Credit with us,
methinks it should give us a far different Idea of Humane Nature, than we seem
to have been yet acquainted with, or make us a shamed of our Practice in a
Religion, which lays before us the greatest Motives and Advantages to invite us
to our Duty, and not only gives us the best Rules to direct us, but also
encourages us with the most certain Promises, of far greater and more durable
Rewards than any other Religion can pretend to. It is a great disgrace and
scandal to our Profession, that notwithstanding, we have greater Expectations,
and larger Assistances in all our Necessities, yet to be outdone by Heathens in
a principal Part of our Duty. They saw the defects of our Nature, and the
certainty of our Miseries, and though they could not search into the hidden
Causes of them, and know from whence to derive a Remedy for them, yet they were
sensible to be expected in Death, than in the mean and imperfect Satisfaction
of Life. Of the one they had already sufficient Experience, and since they
found in themselves a natural Desire after Happiness, they concluded, that
either that Desire was implanted in them in vain, or else it must be expected
in the other Life. This at least they were certain of, that this Life was a
Burden to them, and therefore those were to be accounted most happy, who were
soonest releast from the Miseries of it.

If Reason could go so far by its own Strength, what may not we expect from it,
when it is improved by the Advantages of Revelation; which not only leads us to
the Causes and Original of our Miseries, and shows us from whence they sprung,
but also teaches us how to subdue our inordinate Passions, which still foment
them in us, by laying before us the great Helps and Assistances we shall find,
if we use our best Endeavors to overcome them; and that if we patiently submit
our selves to the Hand of Providence, it will order all things for our Good,
and make even Death it self, the beginning of an immortal Life to us, and
translate us to those happy Mansions, which we shall inhabit for ever with
these whom we so Dearly Esteemed, and who made even this troublesome Life while
here, almost pleasant and desirable to us. What Joy will it be to meet,
embrace and converse with, our Friends and Realtions, who will be then Ours for
Ever! What great Motives have we then, patiently to bear our Troubles and
Sufferings, considering the Recompense of the Reward hereafter!

But some perhaps may say, they could bear with the Loss of their Friends, were
they satisfied of their Happiness in the Other World. To this we may answer,
that it does not belong to us to search into the Hidden Counsels of God. We are
taught to have Charity for all Men, and we ought not especially to deny it to
our Dearest Friends. But besides if they had all that Sweetness of Temper, that
Candor, Gentleness and Charity toward Others, which usually make Men
respected and admired here, joined with a true sense of Religion, a just
Demeanor to all the Truths and Promises of it, and a sincere Obedience to its
Laws and Precepts, though mixed with the common Infirmities of Mortality, we are
in Duty obliged to think, that they enjoy the Benefits and Rewards annexed to
their sincere and faithful Endeavors. We may add to this, that those earnest
Desires which we find in our selves, of enjoying them longer here, seem to
insinuate and whisper to us, that they, whose Conversations were so innocent
and agreeable to us, and made so great a part of our Happiness here, can never
fall short of that themselves in another Life, which they always most
passionately endeavored, though in an inferior Degree to promote in this.

What is there then left for us to Grieve at? Let us take an Estimate, not of
our Loss, but their Gain. And if we cannot as yet be Happy, let us content our
selves with thinking that they are so. Nor ought we so much to lament their
being already taken from us, as be thankful that we have enjoyed them so long.
And besides, that as our Grief can de-out selves no kindness, so would it be
very displeasing to them, were they sensible of it; or could receive any
diminution in their Happiness, by any thing that is done here below.

But besides, though our Grief can be no Kindness or Satisfaction to them, yet it
is a great Dis-kindness to our selves: For it does not only torment and
disquiet us, and make every thing of this Life unpleasant and distastful to us;
but also makes us unfit to regard our Concerns in order to the next. For our
Thoughts are then so vehemently taken up-with our Loss, and our Reason so
totally obscured by the Violence of our Passion, that we are neither at liberty
to recover the one, nor command the other; whereby to become sensible of our
Duty, and perform it according to that just Seriousness and Attention that is
required of us. But moreover, Religion requires great Cheerfulness and Alacrity
in the performance of its Duties, we are and thereupon also, very much
unqualified for the right Exercise of it, whilst we suffer our selves to be
carried away by a quite different disposition of Mind. We ought therefore for
our own Sakes so to moderate this almost ungovernable Passion, especially if we
let it get ground upon us, that we may not fall short of the due Observance of
our Religious Duties, by indulging our Passions and Affections. And certainly,
it is one great Reason why, when the one is enjoined, the other is forbidden,
because they cannot both consist together. For I can neither be so sincerely
Thankful for the protection of Providence over me for the time past, nor beg
its Care for the future, if I am dissatisfied at any of its Dispensations, or
am unwilling to submit to any of its Corrections.

We ought therefore to endeavor by all means possible to subdae this Passion
of Grief in us, by considering in the Third and last place, the dangerous
Consequences that will unavoidably follow our too much giving way to it.

It impairs our Health and Constitution, wastes our Strength, obstructs the free
motion of our Blood and Spirits, and exhausts and impoverishes the whole frame
of our Nature. Nor is immoderate Grief only prejudicial to our Body, but the
evil Effects of it penetrate even to the very Soul it self. For the
Understanding becomes darkened, and is not at liberty either to advise it self,
or hearken to the Counsel of others. For it is so violently bent upon the
Contemplation of an appearing Misery, that it cannot pass a free and impartial
Judgment upon it. And in this case also, the Will is generally so obstinate,
that it prevents the Operations and Exercise of Reason. And where the Will is
prejudiced it is generally very difficult to rectify the Understanding. For
whatsoever I will or choose as best for me, my Understanding is apt to find some
excuse or pretense to comply with it. And whenever the Understanding is
thoroughly convinced of the agreeableness and innocence of any Action, and the
necessity of it, so long as it continues under that Conviction, the Will can
hardly resists its Dictates. For whatsoever it is that my Understanding
proposes as best for me, and if I do really believe it as such, my Will cannot
help preferring the Choice of that before any thing besides. And if the Action
be really unlawful, it is as well the Fault of my Understanding as Will, because
every Action that I do has a present appearance of Good to persuade me to it:
which if it prove to be otherwise, the Understanding as well as the Will is to
answer for it.

Immoderate Grief is also prejudicial to our Reason, by being a Blemish and
Reproach to it. What advantage would it be to us, to search into the secrets of
Nature, to know the Qualities and Essences of Things, to contemplate on the
Perfections of the Celestial Beings, and look even into Eternity it self: To
know what our Soul is, and how it is endued with Reason, the Image of God
Himself; to distinguish Good and Evil, and to know that the One is to be
avoided, und the Other to be embraced, and to enjoy innumerable other good
Things, which Rational Beings are alone capable of; if after all, we cannot
make use of our Knowledge, and noble Endowments, to the suppressing the
Miseries of Life, and to the raising our selves above any of the Dangers which
threaten us in this mortal State? I mean the acquiring such a Superiority and
Greatness of Mind, as will keep us from falling under the Pressures of our
Sufferings, though it exempt us not from the sense of them. What is it that gives
us the the Advantage over the Beasts and Irrational Beings, if we depend wholly
upon things without us, and have neither Courage or Constancy within to support
us? All our Gifts and Faculties would be in vain bestowed upon us, if they
could not exalt us above the Evils and Incoveniencies of Sense, If we can find
Antidotes against Poison, if we can make use of Industry to keep us from
Poverty, and if Reason can supply us with Preservatives against a great many
other Evils, why should we banish the Use of it, when we have most occasion for
it, either to counsel or advise us against apparent Calamities, or to support
us under the present Anguish of our Griefs and Afflictions?

But in the next place, Immoderate Grief is of a very dangerous Consequence, as
it is prejudicial to Religion. For it not only slackens our Endeavors, and
puts a stop to our Practice of Virtue and Piety, by taking the first and
greatest possession of our Minds: but also, as was before observed, brings a
scandal upon our most Holy Profession; as though it was not sufficient to
secure us from the force and violence of this unruly Passion. For it looks like
a great dishonor to Religion, that notwithstanding all the Advantages it
proposes to us, all the Helps and Assistances it gives us whereby to strengthen
and support the Weakness and Infirmities of our Nature, against the Storms and
Insults that may threaten it from abroad, yet that those who through the whole
Behavior of their Lives, and by their constant observance of all the other
necessary parts of their Duty seem to have the fairest Title to Virtue and
Religion, should at last sink under the Pressure of an unavoidable Calamity.
And this we ought the rather to take notice of, because those who make it their
Business to cavil at Religion, seem to derive their chief Arguments from the
Lives and Practice of those that profess it.

For they imagine, that they may justly call in question the Principles of
Religion, and even Providence it self, if those who seem most to live up to the
Rules of the one, and rely upon the Goodness and Care of the other, should fail
in any part of their Duty to either, and become as Miserable, notwithstanding
the promised Helps and Advantages of Religion, and the Protection of
Providence, as those who live without any God in the World. I shall not now
enter into a Dispute with these Unreasonable Men, (who think a Slip or Failing
of a Good Man, a sufficient Argument to shake the very Foundations of Religion)
but shall only add, that we ought to be very careful in the Discharge of every
part of our Duty, least our Neglect should give Occasion to our Adversaries to
reproach our Religion, or to the Enemies of God to Blaspheme.

But in the last place, the greatest Danger that our immoderate Grief at any
Loss we receive, can bring upon us, is, that it will provoke Providence to
inflict greater Evils upon us. God expects a cheerful Submission from us to all
his Appointments, and that we should patiently wait upon his Will and Pleasure
for the Event of all, who has promised neither to leave nor forsake us, if we
put our Trust in his Mercy. An Humble Spirit is the best Sacrifice we can Offer
up to him. And nothing is more displeasing to him, than to murmur or repine at
any of his Corrections. All his Judgments are done in Justice and Equity; but
for us to find fault with them, is to make our selves Wiser than He.

How careful then ought we to be, least by our immoderate Sorrow for any
Affliction he has laid upon us, we should seem displeased at any of his
Doings, and thereby draw down his Vengeance upon us. For who can stand before
him, when once he is Angry? Diffidence or Distrust of God is one of the
greatest Sins we can be guilty of against him, because it seems to question
those great and tender Attributes, his Goodness and Mercy; and therefore if we
offend in that kind, we may be assured, that he will not let so great a Sin go
unpunished, but will make use of another Attribute, that of his Justice, to
convince us of the Abuse we had made of his Mercy.

It is our Duty then, gratefully to acknowledge the Goodness of God continually
to us, and not repine because we may think we are now become Miserable, but be
thankful to him that we were not always so. He is under no Obligations to make
us Happy but what proceed from his own Good will and Pleasure. How then ought
we in Wisdom as well as Justice, to resign all that we have a Concern for, to
his alone Disposal, who orders all things so for our Happiness, as though he
could do no otherwise; and who contrives every thing so much for our Good, as
if He Himself could not be Happy, unless We also were so too; and who has done
so much already to advance our Interest, that we have the greatest Reason to
believe, that it will be our fault, if he be not always the same to us. If we
consider the Mercies we have received, and weigh them against the Evils we have
suffered, we shall find infinitely greater Cause to be continually breaking
forth into Expressions of Praise and Thanksgiving for our Enjoyments, than to
repine at our Miseries. What mighty Returns of Gratitude should this one
amazing Consideration draw from us, that not withstanding all our Provocations,
He is Liberal, Gracious and Merciful to us, and that we still receive new
Mercies from him, though our Sins against him have deserved the greatest of
Punishments. I shall beg leave to add to this, that admirable Passage of that
Great Emperor Marcus Antoninus. Can God, says he, for the Succession of so
many Ages bear without Indignation, with so Great, and so many Sinners as have
ever yet been: and not only so, but also provide for them, that they want
nothing; and do thou, so violently grieve at any thing He has taken from
thee, as One that could bear with Him no longer, Thou that art but for a moment
of time, yea, Thou, that art one of those Sinners thy self?

And thus I have gone through what I at first intended, in offering several
Arguments which I thought most necessary and useful, as well for the preventing
our Sorrows and Afflictions, as for the supporting us under them. For if we
really think it worth our while to purchase to our selves true Peace and
Tranquillity of Mind, we shall certainly find that these Considerations which I
have insisted upon, may be of great Moment to us toward the procuring of it.

For if we first of all would fix in our Minds true Notions of all outward
Things, with the real Uses and Ends of them, how that they were lent us by
Providence, to try our Prudence in the management of them, and not to be made
the Subject of our Happiness, but only the Exercise of our Virtues, we should
certainly reap these Advantages from it. First, whatever outward Blessings
Providence bestows upon us we should receive them with all Thankfulness, as
Blessings which flowed to us from God's immediate Bounty, and not given us upon
any account of our own Deservings. And Secondly, we should use them with
Moderation, and not fix our Hearts and Minds upon them; and then this would
teach us in the Third place, to bear the Loss of them with Patience. Because we
should consider them as Things not really our own, but His that gave them to
us, and that not absolutely, but upon Conditions, such as give us only a
limited use of them, but leave to Providence the absolute Right and Disposal of
them.

And from these Conclusions, what I observed in the Second place will
necessarily follow, that it is our chiefest Interest, to live up exactly to the
Principles of Religion, which will guide us to the great Foundation of all
Happiness, the Resigning up our selves to the Will and Pleasure of Providence,
which knows what is convenient for us, better than we our selves can, and out
of Compassion to our Ignorance and Infirmity, will find out means whereby to
make us Happy, which we perhaps thought could only make us Miserable; and be
our Comfort and Support under all Afflictions here, and advance us to
Immortality, and the Perfection of Happiness hereafter. For how great soever
our Sorrows are here, they will be then sufficiently, and abundantly made up
with fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore.

What Reason have we then to repine at any Afflictions or Sufferings of this
Life, which are so very advantageous to us? For they not only give us a sense
of our own Imperfections, and of the Vanity and Uncertainty of all things under
the Sun, as well as their insufficiency for our Happiness, but lead us thither
for our Comfort, where all Perfection dwells, and teach us to rely wholly upon
Him for our Happiness, who has alone the Power to bestow it upon us So that at
length to our unspeakable Satisfaction, we shall be obliged to confess, that
all his Judgments are as well the Effects of His Goodness, Mercy and
Compassion, as of His Justice, and that out of very Faithfulness he has caused
us to be troubled.

What great Satisfaction, should this one Consideration raise in our Mind, that
God will be a present Help to us in time of Trouble, and though all our Friends
and Relations should either forsake us, or be parted from us, yet The Lord
upholdeth us with his Right Hand. Their Kindness may be great to us, and they
may be willing to serve us to the utmost of their Power, yet they are Defective
in a great many things, and come infinitely short of Him, who can command all
things in Heaven and Earth, and is the sole All-sufficient Good. They have
innumerable Imperfections: but He is Perfect Goodness. They mutable and
uncertain: He always the same, firm and unchangeable. They may be taken from
us, but Him who is Eternal, we can never be deprived of. How Happy then will
our State be, when we can say, Whom have we in Heaven but Thee, and there is
none upon Earth that we desire in Comparison of Thee. When our Heart, and our
Strength fails us, God will be the Strength of our Hearts, and our Portion for
ever. Though we may be troubled on every side, yet shall we not be distressed,
though perplexed, yet not in Despair: though persecuted, yet not forsaken;
though cast down, yet not Destroyed.

The Hopes and Expectations of being thus Happy, might certainly so far engage
our Thoughts and Affections, as to wean us from this World, where we can meet
with nothing but Trouble and Vexation, if we fix our Minds upon it. Especially
if we seriously consider the dangerous Consequences that always attend those
who make this Life and the Enjoyments of it their Happiness. For whatever these
Enjoyments are, they are accompanied with Trouble, and end in Misery. For
either they must leave us, or we them; and which soever it be, we must
certainly be Miserable, because we are deprived of that which alone we made our
Happiness, and therefore are neither prepared nor capacitated for any other.

But besides we ought to consider, that Time is precious, and given us for
greater Ends, than to be spent upon any Worldly Concern, either in over-valuing
our outward Things, by taking too great a Pleasure in the Enjoyment, or by an
unjust Complaint at the Loss of them. All is little enough to be spent upon the
Thoughts of another Life, and not to be misemployed, in showing our
over-fondness of this. If we were to stay here always, we ought to take care,
to fix our Affections here too, and place them upon Objects most agreeable to
us. But since Providence has allotted us but a short Continuance here, and has
suited the Fabric of our Bodies to the shortness of our Stay, and provided us
another Life after this, unchangable and immortal, we ought in Prudence to
bestow our first Care and Affections upon that. And if any thing which we
Dearly Esteemed, has been translated from us, to that other State of
Immortality, before we were willing to part with it, we ought also to follow it
thither with our Thoughts and Affections, and not with our Tears and
Complaints; and conform our present Condition as much as possible to that which
our Friends who are gone before us do already enjoy. Death is only a putting
off these Bodies, the leaving This, and changing it for another Place of
Habitation; and not a ceasing to be, or a falling into Nothing. And though it
is an Admission into that invisible State, which no mortal Eye can enter; yet
our Minds may keep a Spiritual Conversation with those more Perfect Beings, and
may still enjoy them by the Eye of Faith, though not by that of Sense.

Perfect Happiness was never designed for this Life, nor can we expect it; for
if it was, there would be nothing left for us to enjoy in the Next. But yet it
may be in our Power to make large Additions to it, and to advance by Degrees
more and more to that Perfection, which will be Consummate hereafter.

And to this End we may make use of our Afflictions, which the Loss of Friends
brings upon us, to the putting us in mind of our own Mortality; which by our
continual Remembrance of it, will admonish us to grow better, and more fit for
Happiness. Nor will it suffer us to apply our Minds to those things, which will
stop us in our Advances thither: And perhaps it was for this Reason that we
have lost what we now Grieve for, because we fixed our Minds so much upon it,
that we had not leisure to think of another Life, which should have no
Obstacles to withdraw our thoughts from it.

To conclude, We ought not to be concerned too much at any thing that may befall
us here; because we cannot enter into the State of the Blessed, till we have
taken off our Minds from all Sensual and Earthly Desires. We must shake off
these Clogs, before we can be admitted into Happiness. We cannot enter into Life
halt and maimed; we must carry nothing thither but spiritual Minds, heavenly
Thoughts, and exalted Desires, without any mixture, or allay of Sense. We must
temper our Affections to those Mansions of Pleasures, if ever we expect a
Fruition of them. We can never see God, nor enjoy the Beatisick Vision with the
Eye of Sense. We must be purified and refined, before we can behold those
Glorious Objects; and exchange our vitiated Palates, for some more exquisitely
perfect, if we design to taste of the Supper of the Lamb. We must wipe all Tears
from our Eyes, if we expect to gain admittance there, where there is neither
Grief nor Sorrow any more, where there are only Hallelujahs, Praises and
Thanksgivings to Him that sits on the Throne for ever and ever.

What Joy and Transport do the frequent Meditations upon another Life, raise in
the Minds of Good Men! With what Comfort and Satisfaction do they perform all
the Duties of Religion! How Fervent in their Prayers, how Constant and Joyful
in their Thanksglvings! How Ravishing are their Hopes, how few their Fears! In
a word, their Thoughts are so wholly taken up with the Meditations of the next
Life, that they are little concerned for any thing of this. If they suffer
Scorn or Reproach from Men, or feel the immediate Hand of God upon them in
Afflictions, they turn all to a good Use, and endeavor to grow better by them.
They know though they sow in Tears, they shall reap in Joy: That is, their Joys
shall be abundantly greater than ever their Sorrows were. They shall drink
Rivers of Pleasure for every Tear that fell from their Eyes: And for One Moment
of Sorrow, They shall receive Eternal Blessedness, and be for Ever entertained
with Joy unspeakaable and full of Glory. Wherefore let us Comfort one another
with these Words.

The End.

