GOD SAVE THE KING, OR A SERMON OF Thanksgiving, FOR HIS MAJESTY'S Happy Return
to his THRONE.

TOGETHER WITH A Character of His Sacred Person. Preached in the Parish Church
of East Coker in the County of Somme^set, MAY 24.

1660.

By William Walwyn B D. And sometimes Fellow of St. John's College in O^on.

(...).

I will make them one p^opl^ in the L^nd upon the Mo^ntains of Israel, and one
King shall be King to them all. Ezec^ 37. 22. LONDON. Printed for Henry Brom
at the Gun in Ivy lane. 1660.

portrait of King Charles II Charles ye second, by ye grace of God. King of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland. Defender of the Faith (...)


To the Right Reverend Father in God, Brian, by the Providence of God Lord
Bishop of Sarum, Grace, Mercy, Peace, and Life everlasting in our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.
Right Reverend Father in God,
LEt not the Gratitude which for your many favors I owe unto your Lordship,
seem Arrogancy, or Presumption, because by way of Retribution (though it be
but a poor one to repay in Paper only what I received from your Lordship in
richer Bullion) I have taken the boldness to thrust this slender Discourse
under the wings of your Patronage: the truth is, so weak a Chick, could not
likely derive so much life, and vigor, under any other wing as under yours,
though indeed it be a fitter shelter for Phoenixes, and Birds of Paradise only,
the production, I mean of Abler Pens, and richer Abilities, than I dare pretend
to.

Yet my Lord, I hope it will be no disparagement to your Honor to patronize so
slight a thing as This, with which I now present your Lordship, since herein
you will very much imitate the Divine Goodness of the Great Creator; who
cherished the Little Gnat, as well as the vast Elephant, and has a Paternal
providence, as well for a Diminutive Wren, or a Contemptible Hedge Sparrow, as
for the Gayer and Greater Ostru^h, or the Majestic and Towering Aeagle.

Our Great Master preferred the poor Widows single Mite, before all the
Offerings of Those, who cast much more than She into the Treasury: and this
makes me not altogether to Despair, but that this my Mite may also find your
kind Acceptance.

This Discourse is all along a fervent prayer for the King our Great Lord and
Master, as you may see upon the Title page in every Leaf, and it is also an
earnest persuasion to that Loyalty and Obedience, which all His Subjects owe
unto Him, both by the Laws of God and Man; and thus far I am confident this
Sermon will please your Lordship very well.

You have here also another (...), or true Pourtraicture of His Sacred Majesty,
your Royal Pupil, and Great Master also; in which you cannot but with infinite
Complacency behold the rare Fruits of those Seeds, which your Self has sown,
and the influencies of the Divine Grace has ripened, to such an excellent
Maturity, and perfection.

My humble request, my Lord, is only this, that you would please favorably to
take this paper, as the Testification of my Continued Loyalty to my King, and
the most Thankful Acknowledgement of these undeserved respects, which
heretofore you were pleased to cast upon so mean an Object as

From my Study in Fast Cok^r near Y^avil in the County of Sommerset. June 18,
1660. Your Lordships most humble Servant, WILLIAM WALWYN.

To his very much Honored Friend William Helyar Esquire, and one of his Late
Majesty's Colonels, Grace and peace be multiplied.
SIR,
I Was ever very unwilling with the Scriblers of this Age, to do open penance
in a white Sheet; yet the Great Ties, and manifold Obligations, which you have
upon me, have enforced me to lay aside my natural Modesty, (for I would rather
seem somewhat Arrogant than altogether Ungrateful) and to present to your view
this ensuing Discourse; it had not the Happiness to take your Judicious Ear,
by reason of your absence from home when it was preached, and now it craves
your favorable Eye, though perhaps it might better have expired and vanished
with the breath in which it was delivered: But although the meanness of it may
not so well please your accurate Judgment, the Loyalty of it will I know well
please your Loyal Heart.

The Sermon was Calculated at first for the Meridian of a Country Auditorie,
but with your Patronage it may serve indifferently for any other place within
this Nation.

God himself accepted their good Will who brought only a Little Goats hair
toward the Building of the Temple, as well as their richer Offerings, who
being blessed with Greater Abilities than Others, brought in their Gold and
Silver; and so I hope that you Sir will accept this Slender Offering, since it
is also designed for the edifying of the Church of God.

Please you to peruse it, you shall meet in this Discourse, with a True
Character of our Most gracious Sovereign, though I confess it be drawn with
but rude lines, and in weak Watercolors.

As also here you may likewise at once take Prospect of that Happiness, for
which, both like Josuah and Moses, you have so gallantly fought, and so
fervently prayed: and of that Misery, which you, and all Loyal Subjects have at
length escaped, by the miraculous Return of his Gracious Majesty to his
Throne, whom I know you truly Love and honor.

Sir, if this slight Paper-work of mine, may any way be servic^a^le to my God,
my King, my Country, or my Friends, or may by Go^s blessing reduce any Disl^yal
Soul to his lost Alleg^ance, and make him a better Subject hereafter, by
showing to himself his own ugly Metamorphosis, he has his whole W^sh, Intent,
and Design, who here subscribes himself, Sir

Your most Affectionate Friend, Humble Servant and Faithful Pastor W. WALWYN.

God Save the King.
1 Samuel 10. 24. the latter part of the verse. And all the people shouted, and
said, God save the King.
OUR Royal Sovereign has already been proclaimed in all the Signal Towns, and
Cities of this Kingdom, and by the Grace of God this day, I will proclaim Him
in the Pulpit too: and I shall do His Sacred Majesty but Justice, by
proclaiming Him thence, from whence He has so often in our Rebellious times been
much declaimed against; to which end I have made choice of this Text now read
unto you.

The words in the Original sound as much as Vivat Rex, Or let the King live.

Divines distinguish Prayer into two sorts;

(...), or Supplicatorie, for the blessings we want, and (...), or
Gratulatorie, for the benefits we have already received. These words, Vivat
Rex, Let the King live, or GOD SAVE THE KING, are both; for

1. They are a Supplicatorie Oration, wherein the people zealously pray for the
Preservation and permanency of King Readiness Reign over them; and

2. They are a Gratulatorie Acclamation, whereby the people testify their Joy
and Thankfulness unto God for their King.

And indeed were our Savior again upon the earth, I am verily persuaded, that
he would be so far from rebuking us for saying with them, Luke 19. 38. Blessed
be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord, that he would say to those
Discontented Spirits, who should murmr, or be offended at us, what he said to
the Pharisees, verse. 40. of that Chapter I tell you, that if these should hold
their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

We will treat upon the words of the Text, First, as they are a Prayer or
Supplication unto God for the King; and they will afford us these particulars.

First, the Supplicants, And all the people shouted and said.

2ly. The Person supplicated for, and that is REX, the King.

3ly, The Person supplicated unto, and that is God.

4ly, The Matter of the Supplication, and that is, Ut vivat Rex, that the King
might live, or might be saved and preserved.

In the handling of these particulars (waving the Method propounded) I shall
begin with the Person supplicated unto, and that is God.

A Jove Principium; It is fittest that we first begin with HIM, and indeed, to
whom could the people better address their Prayers for their King, than unto
God? for ipse est qui dat salutem Regibus, it is he that gives safety unto
Kings, Psalm. 144. 10. It is not His Guard about Him that preserves a King: for
unless the Lord watch over him, as well as His Cities, The watchman waketh but
in vain, Psalm. 127. 1. Neither can His Armies of Horse or Foot save Him; For
there is no King, says the Royal Psalmist, saved by the multitude of an Host,
a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, An horse is a vain thing for
safety, neither shall he deliver any by his great strength, Psalm. 33. 16, 17.
Nor can the Love of His Subjects prolong his days, the best that they can do,
is but salutare, to pray for His health, as here the people did; it is God
only, that can Salvare, Give Him health and help in the time of trouble. And
therefore, Let Kings, of all men, put their trust in the living God; and that
especially, because they of all men seem to be overshadowed after a more Signal
manner, with the Salvation of Him, who has written on his thigh.

KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS, Rev. 19. 16. And truly, the King of Kings he
is, not only by His Supreme power above them, but also by His Love toward
them, and His Care for them: which especial Love, Providence and Care of His,
over Kings, is remarkably manifested in the Scriptures, by a threefold
Injunction, laid by God upon their Subjects: for

1. God strictly, injoyns them, not so much as to Touch his Anointed, Psalm.
105. 15. and that upon pain of Eternal damnation, Romans 13. 2.

2ly. He injoyns them, as not to lift up the least of their fingers, so not to
wag so much as a Tongue or to open so much as a Lip against them: for Thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, Acts 23. 5. And indeed what an
high displeasure did God once actually show against Miriam and Aaron, for but
muttering against Moses their Prince: for Wherefore were you not afraid, says
the Lord, to speak against my servant Moses? and the anger of the Lord was
kindled against them, and he departed, and the cloud from the Tabernacle; and
behold Miriam became leprous, white as snow; the weakness of her Sex would not
excuse her, Numb. 12. 8, 9, 10.

3ly, As he injoyns not to lift up a finger, or wag a lip against Them, so
likewise he forbids them to contrive so much as an evil thought of them, Curse
not the King, no not in thy thoughts, for the birds of the air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter, Ecclesiast. 10. 20. and
what is that besides the birds of the air? Why by that which is said there to
have wings, some Commentators understand the Guardian-Angels of Kings and
Princes: The Angels themselves shall discover Disloyal thoughts. But how shall
Angels know men's thoughts? One answers, that though the Angels naturally cannot
understand the thoughts of men, yet in such a Case, there is Potestas Data, a
power given by God to the Tutelary Angels of Kings and Princes, to understand
the Traiterous thoughts of all such, as bear disloyal and treacherous hearts
against his anointed ones. And as the King of Kings has thus singularly
manifested His Care over Kings and Princes, so has he been pleased actually to
manifest his vengeance against such Rebels as have risen up against them.

Witness Corah, Dathan and Abiram, whom the earth it self Swallowed up quick,
and became at once, both their Sexton, and their Grave.

Witness Zimri burnt to ashes, in that very Palace whence he had driven his
Lord and Sovereign, 1 Kings 16. 18. and so notable a judgment indeed it was,
that wicked Jezabel her self, took an especial notice of it; for Had Zimri
peace (said she) that stew his Master? 2 Kings 9. 31. I might here be infinite,
if I should add to these instances all those dreadful examples of Gods
vengeance against such as have been Rebels against their Kings, which (with a
wet finger) I could easily fetch you, from both Ecclesiastical and Secular
Histories; but I am to present you with a Sermon, and not a Chronicle: what
has already been said, will sufficiently demonstrate, That God has a most
especial, and particular care in the Preservation of His Anointed, and
therefore to none so fitly may the people address their Prayers for the Life
and Safety of their King, as unto God; and so much for the Person supplicated
unto.

Next follows the Person supplicated for, and that is Rex, the King.

In whom 2. things are considerable, 1. His Dignity. 2. His Duty.

Melech in the Hebrew, and Rex in the Latin tongue, are derived from verbes
which signify to Rule, and Reign, and there is the Kings Dignity.

And the word (...) in the Greek, is derived from (...), which sounds as much
as the Foundation of the people, and there is the Kings Duty. I will spoke
severally to them both. And,

1. Of his Kingly Dignity, and this derives its Excellency,

1. Ab A'uthore, from the Author, or Institutor of it, and that is God: and
therefore St. Peter calls it (...), the Creature of God, 1 Pet. 2. 3. and St.
Paul terms it (...), The Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2. and God himself, in the
preseuce of Wisdom, says, Per me Reges Regnant, by me Kings Reign, Prove. 8.
15. which Per denotes not a bare Permission, but a Commission too: it is not
They Reign by my Sufferance, but They Reign by my Ordinance; and therefore St.
Peter Couples these together in one Yoke, Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Epist.
2. 17.

Many Irreligious people, if they find, or but Imagine sometimes any
imperfection in their Superiors, presently take occasion thereby to despise
them; and whence proceeds this, but from want of the fear of God? for if men
did seriously consider their Superiors to be in Gods place, and by his
appointment, they would then let pass their Infirmity, which they derive from
Adam, and Reverence their Authority, which they derive from God: for as he that
Contemns of Injures the Deputy of a King, Contemns and Injures the King
himself, whose Deputy he is; so he who Contemns or Injures his King, who is
Gods Deputy, Injures and Contemns God himself; and as he that despiset^ the
poor, reproacheth his maker, Prove. 17. 8. So he that despises his Superior,
seems to reproach God for appointing no better a Covernour over him. These are
all sound Truths delivered to us by Gods holy Spirit, in his written Word.

Yet how of late have these Sacred Truths been impunged by the Rebellions, and
Bloody Tenets, of the Jesuits, Anabaptists, and Puritans? I rank them together,
because although Like Sampsons Foxes their Heads part, yet they join Tails
together. And,

1. It is the constant Tenet of the Jesuits, that King-Killing is Lawful, nay
Meritorious, if he be forsooth an Haeretical King, that is to say, if he be not
a Roman Catholic; and they have stood to this their Damnable Doctrine, (a
Doctrine I may call it of Devils) by their Bloody practices; in so much that you
can scarce find a Jesuits sleeve, without a Dagg, or a Dagger, to murder one
Prince or other. It would be too tedious for me to recite, or you to hear the
Dismal Tragedies which they have acted in the Theater of the world: if any man
may think I wrong them, I shall only refer him to Mariana the Jesuit* who has
wrote, printed, and published to the world, an whole Tract of the Lawfullnesse
of Regicide, or King-Killing.

2. Next to these may come in the Anabaptists, for what were the public
Preachments of Muncer in Germany, were they not such bloody stuff, as this, (as
Sleidan in the fifth of his Commentaries relates) God has warned me face to
face, he that cannot lie has commanded me to attempt the Change, by these
means, even by killing the Magistrate; and Phifer his lewd companion, did but
dream of killing many Rats and mice, and presently he expounded his Dream, of
murdering the Nobles; and have not our late Fanatics, as well as these, laid
their heads, as close as they possibly could with the Jesuits in this point?
witness their continual and impetuous railing against the Ministry, that they
might come to fetch the freer strokes at Magistracy: Tracing herein their
Brethren in Germany, who began first with the Bishops, but ended in the Civil
Magistrates. And did we not the like here in England too, when we first laid
aside the Bishops, and then the King?

3. Nor have our Modern Puritans (call them Presbyterians if you will) lately
less opposed the Dignity and Majesty of Kings? witness their Tenets, which
will make you to Blush, Sweat, and Tremble, but to hear them repented, if you
have any fear for God, or any honor for the King. And here that I may not seem
to wrong the men, I will cite their Names, their Books, and their Pages too,
where you shall find these pernicious Doctrines set abroach, to intoxicate the
brains, and poison the hearts of Loyal Subjects.

That it is unlawful in any case to resist the superior Powers, and that we
are rather to submit to their punishments, is a dangerous Doctrine taught by
some, by the permission of God for our sins; so Goodman, p. 30.

And Knox, as if he had borrowed Goodmans tongue, tells us page 26. of his
Appel.

That it is Blasphemy to say, We must obey Kings, whether they be good, or
whether they be evil, and he asserts, (...).

That Princes for just causes may be deposed, as you may see in the 372. page
of his Hist. of the Church of Scotland, alleging further, That if Princes be
Tyrants against God and His truth, their subjects are freed from their Oaths of
legeance, as you may see again in Hib. to England and Scotland, page 78.

And I could here name you (were I so disposed) a great Presbyterian, who upon
the like Suggestion, absolved not a few from their Oaths of Allegiance to our
late murdered Sovereign, a power which none but the Pope himself ever usurped.

Of the same Batch are the Doctrines vented by Buchanan in his Book de jure
Regni apud Scotos, for these Positions he lays us down there.

Populus Rege est praestantior and melior, The people are more excellent than
the King, page 61. of that Book, and that therefore the people have the same
power over their King, that the King has over any one man, page 38. and he
further asserts page 70. That the Minister may excommunicate Him, and then he
draws this Devilish Consequence, That he who by excommunication is cast into
Hell, is not worthy to live upon earth, as in the same page will appear to the
Supervisor. And thus like that Italian who having his enemy at his mercy, made
him first to renounce his God, and then immediately pistolled him upon that
Renunciation, Buchanan has found the way too, How the Subject may kill both
the Body and Soul of his Prince at one blow.

But he proceeds and tells us page 40th of the same book, That it were very
good that Rewards were appointed by the people for such as should kill Tyrants,
(that is to say, such Kings as by them will not be led by the nose) as there be
Salaries appointed for those, Qui lupos aut ursos occiderunt, aut catulos eorum
deprehenderunt. Who have killed Wolves or Bears, or have destroyed their Blood.

And to the Argument, that we should not resist evil Kings, because God places
Tyrants sometimes over the people, for the punishment of their sins, he bluntly
answers, page 57. that so God has appointed private men to kill them. And then
next to that of Saint Paul to Titus, 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and powers, and to obey Magistrates, his answer is, page 55.
That Paul wrote this in the Infancy of the Church, when men were not able to
resist them, and that therefore he wrote then to those Primitive Christians, as
were he alive, he would write to such Christians, as are now under the great
Turk, in substance small, in courage poor, in strength unarmed, in number few,
and generally subject to all kind of injuries, and that therefore his words in
that Text of Scripture, are not to be extended to the Body, or people of a
Potent Commonwealth: so that in his sense, Saint Paul's, Let every one be
subject to the Higher Powers, is no more than this, Let none dare to resist
them, till they find themselves able so to do; and is not this excellent
Divinity?

Lastly, In his Epistle to the King of Scots, prefixed to his Book, he Quarrels
with the Honorable phrases of Majesty, and Highness, and terms them
Barbarismos and Solaecismos Aulicos, the Barbarisms and Solaecisms of the
Court; and that he might make a King to be but Good Man King at the best, he
would have Kings content themselves with less Revenues, and fewer Attendants;
commending highly the Discipline of Laconia, where it is strange to have one
man pluck off another socks when he goes to bed; and very much extols the
example of Pelagius, who first Discomfited the Saracens in Spain, for that he
had his house without any stately Rooms in it, and was contented Good man, with
one and the same place, for himself, his fire, his friends, and his Cattle; and
thus like the Soldiers that Spit upon Christ, These Sons of Beliab have
Bespawled the face of Majesty. See more in Archbishop Bancroft Dangposit.


Nor of late years have the men of our times been more moderate than they; for
have not our Presses sweat, and our Pulpits groaned, under the very same
pernicious Doctrins? nay instead of making them Mont Gerizims, or Monts of
Blessing, have not too many of the Ministry made them Mont Eballs, or Monts of
Cursing? when instead of putting up their Supplications to God for their King,
they have not trembled to spend, even in their Pulpits, their direful Curses,
and Imprecations against the Lords Anointed, to the Eternal shame and Obloquy
of our Church, and the Protestant Religion which we profess; As if they had
labored, to the very utmost of their power, to Wash and Rub off from the face
of Moses, that shining which God had more immediately imprinted upon it. And so
much be said for the Dignity of a King, as it is first drawn ab Authore, from
the Author, or Institutor of it, and that is God; but,

2ly. The Excellency of a King will appear in this, That even God himself has
amongst his own honorary titles, assumed unto Himself the name of a King; for
his style (as you have heard before) runs thus, King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, and his Government of the whole world is Monarchical; for though there
be three Persons in the Sacred Trinity, yet there is but one God, and
consequently but one King everlasting. Let then those Scribblers, and
Pamphleteers, who of late with their Paper Squibs have so Oppugned, and
Dishonored Monarchical Government, tremble to consider, how through the sides
of Princes, they have struck at Gods own Monarchy over the whole world, as far
as their goose-quills could reach. But,

3ly. The Excellency of Kingly Dignity, shines in their Supremacy, which is the
most express Character of Himself which God can put upon a man, and such a
Supremacy St. Peter tells us is only in God and the King, 1 Pet. 2. 13. for God
is the Supreme Ruler of Kings, and Kings are the Supreme Rulers of Men; and in
this very regard, God himself, the better to oblige our obedience to them, as
well as to himself, styles them Gods: they have his Ip'se dixit to show for it,
I have said ye are Gods, says God himself of Kings, Psalm. 82. 7.

It is very true that God has said this of all Inferior Magistrates, as well
as of Kings, but yet Kings in regard of their Supremacy, bear a more full and
express Character of God than they: Inferior Magistrates, according to the
greater or the lesser Authority they bear in the Commonwealth, have the Image
of God drawn upon them like half Pictures, of which some are drawn down to the
girdle, and some again but to the neck and shoulders, but the Supreme
Magistrate, who is above all the rest, and only inferior to God himself, has
the image of God upon him, drawn to the full length, and proportion, as far as
he is capable to receive it, like those pictures which are drawn from head to
foot; and therefore with the greater Emphasis may God style them gods: And
truly, this very Appellation of gods, may God well seem to have given them, as
well to mind Kings themselves of their Duty, as to mind the people of their
Dignity, which brings me to the second thing considerable in this Word Rex the
King, and that is his Duty.

For since Princes and Magistrates are called by God himself, GODS, they should
thence learn to behave themselves toward their inferiors like gods indeed, and
as they bear Gods name, stand in Gods place, and represent Gods person, so they
should imitate Gods properties, and attributes: And

1. They should imitate the Supreme God whose image they bear, in commanding
their Subjects nothing but what is holy, and just: for to threaten, terrify,
or entice men unto unholy and unrighteous actions, Diaboli^est, non Dei, is the
part of a Devil, and not of a God.

2. These Inferior gods should imitate the Supreme God, in his sustaining and
conserving power. Now as God in heaven orders and disposes all things to the
best, and cherishes what is good, and curbs what is bad, and by his providence
continually preserves the world in general, and every one in particular; So
these gods on earth must look to it, not only Ne quid detrimenti Respublica
capiat, that the Common weal be not prejudiced, but that also no one single man
that is a Member thereof be oppressed, it must be their care and providence to
reward and encourage the good, and to curb (yea, if need be) to cut off the
wicked. And hence therefore in the Scriptures, they are called Nursing Fathers,
Isa. 49. 23. to express their tenderness and indulgency toward their
Subjects, whom they are to look upon as their children, as did Augustus Caesar,
of whom Macrobius writes, Saturn l. 1. c. 5. that he carried such an entire and
fatherly affection to the Commonwealth, that he was wont to call it ^iliam
suam, his daughter, and chose rather to be styled Pater Patriae, the Father of
his Country, than Dominus, the Lord and Master of it, because he endeavored
to govern it, rather by love than fear.

2. In the Scriptures, Kings and governors are called Shepherds, to mind them
that they should be watchful to keep out the Wolf, that is to say, whatsoever
may be destructive to the Sheep committed to their charge; for Princes are not
to be like sharp-pointed Pyramids, which are raised on high, but support
nothing; but they must be like pillars, seeing they are erected by God to
sustain and uphold the whole frame and fabric of the Church and State from
Ruin; and so these gods, as God himself styles them, shall show themselve
rightly to be Dii averrunci, and Tutelares, as so many Tutelar gods, to the
Nations and people over whom they reign; for indeed Kings and Potentates are
set over the people, not as Comets, to pour forth nothing but plagues upon
those below them, but as benign stars to cast down upon their inferiors, Light,
Heat and Life.

3. These mortal gods, must imitate the immortal God, as in the Dispensations
of his providence, so likewise in the Administrations of his Justice; for the
impartial, and equal execution of Justice, is the Subjects Birthright, and the
Superiors Debt, as Francis the first of France acknowledged, who when a poor
widow kneeled before him, and begged Justice of him, he bid her to stand up;
For, good woman, said he, Justice I ow thee, and therefore if thou beg any
thing of me, let it be Mercy.

The God of heaven is no respecter of persons, and such should Princes the gods
on earth be, they must impartially execute Justice and Judgment, according to
the Merits of the Causes that are brought before them not acording to the
opinions they have of the persons who come to their Tribunals for justice,
which righteous Rule of Justice has of late years been but little observed in
our Courts of Judicature, where a man, (were his cause never so good) should
have found but little Justice, if he were once discovered to be a Cavalier,
that is to say such an one as heartily loved his King.

And as these earthly gods should imitate the God of heaven in the
administrations of his Justice, so should they likewise.

4. Do the same in the Administration of his Grace and Mercy.

Their Laws like Draco's, must not be written in blood but in milk, lest by too
much rigor their Justice convert into Cruelty; as grapes too hard pressed yield
rather vinegar than wine; nor must they mix their revengefull thoughts, or
rigorous and rough Passions, with the sensures and sentences which they pass
upon poor Delinquents; for so they may commit Murder with the Sword of Justice.

Briefly, the chiefest things, in which Princes should imitate the King of
Kings, are these,

To show mercy, to defend the poor Orphan and widow, to deliver the poor from
him that is too mighty for him, to undo heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, to be nursing Fathers, especially to the Church, and in all
things to be zealous for Gods true Worship and Service; for if Princes have
power in their hands to do good, but do it not, they will show themselves to
be, Idola magis quam dii, dead stocks and idols, rather than gods, even just
such Idols, as the Psalmist describing, Psalm. 115. 7. tells us, They have
hands, but handle not.

5ly, And finally, As the Supreme God above is the poor man's God, as well as
the God of the rich man; so every good King must with King James of ever
blessed memory, in his Basilicon Doron, profess himself to be the poor man's
King; and therefore, as God above rejects not the prayers and supplications of
the poor and needy, and such as pray in faith unto him, though many times they
be stuffed with many imperfections, and polluted with many failings; so neither
must Gods Deputy God, cast by in scorn and contempt, the humble Petition of the
simplest, and poorest of His Subjects; though perhaps, the silly wretch has
greased it in his pocket, or soiled it with his thumbs, and though it be but
badly indicted, and worse penned, and so have we done

First, with the person supplicated unto, and that is God.

Secondly, with the Person supplicated for, and that is the King.

Come we next to the matter of the Supplication, and that is, Ut VIVAT, That he
may live, or that God may save and preserve Him, God save the King.

Which words in their full extent, may reach as well to the Political and
Spiritual Life of the King, as to his Natural and Corporal life; and this was
indeed the whole matter of the Primitive Christians prayers, even for those
most barbarous and Heathenish Emperors, under whose Dominions and tyranny God
had placed them; for we pray says Tertullian in his Apology for the
Christians. pro omnibus Imperatoribus, for all Emperors; for all, without
exception, for the worst, as well as for the best: well! and what did they
pray? why, we pray, says he, that God would give them vitam prolixam, a long
life, securum Imperium, a secure Empire, Domun tutam, a safe dwelling,
Exercitus fortes, puissant Armies, Senatum fidelem, Faithful Senates or
Parliaments, populum probum, good and Loyal Subjects, Orbem quietum, a quiet
and peaceable Reign, and finally, Quaecunque hominis, aut Caesaris vota sunt,
i. e. whatsoever good things, either the people can wish for Him, or with
Caesar himself can wish for himself. All this was the Subject or matter of
their Prayers, and so it should be of ours; But I verily believe, that the life
here principally prayed for by the people in my Text, was only the Natural or
Corporal life of the King, and surely their praying for the Kings life, is in
effect to pray for their own; for the King is the Breath of his peoples
nostrils, Lam. 4. 20. because the very life and well-being of the people
depends upon the life and wellbeing of their King; as the life of a man depends
upon his breathing, and this Consideration it was that made the men of David to
swear that he should no more go out with them to Battle, lest he quenched not
the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21. 17. Serinus apud Stebaeum, Sermon. 42. mentions a
Law amongst the Persians, that after the death of the King, there should be a
five days Interregnum, or Cessation of all Law and government, (...), that the
people, by that want might learn to know what a great blessing it is to enjoy
the King and his Laws, and surely, if the want of our King and the Cessation of
the due execution of the Fundamental Laws of this Land, for so many years now
past, will not open the eyes of a Rebellious people, to see what a blessing
they had forfeited, and lost, I may justly fear that such a darkness
possesses them, as will end in utter darkness.

It is held by some Learned Astronomers, that when the Sun in Joshuas time
stood still, the Moon and Stars made the like pause; whether it were so or no,
I now dispute not, but sure we are, that since our Sun stood still, the
Religion of our Church amongst us, which is in Scripture compared to the Moon,
like one in a deep Apoplexy, had not any visible life, or motion: and our Laws
which are as it were those Stars, by whose Influences our Lives and Liberties
are preserved, were almost altogether suspended, from their due execution:
Currat Lex, and Vivat Rex, must ever go both together. When there was no King
in Israel, it is said, Judge. 17. 6. That every man did that which was good in
his own eyes, and that was stark naught you may be sure; and was not this our
very Case, whilst we had no King in this our Israel? were not the Laws of God
and Man laid aside? when every one might serve God, or not serve Him, might go
to Church, or not go to Church, might pay Church dues, or not pay them? this
was the Licentiousness that sprang up amongst us, for want of our Sovereign,
and this ^icentiousnesse was impiously nick named forsooth Liberty of
Conscience.

This and much sadder than this, was the Ataxie, or disorder which had crept in
amongst us, and therefore well may the people pray Vivat Rex, ut vivat Regnum:
Let the King live, that the Kingdom may live, or God save the King, that God
may save the people.

But besides the motive the people have to pray for the King in respect of
their own good, they have another motive to pray for him, in respect of the
Kings good.

First, In regard, that although God has made him a King, yet he has still
left him but a mortal man, for though God, whom the Scriptures compare to a
Potter, has glazed Kings and Princes, and made them shine and glitter with
greater Power, Dignity, and Majesty, than meaner vessels, yet they are still
composed but of the same clay with other men, and are as fragil and apt to be
broken; nay more apt than other men of low degree; for they have more cares to
shorten their lives, and they have more enemies (if God prevent them not) to
cut off their days; for alas, no men have more, either ghostly or bodily
enemies than they, and

First, For their ghostly enemies, besides their own sins, to which the
Luxuries of their Courts, the Luxuriancy of their prosperities, the
haughtiness of their glory, and the uncomptrollablenesse of their power and
Sovereignty, may possibly tempt and prompt them, they find many times that the
sins of their people also are their deadly enemies; for by them God is often
provoked to take off the King: even the most pious Princes have suffered much
for the sins of their people; as the head commonly aches for the ill vapors of
the stomach that is placed beneath it; and thus the Psalmist tells us, that
when the people murmured, and Rebelled against God, That it went ill with Moses
for their sakes, Psalm. 106. 32. and indeed none are such bitter and pernicious
enemies to a King, as the sins of his people: These are they that cry out
against the King, Crucifige, crucifige, Crucify him, crucify him, even whilst
with their mouths the people cry Hosanna, Blessed be the King that comes in
the Name of the Lord.

And therefore let all faithful and Loyal Subjects, who truly love the King,
take heed lest by the sinfulness of an extravagant Joy, for God his sending
them their King again, they provoke not God to ravish Him from us once more:
and so our long looked for, long prayed for, and long stayed for happiness
(like Orpheus his Euridice) give us not the slip, and irrecoverably vanish
away, even whilst we are turning to catch and embrace it. Let us, O let us this
day especially, take heed, that we impair not the Kings Health, by making our
selves drunk with drinking His Health. But farther yet, as the Kings own
frailty, and mortality, and his sins, and the sins of his Subjects, may well
incite us to pray, God save the King; 2ly, So likewise may the many dangers and
storms from without, to which the Lords Anointed ones, these full and straight
Cedars, are more obnoxious, than the lower shrubs, move every good Christian
and Loyal Subject to implore Gods Protection over his King: for as Brands are
the more subject to catch fire, by reason of their frequent employments about
the Chimney: So Kings, who by their places and ^^^eminences are to govern, and
order both Church, and State, and by their office must scatter the wicked, and
bring the Wheel over them, Prove. 20. 26. are more liable ever to be traduced,
and scorched by Satan's imps, and Factors, the sons of Belial, than those whom
Solomon calls, Prove. 22. 29. Chasshukim men of mean birth, and obscure places,
and no public employments Those who walk in the Sun, will have always a black
shadow attending upon them, which way soever they move, and so men of the
brightest Dignities, and Merits, shall still be sure to be haunted, with the
Spirits of Envy, Hatred, Malice, or Discontent, They shall ever find some
laboring to overshadow or eclipse the King, and (if it may be possible) to
quite extinguish the Glories with which they be invested and arrayed; and (if
the Report be true) Some already have been plotting mischief against our
Gracious Sovereign whose sore eyes could not endure the brightness and
Splendour of our Rising Sun, though blessed be God, the Preserver of men, and of
Kings, especially, God has given their bloody Devises a miscarrying Womb, and
dry Paps.

But doubtless, there are more such Villains yet undetected; for there are now
whole Swarms of Professed King* killers, I mean Jesuits, amongst us, who as
they have had every finger of their hands in working our distractions, will
employ both their Arms also to hinder the peace and happiness of our Church
and State, and it is clear as the Sun, that there are millions of
Anabaptistical, and fanatic Spirits, who will readily join heads, hearts,
hands, and purses to the work: there is no trusting to their crying out with
the rest of the Kings good Subjects, God save the King, for like Rogues that
are Burnt in the hand, they only say so, because they see they must either for
fear, or shame.

God I hope will put it into the hearts of our Patriots in Parliament, to
ferret these Vermin out of their holes, and with a Salutary breath, like that
mighty strong West wind, which took away the Egyptian Locusts, and cast them
into the Sea, Exodus 10. 19. to clear the Land of all such Malvoglio's, as are
displeased with the peace and felicity of it; and so I pass from the
Consideration of these words, as they are a Supplication for the safety of the
King, to a review of them, as they are the peoples Acclamation, whereby they
testify their Gladsomnesse to God for their King; for all the people shouted
and said God save the King.

This Acclamation was made at the Inauguration of Saul, as bad a King as likely
could be found in the whole pack: which I the rather observe, that I may incite
you with the more gladsome hearts, and fervent prayers, to receive your most
Gracious Sovereign: for if all Saul's people shouted (which was the Signal
expression of their Joys exultancy) how much more cause have we to Triumph
with exceeding Joy, at the Reception of our CHARLES? to whom (were we freely to
chose a King out of the whole stock of the Kings of the Nations) I am verily
persuaded, we should not possibly find an Equal, for where, oh where shall we
find a mate to this Phoenix? whose presence, and virtues, are able to make us
almost forget his incomparable Father.

Witness his pure and unspotted Chastity, Emblemed by the Snow-white Lillies
in his Royal Arms, never yet so much as tainted, by the Black-parrated
tongues, of his most malicious detractors, though being now in the Heat and
Gallantry of his youth, he might doubtless have found Temptations enough, to
have fired inordinate affections, amidst the looseness, and luxuries of
foreign Princes Courts.

Witness his profound wisdom, and prudence, in his solid composing, the fierce
Rebellions of the French Subjects against their King, Fomented, and Backed by
the Prince of Conde: Though indeed he was most unworthily requited, for that
grand piece of Service, by the French King his nearest Relative.

Witness his Gallantry, and Fortitude, in bearing up his Royal Spirit from
dejection, though pressed with the grand injuries, and indignities of a 12.
years Banishment, and upwards from his native Soil, Court, Throne and Dignity.

Witness his patience and tolerancie, under his almost insufferable
afflictions, and contumelies, who having the free profer of Foreign Princes Aid,
and Assistance, for his Restitution. He chose rather to want his Crowns than to
Swim to his Throne in the Blood of his Subjects; desiring rather to be received
with our Condui^s running with Wine, than with our Channels running with Blood:
and with Bonfires in our Streets, than with the Conflagrations of our Towns and
Cities.

Witness his faith, hope, and firm dependency upon his God, under his tedious
and Long-lived sufferings.

Witness his Zeal and Constancy in adhering to his Principles, in his
profession of the true Protestant Religion, notwithstanding all Tamperings with
Him, and Arguments used to enforce, or persuade Him, to turn an Apostate from
his dear mother, the Church of England, commended to his tender Tuition by his
dying Father, as Christ commended the care of his mother, the Virgin Mary, to
his Beloved Disciple, John the Evangelist. Witness I say His constant
adherency to that Church, to the Infamous shame, both of those Clergy and
Laymen, who in these times of our Distractions, have so often turned their
Goats. Surely had not His Sacred Majesty been as immovable as a Rock, he was
Battered with Arguments enough, to have made Him made Shipwreck of his Faith.
Arguments enforced

1. By our grievious Distractions in our Religion here at home.

2ly. By the Scandal of our latter time.

3ly. By the Exigency of his Majesty's then present Affairs.

4ly. By the uncertainty of his future Livelihood.

5ly. By the Injustice of his Subjects; which might well have prompted his
Courage, and Revenge, to have said, what the King in the Gospel said,
concerning his Servants that had abused him, since mine Enemies will not that I
should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27.

6ly. By the Tediousness of his Banishment. And,

7ly. By His irrecoverable restoration, as to all humane Judgments, and
Opinions, without his gratifying Popish Princes, by his perversion to the
Romish Church.

But the grace of God had taught him, as well to want, as to wear a Crown,
which is not worth the taking up, upon Sordid, Dishonorable, and Irreligious
terms; as His most incomparable Father in his (...), has admirably admonished
him. And what can we now expect but happy times under so Gracious a Prince?
wherein by our miseries we have, I hope, sufficiently Learned what our late
Martyred King before hand had foretold, that our Religion toward our God, and
our Loyalty toward our King cannot possibly be parted, without both our Sin,
and our Infelicity, and I pray God we may learn and remember this, that it may
deter and Affright us, from ever returning again to our former Follies, and
Rebellions, since the taking off the Head from the Body Politic (and such is
the King) is (if we rationally consider it) but a mad way to cure the
distemperatures, of the Inferior parts. For who would not account him a Bloody
Murderer, and not a skillful Physician, who should order his Chirurgions, to
cut off the Head of his Patient, to cure the Surfeit in His Stomach, or the Gout
in his Feet?

The King is the Head of his people, So Samuel calls him, 1 Samuel 15. 17. so
does Isaiah 74: and so does Hosea 1. 11. but especially so Daniel in express
terms, Dan. 2. 38. Tu es caput Aurcum, speaking to the King, Thou art the head
of Gold, and the Persians by the light of nature, called their King Assuerosh,
that is Sovereign head, now as Philosophy, and experience both demonstate unto
us, from the head we derive motion, sense, and life, for at the head we take in
the breath we live by, and in the head are seated the animal spirits, from
whence we receive sense, and motion, and we experimentally see, that the head
is no sooner taken off, but the body straight falls and tumbles to the ground;
struggle indeed for some short space of time it may, but live long it cannot
without its head: We have Buzzed, and Turned, and Turned, and Buzzed, like a
flesh fly, without his head, i. e. we have kept a great stir, and pudder, and
made a great noise a while in the world, and have tried all the ways we could
imagine, to live without our head, but we found that we could not long subsist
in this condition: Our State like a carcass that had been long without an
head, began even to stink in the Nostrils of all the Nations round about us;
our Church was cut into so many Shreds, by so many Fanatique Sects, and
Schisms, that we could very scarcely perceive, that there was any Religion
visible amongst us; Our Trade, and Commerce, was quite decayed, and now
perceiving well, that we could not live any longer Acephali, a people without
an head, we would fain try whether we could live Pseudocephali, a people with a
False head* Having therefore first taken off the head of Jupiter, we set the
head of a Caligula in the place thereof, and was not the matter well amended
trow ye? when thus like Horace his Painter we fixed upon the shoulders of a
man, the head of a beast? And that not as he did the head of an horse, an
harmless and useful Creature, but of a venomous and subtle Serpent rather,
which like the Viper eat through the very bowels of the Church his Mother that
bred him, and instead of Protecting the State under his shelter, like the
Bramble-King in the book of the Judges, scratcht it to the very bones? till at
length God in mercy to the poor Church and State took Him off.

And now Exit Protector! the Scene is changed; yet being wantonly Rebellious,
seeing we could no longer subsist Acephali, without an Head over us, or
Pseudocephali, with a false head, or an Head that was not rightly and properly
our own, we were ^^solved to try, whether we could better our condition, by
being Polycepholi, i. e. by putting an whole Consistory, of heads over us, as
many heads, as the Scarlet-colored beast had that carried the Whore of Babylon
upon his back, Rev. 17. 3. or as many heads, as the monstrous Hydra is famed to
have in the Poet, or rather as many heads as stood heretofore upon London
Bridge. But alas, we found that our case now waxed from bad to worse, for now
we found, that those many Heads, like the heads of those children that have the
Rickets, began to suck and attract wholly to themselves all the juice and
Radical moisture from the rest of their inferior parts and members, the poor
Commonalty; that so they might swell themselves to an exorbitant greatness.
This, this was our sad and woeful case, and yet far worse than this it had been
with us, had not the King of Kings put into his own place again, the Stone
which the Builders refused, and made Him the Head of the Corner, This
doubtless was the Lords doing, and it ought to be mavelous in our eyes: and
we are all this day met to acknowledge Gods Power and goodness, in bringing
this mighty work to pass: Wherefore for this let us now render unto God all
possible praise and thanks, Shouting aloud with the people in my Text, and
saying,

God save the King. Here is yet one thing further observable in this
acclamation in my Text, and that is the universality of it, for All the people
shouted, and said, God save the King, and truly, Vox populi, Vox Dei, the voice
of the people, whilst they thus pray, is the voice of God: for God would have
all the people thus to pray, and that with an Imprimis; for I exhort says his
Apostle. That first of all, Supplications, Prayers and intercessions, and
Thanksgivings be made for all men; for Kings especially, and all that be in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life, in all Godliness and
Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. cap. 1, 2, 3 verses, Montague in his Essays tells us, that some of the
Town of Arras, at what time Lewis, the 11th of France took it, chose rather to
be hanged, than to say, God save the King, and if there be any of such
Obstinate, Malignant, and disloyal Spirits amongst us, it mattered not, if they
had their choice: such strings as will not be unison with the rest of their
fellows, deserve fairly to be broken, and thrown aside; for when ought our
acclamations of joy to be universal, if not now? since we have obtained again
of God,

1. Regem, a King, that we might not any longer be an headless people.

2. Regem unum, one King, and so are no longer, Ta^quam Bellua multorum
capitum, as a monstrous Beast with many heads, and surely to have a King, and
but one King, and not many Kings over us, is promised as a very great blessing
to Gods people, Ezech 37. 22.

3. Regem Talem, such a King as has no Qualem, no Peer to match Him, being

1. Talis, Such a King, who as far surpasses any of the people in the
eminencies of his virtues and graces, as ever Saul did surpass all the people,
in the tallnesse of his stature, verse 24. of this Chapter.

2. Talis, Such a King, as by his own sufferings, must needs be more sensible
than other Kings of the sufferings of His Subjects; for as to your comfort, as
you are Christians, the Author to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 4 15. That we have
not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
because in all points he was tempted, like as we are; so to your comfort, as
you are Sujects, I may tell you likewise that you now have not a Sovereign,
that cannot have a fellow-feeling of your Oppressions, since Himself has been
brought up in the School of affliction.

3. And Lustly, Talis, such a King, as had an indubitable Right to the Crowns
of these Realms, and therefore to have detained Him longer from them, must
necessarily have brought one time or other some dreadful Judgment upon the
Land for our Injustice.

You then who desire the Restoration of your Religion, Laws and Liberties,

You that pray for the Peace of the Church, and the Prosperity of the State,

You that would freely enjoy a comfortable assurance of your lives and estates,

You that hope for better Trading and Commerce.

You that would be happy under a Religious, Peaceable, wise, just, and
merciful King, and finally,

You that would choose to have one King, rather than an whole Committee of
Tyrants over you,

Join now unanimously your prayers with all the people, and cry,

God save the King. Amen.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane.
THe Aliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
England since the Reformation: by Hamon L'estrange Esquire.

The Souls Conflict, being 8. Sermons, preached at Oxford, and so much
recommened by the late Dr. Hewyt.

Dr. Browns Sepulchral Urns, and Garden of Cyrus.

Two Essays of Love and Marriage.

The Queens Exchange, by Mr. R. Brom.

Five New Plays, by Mr. R. Brom, never before printed.

Adam out of Eden, by Mr. Speed.

Poems on several Persons and occasions, by No body must know whom.

Crumbs of Comfort.

Most of Mr. Prynnes Books.

Shepherds Duty of Constables*

St. Bonaventures Soliloquies.

Healths Improvement, in 4to.

Mr. Baxters Treatise of Conversion.

That long-expected piece, The Survey of the Law; containing directions how to
prosecute, or defend Actions brought at Common law, by William Glisson Esquire;

A Second Ternary of Sermons, by the Learned Dr. Stewart.

The Elements of Water drawing, in 40.

Mr. Sprat's Plague of Athens, in 4to.

Jews in America, by Mr. Thorowgood.

The Royal Buckler, in 80.

A Collection of all Songs and Ballads made upon the Rump.


