THE LETTER OF THE LONDON MINISTERS TO THE Assembly of DIVINES at Westminster;
against TOLERATION, mildly examined; AND The mistakes thereof friendly
discovered; As well for the sakes of the Independent and Separation, as for
the good of the COMMONWEALTH.
WHen I call to mind the general oppression (before the Parliament) exercised
upon good people, conscientious in the practice of their religion; and that the
Presbyters did not only suffer as much as any therein, but exclaimed, and
labored as much as any there-against: It is a wonder to me, that now that yoke
is removed, and a blessed opportnnity offered by Almighty God, to the people and
their Parliament, to make every honest heart glad, by allowing a just and
contentfull Freedom, to serve God without hypocrisy; and according to the
persuasion of conscience: That one Sect amongst us, that is the Presbyters,
that have been yoke-fellowes with us; should not rest satisfied with being free
as their Brethren, but become restless in their contrivances and endeavors,
till they become Lords over us. The wonder is the same, as it would have been,
had the Israelites, after the Egyptian bondage, become Taskmasters in the
Land of Canaan one to another, but that is more in them who have been
instructed by our Savior in that blessed rule; of doing unto others, what they
would have others do unto themselves.

To discover the several policies the Presbiters have used to get into the
chair they have justled the Bishops out of, whose example they have followed
in many particulars; as especially in the politic and graduall obtaining the
Ordinance for Licencing, upon a pretense of stopping the Kings writings, but
intentionably obtained, and violently made use of against the Independents,
Separation, and Common-wealths-men, who either sees more, or something contrary
to the designs of the Licencer. To signify to the People, how the Presbiters
have labored to twist their interest with the Parliaments, as the Bishops did
theirs with the King, how daily and burdensomly importunate they are with the
Parliament, to establish their Government, (which they are pleased to call
Christ's) and back it with authority, and a compulsive power, (which by that
very particular appears not to be his) To lay open their private juncto's and
councels, their framing Petitions for the easy and ignorant people, their
urging them upon the Common Council, and obtruding them upou the chusers of
Common Council men, at the Wardmote Elections, even after the Parliament had
signified their dislike thereof; to sum up their bitter invectives in Pulpits,
and strange liberty they take as well there, as in their writings, to make the
separation and Independents odious by scandals and untrue reports of them, in
confidence of having the press in their own hands, by which means, no man
without hazard shall answer them, to lay open the manner and depth of these
proceedings, is not the intention of this work; I only thought good to mention
these particulars, that the Presbiters may see they walk in a net, no it is no
cloud that covers them, and that they may fear that in time they may be
discerned as well by the whole People, as they are already by a very great part
thereof.

The London Ministers Letter, contrived in the conclave of Sion College, is
one of the numerous projects of the Clergy: not made for the information of the
Sinod, but the misinformation of the People, to prevent which is my business
at this time; I will only take so much of it as is to the point in hand, to
wit, Tolleration.

Letter,
It is true, by reason of different lights, and different* sights among
Brethren, there may be dissenting in, opinion, yet why should there be any
seperating from Church Communion.

Why? because the differences in opinion is in matters that concern Church
Communion: you may as well put the question, why men play not the Hypocrites?
as they must needs do if they should communicate in that Church Society, their
mind cannot approve of. The question had been well put, if you had said, by
reason of different lights, and different sights, there may be dissenting in
opinion, yet why should our hearts be divided one from another? why should our
love from hence, and our affections grow cold and dead one toward another? why
should we not peaceably, bear one with another, till our sights grow better,
and our light increase? These would have been questions I think, that would
have pusled a truly conscientious man to have found an ans were for.

That which next follows, to wit, the Churches coat may be of diverse colors,
yet why should there be any rent in it: is but an old jing of the Bishops,
spoken by them formerly in reference to the Presbiters; and now mentioned, to
make that which went before, which has no weight in it self, to sound the
better.

Letter.
Have we not a Touchstone of truth, the good word of God, and when all things
are examined by the word, then that which is best may be he ld fast; but first
they must be known, and then examined afterward.

I shall easily concur with them thus far, that the Word of God is the
Touchstone, that all opinions are to be examined by that, and that the best is
to be held fast. But now who shall be the examiners, must needs be the
question; If the Presbiter examine the Independent and separation, they are
like to find the same censure the Presbiters have already found, being examined
by the Bishops, and the Bishops found from the Pope: Adversaries certainly are
not competent Judges; aga ine, in matters disputable and controverted, every
man must examine for himself, and so every man does, or else he must be
conscious to himself, that he sees with other men's eyes, and has taken up an
opinion, not because it consents with his understanding, but for that it is the
safest and least troublesome as the world goes, or because such a man is of
that opinion whom he reverences, and veri^y believes would not have been so,
had it not been truth. I may be helped in my examination, by other men, but no
man o^ sort of men* are to examine for me, insomuch that before an opinion can
properly be said to be mine, it must concord with my understanding. Now here is
the fallacy, and you shall find it in all Papists, Bishops, Presbiters, or
whatsoever other sort of men, have or would have in their hands the power of
persecuting, that they always suppose themselves to be competent examiners and
Judges of other men differing in judgment from them, and upon this weak
supposition (by no means to be allowed) most of the reasons and arguments of
the men forementioned, are supported.

They proceed to charge much upon the Indepe^dents, for not producing their
model of Church Government; for answer hereunto, I refer the Reader to the
Reasons printed by the Independents, and given into the House in their own
justification, which the Ministers might have taken notice of.

I proceed to the supposed Reasons urged by the Ministers, against the
Tolleration of Independency in the Church.

Letter.
1. Is, because the Desires and endeavors of Independents for a Toleration,
are at this time extremely unseasonable, and pre: properous For, The
reformation of Religion is not yet perfected and settled amongst us, according
to our Covenant. And why may not the Reformation be raised up at last to such
purity and perfection, that truly tender consciences may receive abundant
satisfaction for ought that yet appears.

I would to God the people, their own friends especially, would but take notice
of the fallacy of the Reason: They would have reformation perfected according
to the Covenant, before the Independents move to be tolerated: now Reformation
is not perfected according to the Covenant, till Schism and Heresy is
extirpated; which in the sequel of this Letter, they judge Independency tobe,
that their charity thinks it then most seasonable, to move that Independency
should be tolerated after it is extirpated: their reason and affection in this,
are alike sound to the Independants. Their drift in this, indeed is but too
evident, they would have the Independents silent, till they get power in their
hands, and then let them talk if they dare, certainly, the most seasonable
time to move for tolleration is while the Parliament are in debate about Church
Government; since if stay be made till a Church Government be settled, all
motions that may but seem to derogate from that, how just soever in
themselves, how good soever for the Commonwealth, must needs be hardly
obtained.

And whereas they say, Why may not Reformation be raised up at last to such
prity and perfection, that truly tender consciences may receive abundant
satisfaction, for ought that yet appears.

Observe, 1. That these very Ministers, in the sequel of their Letter, impute
it as Levity in the Independents, that they are not at a stay, but in
expectation of new lights and reserves, as they say, so that a man would thinkf
they themselves were at a certainty: But it is no new thing for one sort of men
to object that as a crime against others, which they are guilty o themselves:
though indeed but that the Presbiters use any weapons against the
Independant's, it is no crime at all, yea it is excellency in any man or woman,
not to be pertinacio^s, or obstinate in any opinion, but to have an open ear
for reason and argument, against whatsoever he holds, and to embrace or reject,
whatsoever upon further search he finds to be agreeable to, or dissonant from
Gods holy Word. It does appear from the practices of the Presbiters, and from
this Letter and other Petitions expressly against Toleration, that unless the
Independants and separation will submit their Judgments to theirs, they shall
never be tolerated, if they can hinder it.

Their 2. Reason is that it is not yet known what the Government of the
Independent is, neither would they ever let the world know what they hold in
that point, though some of their party have bin too forward to challenge the
London Petitioners as led with blind obedience, and pinning their souls upon
their Priests sleeve, for desiring an establishment of the Government of
Christ, before there was any model of it extant. Their 3d. Reason, is much to
the same purpose.

I answer, 1. That the Ministers know that the Independent Government for the
General is resolved upon by the Independents, though they have not yet
modelized every particular, which is a work of time, as the framing of the
Pres^^terian Government was. The Independents however have diverse reasons for
dissenting from the Presbyterian way, which they have given in already. And
though they have not concluded every particular of their own, but are still
upon the search, and enquiry; yet it is seasonable however to move for
toleration, for that the ground of moving is not because they are Independents,
but because* every man ought to be free in the worship and service of God,
compulsion being the way to increase, not the number of Converts, but of
Hypocrites; whereas it is another case for People to move for establishing of a
Government they understand not, having never seen it, as the London
Petitioners did, that is most evidently a giving up of the understanding to
other men, sure the Presbiters themselves cannot think it otherwise, nor yet
the People upon the least consideration of it. Besides, the London Petitioners
did not only desire, as here the Ministers cunningly say, an establishment of
the Government of Christ, but an establishment of the Government of Christ (a
model whereof the reverend Assembly of Divines have framed, which they never
saw) so that herein, the People were abused by the Divines, by being put upon a
Petition, wherein they suppose that Government which they never saw, to be
Christ's Government. If this be not sufficient to discover to our Presbyterian
Lay-Brethren, the Divines confidence of their abilitity to work them by the
smoothness of phrase and Language to what they please, and of their own
easiness, and flexibility to be so led, I know not what is.

2. The Ministers urge that the desires and endeavors of the Independ^nts for
Toleration, are unreasonable, and unequal in diverse regards.

1. Partly because no such toleration has heitherto been established (sofar as
we know) in any Christian State, by the Civil Magistrate.

But that the Ministers have been used to speak what they please for ^ Reason
in their Pulpits without contradiction, they would never sure have let so
slight a one as this have past from them: It seems by this reason, that if in
any Christian State a Toleration by the Magistrate had been allowed, it would
not have been unreasonable for our State to allow it: The practice of States,
being here supposed to be the rule of what is reasonable; whereas I had thought,
that the practice of Christian States is to be judged by the rule of reason and
Gods Word, and not reason by them: That which is just and reasonable, is
constant and perpetually so; the practice of States though Christian, is
variable we see; different one from another, and changing according to the
prevalency of particular partees, and therefore a most uncertain rule of what
is reasonable.

Besides, the State of Holland does tolerate; and therefore the Ministers
Argument, even in that part where it seems to be most strong for them, makes
against them.

Again, if the practice of a Christian state, be a sufficien^ Argument of the
reasonableness of a Tolleration, our State may justly tolerate because
Christian, and because they are free to do what ever any other State might
formerly have done. But I stay too long upon so weak an Argument.

2. Partly, Because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot suffer
Presbitary, and answerable hereunto is their practice, in those places where
Independency prevails.

It Is unreasonable it seems to tolerate Independents, because Independents
would not if they had the power, suffer Presbyters. A very Christianly
argument, and taken out of the 5. of Matthew 44. Love your Enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt
you, and persecute you: What, were all our London Ministers forgetful of t^eir
Saviors instructions? Does their fury so far blind their understanding, and
exceed their piety? Which seems to be but pretended now, since in their
practice they would become Jews, and cry out an eye for an eye, and a tooth for
a tooth. Whosoever meddles with them it seems, shall have as good as they
bting: Was ever so strange a reason urged by a Sect of men, that say they are
Ministers, Christ's Ministers, Reformers too, that would make the world believe
they are about to reduce all matters Christian, to the original and primitive
excellency of Christ and the Apostles, and yet to speak and publish to the
world a spleenish reason, so expressly contrary to the precepts, to the
practice of Christ and his followers. To Christ I say, that bids us love our
enemies, that we may be the children of our Father which is in heaven, who
makes the Sun to shine on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just
and on the unjust. The Ministers should be like the Master, what a
dispro^ortion is here? As if the title were taken up for some other end; we
know the Apostle speaks of Ministers that could transform themselves ^s though
they were the Ministers of Righteousness; I pray God our Ministers do not so,
I would willingly suppress those fears and suspicions; which, do what I can
arise in me, from their words and practice. Sure they had approved themselves
better christians, if upon the discovery of so bad a spirit in any of the
Independents; as to persecute, had they power (though I believe, there are not
any such) I say, it had been more Christ-like in our Ministers, to have
dissuaded them from s^unmanly, so much more unchristianly a vice, then to have
it made an argument for practice in themselves. They might by the same rule, be
Jews to the Jew, or Turk to the Turk, Oppressors to the Oppressor; or do
any evil to others, that others would do to them: if other men's doing of i^,
be an argument of the reasonableness thereof. But I hope, our Ministers will
be so ingenious, as when they see their weaknesses forsake them, it will be
both more comfortable to all other sorts of men, and in the end more happy for
themselves.

2. Again, I suppose your suggestion to be very false; namely, that the
Independents if they had power, would persecute the Presbyters: though let me
tell you of all s^cts of men, those deserve least countenance of a State that
would be Persecutors, not because of their consciences in the practice and
exercise of their Religion, wherein the ground of Freedom consists; but
because a persecuting spirit is the greatest enemy to humane society, the
dissolver of love and brotherly affection, the cause of envyings,
heart-burnings, divisions, yea, and of wars it self. Whosoever shall cast an
impartial eye upon times past, and examine the true cause and reason of the
subversion, and devastation of States and countries, will I am confident;
attribute it to no other, then the Tyranny of Princes, and Persecution of
Priests. So that all States, minding their true interests, namely the good and
welfare of the people, ought by all means to suppress in every sect or degree
of men, whether Papists, Episcopalls, Presbyters, Independents, Anabaptists,
etc. the spirit of Domination, and Persecution, the disquieter and disturber of
mankind* the offspring of Satan. God being all Love, and having so communicated
himself unto us, and gave us commands to be like him, merciful, as he our
heavenly Father is merciful; to bear with one another infirmities: neither
does reason and true wisdom dictate any other to us, then that we should do
unto others, as we would be done unto our selves; that spirit therefore which
is contrary to God, to reason, to the well-being of States, as the spirit of
Persecution evidently is; is most especially to be watched, and warily to be
circumscribed, and tied up by the wisdom of the supreme power in
Commonwealths. I speak not this to the disgrace of Presbyters, as Presbyters;
for as such, Isuppose they are not Persecutors: forasmuch as I know, some, and
I hope there are many more of them, that are zealous and conscientious for that
form of Government, and vet enemies to a compulsive power in matters of
Religion. But for this end only, namely to beget a just and christian dislike
in all sorts of men, as well Presbyters, as others; of forc^ng all to one way
of worship, though disagreeable to their minds: which cannot be done, without
the assistance of this fury and (...)

3. And partly to grant to them, and not to other* Sectaries who are free* born
^s well as they, and have done as good service as they to the public (as they
use to plead)* will be count^d injustice, and great partiality; but to grant it
to all, will scarce be cleared from impiety.

To the former part of this argument I gladly consent, that Sectaries have as
good claims to Freedom* as any sorts of men whatsoever; because freeborn,
because well-affected, and very assistant to their country in its necessities.
The latter part of the argument is only an affirmation, without proof; the
Ministers think sure it will be taken for truth because they said it, for such
a presumption it seems they are arrived to. In the mean time what must they
suppose the people to be, that do imagine their bare affirmations ground for
the peoples belief* I would the people would learn from hence to be their own
men, and make use of their own understandings in the search and belief of
things; let their Ministers be never so seemingly learned or judicious, God
has not given them understandings for nothing; the submission of the mind is
th most ignoble slavery; which being in our own powers to keep free, the
Subjection thereof argues in us the greater baseness* but to the Assertion,
that it will be impiety to grant it to all Sectaries.

I answer, First, that the word Sectary is communicable both to Presbyters and
Independents, whether it be taken in the good sense for the followers* of
Christ; for such, all Presbyters, Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists, and all
else, suppose and profess themsel^es to be: or in the common sense, for
followers of some fewmen more eminent in their parts and abilities then other.
And hereof the Independents and Presbyters are as guilty as the Separation, and
so are as well Sectaries. Now all Sectaries, whether Presbyters, Independents,
Brownists, Antinomians, Anabaptists, etc. have a like title and right to
Freedom, or a Toleration; the title thereof being not any particular of the
Opinion but the Equity of every man's being Free in the State he lives in, and
is obedient to, matters of opinion being not properly to be taken into
cognizance any farther, then they break out into some disturbance, or disquiet
to the State* But you will say, that by such a toleration, blasphemy will be
broached, and such strange and horrid* opinions, as would make the ears of
every godly and christian man to tingle; what must this also be tolerated? I
answer, it cannot be just, to set bounds or limitations to toleration, any
further then the safety of the people requires; the more horrid and blasphemous
the opinion is, the easier suppressed, by reason and argument; because it must
necessarily be, that the weaker the arguments, are on one side, the stronger
they are on the other* the grosser the error is, the more advantage has truth
over it* the less color likewise, and pretense there is, for imposing it upon
the people. I am consident, that there is much more danger inn small, but
speciously formed error, that has a likeness and similitude to truth, then in
a grosle and palpable untruth.

Besides, can it in reason be judged the meetest way to draw a man out of his
^^ror, by imprisonment, bonds, or other punishment? You may as well be angry,
(...) ^^ripes or bonds to recover his sight how pr^posterous would this (...)
Your ho^per and mee^ way ^u^e is to apply things (...) to his cute. And so
likewise to a man whose understanding is cloud^d, (...) and imperfect whose
mind is so far misinformed as to (...) or the Scripture^ (for we instance in
the worst of errors) ^a^ B^^lam or the Fleet reduce such a one? N^ certainly*
it was ever found by all experience, that su^^ rough (...) did (...) the error,
not remove i^ nothing can do that but the (...) and (...) power of found
reason and argument* which, (...) to b^ doubted, they are (...) furnished
withal that use other weapons* Hence have I observ*d that the most weak and
passionate men, the most unable to defend truth, or their own^ opinion are the
most violent for pesecution* Whereas those whose minds are established; and
whose opinions are built upon firm and (...) ground ^eare no^ what winds blow^
fear not to grapple with any e^ror, because they bo^^d ^n^ they (...) overthrow
it*

3. Independency is a Schism, and therefore not to be tolerated.

The principal argument brought to prove it, is this* Because they d^part from
the Presbyter Churches, which are true Churches, and so confost to ^o (...) by
^he I^depend^nt^.

I answer, that this Argument only concerns the (...) because they only
acknowledge them to be true Churches. Whether they are still of that opinion o^
no I know not, it is to be doubted they are not, especially (...) they have
discerned the spirit of enforcement and compul^ion to ^aig^ in that C^ur^h* the
tr^est mark of a false Church. I believe the Independents have ^^^ng'd their
(...) ^ es^eially those of them whose Pastors r^^^ive their Office and
Mi^is^try (...) the election of the people or congregation, and are not engaged
to allow so much (...) the Presbyters, because of their own interest* as
deriving their calling from the Bis^ops and Pope* for the making up a supposed
succession from the Apostles, who se^ their own sakes are enforced to
acknowledge the Presbyter for ^ true Church, (...) the (...) are necessitated
to allow the Episcopal and Papist Church, true o^ valid for the substance* as
they confess in the ordinance for Ordination, because they have received their
Ministry therefrom, without which absurdity they cannot maintain their
succession from the Apostles. But that the Independents are not a schism, they
have and will, I believe* upon all^occa^ions sufficiently justifi^* I shall not
the^e^or^, ^ince it concerns them in particular, (...) thereupon* (...) to the
supposed mischiefs which the Ministers say will ^nevitably fo^low upon th^^
toll^r^tion, both to the Church and Commonwea the First, to the Church.

1. Causeless and unjust revol^s from our Ministry and Congreg^tions.

To this I say, that i^ argues an abundance of distrust the Ministers have in
their own abilities, and the doctrines they pr^^ch, to suppose their ^uditors
will for^^k^ them if other men have liberty to speak. It Is authority it seems
^ust (...) their Churches, and not the truth and eff^a^cy of their doctr^nes. I
j^dge it ^or my pa^^ ^ ^ufficient ground to suspect that for gold that cannot
abide a trial. It seems our Ministers doctrines and Religion, are like Dagon
of the P^ilistins, that will fall to pie^^s at the appearance of the Ark. Truth
sure would be more confident, in hope to app^^^ (...) glorious, being set off
by falsehood. And therefore I do adjure the Ministers, from that loveliness and
potency that necessarily must be in Truth and Righteousness, if ^hey think
they do profess it, that they* would procure the opening of every man's mouth,
in confidence that truth, in whomsoever she is, will prove victorious; and ^ike
the Suns glorious luster, darken all errors and vain imaginations of man's
heart. But I fear the consequence sticks more in their stomachs, the emptying
of their Churches being the eclipsing of their reputations, and the diminishing
of their profits; if it be otherwise, le^ it appear by an equal allowing of
that to others, which they have labored so much for to be allowed to
themselves.

2. Our peoples minds will be troubled and in danger to be subverted, Acts 15.
24.

A. The place of Scripture may concern themselves, and may as well be urged
upon them by the Separation o^ Independents, as it is urged by them upon the
Separation and Independen^s; namely, that they trouble the peoples minds, and
lay injunctions upon them, they were never commanded to lay. And it is very
observable, the most of those Scriptures they urge against the Separation, do
most properly belong unto themselves.

3. Bitter heart-bur^ings a^ong brethren, will be foment^d and perpetuated to
all posterity.

I answer. Not by, but for want of a Tolleration: Because the State is not
equal in its protection, but allows one sort of men to trample upon another;
from hence must necessarily ^rise heart-burnings, which as they have ever been,
so they will ever be perpetuated to posterity, unless the State wisely prevent
them, by taking away the distinction that foments them; namely, (the particular
indulgency of one party, and neglect of the other) by a just and equal
tolleration. In that family strife and heart-burnings are commonly multiplied,
where one son is more cockered and indu^g'd then another* the way to foster
love and amity, as well in a family, as in a State, being ^n equal respect
from those that are in author^^y.

4. They say, ^he Godly, painful, and orthodo^* Ministers will be discouraged
und d^spis^d*

Answ. Upou how slight foundation is* their reputation supported, that fear
being despised unless Author^^y forces all to Church to them? Since they have
confidence to vou^h themselves godly* painful, and orthodot, me thinks they
should uot doubt an ^udience. The Apostles could empty the C^urches, and Jewish
Synagogues, and by the prevalency of their doctrine convert 3000 at a Sermon;
and do our Ministers f^are, that have the opportunity of a Church, and the
advan^age of speaking ^n h^^re together without interruption, that they cannot
keep those Auditors they h^ve; but that they shall be withdrawn from them by
men of ^eaner (...) (in their esteem) by the illiterate and under-valued lay
Preachers, that ^r^ (as the Ministers suppose) under the cloud of error and
false doctrine? Surely they suspect their own Tene^ss or their abilities to
maintain them, that esteem it a discouragement to be opposed* and fear they
shall be despised if dispu^^d withal.

5. They say, The life and power of godliness will be eaten out by frivolous
disputes and vain janglings.

Answ. Frivolous disputes and vain janglings, are as unjustifiable in the
people as in the Ministry, but mild and gentle Reasonings (which authority
are only to countenance) make much to the finding out of truth, which does
most advance the life and power of godliness. Besides, a Toleration being
allowed, and every Sect laboring to make it appear that they are in the truth,
whereof a good life, or the power of godliness being the best badge or
symptom; hence will necessarily follow, a noble contestation in all sorts of
men to exceed in godliness, to the great improvement of virtue and piety
amongst us. From whence it will be concluded too, that that Sect will be
supposed to have least truth in them, that are least virtuous, and godlike in
their lives and conversations.

6. They urge, That the whole course of religion in private families will be
interrupted and undermined.

Answ. As if the Independents and Separation were not as religious in their
private families, as the Presbyters,

7. Reciprocal duties between persons of nearest and dearest relations, will
be extremely violated.

Answ. A needless fear, grounded upon a supposition, that difference in
judgment must needs occasion coldness of affection, which indeed proceeds
from the different countenance and protection, which States have hitherto
afforded to men of different judgments. Hence was it, that in the most
persecuting times* when it was almost as bad in the vulgar esteem to be an
Anabaptist, as a murderer, it occasioned dis-inheritings, and many effects of
want of affection, in people of nearest relations; but since the common odium
and vilification is in great measure taken off, by the wise and just permission
of all sects of men by the Parliament, man and wife, father and son, friend and
friend, though of different opinions, can agree well together, and love one
another; which shows that such difference in affection, is not properly the
effect of difference in judgment, but of Persecution, and the distinct respect
and different countenance that Authority has formerly shown toward men not
conforming.

8. They say, That the whole work of R^formation, especially in discipline and
Government, will be retarded, disturbed, and in danger of b^ing utterly
frustrate and void.

It matters not, since they mean in the Presbyterian discipline and Government,
accompanied with Persecution; Nay, it will be abundantly happy for the people,
and exceedingly conducing to a lasting Peace (to which Persecution is the
greatest enemy) if such a government so qualified be never settled. The
Presbyters I hope, will fall short in their ayms. ^. It Is not certain that the
Parliament mean to settle the Presbyterian Government, since they have not
declared that Government to be agreeable to Gods Word; although the Presbyters
are pleased, in their expressions, frequently to call their Government, Christ^
Government. Howsoever their determination (which may well be supposed to be
buil^ upon their interest) is not binding* They are called to advise withal*
not to control. 2. In case the Parliament should approve of that Government in
the main, yet the Prelaticall and persecuting power of it, we may well presume
(since they themselves may smart under it as well as the rest of the people)
they will never establish.

9. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom, will be encouraged to
endeavor the like tolleration.

Sects and Heresies* We must take leave to tell them, that those are ^ermes
imposed ad placitum, and may be retorted with the like confidence upon
themselves. How prove they Separation to be Sects and Heresies; because they
differ and separate from t^em? That Is no Argument, unless they can first prove
themselves to be in the truth? A matter with much presumption supposed, but
never yet made good, and yet upon this groundless presumption, the whole
fabric of their function, their claim to the Churches, their pre-eminence in
determining matters of Religion, their eager persuit after a power to
persecute, is mainly supported. If the Separation are Sects and Heresies,
because the Presbyters (supposing themselves to have the countenance of
Authority, and some esteem with the people, judge them so: The Presbyters by
the same rule were so, because the Bishops once in authority, and in greater
countenance with the People, did so judge them to be.

And whereas they say, That Sects and Heresies will be encouraged to endeavo^r
the like tolleration with the Independents.

I answer, that it is their right, their due as justly as their cloths, or food;
and if they endeavor not for their Liberty, they are in a measure guilty of
their own bondage* How monstrous a matter the Ministers would make it to be,
for men to labor to be free from persecution. They think they are in the
^addle already, but will never I hope have the reins in their hands*

Their 10th. fear is the same.

2. They say the whole Church of England (they mean their whole Church of
England) in sh^rt time will be ^wallowed up with di^traction and confusion.

These things are but laid, not proved: were it not that the Divines blew the
coals of dissension, and exasperated one man's spirit against another; I am
confidently persuaded we might differ in opinion, and yet love one another very
well; ^s for any distraction or confusion that might entrench upon that civil
peace, the Laws might provide against it, which is the earnest desires both of
the Independen^^ and Separation.

2. They say, Tolleration will bring diverse mischiefs upon the Commonwealth:
For,

1. All these mischeifes in the Church will have their proportionable influence
upon the Commonwealth.

This is but a slight supposition, and mentions no evil that is like to befall
the Commonwealth.

2. They urge that the Kingdom will be woefully weakened by scandalls and
Divisions, so that the Enemies both domestical* and foreign will be
encouraged to plot and practice against it.

I answer, that the contrary hereunto is much more likely, for two Reasons.

1. There is like to be a concurrence, and joint assistance in the protection
of the Commonwealth, which affords a joint protection and encouragement to the
People.

2. There can be no greater argument to the People, to venture their estates
and lives in defense of their Country and that government, under which they
enjoy not only a liberty, of Estate and Person, but a freedom likewise of
serving God according to their consciences, which Religious men account the
greatest blessing upon earth; I might mention notable instances of late actions
of service in Independents and Seperatists, which arising but from hopes of
such a freedom, can yet scarce be paraleld by any age or story.

3. They say it is much to be doubted, lest the power of the Magistrate should
not only be weakened, but even utterly overthrown; considering the principles
and practices of Independents, together with their compliance with other
Sectaries, sufficiently known to be antimagistraticall.

An injurious, but common scandal, this whereof much use has been made to the
misleading the People into false apprehensions of their brethren the
Seperatists, to the great increase of enmity and disaffection amongst us,
whereof the Ministers are most especially guilty: Let any impartial man
examine the principles, and search into the practices of the separation, and he
must needs conclude that they are not the men that trouble England, but those
rather that lay it to their charge: the separation indeed and Independents are
enemies to Tyranny, none more, and oppression, from whence I believe has arisen
the forementioned scandal of them: but to just Government and Magistracy, none
are more subject, and obedient: and therefore the Ministers may do well to lay
aside such obloquies, which will otherwise by time and other discovery, turn
to their own disgrace.

In the last place they say, it is opposite to to the Covenant, 1. Because
opposite to the Reformation of Religion, according to the Word of God, and
example of the best Reformed Churches.

I answer, 1, That the example of the best reformed Churches is not binding*
further then they agree with the Word of God, so that the Word of God indeed is
the only rule. Now the word of God is express for tolleration, as appea^es by
the Parable of the Tares growing with the wheat, by those two express and
positive rules, 1. Every man should be fully persuaded of the truth of that way
wherein he serves the Lord, 2. That whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and 3.
by that rule of reason and pure nature, cited by our blessed Savior: namely,
whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, that do you unto them.

2. They say it is destructive to the 3. Kingdoms nearest conjunction and
uniformity in Religion and Government.

I answer, that the same tolleration may be allowed in the 3. Kingdoms,
together with the same Religion and Government; whether it shall be
Presbiterian, or Independent, or Anabaptisticall: Besides that I suppose which
is principally intended by this part of the Covenant, it is the Union of the 3.
Kingdoms, and making them each desensive and helpful to the other, which a
tolleration will be a means to further, because of the encouragement that
every man will have to maintain his so excellent freedom; which he cannot
better do, then by maintaining them ^ll because of the Independency they will
have one upon the other.

3. It Is expressly contrary to the extirpation of Schism, and whatsoever shall
be found contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of Godliness.

I answer, That when it is certainly determined by Judges that cannot err, who
are the Schismatics, there may be some seeming pretense to extirpate them,
though then also no power or force is to be used, but lawful means only, as
the wise men have interpreted it; that is, Schism and Heresy, when they
appear to be such, are to be rooted out by reason and debate, the sword of the
Spirit, not of the Flesh; arguments, not blows: unto which men betake
themselves upon distrust of their own foundations, and consciousnesse of their
own inability.

Besides, as the Presbiters judge others to be a Schism from them, so others
judge them to be a Schism from the Truth, in which sense only the Covenant can
be taken.

4. Hereby we shall be involved in the guilt of other men's sins, and thereby
be endangered to receive of their plagues.

I answer, that compulsion must necessarily occasion both much cruelty and much
Hypocrisy: whereof the Divines, laboring so much for the cause, which is
persecution, cannot be guiltless.

5. It seems utterly impossible (if such a tolleration should be granted) that
the Lord should be one, and his name one, in the 3. Kingdoms.

I suppose they mean by that phrase, it is impossible that our judgments and
profession should be one; so I believe it is, whether there be a Tolleration or
no. But certainly the likeliest way, if there be any thereunto, is by finding
out oue truth; which most probably will be by giving libetty to every man to
speak his mind, and produce his reasons and arguments; and not by hearing one
Sect only: That if it does produce a forced unity, it may be more probably in
error, then in truth; the Ministers being not so likely to deal clearly in the
search thereof, because of their interests, ar the Laity, who live not
thereupon, but enquire for truth, for truths sake, and the satisfaction of
their own minds.

And thus I have done with the Argumentive part of the Letter. I shall only
desire, that what I have said may be without prejudice considered: And that the
People would look upon all sorts of men and writings, as they are in
themselves, and not as they are represented by others, or forestalled by a
deceitful rumor or opinion.

In this controversy concerning Tolleration, I make no question but the
Parliament will judge justly between the two parties; who have both the
greatest opportunity and abilities, to discern between the integrity of the one
side, and the interest of the other. That the one party pleads for toleration,
for the comfort and tranquillity of their lives, and the peaceable serving of
God according to their consciences, in which they desire no man's disturbance.
That the other that plead against it, may (I would I could say only probably)
be swayed by interest and self-respects, their means and pre-eminence. I make
no question but the Parliament, before they proceed to a determination of
matters concerning Religion, will as they have heard one party, the Divines, so
likewise reserve one ear for all other sorts of men; knowing that they that
give sentence, all partees being not heard, though the sentence be just (which
then likely will not be) yet they are unjust. Besides, the Parliament
themselves are much concerned in this controvers^e, since upon their
dissolution they must mix with the people, and then either enjoy the sweets of
freedom, or suffer under the most irksome yoke of Priestly bondage: and
therefore since they are concerned in a double respect; first, as chosen by the
People to provide for their safety and Freedom, whereof Liberty of conscience
is the principal branch, and so engaged by duty: secondly, as Members of the
Commonwealth, and so obliged to establish Freedom, out of love to themselves
and their posterity.

I shall only add one word more concerning this Letter, which is this; That
it is worth the observation, that the same men are part of the contrivers of it,
and part of those to whom 'twas sent; Mr. Walker being President of Sion
College, Mr. Seaman one of the Deans, (observe that word) and Mr. Roborough,
one of the Assistants, all three Members of the Synod: who with the rest
framing it seasonably, and purposely to meet with the Letter from Scotland,
concerning Church Government, may w^ll remove the wonder and admiration that
seemed to possess one of the Scotch grand Divines in the Synod, at the
concurrence of Providence in these two Let^ers: of the politic and
confederated ordering whereof, he could not be ignorant.

FINIS.

