A WARNING-PEECE TO THE Commons, Commissioners, Army General, which now sit as
Judges ON HIS Majesty's sacred Person, In the behalf of the whole Kingdom.

Written by one that fears God, and honors his King, and prays for the peace
of England.

Printed in the Year. 1649.

A Vindication of the Army, by way of recrimination against the Lords and
Commons, etc.
THe name and title of Army and Soldier has of late been as formidable and
odious as Sequestrator, Excize, Committee, or Parliament Man. And the complaint
of the Lords, Commons and City of London have caused the greatest part of this
hate and rancour against the Army. I therefore challenge them not with sword,
for they are most of them errand cowards, but with my pen, and bid them
severally answer if they can.

And first thou o City, why and with what face can thou complain of me while
I call for Justice, and the strict execution thereof, when as thou thy self
first made the loud cry to the Parliament for Justice, and thereby most
unjustly sheddest the blood of the innocent?

2. Why and with what face complainest thou of the Army for excluding some
Members from the Parliament, who did never cease bawling at the Parliament
doors for the ejection of the most ancient and most rightful Members in
Parliament?

3. Why and with what face complainest thou of the Army for taking assesse and
quartering upon you, who were the first principal raiser of this Army, and
were ever well content that others should pay and give free quarter?

4. Thou O City who have raised and first have maintained this Army to be as a
rod or sword of God, why and with what face can thou deny them 40000. l.
granted them, and much more by an Ordinance, when thou have most ambitiously
sued, that thou might freely give many millions for the conquering the King,
abolishing Religion, and subjecting the Laws, Liberties, and properties of all
the Subjects in England to an arbitrary power? Yea and when it was put into thy
hands to have remedied all, yet then for fear, falsehood or treachery, thou
forsookest thy self, and betrayedst the whole Kingdom.

Think thou therefore (o City) that judge them which do such things and
do, the same that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Romans 2.3. No,
hear what God has spoken, The spoiler is come upon her even upon Babylon the
great City, Revel. 18. and her mighty men are taken, for the Lord God of
recompenses shall surely requite, Jer. 51.5.6.

And ye Commons, why and with what face can ye complain of the Army for their
Remonstrance and Declarations tending to Justice and public good, when your
selves have published such gross slanderous and impudent lies both in
Declarations and Remonstrances, thereby to cheat the People, to the Kings
destruction, and the Kingdoms ruin?

2. Why and with what face can ye complain of the Army for imprisoning some of
your Members, in Royal and great houses, when your selves have driven so many
thousands of Clergy and Laity out of their freeholds, and thrust too many by
thousands into noisome and close prisons, to the loss both of liberty and
life, and yet never to this hour showing any cause why?

3. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army for excluding some of your
Members from your house? when ye your selves a first, second, and third time
sent up forged Bills for the utter casting out of the Bishops from their most
ancient and most just sitting in the upper House, and at last by threats and
menaces put upon the Lords, forced them to give their most dishonorable and
unconscionable assent thereunto: Yea and did not this alone to the Members of
the Lords House, but did as much or more even to your own, either by not
admitting such though rightly elected, or by threats and force driving them
away by 200. at a clap; which was the only true cause of their sitting at
Oxford.

4. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army for breaking the Laws and
Privileges of Kingdom and Parliament, when ye your selves have been not only
Authors and Actors, but Teachers and Instructers of them by your examples to do
the like to you, as you have done both to your Sovereign Lord the King, and to
your fellow Subjects?

5. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army, for banishing all ill
affected to them 10. miles from London for a month? when as your selves have
banished all ill affected to you, 20. miles thence sometimes for 2. at other
times for 6. months; and that on no less penalty then High Treason, and
accordingly to be arraigned, tried and executed as Traitors without mercy.

6. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army, for committing your Members
to custody? when as your selves the 15. June 1648. authorized any 3. of your
House (though those Colonels and close friends to the Army,) to seize imprison
and carry away Subjects free from Delinquency, to our Army lying then before
Colchester.

7. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army, for calling you corrupt
false traiterous Members? who 21. April. 1648. gave power to any 3.
Committee Men in all the several Counties in England to sequester and imprison
any whom these Committee Men should judge or deem to have spoken reproachfully
against the proceedings of this Parliament.

I could be infinite in the enlarging your unjust and unequal complaints
against the Army, judging and condemning them for those and the like things,
wherein your selves have been most guilty: but I shall end all in this kind
with a word to the Gent. of the long Robe, Lawyers, as Members of your House.

8. And why, and what face complain ye of the Army for desiring 1. That
thescattred and unknown Laws of this Kingdom, may be wisely and carefully
collected, and the best and fittest being culled out, to have them all printed
and published in one volum or body? 2. That they may be translated or put into
our own English and known tongue, whereby every subject may be able to read,
understand and know what he is to do, and what to eschew, what may save and
what may destroy him; and that he may not be constrained to give twenty
shillings or more for every spoonful of compounded or sophisticated hot-water
which may perhaps poison him or his Estate. 3. That the subject may not be
compelled to trudge to four standing Marts or yearly Faires kept in Westminster
Hall there to be forced to buy, and to be cheated in such pedling commodities
(to say no worse) as they might have better for less money in their own
Countries.

I say why and with what faces complain you of the Army for this? when ye your
selves these eight years and upwards have not only been silent, but
consenting, voting, acting to the destruction of all our ancient best Laws:
yet few or none can conceive to what end ye have done all this, except either
for the advance of your own present base gain, or else hereby to comply with
the Grandees and Parliament drivers, to keep them from these just things which
now the Army so earnestly do desire,

Why and with what face complain you of us, because we being your servants
would rule and govern you? when as you have been our masters and teachers in
the art, and accordingly under the pretense and name of Religion, Justice and
public good, have ridd your Masters the people of this Kingdom, not only out
of their fat, but their flesh, and almost off their legs too: And why may not
we, being so many thousands, who have with our blood conquered all, rule and
reap the sweet? as well as 3. or 400. of you have all the while enjoyed the
benefit of our travailes and hazards, daily raking Offices, and heaping up
riches, to the impoverishing the Kingdom.

And to you we may add, as to the whole people of this Land, that as well may
we be their rulers as you, or any other sorts of the people, for while they
come to their ancient government, let them be assured that they shall be rid
one while by one, another by another Faction, and ever by that which by turns
shall get the power, till in a short time all will and must fall into such
confusion, that we can expect no other rule or government but cutting of throats.

But if any seriously ask me, why may not this State come to be governed by an
Aristocracy as well as Venice, and some parts of lower Germany? I must answer,
that the question discovers so much ignorance in Political government, that it
deserves no answer, yet (in a word) who is so ignorant that he knows not,
besides the unspeakable danger of new modelling a State, as of new altering the
temper of an old crazy body, that in this the body natural and civil agree,
that that diet, exercise, physic, government which preserves the one body, may
and will destroy the other, and that as Suits fit not every body, so neither
are the tempers and dispositions of all men taught and guided by the same rule
and power: England, within these 8. last years past, has paid dear for the
learning her Latin tongue, as Delinquent, Malignant, Sequester, Secure,
Compound; and I dare say, two or three Greek words shall be more worth to it then
all those, and the like, if they will understand and follow these, which is no
more then Homer read long ago, (...); each State a rule and Government must
have, which the many destroy while the one does save: or if you believe not
reason and truth, because it comes from a Poet, yet hear and believe God which
is truth it self, and who can neither deceive nor be deceived, and he tells
you Prove. 28.2. For the trangressions of a land many are the Princes thereof,
but by a man of understanding and knowledge the State shall be prolonged.

In a word, O ye Commons, nor murmr nor complain any longer against us, for
ruling you and the rest, for God has spoken it and it shall come to pass,
with what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged, Math. 7.2. And with what
measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again: and Romans 2.2. We are sure
(says S. Paul) That the judgment of God is according to truth to them which
commit such things, and v. 3. think thou that do such things that thou
shall escape the judgment of God?

But of all others, o ye Lords, who are least to be pitied, why and with what
face complain ye of the Army, for taking away your negative Voices in the upper
House, when as you who vote only for your selves, yet after that (at two
several times) ye had voted, and so sent it down to the House of Commons, that
ye could not with justice and honor remove the Bishops out of the Lords House,
yet after with injustice and dishonor ye voted them forth, and from that House
which was their proper freehold, by the just and lawful prescription of above
8000. years, to the third part of which time no Peer now in England can
pretend, and who sat and voted there not for themselves alone but for God, the
Church, and as the Representative of all the Churchmen in England.

2. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army, for endeavoring to subject
you to the Laws of the Land equally with other Subjects, who have been the
principal Authors and Actors in destroying both the Laws and the freedoms of
all the Subjects in England?

3. Why and with what face complain ye of this Army as Rebellious, when as you
your selves so lately in a storm, or rather stricken with a Pannique fear,
like your selves, that is, like valiant Lords, run away from a few boys
unarmed, and fled to this Army for help as to your Tutelar God.

4. Why and with what face can ye complain of the Army for levelling you with
other freeborn Subjects, and bringing you down to the Commons, when most of
you have neither so much honesty nor true honor as most of the ordinary
Gentlemen in England have, no nor yet can plead anything of worth in your
selves for sitting there in that high place, more then either purchase of
titular honor for money, or Royal favor to some of your entitled
Predecessors, to whose virtues notwithstanding ye are as little of kin as
perchance ye are rightly, if all were known, to their blood.

5. Why and with what face complain ye of the Army, for censuring and
sentencing you, who suffered the Commons to censure and sentence your own
Members, contrary to the Privileges of your House, and the Laws of this
Kingdom? Hear the righteous Judge of all the world speak; With what judgment
ye judge ye shall be judged, ( Math. 7.2.) And with what measure ye mete it
shall be measured to you again. For it is written, vengeance is mine, I will
repay says the Lord. Romans 12.19.

And yet O ye Lords, Commons and City, why stand ye as men affrighted at our
Remonstrances and Declarations? know rather that though we are and would be
accounted just and righteous, yet we may and will act according to reason and
prudence, with which God has enriched us above other sinners.

And therefore be assured, that if ye shall repent and turn unto us, and go
our ways, which are the ways of our Lord God, we likewise will repent and
turn and be merciful unto you, we will receive you into our favor, and with
us ye shall eat the good things of the land, and be satisfied plentifully
therewith.

But and if ye shall not speedily return and join with us, and to be
commanded by us into whose hands the Lord of Hosts has delivered you and all
yours; then know for a certain that what ever we have denounced shall come to
pass, that is you shall be scattred among the People, and shall be devoured by
wild beasts, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

But O Army, least that I seem partial in pleading your cause against the
Lords Commons and City, making their crimes and errors as it were a cloak for
your enormities and misdoings, give me leave to speak and to propound a
question to you or two to you in the name and behalf of the Lords Commons and
City.

For if you truly be (as you pretend to be) the rod and sword of God, appointed
to reward and punish ungodly and unjust offenders; yet boast not your self,
neither say in your prosperity you shall not be moved, your mountain is made so
strong: or that because these are sinners and transgressors, whom you have
judged and condemned, that therefore you are inexcusable and clear from all
unrighteousness; for know that God who breaks the bow, and cutteth the
spear in sunder, and casts the rod of his anger into the fire, when they have
fulfilled his will can and will do the like to you, unless you have good
evidence and warrant from Gods revealed Will for what you have or shall intend
to do; or if your designs or actions have any other biassed ends or
selfe-interests besides Gods glory, and the public good.

And whether these things be so, let me interrogate you: Why, and with what
face can you complain of the late Treaty, the Movers thereof and the
Propositions therein? who your selves so lately did Court the Royal party, and
woo the King to a peace and pardon by the tender of more advantageous
Proposalls on his behalf, and his friends then were offered in the Treaty?

2. Why, and with what face can you so suddenly call for fire from heaven to
destroy such and such Delinquents, whenas in your former Declarations and
Remonstrances you professed, (and rightly) the contrary way, to be most
agreeable both to Gods Word and humane prudence?

3. Why, and with what face can you so suddenly cashiere the Lords, and level
them, who so lately professed the maintenance of them in all their Privileges
and Honors?

4. Why, and with what face can you, who have sworn to maintain and defend
the Laws of this Kingdom, dare now not only in your own persons and places to
act, but to profess against all those Laws, and to hold nothing binding but
your own will and desires, or the desires and wills of such of your own Party,
whom alone you style the godly, honest, and well-affected?

5. Lastly, can you think, that if self-love, pride, or ignorant zeal, have so
blinded your eyes, that you cannot see your selves, nor discover your own
hearts, that therefore neither other men, no, nor God himself does epsy and
abhor all hypocritical and abominable ways? Be not deceived, nor think that
you can long blind and deceive the world with vain pretenses and windy words
of Godliness, Justice, and Righteousness, for God will not thus be mocked, no,
nor man will ever be thus fooled and cheated; rather foresee, fear, and
prevent the just judgment of God, who does and will in his time repay both in
weight and measure, for Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, (who
is the Lord of Hosts) Rom, 12.19. and therefore can do it, as he has done to
an Army which twenty times exceeds yours.

And that you may stop the mouths of those that murmr and repine at your
Power and Greatness, and that you may in part redeem or satisfy for what you
have trespassed upon and wronged your Countrymen, suffer a word of
exhortation, as from the whole Kingdom of England.

We confess you have propounded 12 Herculean Labors, and how we affect or
relish them, you may guess by some hints or glances in the preceding
passages: but above the rest, that one for the abridging, Englishing, and
regulating the superfluities, defects and abuses of our Law as now in use, we
so far approve and commend, that we wish our Votes and desires might be sent
up with yours: viz.

1. That we conceive the present Common Law now in practice, to be little more
then as you term it, an hair-loome of the Norman Conquest.

2. That contrary to the Laws of all best and wisest Nations, our Law is a
dis-joynted, scattered and confused thing, or a thing like a Tailors Cushion,
so patched together out of many pieces, and that without all or any authority
given thereunto, that it looks more like the new Sergeants Coats, or a motley
Cloak-bag, then the Law of a wise and great People.

3. That this Law, all or the most part of it, is written in an unknown
Pedlar-like Language, which edifieth not the poor Subject, though it
benefiteth the Lawyer.

4. That the Law, as now used, may have that word given it which was written on
the head of the woman, Revel 17.5. Mystery, and such as works, 2 Thessalonians.
2.10. with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness.

5. That many Lawyers, but especially Pettifoggers and Officers may (...) the
mutability of worldly happiness, and the just reward of Ambition and Treachery.

And though at this time some of your Army and of the people, for your sake may
he droven to so much wickedness, as to depose or murder their Liege Lord, the
Vicegerent or God, without all Law; yet conceive you not, that either these,
the rest of the people of the old Army, or even of your own new Model, may
not either return to their right wits, or retain so much Loyalty or Religion,
as to requite this act, (according as they are bound by all the Laws of God,
Nations, and this Kingdom.)

And whether your design be to depose or murder the King, because he did
leave you and lean to your opposites; or to destroy the Preshyterian leaders,
because they did adhere to the King, and against you; yet be assured, that as
your aim is blood and destruction, so destruction and blood shall be your end;
remember Adonibezek, Judges 1.6.7. as I have done, so God has requited me: and
hear the Poet,

-- nec enim lex justior ulla est,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
But above all hear God, Hof. 1 4. I will avenge the blood of Iezrael upon the
house of Jehu. And although God gave Iehu an extraordinary Commission for
putting Aha^ to death; yet this in Hos. 1.4. was denounced and executed against
Jehu, because he executed the Commission with a by-end of his own, and in an
undue manner; and this Decree on Iehu's house and posterity was to take affect
speedily: yet a little while says the text, and I will avenge says the Lord,
etc. and this little while was within one year and a half after the Decree,
Zanch. in Hos. And let that be written as a perpetual Memento over the doors
of your private Closets and public Counsels, or Courts, which you read, 2.
Kin. 21.23.24. That although King Amon (as King Aha^) was a great and most
gross Idolater, and such as by Gods express Law, had incurred the penalty of
death from God the Lawgiver, yet his servants (his subjects) for attempting
and executing the death of their lawful King, are by God himself judged, and
so styled Conspirators; and they accordingly by the providence and justice of
God are slain (and that presently upon their wicked act) by the people of the
Land, which certainly it so expressed and recorded, that it might teach all, how
much it is against Gods will that subjects should in any case conspire, plot, or
execute the death of him, who is their Lawful Anointed King. And accordingly
as you shall act or repent the Lord prosper you, and this undoubtedly is the
prayer of the greatest and best part of this Kingdom, who jointly cry, Amen,
Amen.

FINIS.

