JURIES justified: OR, A WORD OF CORRECTION TO MR. HENRY ROBINSON; FOR His
seven Objections against the Trial of Causes, by Juries of twelve men.

By WILLIAM WALWIN.

Job. 22.28. Remove not the ancient Landmark which thy Fathers have set.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by Robert Wood; and are to be sold at his house, near the
Flying-Horse in Grubstreet. 1651.

decorative border

Juries Justified: OR, A Word of Correction, to Mr. Henry Robinson.
THough a silence had seized me, equal to his that was born and continued dumb,
till his father was in danger of being murdered; yet retaining still a sincere
and vigorous affection to my Native Country, and seeing this man's Knife
offering at the throat of our preservers (such I esteem our Juries) for
Englands, and for this its fundamental effential liberty, I could not hold my
peace; but must tell Mr Robinson, he deals most injuriously with his Country,
whereof he must either speedily repent, or be made ashamed: For how does it
appear, That there is not a competent number of understanding and fit men to be
had in the lesser divisions of a County, for trial of all causes upon all
occasions? which is his first frivolous objection. If by lesser Divisions, he
means Hundreds, who does not know it to be a most notorious slander? there
being not the least in England, but affords a double competency of
understanding and fit men; yea, should he mean Parishes, I verily believe, a
sufficiency might even there be found, for trial of all the causes of each
Parish; but that needs not, the divisions of Hundreds being more commodious,
and the Hundred Courts being of ancient continuance, might soon be reduced to
the former use; in which Courts (before the Conquest) all causes or matters in
question, upon especial penalty were finally to be decided, in every Month.

And though William the Conqueror was so unjust and unworthy (indeed so
perjured) as to alter this course so far, as to ordain that four times in the
year, for certain days, the same businesses should be determined in such place
as he would appoint, where he constituted Judges to attend for that purpose,
and others, from whom (as from his own bosom) all litigators should have
justice, from whom was no appeal; and appointed others for the punishment of
malefactors: yet he never attempted to take away Juries, as finding by the
resolute struggling of the people against what he did, that they would never
bear it. So as this Mr Robinson does what he can, to induce the present
Parliament, to deal worse with us then the Conqueror did with our Predecessors
not minding as it should seem, how heinous an offense it has been always
judged, for any to endeavor the subversion of the fundamental Laws of the
Nation: nor regarding how frequently this Parliament have avowed to maintain
inviolable, those fundamentals, in all things touching life, liberty, and
estate, with all things incident thereunto; so as he invites them to do that,
then which nothing could be more dishounourable. Insomuch, as it is a difficult
thing to conceive, whence it is that he should engage himself in such a
subject, nor can I imagine; except it be from his proneness to invention, a
humor for the most part got by travel, but proving very unhappy to this
Nation; as might be instanced, in our exchange of many of our substantial
honest plain customs, for Frenchified and Italianated inventions, which have
had no small share in our late distempers, new platforms of Government, sent
English-fugitives abroad, to reduce us into the like depth of bondage with our
neighbors, having been received with too great applause; but it is strange the
ill success of the inventers and attempters, few of which have escaped exemplar
punishment, should not as Landmarks warn travelers from such Shipwracks. And
of all our English travelers (I say) well fare Col. Henry Marten, who returned
a true Englishman, and continued so ever after; always manifesting a most
zealous affection to his Countries liberties, and especially to this, of Trials
by 12 men or Juries; as eminently appeared by his demeanor upon the Bench at
Redding, where it being his lot to give the charge to the Grand Jury, in the
first place, he wished them to be rightly informed of their own place and
authority, affirming it to be judicial, when as their own (meaning the
Justices) was but ministerial; and therefore desired them not to stand bare any
longer, but to put on their hats, as became them, and not to under-value their
Country, which virtually they were; or words to this effect: which I the rather
mention, to set traveller against traveller; for had he been a mere country
Justice, and not seen the world abroad, this our Anti-Juriman, possibly would
have said it had been a vapor, suitable to one that had never been farther then
the smoke of his own Chimney; for so our inventive innovating travelers, use
to silence those that oppose their corrupt reasonings: And I have good hope our
fear is our greatest harm, for certainly the Honorable Parliament would never
have referred the care of the Regulating of Law and its proceedings, in so
special a manner to Colonel Marten, but that they approve of his affection to
Trials per Juries.

But it may be, he lays the most weight of his first Objection upon the word
Understanding; that there is not a competent number of Understanding and fit
men: Understanding indeed is very good, but as I take it, there is not so great
a want thereof in England, as there is of Conscience a faculty that puts on to
the doing of what is approved to be ones duty, and to the resistance of what is
not: a little quantity whereof (in my opinion) were very wholesome for one that
is troubled with the rising of such Objections. But as for understanding
sufficient to judge between right and wrong, in any case, where proof is to be
made by witnesses openly and freely to be examined, and where a man shall be
sure to have the help of eleven more equally engaged under oath to be careful
therein; truly I wonder, that (any man not suspicious of his own judgment, or
not overweening it) should so much as doubt, that a competency of such
understand fit men, are not in every lesser Division or Hundred to be found.

Indeed, understanding is in great reputation; and so is utterance too, but yet
nothing is so precious as a true conscience; not such a one as is satisfied
with, touch not, taste not, handle not; nor with saying Corbun: nor with
observation of days and times, no nor with saying Lord, Lord; but with doing
judgment and justice, in delivering the Captive, and setting the Oppressed
free; in feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, visiting the Sick and the
imprisoned; and in faithfully keeping all promises and compacts amongst men,
without which civil societies cannot be maintained.

And certainly, any one that has such a good Conscience, would make a
Conscience of removing so ancient a Landmark, which our forefathers have set,
Job. 22.28. and more of such good Conscience I believe are to be found amongst
our ancient English Gentry, and other our Freeholders, than among our
sharp-sighted, smooth tongued Travelers; and such as (to the honor of our
English nation) have in all time served their Country justly and faithfully,
judging the causes both of rich and poor without fear of favor, as justly as
can be expected amongst men, yea, without respect to persons or opions, as
truly honoring God in their hearts, and trembling at an Oath taken to deal
justly; and who with their live and fortunes, all times, have presterved this,
the most essential Liberty of England.

For howsoever men in these days make bold to trample Magna Charta under their
feet, making sport at the many absurd prerogative and superstitions things
therein contained; it is to be noted, that these things are but as a French
garb or clothing, which the Conqueror and his successors, by main strength,
forced our forefathers to put on: but yet, as an Englishman is to be known
from a Frenchman amongst a thousand, though he labor to fashion himself as the
most Frenchified Gallant; so are our true English Liberties, contained in Magna
Charta, as easy to be differenced from amidst that superstitious and in some
measure, tyrannical heap east upon them, the late King, culled out to purpose,
and reduced into that excellent Law (as this parliament styled it since his
death) the Petition of Right, and wherein trials per Jurles is the principal.

And therefore this is a strange kind of service or gratitude to the Parliament
in Mr. Robinson, for so many profitable places and favors conferred upon him,
to invite them to take away Junes, and to erect another way of trial of Causes,
whereby he must necessarily render them more odious to the people, that the
worst of those they have removed: for certainly, had either party when these
public differences began, proposed the taking away of Juries, they had never
had a thousand men to have taken part with them; so as if his counsel should
take place, I wonder where the parliaments Cause would be, which they have
ever, hitherto, held forth, for the concurrence of the People? is it not also
as easy to judge for whom he labors to beget friends, by his so doing, it
being no new thing with him to play the Lapwing.

As ill also does he repay the Army; for whereas they publish to all the world;
That they esteemed all present enjoyments (whether of life or livelihood, or
nearst relations,) a price but sufficient to the purchase of so rich a
blessing, viz. That they, and all the freeborn people of England might sit
down in quiet under their own vines, under the glorious Administration of
Justice, and Righteousness, and in full possession of those Fundamental Rights
and Liberties, without which, they could have little hopes to enjoy either any
comforts of life, or so much as life it self, but at the pleasure of some men,
ruling merely according to Will and Power.

What more fundamental liberty than the trial of causes by Juries of twelve
men? What more constant, more glorious administration of Justice and
Righteousness? Yet this true or false lover of the Army, insinuates, nay,
invites the taking of this away, as the end of their conquest, as if they had
conquered, not for the establishment of our fundamental liberties, but for
their extirpation: it these are his mites he so much boasts of, to cast into
the work of Reformation, sure it is not for the English, but the Scotch
Treasury; where is he should be as acceptable as (time was) one was at Oxford
and Newcastle, the new Office of Address may serve turn for private parties,
with any body, and is a fit contrivance for him to be hic and ubique as
formerly: What think ye of it? is it, or is it not? Is it not more likely,
than that England should not be able to afford a sufficient number of judicious
and conscionable men for Juries? for my part I profess I think it is.

And how I pray does it appear, that People are generally unwilling to be
called upon for Jurie-men, whereby they neglect their own affairs? which is his
second objection. What an unheard of grievance has this tender hearted man
found out! even the most insensible burden of serving upon Juries; wherein his
care appears above and beyond all that ever petitioned the Parliament: not one
Petition of the well-affected, in all their large Petitions, so much as minding
or desiring to have it removed; no, nor none of the ill-affected: manifestly
showing, that either he is better then the best, or worse then the worst
affected: say Scotch, or English, whether is it? (for he desires us to be tried
by God and his Country) is it not right steeling. But certainly Mr Robinson is
troubled, the plain people should be put upon occasions to understand
themselves in any measure, or be able to discern of one another causes, but
would have them so wholly fixed upon their own particular affairs, that they
might remain as ignorant of the laws of the land, as in time of Popery they
were of the laws of God; then, knowing no more but what the Priest pleased: and
now he would have them put all their understandings (in the affairs of law)
into the pockets of such Judges, as he in his own brain fancies, and would
persuade them to it for their own good, then they might the better follow their
more profitable callings; he finding, it seems that every man is born for
himself, and not so much as a Jury-mans time to be spent for the public: sure
'twill not be long but he will also find, Constables, Headboroughs, and all
other Officers to their hands; but by the way, not without good pay, for so he
carefully proposes for his Judges, and so large as they may live upon it when
they are out of their Offices; and thus he will devise ways to raise moneys in
such sort I warrant ye, as shall be no ways burdensome to the people, no so
much as felt by them, if you will believe him, but so long till he has brought
you into his fools Paradise, when he has you there, believe or no, all is
one, he will make you pay, and say too you feel it not; to such an end drives
his Mountebank promises, in all he has yet undertaken; for he has made some
believe, that he will show how all the vast charges of the Commonwealth should
be constantly defrayed without burden to the the people; but sure his meaning
is, that he would have them at such a pass, as they should not dare to say the
contrary, if he but say it is so: otherwise; where are the mountains he has so
often promised, are they in his office of address, or are they not? it is like
there is more, then such as truly love the Liberties of their Country can imagine.

Well, all the Jurie-men in England shall be excused from any further service,
because they are generally unwilling: off with your hats, Countrymen, and
thank him; he only takes care of you and your affairs: Not a Parliament man,
God be praised, has had this wicked care of you, as for a poor complement, a
little drawing back from your duty, to take you at your words, and smile you
out of all your liberties at once; for believe it, lose this and lose all: No
more complements, I beseech you; but upon the first call, pack up and be going,
for if once Mr. Robinson take you napping, he may chance show you a new
Florentine trick for it.

For he further objecteth, that though they do come to avoid the penalty, they
seldom take the course to be rightly qualified and fitted to judge of the
matter in controversy. But does it appear to be a truth, that they come (only)
to avoid the penalty? it may be some do so, and yet they may bring their
consciences with them; (which, some think, have been as frequently found under
Felt Hats and Worsted Stockings, as with people of a finer Stuff,) and then I
hope, it is well they are there; but that one Swallow should make a Summer, or
one Woodcock a Winter, is against our English proverb; and as ill reasoning it
is, to imply (as he does) that none come, but to avoid the penalty, when as it
is impossible for him to know it, or to think it, so as to believe it: but some
say, our decoy Ducks may twattle any thing, for what is this and all the rest
but twatling? They seldom take the course to be rightly qualified and fitted
to judge of the matter in controversy, What course trow has he seen beyond the
seas in his travels, that are wanting here? are not our Juries and Jurie-men
sufficiently known before hand, who shall be upon this, and who upon that
cause, that the parties concerned might apply themselves to them by great
letters and gifts, to make them sensible? what a horrible defect is this, and
it seems would be perfectly supplied by such Judges as he fancies; then indeed
they might be rightly qualified to judge, as should be best for their own and
their Patrons advantage: And truly, in this way sure he ayms to be a Judge
himself, and no doubt would soon come to have a feeling of the Cause; but if he
do, I hope his itch will not yet be cured, and that he shall scratch where it
does not itch, first, as he has done formerly; though now provender prick him
to spur-gal his Country, as now he does.

For yet again he sticks them in the sides, with this; That, Most commonly, one
or two active and nimble-pated men over-sway all the rest of the Jury; and too
often for the worst: which is his 4th Objection. But truly, with us in England,
our nimble-pated men are not in so great credit, as possibly they are in other
parts, we are generally of somewhat a more dullish complexion, which renders
most so considerate as to suspect those few nimble-pated men as are amongst us;
and for the most part not without cause: so as the nimble-pated seldom carry
any thing, except they have reason and equity of their side, and then the more
they sway therewith the better: And those dull men (as he accounts them now it
servs his turn) were he to deal with them in buying, selling, letting or
setting, I believe he would not think them so easily caught with Chaff or
Nut-shels: Nor is right and wrong so difficult to be discerned in Causes and
Controversies, but that an ordinary capacity (careful to keep a good
conscience, and that is tender of an oath) shall soon perceive the true state
thereof; and be able to do right therein according to evidence: Nor will this
nimble-pated Mr Robinson with all his quickness of wit, be able to make this
(the most desperate project he ever undertook, or was ever offered at in
England) pass for current Coin with our dullest apprehensions; and in time may
be made to know, that none are so apt to mistakes as the quick-sighted; nor any
so sottish, as those that are conceiptedly wise.

Another gird he gives Our goodmen and true, is; That, Though never so many of
them dissent in judgment from the rest, they must notwithstanding all concur in
the Verdict, or be wearied into it; which is his 5th Objection: And truly (how
strong soever he believes it) nothing in my opinion is more commendable in the
institution of Juries, than the provision that all must agree, and agree
necessarily and finally in so short a time; for should it rest on a major part,
there might be some won for partiality, and some won for complaint in the
parties against whom the Verdict is given; and some cause of quarrel ever after
amongst the Jurymen themselves: but in that all 12 must be agreed, all these
mischievous inconveniences are manifestly to be avoided; and in that it is
provided that they must make an end before they shall either eat or drink, it
supposes (what is said before) that right and wrong are not hard to be
discerned, and that those that are convinced of the truth and yet desire to
carry it otherwise, wanting that strength of a good conscience, to bear them
out in such a strait of time, will yield to the truth rather than die in it;
which those that labor to keep a good conscience, even dare to die: besides,
had they further time, what means would be un-assayed to corrupt their Verdict?
So as all things justly considered, doubtless it is the best provision that
ever was in the world.

But he hunts farther to find matter against them, and has found; That if
they give corrupt or erroneous Verdict, there cannot justly be any penalty
inflicted on them, because they may pretend, they did at first declare
themselves unfit for such employment; that they undertook it not willingly, but
were compelled thereunto: This is a long-winded Objection. But (if any part of
it were true, as I do not see it is) may they not justly be unfit for a corrupt
Verdict? what a vast difference is there in judgment between our forefathers
and some of their white sons? They no doubt, in the time of the institution of
Juries, foresaw as much as this man objects, and yet provide the most heavy
and reproachful punishment for a false Verdict, found per Attaint, as ever the
wit of man devised; As, that every one of their Houses should be razed to the
ground, their Trees stockt up by the roots, and all their Ground turned up and
made useless, etc.

And all this justly too, as being fully convinced, it could not be, except it
were wilfully and wickedly done, and deserving to be made exemplary; and is so
good a provision against corruption, that very seldom has such a case befaln:
but either men have had consciences for right; or have been deterred from
daring to be confederates in so high a wrong, as to give a false or corrupt
Verdict; as knowing it in vain to say in excuse, as this man goes on: That they
undertook it unwillingly, and were compelled thereunto; and when they saw there
was no avoiding it, they endeavored to proceed therein according to the
uprightness of their Consciences, if they be thought to have done amiss, it was
but what they could not remedy, and are heartily sorry for it. Such Childish
toys, as fitter for Children than men, were of no value with them; and
therefore supposing every man, a Man, and bound to serve his Country in any
place as he shall be lawfully called thereunto (willing or unwilling) and to
discharge his trust judiciously and faithfully, or to suffer for it.

His last Objection is; That, The keeping the Jury without Fire-light, Bread,
or Drink, as the Law requires, may possibly make the major part of them, if not
all, agree upon a Verdict contrary to their Consciences, to be freed from any
of these exigencies; at least, some of them to strike up with the rest in a
joint-Verdict, since it is well near impossible for twelve men, all
circumstances considered, much more in a doubtful case, to be of one opinion;
and though the case were never so clear, yet one peremptory man of a strong
constitution, whether his judgment be right or wrong, may sterve all the rest,
unless they will give Verd^ct as he will have them. Certainly, he thinks most
men of such a kind of tenderness in conscience, as soon is cracked a sunder;
believe it Sir, a true English conscience is of more solid stuff, and will
endure every one of these, yea death it self, rather then be so base and
unworthy; and certainly, but from unworthiness could not be supposed: For if a
man were but resolved how base a thing it were so to do, how could he once
think of striking up with the rest, in a joint false Verdict (conscience in
this case being more powerful then the strongest constitutions?) And as for any
absurdity in their being kept without fire-light, etc. it supposes that they
have had time enough at the Trial (or might have had) to be fully satisfied
from the examination of the Witnesses, in the right state of the Cause; which
then they are to look to, and to clear all their scruples by what questions
they please, and well to understand themselves and one another before they
discharge the Witnesses or go together: And this standing for good, what cause
is there they should have any longer time then is admitted them? Except to to
make them liable to corruption.

For my part, I have heard many discourses touching Juries, but never any
material exception against the way of Trials by them: Indeed I have heard
diverse complain and wonder, that the way of proceeding before Causes come to
Juries, should be so tedious, so full of charge, trouble, and perplexity; since
in their account, there is very little more requisite in any Cause, but a
convenient time for preparation and appearance, as about a Month or two; and
then one chief Officer (a Judge or the like) Witnesses, and a Jury, and time for
Trial, and so an end: A dispatch as speedy, with less charge, and more
certainty, than any new thing proposed by this new Inventor; most of the
accustomed pleading, serving rather to perplex then clear the Cause to the
understanding of the Jury: Which ocasioned that at a certain Trial (time was)
after the state of the Cause was set forth in the Declaration (the Council
beginning to speak) the Foreman of the Jury, calls to the Judge and tells him, he
had an humble suit to his Lordship; well (says the Judge) what is it? My Lord
(said he) it is; that now the state of the Cause has been set forth, we may
proceed immedily to the examination of Witnesses, and so to give our Verdict,
whilst we remember what is material, and that we may spare the labor of these
Gentlemen the Council on both sides, whom I see are prepared to speak largely
thereunto; for truly (my Lord) if they shall fall to work as they use to do,
our understandings will be so confounded by their long discourses, and many
niceties, as we shall not be able so rightly to judge thereof as now we shall,
this was his humble motion; but the Judge having formerly been a Pleader, laughed
at the honest man, and so did all the Court, except some plain people that had
so little understanding as to think there was reason in it. But such was the
sport of those times, and perhaps may make some merry now, but yet they may
consider that mocking is catching, and that laughter often ends in Lachrymae.
It Is but a story, yet a true one, and may one day be acted to the life, and
with a general applause, so it be well and thoroughly done: And do this man what
he can, the many good men's lives and estates, that have been preserved by
Juries, will never be forgotten whilst England is England; and wherein I deem
my self so much concerned, as in gratitude I justly owe my Country this
service; but have done it gently, as judging gentle Correction to be the best;
and the rather, because the Objector is of my acquaintance, which made me
indeed unwilling to undertake him, left it might be deemed disagreeable to
friendship; but seeing no body else did, and since he knew my mind to be
against his Propositions, and much more against his endeavor to deprive us of
our Juries, and yet would publish them, to the prejudice of Common Right,
(against which in all his writings he has uttered most irradicating
expressions) I take it, this Word of Correction is properly bestowed on him;
and I hope profitably for the Commonwealth, having indeed been born withal
too long: for whilst the Husbandmen sleep, envious men will be sowing their
Tares.

To Correct all the rest of the errors in his little Treatise, were an endless
labor; nor will this my present labor (I hope) be absolutely needful, for
certainly Juries cannot in time of Parliament b^ in any danger; and then, they
standing, his project falls: Only I thought it necessary to appear a friend to
this my Countries principal liberty, when any one should adventure to appear so
palpable an enemy; wishing with all my heart, that he may consider the nature
of what he has done, remembering, that as there was a Law (amongst the Locrines
I take it) that he that moved to have any new Law established, should appear as
if he were going to Execation, and if that he moved were not approved, he was
indeed to suffer: Even so among us, there is a Law called the Excomengement,
wherein all are accursed, that shall move for any Law to be made, contrary to
our ancient Rights; and to subvert the Fundamental Law, has been always
adjudged a capital offense; and though with help of a little Fasting-spittle, a
man may play with Quicksilver, yet it is a fond thing to take fire into ones
bosom, and venture upon a charm only to keep it from burning. It were much
better to pray unto God to give no more wit, nor strength, nor power, than men
have good consciences to make a right use of, to his glory, and their spiritual
good: Which is and shall be ever, the hearty prayer of

William Walwin.

FINIS.

