CALEB'S INHERITANCE IN CANAAN: By GRACE, not WORKS, AN ANSWER

To a Book Entitled The Doctrine of Baptism, and distinction of the Covenants,
lately published, by Tho. Patient:

Wherein a review is taken, I. Of his four Essentials, and they fully answered;
Ergo II. Dipping proved no Gospel practice, from clear Scripture. III. His ten
Arguments for dipping refuted. IV. The two Covenants answered, and Circumcision
proved a Covenant of Grace. V. His seven Arguments to prove it a Covenant of
Works, answered. VI. His four Arguments to prove it a seal only to Abraham,
answered: and the contrary proved. VII. The seven Fundamentals that he pretends
to be destroyed by taking Infants into Covenant, cleared; and the aspersion
proved false. VIII. A Reply to his Answer given to our usual Scriptures. For
Infant-subjects of the kingdom, in all which Infant Baptism is cleared, and
that Ordinance justified,


By E. W. a Member of the Army in Ireland.

Joh. 1.46. Can any good thing come out of Nazareth, come and see.

Rev. 16 15. Blessed is he that watches and keeps his Garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame.

Zach. 13.4, 5. And it shall come to pass in that day, the Prophets shall be
ashamed, every one of his vision, and he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am a
husbandman. For man taught me to keep cattle from my youth.

London, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the sign of the Bible upon
Ludgate Hill. 1656.

The Author to the Christian Reader, especially such who are his Comrades and
Brethren, in the Armies of this Commonwealth.
I Shall tell thee no long story of experience to draw on thy belief to embrace
either truth, or error, nor do I think that an Argument sufficient to persuade
men; besides their reason, and Conscience. It Is that which Gods word condemns,
in that boasting Church, who to entice and allure others, cried out she was
rich, and endued with substance, and wanted nothing; when yet she was poor and
miserable, and blind and naked. He that has faith in this sense, let him have
it to himself before God, and happy is he that condemns not himself in the
things he allows. These are boasting days, wherein men in false ways under
false Ordinances, pretend to have much communion with God: A day is coming when
their works will be manifest, whether wrought in God or not, when wood, hey,
and stubble will be burnt up: the work is already on the wheel, and a poor
doubting Christian then will lie nearer Christ's heart, then fleshly boasters: it
is not men's pretenses to be acquainted with the depths of God, that will make
them sound Christians, such there were in the first times of the Gospel, that
would be talking of depths: but the holy Ghost, calls them Satan's depths. I
could heartily wish that the Author of the new Doctrine of baptism had no cause
to doubt of the currantness of his coin, I mean of his principles for heaven:
but this I am bold to say, that did I pretend to be such a master in the school
of experience, I should not only question all my teaching, but learning also;
especially when it comes with such high swelling words against the ways of God:
and let me tell thee, though I have no cause to boast of any thing; yet in this
I will lay my experience against his: rejoice, and boast, with much confidence,
and assurance, that those Ordinances which he calls counterfeits, and cries
down for error, etc. and stamps such a black brand of reproach upon, throughout
his whole book, shall stand and triumph as the glorious truths of Jesus Christ,
in matter of worship, when all his mists and fogs shall be dispelled with the
son of righteousness. The Reasons of my undertaking this task, are these which
follow;

1 First, Because I thought men of parts and abilities, as they would look upon
the piece to be weak, feeble, and inconsiderate, and to deserve no answer, so
their time was better employed then to spare it to such a work.

2 Secondly, Lest any on the other hand, out of ignorance should think it
unanswerable, as I hear many that cry it up, who are ready to mis judge, that
our silence gives consent thereto.

3 Thirdly, Because most of his Arguments (I perceive) are such as I have
lately seen in pieces long since published, therefore the answer of him does
answer others of the same strain.

4 Fourthly, Because the standing for this truth, for the interest of Infant
Church-seed in the covenant, is a sprig of generation work, as the holy Ghost
witnesses, Genesis 17.9. which yet is opposed by our dissenting friends, I have
therefore used this Trowel with those in Nehemiah 4.

5 Fifthly, And to let good men know there are a few names in Sardis, that have
not defiled their garments, who are apt to think the contrary.

6 Sixthly, And to give a hand to pull them out that are fallen into Rivers: to
reclaim their practice, by informing their judgments, or at least to cause
them to make a halt, and to go no further in error; but remember from whence
they are fallen and repent.

7 Because the name T. P. is looked upon as the chief in this moist clymate,
that bears away the bell; and therefore fittest to be answered, his name being
so well known amongst us, as also because, though there has been never so much
said, yet if it comes not forth as an Answer by name, there is but few that
will vouchsafe to give it the reading. As if the most part of that judgment,
were resolved to act from implicit Faith, or to bolt out the truth, and shut
out the light that shines, in so many choice and learned pieces that are
published, both touching the covenant and baptism.

I cannot but think there are many censorious spirits who will be ready to
smite with a reviling tongue; because they are even ready to call the Master of
the house Beelzebub, much more therefore a mean servant. It is the common
language of the children of Belial in these days, that if a man do but speak a
word for the Ministry, and servants of God, employed in that work of double
honor, as I am here necessitated to do, there goes a Priest-ridden fellow. All
I shall say to such, is to remember what Paul says of scoffing Ishmael, Gal.
4.29, 30.

The spirit by which his book was penned, I shall speak little to it here,
because occasion will be offered to meet with it so fully in the Answer; only
this I will say, that from one end to the other, I have not met with one
Scripture by him quoted, but has been most shamefully abused, either in
Explication, or Application; and if that large story of his experience were
right, which he speaks of in his Epistle, it is strange that a man so
pretending should not hit the right mark of any one Text. God direct us to
understand his Mind and Will: that so we may know the truth, and hold it
fast in erring days, when there are so many deceitful counter-truths abroad,
that Christians may not mistake the one for the other, and run up and down
like Samsons Foxes, in days of heat, when so much combustible stubble is
abroad, to set all in flames. Methinks the most acceptable news in these
Athenian days, to all good men, would be, to hear our fallen Brethren
reclaimed, and dissenting Protestant friends united in one Faith, under one
Lord, in one Baptism: That hearts and hands being joined against the common and
public enemy of the truth, the work of our Generation may the better go on and
prosper.

Division and dissension is but the Devils bone of hatred and strife cast
amongst Brethren; who well knows that nothing is more like to obstruct Gods
work in every generation. As that wise man tells us, how can two walk together
except they are agreed? When persons are disjoined, in heads, and hearts; be
sure they will fall short of the end. Our Lord Christ himself well knew the
danger of such Doctrines, when he applies it to Kingdoms, and Families, and
tells us they cannot stand.

Look upon that Image of the four Monarchies in Daniel the second, that has
ruled the world. It is division has been their ruin, when Gold, Silver,
Brass, Iron, and Clay have been mixed. It is the glory of the Fifth Monarchy,
that shall stand as long as the world lasts, that it is but one stone cut out:
and then it is like to be a swelling one, when the other shall be Babel'd,
being smote on the divided Toes and Feet.

Look into Germany and Savoy, the streets of the great City, are not the
Witnesses killing there, that are to lie dead three days and a half? If that be
so, stand upon your Watch-Towers, Christians; and see Romes doom approaching:
the expectation of their Isles is mounted, to behold what God is a doing; let
all the earth keep silence before him, the hope of Israel is at the doors: and
e're long Abraham's Covenant will be the voice of the people. Those that divide
here, so as to cast off this Covenant, are undone, and ruined; those that unite
upon Covenant-terms, and own the Conditions, are, and shall be as Mount-Sionn,
ever removed.

Look toward the Wilderness: [How goodly are thy Tents O Jacob! and see the
Church coming out leaning upon her beloved: there will not be an Infant left
behind. It is pity then to see those who cry out, the Temple of the Lord, to
carry on the Dragons design in making war against the Churches seed. It has
been his project from the days of Abel; If they are let alone, the Church will
soon grow too numerous: therefore Pharaoh will play his part, and Herod his
part; That the voice of Rachel may be heard in Ramah, weeping for her children,
because they are not. If I am thought too hot in the following discourse; let
it be considered, that to give an Answer to that book, is to work in the fire,
It being so full of Taunts and heats against the Truth.

Reader, This Item I shall leave with thee: Study Controversy so far as to
find the Truth; but take heed of losing thy hear^ therein; get as much
experience as thou can, but do not blaze it to the world: -- It is a word of
advice from him who desires to be

Thy Christian friend ED. WARREN.

CALEB'S Inheritance in CANAAN By Grace, not Works.
CHAP. I. The Doctrine examined, raised from 2 Act. 37.
IT is the saying of the Holy Ghost, 2 Timothy 3. that in the last days perilous
times should come, and amongst the list of dangerous persons, he tells us there
should be false accusers: despisers of those that were good: and yet they
should be such as had a form of godliness. And after he has laid down what
they are in themselves, he also gives a further description of them in their
actions: what they should do, and who they should be like, Now as Jannes, and
Iambres withstood Moses, so do these men resist the Truth, men of corrupt
minds, and reprobate concerning the Faith: But because the people of God would
be fearful what the issue of such things would come to, therefore in ver. 9 he
comforts them in this, That they should proceed no further, for their Folly
shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was. As if he had said; the way to
put a stop to such persons, is to lay open their folly: and to show the world,
that their accusations are false: this course did Moses take with those
Egyptian Priests.

The person with whom I am to deal in this Reply, has showed himself in Print,
to come in the number of those false accusers, declaring to the world that our
practice of Infant Baptism does fight against and destroy, seven fundamental
points in the Christian Religion; by which we may see his Charge mounts very
high, and either he must make it good, or else he will fall under the guilt of
his own folly and blindness, if not wickedness so to affirm. And will be also
thereby brought under that following description to be a resister of the Truth,
Co-partner with those false Priests before mentioned.

I have therefore dealt with him not only in those particulars wherein the
accusation lies, but have begun and ended with his whole piece: to unvail and
discover the rottenness and deceit thereof, that so, such who through weakness
have been ready to embrace this error in their hearts, may in time dislodge it.

These are the days wherein men heap to themselves teachers, having itching
ears; for what is writ in this book, called The Doctrine of Baptisms, is no
more then what long since he publicly taught, as may be gathered from his own
words. But doubtless, if a man should desire an account of his Ministerial
Authority, by which he entitles himself a laborer; it would appear to be more
from men then God; and that he was never ordained, to such a work: But is
rather in the number of Jeroboams Priests, who was made of the lowest of the
people, in the fullest extent of that word.

In page 5. We have the groundwork and foundation of all the ensuing
discourse, laid down in this Doctrine. That it is the duty of all that believe
and repent to be baptized; which though it be truly raised, yet it is falsely
applied, I shall therefore examine this Doctrine in the application of it. For
as it is true, that he that believes and repents, being converted from Judaism
or Heathenism, ought to be baptized; As such were they to whom the Apostle
preached in this Act. 2. from whence this Author takes his Text; I say, as the
application of this Doctrine is true to such that never yet embraced the
Gospel, and so never practiced that Ordinance, so on the other side, to apply
it in such universal terms to those that have embraced the Gospel, and have
been baptized, is unsound. For though a Doctrine be never so truly rais^d yet
if it be not as truly applied, it is a wrenching and abusi^g the Scriptures,
which is easily done, when we consider not the diffe^ence and nature of the
Auditors: to clear which, let us come to some instances; suppose a Church be
truly constituted, of which, a great part may be hypocrites, such as were
Judas, Magus, Ananias and Saphira, Hymeneus, Alexander, Phyletus, mentioned in
the Scriptures, all which were never true believers. These, all these, or any
of these becoming true Converts, and such as truly repent of their wicked
Hypocrisy; is ^his a Doctrine fit to be applied to them; without doubt such a
practice would quickly overturn the Authors dipped Societies: If he be true to
the principles of this Doctrine, as by himself it is applied; or else his words
do imply that such Doctrines of Faith and Repentance is to be preached only to
such as are without the Church, as if those that ^ere within had no need
thereof: when as we know they are Doctrines of the Gospel: which is the
kingdoms Gospel, and belongs to such as are within as well as without the
kingdom; were I a Minister and should come amongst master Patients people, and
preach this Doctrine, and apply it as he does; would he not think it very much
knocked out of joint in the application, to tell them it is the duty of all, who
really repent and believe to be baptized; doubtless there is no rational
Christian but would so judge: If therefore it holds in one, it must hold also
in the other, for it is not persons being hypocrites, or carnal, that nullifies
their baptism: no though the Administrator and manner also be circumstantially
corrupted and defective: what if John had baptized only by pouring out water
which he did (as shall be after proved) when he should have plunged and dipped
them as this Author does; The Ordinance had not been thereby null and void for
want of that circumstance. So on the other hand, should this Doctor of dipping
convert a Heathen or Jew, and plunge him, when he should have only poured the
water on him after the Primitive practice, yet the baptism stands in force
still; yea, though the Author so dipping be no true, real, but a pretended
Minister; as Ziphora's circumcising stood in force though she were a defective
Administrator; and this is the general sense of Protestant Authors; that those
Children or persons that receive Popish baptism by their Priests after they are
really converted to the Faith of Christ, ought not again to be baptized: and
yet we see they are as ignorant as heathens: by what therefore is said, it is
apparent the forementioned Doctrine is not to be extended to all alike, and
though it be an undoubted truth amongst such as preach to the heathens in
New England, or to such amongst our selves as are yet unbaptized, yet it is not
therefore a suitable Doctrine to such as have been before baptized either there
or elsewhere. And yet we see with what fury, and height of Confidence this
theme is prosecuted throughout all his book: It Is a like Argument with this When
Christ sent his Ministers to preach and baptize, their Commission was to go
into all the World. Therefore he that is a true Minister of the Word and
Baptism must be an Itinerary preacher. Augustus Caesar a Tyrant taxt his
people; therefore it is lawful for all Magistrates to tax their subjects: which
last has been a Doctrine so raised by the Author in my hearing.

CHAP. II. Relating to the Administrator answered.
HAving examined the Doctrine and foundation let us come to survey the building
to see what work is made there; he goes to open and explain what is meant by
baptism, and so leads us to a new Text, which indeed usually leads the Van
Argument: but is here brought in as a prop to uphold the Doctrine before
raised, Mat. 28.18. From which two places he has engaged to run through the
whole Controversy of Baptism in four Essentials by him so called, 1. The
Minister 2. The Form 3. The Name into which 4. The Subject.


All which being laid down as so many Essentials, if any one be wanting, the
baptism in his sense is made null and void: we are therefore come to examine
these several heads, and first the Minister or Administrator: p. 6. preaching
Disciples go ye therefore, but when he afterward comes to explain his meaning,
who they are, he speaks thus, That Disciple that can bring down God to the
soul, and the soul up to God, is a lawful Minister of baptism.] I shall
therefore a little search into this unheard of qualification, according to the
place by him quoted; first the persons spoken of, had an immediate Commission
from Christ. Go ye therefore: Secondly, The persons sent were Apostles; men in
Office, men of Gifts, for the work; Go teach all Nations, baptising, such they
were that baptized in a way of office, power, and authority; And because these,
therefore every man that undertakes to preach by a Gift, either occasionally or
intentively not having any Commission or Call thereto may baptize: is this any
lawful deduction, or rather is it not the way to destroy the Ministry? by this
rule, if there be twenty in the Church of which this Author is a labourer, or
Minister, that can preach (or talk rather) as well as himself, they shall
therefore take his power of administering these Seals out of his hands. When as
both he, and they are bound to desist from any such actions until they are duly
and solemnly admitted into an office that capacities them for the work; And the
contrary is condemned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. Are all Apostles, are all
Prophets, are all Pastors and Teachers, etc. And therefore God has set every
member in the Church to be useful to the body in his due place: as are the
members of the natural body, and not one to intrude upon the other. Consider
further

Secondly, If that be all the qualification required for the administration of
Sacraments before mentioned, then may a woman be a lawful administrator; for
though the title of preaching Disciples reaches only to the Males: yet that
kind of explanation will reach females. What if such a one as Priscilla, who
was a Disciple, should amongst many of her own Sex, be an instrument to convert
some to the Faith? I hope it cannot be denied but she brings down God to the
soul, is it therefore lawful for her to baptize? there must therefore such a
restriction be put upon the words, as confines them to persons in office, or
else we are like to come to a strange kind of Reformation at last. But indeed
this kind of qualification, though the full current of the words are rough and
harsh; yet may it well suit with their practice, for though they lay much
weight upon the thing it self, called the Ordinance: yet are they very loose in
this which he calls an Essential, namely the Administrator, for if the Pastor
or Officer be absent, or sick (but usually they have neither) if the people do
but desire such a brother to baptize and give the Sacraments, although it be
but for a day, this is looked upon as a sufficient warrant to make such a person
fit for the work, and thus the practice thereof shall run in the vein of
Discipleship, one baptising the other, which is expressly against the very
nature of the Ordinance, and all Scripture examples and presidents. Look upon
John the Baptist a Prophet, a man sent by God, the Disciples of Christ, all by
himself called and Commissioned: and so they were to administer baptism in a
way of Office to the end of the world, and not only the Apostles, but their
successors also, Pastors, Teachers. Which are as well given to the Church, as
the Apostles, Prophers, and Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11. and do and shall continue
so long as the Commission remains till the worlds end: had it been given
equally alike to all the Church Disciples, he would not have singled out
persons in Office: so Philip an Evangelist called by a voice from Heaven,
Ananias called by a vision from God Act 9.

Obj. But Baptism is an Ordinance that belongs to the Church, and it is in
their power to give the keys as they shall judge fit.

Answ. The Church can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth: nothing
without the rule. If granted that all the males have their votes, yet the
administration of the keys lies in the Office or Angels power, for
administration of the Seals Rev. 21.12. Ezekiel. 44.5, 11. Thirdly, Consider yet
further how shall we know who is enabled to bring down God to the soul, and the
soul up to God? Conversion is an act of Grace* and not in the Creatures power;
and though a Minister may be truly called to the work by God and man: yet we
know the word may not work for many years, but like seed, may lie hid in the
ground, yet, must not this man baptize any, by this rule, though converted by
others, because the success of his own labor lies hid, so as that he is not
able to say he has been instrumental in that kind to the souls of his hearers.

In page 7. He strikes down our Ministry at a blow, and indeed opposes
diametrically what before he affirmed: That though a Minister do preach so as
to convert, and bring down God to the soul, yet if he be ignorant of this
practice of dippping, which he calls the true way of dispensing the Ordinance
and a fundamental: he is no justifiable Minister, that in stead of dipping
shall sprinkle carnal ignorant Children. By which we may see that the
foundation of a true Ministry in his sense, lies more in the water then in
conversion: For he denies any true Gospel Ministry, but those of his own stamp.
So that when the Apostle Paul affi^ms the truth of his Ministry was evidenced
by that Seal, the seal of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.2. This
Author would have it run The seal of a justifiable Minister, are ye in the
water: and thus he destroys not only the present Ministry of Christ in this
world: but also that of the Apostles themselves. For as I shall afterward
prove, they were all strangers to this practice of dipping, their manner being
by pouring water on the subject: If Jesus Christ shall then justify our
present Ministry in sealing their labors, it is too bold an act for a man of
such a feeble practice to condemn them. Thus the Reader may see his result on
both hands; when the Argument is brought against our practice: then no man is a
lustifiable Minister, except he know how to plunge, and does so practice, when
he comes to show what a lawful administrator is in his sense, then he that can
bring down the soul to God: so that we may from hence see, what a Babel
Ministry this man of contradictions would set up in the world: If I should here
ask the Author of this new Baptism, under what Ministry he was converted, no
doubt but his answer would be very favorable to those, whom he here opposes.
Remember then your third Doctrine; That it is the disposition of such, that have
the beginning of saving light, to desire more; and that from them whom God has
spoken to their souls by: Or else you may question whether you have any light
at all. But because it is to speak a word for the truth, in opposing error, let
me therefore return him Talion Law.

1. He that takes the Covenant of Grace for a Covenant of Works, can be no
Gospel Minister, because ignorant of the Gospel in the fundamentals thereof.

2. He that affirms a Believer at one time may be under two Covenants of Works
and Grace, he is no Minister of the Gospel.

3. He that denies the extent of the Covenant of Grace to be as large and
complete under the Gospel, as it was under the Law, can be no Minister of the
Gospel.

4. He that is not lawfully Ordained to the work of the Ministry, he can be no
lawful Minister, because like the false Prophets, he runs before sent.

5. He that shall by his Doctrine and Practice, put greater burden and yoaks
upon the necks of Christians, then ever the false Teachers did by Circumcision,
Acts the 15. he is no warrantable Minister: But such a one is this Author of
the Doctrine of Baptisms; ergo. The Minor I shall make appear through this
whole discourse, given in as an Answer to his Book. Lastly, as to that contempt
and reproach which he casts upon the seed of Believers, who are Abraham's
children, calli^g them carnal, ignorant, as though they were incapable of any
good: Let him that rails know, that he that casts off Abraham's seed when
infants, as not fit matter for worship, does keep them out as an unclean thing:
And so, though God has separated them to a holy use; they are made unholy, and
kept off as execrable, and so accursed: Which the Lord no doubt foresaw, when
he gave Abraham that promise, Genesis 12. I will curse him that curses thee. I
say this, this word of the Lord will at last reach such, and pull them down, if
their ^est were built as high as the stars of heaven. Therefore hear and fear,
and do no more so wickedly, all ye that hope for the blessing of Abraham's
Covenant.

CHAP. III. His second Essential, relating to the manner of Baptism by
Dipping, answered.
THe second Essential he so calls in this Doctrine of Baptismes, is the manner
thereof, by Dipping, not sprinkling. To prove which, though he say the word is
rendered to Dip, Dous, Drown, or Plunge, in this he speaks with a hood-winked
understanding, and must shake hands with the Roman Tribe, that acts from an
implicit faith, believing as learned men tells him; though yet he can hardly
afford them a good word, or charitable censure. As for the place he brings, 2
Kings 5.14. where the Prophet bids Naaman go wash in Jordan seven times, and he
dipped himself. Answer, Though washing is sometimes by dipping; yet not always,
yea but seldom. A man may properly be said to wash himself in a River, though
he only dips in his hand, and casts water about him, which is most frequent and
usual, both in our practice, and acceptance of the word, either in our vulgar,
or in Scripture dialect: Were a man to wash his face or head, must he needs dip
it; and so of any other part, or the whole body: But let us search the
Scriptures, Mark 7.4. Except they wash they eat not; and Luke 11.30. They
marvail at Christ, that he had not first washed before dinner: Is any man so
void of reason to think, that before the Pharisees sat down, they plunged
themselves: And Christ, who well knew what the word to baptize, or wash,
signified, gives them such an answer as relates to the pouring out of water, so
washing only the outside of things, verse 39.

Had their cups and platters, tables and beds, been dipped, and so washed, then
had inside, outside, and every side, been washed. The word then has a
promiscuous acceptance, some times taken one way, some times another; as
Sidnam clears this, Budeus, Scapula, Pasor, Grotius, do give the sense of the
word: Therefore to no purpose is this unlearned Authors Appeal to the Greek,
Latin, and English Churches: Though yet, it is considerable, that he should
acknowledge such as Churches, whom his words and practice do so much cry down;
therefore I doubt his charity is much of the same nature with those of the late
fifth Monarchy; who though they would use the word of Protestant Churches, yet
they did look upon them but as the outworks of Antichrist, which were first to
be stormed: For there is scarce a Book extant of the Anabaptists, but has a
touch thereof; such is that Piece called The Storming of Antichrist, which came
out long since, and others of the like stuff.

Secondly, he tells us that the phrase in which Baptism is rendered, does
usually, and necessarily import such a thing, And therefore when mention is
made of Baptizing, it is commonly translated, in, or into, and therefore suits
most with dipping, and not that preposition [with] which suits most with
sprinkling; and when our translation tells us that John Baptized with water, he
would correct it within water; and instead of ye shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost and with fire, it should be rendered in the holy spirit and in fire.

Answ: W^ may see to what height ignorance is mounted, when he that knows not
what a preposition is, shall undertake to mend translations: what property of
speech can there be in that phrase, Mark 1.8. to say he shall baptize you in
the holy Ghost, and in fire, when the word is, with: is it possible for a man
to be dowst, drowned or plunged into the holy Ghost, methinks he might blush to
show his ignorance.

But to make this clear, let us view and compare the place with Acts. 1.5. For
John truly baptized with water, so Mark 1.8. I have baptized you with water,
and Math. 11. I indeed baptize you with water but ye shall be baptized with the
holy Ghost, and with fire, would it not be strange to read it into fire,
considering also, that these words relate to the pouring out the holy Ghost,
spoken of Acts 2.3. and there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like unto
fire, and it sat upon each of them, they did not sit in the fire, but the holy
Ghost like fire sat upon them; and then in verse. ^7. the Apostle Peter, who
very well knew what was meant by the word Baptize, interprets it, by Ioell 2.31
to be the pouring out of the spirit prophesied of. And thus when Christ's tells
them of their being Baptized with the spirit, it appears to be meant of the
spirits pouring out, so that from hence its evident, that John's Baptism was by
pouring out water, and not plunging into water, or else it would not have been
so conjunctively placed with the the manner of the spirits Baptism: John truly
Baptized with water, but ye shall be Baptized with the holy Ghost. For as the
pouring out the holy Ghost was the true Baptism of the Spirit, so John truly
Baptizing with water, was by powreing it out also; let but any Englishman read
it that knows but how to make sense of what he reads, and it must of
necessity gives a dash to all their plunging; Let therefore such as have been
deluded into so groundless a practice consider it and repent thereof.

A second parallel instance to confute this practice of dipping, is that of
Isreal's being Baptized in the clouds and in the Sea 1 Cor 10. which by Paul the
Apostle of the Gentiles, as before Peter was of the Jews, is called a Baptism:
and by what principle of reason or conscience, can any man think that Israel
was plunged into either cloud or sea, when the word of God tells us they marched
through the sea upon dry land: Exo: 14: 22. the waters being divided, yea
David's relating to this very march of Israel Psalm the 77.15.17. tells us that
this Baptism (which Paul so calls, in which believers and their seed were
Baptized) was by pouring out water, and not plunging into water: For thus the
word runs, the clouds poured out water.

If men therefore will not harden their hearts against the truth and blind their
own eyes, here is light enough to show us what is meant by this word Baptize;
the Authority of Peter and Paul both eminent Apostles bearing witness to this
truth: and yet we must be deluded from the truth by ignorant men, against not
only the very light of nature, but of Scriptures also. As for that other
Preposition example, which he brings in that page of baptizing in the
Wilderness, and in Jordan, he tells us it would be improper to render it, with
the Wilderness and with Jordan, and therefore would urge it to be as improper in
that other place.

I answer, the Reader may from hence also gather how sadly fit this man is for
a minister, who to make our practice speak nonsense, does not himself know
what belongs to a sense. For because the preposition [with] is by us maintained
proper, when it relates to the matter, or manner, therefore he would have it
also as proper when it relates to the place: as if I should say, Master Patient
has baptized with the milpool with Dublin, for in the milpool in Dublin.

4. In Page 9. his next place he brings to maintain his dipping is that of
Paul. 1 Cor 10. already touched on, they were all Baptized to Moses in the
Cloud, and in the sea, not with the clouds and with the sea.

Answ: Which is most proper to say, Israel were Baptized by pouring out water
from the cloud, and by sprinkling from the sea, or to say, Israel was Baptized
by plunging into the cloud, and into the sea, for then they must be all
overwhelmed with both. And David in the place before-quoted tells us it was
done by pouring out water; was it improper to say, Israel was Baptized in the
sea, when they were in the sea? for though God wrought a miracle to divide the
waters, that Israel might march upon dry ground, yet was it in the Sea. As when
a man has been in a shoure of rain, Is it improper to say he has been in the
rain, because it is not proper to say he has been dipped into a cloud? I shall
therefore refer this to the consideration of the most judicious of that
Judgment (of which, there are many.) What ground of Reason there can be for
such a construction as is made of that place, by this Author, and shall also
leave that place, Exodus 15.4, 5. to be thought of as an example, That when the
Egyptians marched into the Sea, they were baptized in his sense, i. e. Dipped,
dowst, and drowned, but not Gods Israel; take heed therefore of your too eager
pursuit of Abraham's Seed; who as they were then, so still are baptized by
pouring or sprinkling.

Fifthly, In Page 10. the next place he brings for dipping, is in Acts 8.38,
39. Philip baptized the Eunuch, they being both in the water, he dipped the
Eunuch, as John did Jesus, Matthew. 3.16.

Answ. And much at one, that is, the Eunuch was as much plunged as Christ was
plunged; for they were neither of them so baptized. It has been already
proved, that John's manner of baptizing, was not by plunging, but pouring out
water; and therefore that Text, Matthew. 3.6. stands for a cipher in this
particular. A man may as properly be said to go down into the water, and come
up out of the water, though not wet-shod, as if he had been dipped all over: So
was Israel in the Sea properly, and yet not dipped; besides, Philip was as much
in the Water as the Eunuch, and in that construction they must be both plunged;
but not a word is here of the mode of Baptism, only he baptized him, the
manner must be picked out of other Scriptures, which may be easily gathered from
what has been already spoken: There may be other Reasons also given, why it
could not be by dipping, as that the Eunuch was upon a journey traveling
homeward; and therefore neither he, nor Philip, provided with garments suitable
for such a work, it being accidental to them both: For if it be a Gospel
Ordinance, it must not be done, they being both naked; for so it would have
been an action of no good report, contrary to Paul's rule. And indeed, take it
in the most serious manner, as now practiced yet there is no show of carriage
or deportment suitable to the Majesty of the Gospel of Christ, which may easily
appear to any sober Christian, whose eyes are not darkened by ignorance or
blind zeal: For what gravity can there be for a Minister, who is Gods
Ambassador to the World, 2 Cor. 5.20. to put off his shooe's and stockings, and
to lead a Gentlewoman by the hand into a River, and throw her on her back? Is
this a deportment fit for Ambassadors that come from God? whose holiness is
such, that will not permit a Woman to be uncovered or unvailed in the Church,
and shall we think then he will own such inhumanities? Methinks the very naming
hereof should be a sufficient confutation, which is enough to make a modest
face to blush. Also considering, that either Subject or Administrator, and
perhaps both, may be of so tender, weak, and feeble constitution, as they are
not able to undergo the cold. Many such considerations falls in, that were it
practiced amongst Heathens, that do by nature the things contained in the Law;
that very light amongst them would condemn it.

Sixthly, He argues in Page 10. from John's Baptism, his work being to Baptize,
he remained near Jordan, and afterward at Enon near Salem, because there was
much Water in that place. Ergo, He baptized by dipping.

Answ. It has been already proved from Mark 18. with Acts 1.3. and Chap. 2.17.
which relates to Joel the second, That John's Baptism was not by dipping, but
pouring out Water; and therefore this cannot be the reason why he chose that
place, namely, Because there were many Waters to dip. Other Reasons must be
therefore given, as, That because the work of baptising a whole Region was very
great; and John not only baptising himself, but very likely, having made
Disciples which he taught more immediately, Luke 11.1, 2. John 4.1, 2. Matthew.
11.2, 3. Luke 7.18. as Christ did his Disciples: He also might ordain and
appoint them to the work, that so when the whole multitude of people came
together, they might have each a share of the work, and convenience of place
accordingly, because there were many waters, when other parts of the Country
were very scarce thereof; as not only History, but Scripture mention; track
Isreal's march from Egypt.

Surely, had this Author of the Doctrine of Baptisms lived in Spain, or in many
parts of Zona-torida, where they sell Water as we do Beer, not having enough to
drown a man in a Country; he would have been of a more sober judgment. Adding
this also thereto, That when John baptized a whole Region, both men and women,
rich and poor; either, he must send out O^ders to all the Country, ^o bring
suitable Garments, which the poor, it is likely, could not do or else
promiscuously he must dip them naked, or, in such G^^ments as they wear; the
unworthiness of which practice is already shown: Therefore it is much to think,
that a person who pre^ends to Preach the Gospel, as this man does, should be so
purbsinde, having his eyes shut against the truth. But that God deals so by men
in a way of Justice, when they set up idols in their hearts, he answers them
according to their idol^, Ezekiel. 14.1, 3, 4, 5. a place by himself afterward
quoted, though falsely applied.

Page the eleventh and twelfth, contains his seventh, eighth, and ninth
Arguments, which may be all put together, because all alike, and the
confutation of one answers the rest; where he tells us, That Baptism ought to
be by dipping, is proved from the nature of the Ordinance; and from the
Analogy, it has with the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ, many
places he brings, but to every little purpose. And therefore I answer with Mr.
Sidenham

1. That plunging cannot represent it, is most clear; for when Christ was
buried, he was not plunged into the Earth, but laid in Joseph's Sepulcher cut
out of a Rock, Matthew. 27.6. which was the manner of burials amongst the Jews;
and if covering all over, though in a Rock, was sufficient, to cause such a
resemblance by dipping, then had Christ been covered in a House or Coffin for
three days; it must also have been so resembled.

2. Neither does it answer to the mode of burying amongst Christians in Europe,
or elsewhere: For the Earth, by which the person is covered, is applied to the
subject, and cast upon him; so that the applying of water to the subject in
Baptism, as John did, in those places before quoted, [I indeed baptize you with
water, etc.] does more lively represent Christ's burial, then dipping can. To
what purpose therefore is it for a man to heap up a multitude of Scriptures, as
this Author hear does, to make all sure, when he is wholly mistaken in the
thing, and manner thereof* and not one of those Texts proves, that ever Christ
was so buried?

Seventhly. Page 13. he comes to his tenth Argument to prove Baptism by
dipping, namely, because it holds forth a conformity to Christ in his
sufferings. So says Christ, I have a Baptism, meaning his death, and can ye be
baptized with the Baptism wherewith I am baptized; meaning his afflictions. And
this is set forth by dipping into water, because when the Saints in the
Scripture express their afflictions, they set them forth by being in the
depths, Psalm. 130. Out of the depths have I cried And Isa. 43.2. When thou
passest through the waters, they shall not overflow thee: Therefore Believers
are to be dipped all over into the water; and as he is raised up again by the
hand of the Minister, it holds forth, that so such souls, shall be saved from
all their affl^ctio s by Christ. Psalm. 24.17. Many are the afflictions of the
righteous* but God delivers them out of all: And that this does signify our
Salvation does further appear, 1 Pet. 3 ^1 Alike figure whereunto Baptism even
s^ves us: And Mark 6 16. He that believes, and ^s baptized, or dipped, shall be
saved.

Answ. What strange Hieroglyphics does this Author make in the Water, by
dipping? What stretched inferences to make the Scripture answer his fancy? let us
try the places. If Christ calls his afflictions a Baptism, does it therefore
follow, That all Believers should represent it by plunging? We know that many
Christians never meet with such afflictions; and such a practice to be so
plunged, would be a greater affliction then ever befell them; and the place
implies this, to be in deep waters, is an affliction; or, would this new Doctor
have Believers do themselves a mischief, to represent Christ's afflictions:
Which of necessity, thousands must do by this practice of dipping. It is no
hard matter to give several instances hereof.

Secondly, What should such do to represent those afflictions of Christ, that
have not water enough in a Country, except they should make deep Ponds or
Vessels of purpose. Did ever the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, or the Primitive
persecutions, take that course, and yet no doubt but they were as much baptized
into Christ's death and afflictions, as ever this Author could be, though with
his practice he should give his body to be burnt, to justify the same.
Therefore, let the judicious but impartially judge what strange doctrines this
Laborer, for dowsing, brings. What though David cried to the Lord out of the
depths; yet his head still kept above water: unless he will affirms, that the
promise in the place, by himself quoted Isai. 43.2. was not made good unto him,
[When thou passest through the water, it shall not overflow thee.] And though
afflictions shall never quite overflow a child of God, yet by this doctrine
the body must be dipped all over: A strange resemblance!

The like we may say to that of 1 Pet. 3.21. by which he would prove, That
Baptism is a figure of Salvation, though yet, it cannot be by dipping under
water, because the Apostle calls it a like figure to the Ark: But the Ark was
never under water, but always floating, and so the persons that were in the
Ark; therefore if Baptism be a like figure, then it needs no going under water
for a signification: For had the Ark been dowst under water, the signification
had been lost, or at least not so clear. By this therefore, we may take the
hint of an other Argument, to prove dipping under water, not to be the
Scripture way of baptising. Thus we may see how fully and apparently even his
own Scriptures, makes against both his Book and practice.

As to that other place, Matthew. 16.16. it is quite besides the business; for it
does not prove Baptism to be a figure of Salvation: only he that believes and
is baptized, i. e. obeys the Gospel, shall be saved. Thus then his second
Essential of dipping has been examined with all his ten arguments: upon which
this Author of the doctrine of Baptismes does build the whole stress and
fabric of dipping-grown persons with so much heat and confidence, and such
slighting contempt of his opposers, and upon the whole result it appears but as
a bubble quickly broken, Ergo dipping is no Essential.

CHAP. IV. His third head of Essentialls concerning the name into which persons
are Baptized.
WE are come now to examine and look into this third Essential (by him so
called) of dipping into the name of the Father etc. as it is by him opened page
14. 15. 16. and 24. in which he tells us a person cannot be rightly Baptized
into the name, except he be able to give a distinct Account of the Trinity of
persons in their several operations. Let us therefore review those primitive
and 'Apostolicall examples.

Answ: The Baptism of John, none will deny, but his Baptism and Ministry was
from God, and so a Gospell-Baptizm: did the persons he Baptized give this
Account? the contrary is most evident, and that they claimed a right to that
ordinance as being Abraham's seed to whom the covenant was made: therefore when
the Pharisees came to be Baptized, who lived not as Abraham's Children, he
turns them back with a reproof, think not to say within your selves you have
Abraham to your Father: for you are a generation of Vipers. Had not the rest
been received upon that consideration as Abraham's seed; the reproof had not
been suitable: but no mention is made of their distinct knowledge in the mystery
of the Trinity.

Secondly had this been an essential, then was John's Baptizm quite null, and
the Apostles also before Christ's death: for the third person was not so
eminently known nor sent, because Christ was not then glorified, yea John's
disciples never heard whether there were any holy Ghost, therefore how could
they believe in him (and so confess, him) so distinctly and eminently? Romans
10.14.

This further appears by considering the commission it self, and the practice
of the disciples thereupon: the words of the Commission are, go teach all
nations etc. teaching them to observe whatever I command you. In which
something is to be taught before, something after Baptism, now that which is to
be taught before is so much as capacifies them to be disciples, for so our
opposits give the Rendition of the words, go disciple all nations. As a Child
then may be a disciple when he first begins to learn his A. B. C. so may a
Christian be a disciple of Christ without such a high pitch of Knowledge into
the mystery of the Trinity. For without all peradventure, the Apostles
themselves were ignorant thereof though Baptized, when Christ first called
them, and were afterward taught further by degrees: for the Scripture tells us
they were disciples before they knew how to pray Luke. 11.1.2.

Fourthly, That this is no Essential, further appears, if we view the practice
of the Apostles after Christ's ascension; as for instance, that place Acts 2.
where so many thousands were Baptized together, can any reasonable man think
that they all gave such a distinct Account of their faith into the persons of
the Trinity, and that in one day. The like also in the Eunuch Acts the 8. what
Accounts did he give, but only I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God,
and surely had there been more needful, when he asked that question, what
hinders? Philip would not have Baptized him before he had given a fuller
account into all the persons of the Trinity, For to what purpose had it been,
when his Baptism had been null for want thereof; the like instance also is that
of Simon Magus Acts, 8. then Simon himself believed also and was Baptized, and
yet afterward he appeared to be so Ignorant of the holy Ghost, that he would
have bought the gifts thereof with money, yea were this to be decided by the
Anabaptists themselves there would not be one in twenty rightly Baptized,
supposing (though not granted) their practice to be true, For how ^ew amongst
them are able to give such an account of the Trinity of persons, when as also
many of them, to my knowledge, and that not of the meanest, deny the
personalitie of the holy Ghost at all? we may therefore see what new doctrines
are intruded upon the consciences of weak Christians, by men that do not
understand what an Essential is, yet I would not be so understood as that I
should deny the form of words, to all within the Covenant, when the ordinance
is administered, or that I plead against a preposition or confession of faith,
from such as are converted and not Baptized, which yet may be, as has been
here proved, though there may be much ignorance of so high a mystery; thus
also having examined this head, we find that the name into which B^leevers with
their seed are Baptized is, not so to be applied, as that a person ought not to
be baptized, unless he can so distinctly answer to this Doctors new Catechism,
Ergo such a kind of knowledge, is no Essential.

CHAP. V. Relates to the subject fit for Baptism, in which the whole Scriptures
give in their votes to believers and their Infants.
IN Page the 17 he comes to his last head of Essentialls, namely the subjects
to whom the ordinance is to be administered, laid down in these terms,
Disciples, penitent persons: the Texts he brings are Mark. 6.16. go preach the
Gospel etc. he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, compared with
Matthew. 28.10. Go teach all nations Baptizing.

Answ: ^o clear these places we are to consider, that before the death of
Christ the Gospel, i. e. Abraham's Covenant was shut up to the Jewish nation
only; And therefore the wall of separation, being broken down by the death of
Christ he inlarges that commission to all nations which before was confined to
the Jews, According to that old prophecy of Noah Genesis 9.27 God shall enlarge
Iapheth; and he shall dwell in the tent of Shem. So that look what privileges
the Jews had before, and in what sense they were disciples, and Canaanites
made subject to them; In the same large extent the same privileges of
covenant-discipleship, was by this commission published to the world. i. e. to
all nations Go teach all nations, i. e. open Abraham's covenant to all nations,
i. e. Let all nations upon embracing the Gospel and submitting to the
conditions of Abraham's covenant, (for there can be no other Gospel taught,)
have the same benefit of being disciples that the Jews had before, that is,
both they and their seed; for so it is clear the Jews and their Children were
disciples, Esa 8.16. seal the law amongst my disciples. And Acts 15. they were
those upon whose necks the ^alse teachers would lay the yoke of Circumcision
after the manner of Moses, and are called in verse ^0. Disciples. Another
clear text for this is Math. 10 last verse, whosoever shall give to one of
these little ones a cup of cold water, only in the name of a disciple, shall
not loose his reward where we have three sor s of persons named, a Prophet: a
righteous man, and a little Child, and the least of these called a disciple by
Christ himself* that, by little ones is meant Children, and not believers
Adult, is plain, because that otherwise it had been Tautologie, the word
righteous man including all such Adult-believers. [See this place also to prove
children disciples, Matthew. 21.15. with Luke 19.37, 39.] For the whole verse
runs in diminitives, both as to the favors shown, and the person to whom: For
as a less favor could not well be extended for Christ's sake, then the giving a
cup of water, so it could not be extended to a less subject, then to an
Infant-disciple. The same word is used, Matthew. 18.2, 3, 4, 5, 6 The result
comes to this, That if Children were disciples amongst the Jewish Nation, to
whom the Gospel or Covenant was first preached; and this new Commission was
given by way of enlargement of that Covenant to all Nations, baptizing, etc.
It Is then evident, that children of Believers are now also disciples, therefore
fit subjects for Baptism; and the putting of any other sense upon the place, as
our opposites do (in all their Books lately published) is but a resting and
abusing the holy Scriptures. And

Secondly, All those other Texts by this Author brought for baptising of
Believers in Page 17, 18, 19. are those, which in a right sense we deny not,
provided, (as has been already said) They are converted from Judaism, or
Heathenism; or such amongst our selves that have for several years past,
neglected their Baptism. An example whereof, we may take from the practice of
our Brethren of New England, in baptising many Heathens, lately converted,
which this Author might have seen, had he staid there a little longer, and been
as Patient in nature, as he is by name.

The next proofs he brings to prove Adult-believers, and not Children, to be
the only subjects of Baptism, is all those Families, Page ^oo mentioned in the
New Testament, where this opposite undertakes to prove they were all converted
Disciples, such as upon hearing the Word, did actually believe hitherto
notwithstanding any thing he has said. As in page 18. That God commands his
Ministers to dip B^lievers only: It has been proved, and that by the
testimony of two Ap stles, That dipping is not the Scripture-way of bap ising;
and that Adult believers are not the only subjects of Baptism, is in part
cleared: And though he is pleased to say, The Apostles did b^p^ize only such,
it shall appear, That what he affirms therein, is against the very scope and
mind of God, through the Scriptures, in these following examples.

1. The first Family Text he quotes* is that of Lydea, Acts 16.14, 15. And a
certain woman named Lydea, a seller of Purple, of he City of Thiatira, which
worshipped God, heard us, whose heart the Lord opened that she attended, etc.
And when she was baptized and her household, she besought us, saying, If ye have
judged me faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and she constrained us.
Which Family Mr. Patient says, were all Believers, Verse 40. which Paul and
Sylas went to visit.

Answ. The consideration of the words preceding the Text, and the several
circumstances, will give a clear light to find out the truth, by him (and many
Scribes of a late edition of that party) obscured and darkened.

First, The persons that were met together, were only women.

Secondly, Of all those Women met, we find only Lydea converted.

Thirdly, Upon her conversion, we find her household baptized, and that at the
same time: By which it is apparent, that she took with her, her family to the
place of worship; for thus the words run, And when she was baptized, and her
household, she besought us, saying, If you have judged me faithful to the Lord,
come with me, etc. Both she and her household, were baptized before they went
home; by which also, we may very lawfully gather,

1. That there were no men at the meeting.

2. That therefore those Brethren afterward mentioned, could not be then at
that time converted, because, had there been men, and they wrought upon, the
Holy Ghost would not have overslipt them, to take notice only of the Female:
Therefore it is evident, That those Brethren spoken of, Verse 40. were either
some of the Family afterward converted, or some other of the City, then met at
her house, which were after Lydea's conversion, wrought upon, because we find
Paul and Sylas were committed to prison; and it is likely, it was upon that
converting work, which the Gospel made amongst them, according to the voice
that called them, come over and help us. Or 3. they might be believing Brethren
from other parts, that came to buy Purple, because we find the Spirit of God
taking such exact notice of her profession, Verse. 14. But that those Brethren,
were converted at that time, when she and her household were baptized, is
against the express Letter of the Text, as any observant Reader may see. This
Text therefore makes against Mr. Patient; for if Lydea and her household were
baptized, when we find only Lydea converted: And if by house, is meant
Children, as I shall afterward prove it is, then it is ^greeable to the very
mind of God, to say, That her believing gave her Children aright to Baptism,
because we do not find any that believed, but her, and yet we find all her
household baptized. Thus then this place breaks forth with much clear light,
dispelling those foggs of error that scribbling pens have cast upon it.

Secondly, The next place he brings is the Jailer and his house, Acts 16. who
rejoiced in God with all his house, [hee beleeving] For so the words are truly
rendered, by which it does not appear the whole house believed, but the whole
house rejoiced, and yet, both he and his whole house were Baptized. Secondly
it is observable, the exhortation given the Jailer runs in the very strains of
Abraham's covenant, Genesis 17. walk before me, And I will be thy God and the God
or thy seed; so here, believe, and thou shall be saved and thy house, so Acts
2. when they were pricked in heart, as this Jailer was, Repent and be Baptized,
the promise is to you and your Children: so here verse 33. he was Baptized, he
and all that were of him. A fuller expression could not well be used, to set
out his Children by, who may properly be said to be of their Parents, and none
but they. Therefore, if the Jailer and all that were of him were Baptized, when
only the Jailer believed, though all rejoiced, then he and his Children were
Baptized; unless any man can be so unreasonable as to say, that those that were
of him were not Children; which to affirm, will but rather discover weakeness
then Eclipse the truth.

Thirdly, A third example which holds forth a clearer light to the preceding,
is that of Zacheus, Luke 9 who was a Gentile-Publican, yet upon Christ's calling
him, he uses this argument, to day I must abide at thy house, and in verse 9.
this day is salvation come to this house, For as much as he also is a Son of
Abraham: In which word [also] the very covenant of grace made with Abraham and
his seed is confirmed to him and his house though a Gentile, that had no
relation to Abraham's seed by birth, yet, thou also though a Gentile, art the
son of Abraham; and therefore salvation is come to thy house. Noteworthy are
the collections of faithful Sydenham, from this place, whose little piece has
made their water-workes totter, and remains not only unanswered, but
unanswereable, though the spattering of a scratching pen has given a late
attempt to little purpose. His collections are these, first, that as soon as
Zacheus believed, Christ applied Abraham's promise to his house; And it there
had not been something more in it, he would have said only, salvation is come
to thee: For the spirit of God does not put a syllable more in the Scriptures
then is useful and necessary.

Secondly He opens Abraham's covenant not only to him, but his house, and
argues the privilege from his being a son of Abraham, though a Gentile, showing
that Abraham's covenant has as large an extent amongst the Gentiles, as it had
amongst the Jews to a believer and his seed; otherwise it had been enough to
have said salvation is come to thee: but to mention his house with himself,
and to bring them into the blessing, and give this as a reason, because thou
also art a son of Abraham, is as much as to say, that the privileges of
Abraham's covenant are the same to thee a Gentile and thy house, as they were to
Isaac, for as much as thou also art a son of Abraham, as well as he. Now for
Christ to speak in this dialect, and to tell them of their household and his
favor to them, and that in the beginning of the Gospells planting, and yet at
the same time to exclude their infants from all outward signs of the promise,
which they ever had in darkest days of Grace, is a strange policy unsuitable
to the simplicity of the Gospel.

These are such plain examples, that I marvel what kind of conscience men
pretend to have, when they shut out the sun that shines in these scriptures,
and cry out they are full of darkness.

Fourthly, The next place and example brought by this Author, is the house of
Stephanus, whom Paul Baptized; A Triumphant place so thought, to prove that
there was no Children in those houses mentioned 1. Cor. 11.6. chap 16.15. the
words run thus; I beseech you brethren you know the household of Stephanus, that
it is the first fruits of Achaia: that they have addicted themselves to the
ministry of the Saints; That ye submit your selves to such, and to every one
that labors with us: where says Master Patient, we see they were all
ministers, and men that labored with the Apostles, therefore not Babes or
Children.

Answ: The Apostle does not say they were all Ministers, or such as labored in
the word and doctrine, as he did himself; But they are so said to Minister,
because they addicted themselves to the ministering to the Saints, in a way of
Hospitality, for so the word is taken for releeving the Poor and so the same
chap. refers to 1 Cor. 16. namely a free, liberal and charitable collection
for the poor Saints: verse 1.2.3. and 2 Cor 8.4. chap. 9.1. now as touching the
Ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write etc. In which places
the same word is used, as here in this example of Stephanus and his house, who
addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints. by which it appears, that
as the Apostle had boasted of others in the former chap. so in this also he
commends the freeness and Hospitality of Stephanus; because in such actions
there is much heart-sinceritie to be seen, in entertaining poor Christians,
This being so, Then it is no hard matter to know, who is meant by the house of
Stephanus which Paul Baptized. For though the servants it is likely might be
gracious, and full of love to poor Christians, yet by the word house is
property meant, Parents and Children, and it is very, unlikely, the servants of
the house should be so free and hospitable of their Masters goods. And as for
the Children, they were taken in by their Parents Actions and so the whole
house is commended, For the hospitality of Stephanus and his yoakfellow, as
it is usual in such causes, to say, such a house is noble and free, when it is
meant only of the heads and chief of the family, and these were the persons
that Paul presses the Church to honor and esteem; and to submit to such; And
not to such only, but to every one also, that helps with us, and labors.
But it is a stretched inference to say, that because his house addicted
themselves to the ministry of the saints, therefore they were all preachers,
and such as labored in the Gospel, and the Church was to submit themselves to
all the household i. e. servants, and all as ministers, therefore no Children.
The like also the Apostle pressed them in the following verse to submit to
Fortunatus and Achicus, who came with a seasonable and refreshing releef and
supply to their wants; therefore acknowledge ye them that are such, verse 18. i.
e. such who minister releef to Christians in necessity. So Matthew. 8.15. it is
said that Peter's Wives Mother ministered to Christ. Master Patient, surely will
not be so far besides himself, to think that she preached to Christ, as a
minister; from what then has been also said to this instance, it is abundantly
clear to any sober spirit who is willing to search after truth, and not take
things barely upon the count of Master Patients word. Our opposites have not so
honestly quitted themselves in all their writings in interpreting this text, to
lay a snare, or decoy, to entrap, or entice people into the lake of error, by
saying that here was none but Adult-beleevers in this house, when as the tenor
of those Scriptures hitherto which related to households, has still run to the
children upon the parents believing.

Quest. But how shall I know, whether, when the Scripture speaks of house,
there were any Children? for the word is not expressed; they might be households
and yet no Children.

Answ. It Is the common way in finding out the mind of God in Scriptures to
compare them, that so what is, dark in one, may be cleard by the other; And
since the spirit of God at the first tender of the Gospel, did delight to
speak to Jew and Gentile, in the Old Testament Dialect, as to say of Lydea, She
and her House, the Jailer and his House, Cornelius and his House, Stephanus and
his House, Zacheus and his house; so Crispus believed in God with all his
house, the house of Aristobulus, the house of Narcissus; it is as if he had
said, If you would know what I mean by this word house, then look back to my
First will and Testament; for what it was then, it is now. Therefore when upon
review, we shall find in the Old Testament, there were Children mentioned, and
chiefly included; It will be then an undoubted truth to say, and maintain, That
in all these houses mentioned to be baptized, there were Children, which
properly gave the denomination, and they all baptized whilst little ones, upon
the Belief or Covenant-right of their Parents. See Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all
the families of the Earth be blessed: Who are so properly the Family as
Children? Chap. 30.30. And when shall I provide for my own house also? Who was
that house that Jacob was bound to look after, and provide for, but his Wife
and Children. And Chap. 45.18, 19. Then said Pharaoh, Say unto thy Brethren,
take your Father, and your Household, and come unto me. And Verse 19 it is
explained to be heir little ones, Wives, and Fathers. So Number. 3.15. 2 Samuel
23.5. Josh. 24.15. So the Apostle, He that provides not for his own house, i.
e. His Children, is worse then an Infidel, and has denied the Faith, 1 Timothy
5.8. What denying the Faith can this be, for such as profess Christ, if it be
not the Faith of that Covenant of Grace, into which, Believers and
Professing-Christians with their Seed, are admitted? The neglect of a
Heathen-Parent, in not providing for his Children, cannot be called a denying
the Faith, but the denying the Law of Nature. But the neglect of Christians in
not providing for their Children, is a denying the Faith, because visibly
within the Covenant. Exodus 1.1. Prove. 31.11. 1 Samuel 20.15. 2 Samuel 9.3, 9. 1
King. 17.1^, 13, 21, 22, 23. Psalm. 127.1, 3. Prove. 12.7. Hos. 1.4. 1 Timothy 3 4,
5. and 5.4, 8. 2 Timothy 1.16. A full Text also is, That where the Prophet speaks
of Isreal's conversion and gathering under the Faith of Christ, yet to be
fulfilled. Jer. 1.1. At that time, says the Lord, will I be the God of all the
Families of Israel, and they shall be my people: A Text so remarkable that it
is enough to convince any man, that, look what God was to Israel, and the
Families of Israel, in blessing them, as their God; i. e. aged in Covenant with
them, and their ^eed, so he will be the same God again to Israel, and their
Families in Gospel-days: Which ^ime is near at hand, and they, and their Seed,
whilst Babes, shall be his people; so that either our opposits must oppose that
doctrine of the Jews conversion, when both they and their Children shall be
brought into the Faith of Christ, or else of necessity they must acknowledge
the truth by us maintained.

Now then to sum up all, the premises considered, and that upon the advantage
the Spirit of God puts into our hands, in explaining what is meant by the word
house, himself, who is a better Expositor, then Mr. Patient, or any else; We
see the whole Catalogue, or Cloud of Family-Witnesses and Examples, in
Scripture, do give in their Light and Testimony to Abraham's Infant Seed. And
that when the Scripture speaks of Households baptized, it is meant Parents and
Children; and when a Master of a Family was converted, and became the son of
Abraham, as Zacheus, though a Gentile, his Seed, or House also, were taken
visibly into Covenant, Luke 10 3, 6. So that by this time, we see the vanity,
and self-confidence of this Author, to speak such bitter words of Gall and
Wormwood, as he does in page 23. against a world of people; who, as he says,
from Custom, and Tradition, run headlong after this Idol of man's invention. By
which it is evident, That whosoever embraces not this new doctrine of dipping,
which has already been proved, not Apostolical; he is no otherwise looked
upon, or esteemed, then, yea called an Idolater. And thus not only the Truths
of God, and Privileges given to all Gods people, suffer; but also the Powers
and Authorities of these Nations come to be undervalued, slighted, and
contemned, for practicing or countenancing such Idolatries. Thus the dark-side
of the Cloud, by this, appears only to such spirits, when the Israel of God, i
e Abraham's Seed, have light within their dwellings. Ye therefore who have
upright hearts to God, and his ways, that have been hitherto led in these
untrodden paths, and so have lost the way, enquire after the footsteps of the
flock, and have more pity to your own bowels: Cut not off their entail to
Grace, by losing your visible right and title to the Covenant, in which the
invisible part thereof is conveyed. What though they are born in sin and
iniquity, yet the Promise reaches them whilst young, as it reached Isaac when a
Child. If you are not wanting in your duties, your children have a
Gospel-right; the Seed of the Jews had it, yea, they shall have it again to the
same Covenant. Take heed least your Children cry our against you at the last
day, and say, their cruel Parents took away their Bread, and gave away their
birthright for naught. Let me therefore say with the Prophet, It has and
shall be for a lamentation, to see Christians kick against their own mercies.
And let me leave this with you Mr. Patient, To. 2.22. thou that abhorrest an
Idol, do not commit sacriledg, by stealing away a Church ordinance from those
to whom God has given it: Thus far his four Essentialls are weighed, over
which we may write that superscription Daniel. 8.15. Mean Mean tekel vpharsin
thou art weighed in the balance and found too light.

CHAP. VI. Page 23. 24. Is a preludium to the subsequent chapter touching the
Covenant.
WE are now come to view that passion of Weakness that lies in those two
Pages, and first, of his distinction given of Idolatry, which though I grant
to be good; yet he still mistakes in application: for he comes again to tell
us, that in the room of this precious Ordinance of God, the dipping of
believers, which Christ has confirmed by his blood, is set up an Idol of man's
invention, namely the sprinkling of Carnal poor infants; and doubtless if
there be an Idol in the world, now set up amongst men, this must needs be one
in his sense, because he has learnt this to be an Idol, either the
worshipping a false God, or the true God in a false manner, etc.

Answ. Let any reader Judge whether this man of the waterie element does not
speak with as high a piece of confidence, as if he had a spirit of
infallibility to judge our practice by, he tells us that dipping of believers,
was an ordinance confirmed, by the blood of Christ, therefore sprinkling of
Children must needs be an Idol his Allegatitions have been examined in all the
parts thereof, and: we still find notwithstanding any thing he has said to the
contrary) that Childrens Baptism remains an Ordinance, That dipping is not the
way of the Gospel; and therefore I must tell him, that dipping was never
confirmed by Christ's blood; Ergo, He speaks untruths in the name of the Lord:
neither is it an Idol of the first or second magnitude; no Image of Baptism,
set up in the room thereof by man's invention, which are terms by him used, to
bespatter the truth. But the contrary is proved, The Administrators Right, a
person qualified and ordained; the manner, by sprinkling or pouring out water
Right, the form of words Right, and the subject Right: And therefore an
Ordinance that shall stand (mauger all the malice of men) as a precious Ordinance
of Jesus Christ, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. And therefore instead of
your appealing to men, since there has been enough said, If you and I had
never written; let us appeal to God; and let all those that own their childrens
right in the Covenant say, Amen.

In Page 25 he concludes again, that Infant Baptism is corrupt in the four
Essentialls aforementioned,

Answ: First then by his own words, it is not anihillated, but only Corrupted,
and that a person though corruptly Baptized ought not to be Baptized, that
being already prooved. But,

Secondly, He reckons without his host, and therefore must come to a new
account: They are not Essentialls, nor any of them, as laid down by him, but
whimsies of his own brain; therefore.

The next thing we are to follow him in is the business of the Covenants, with
its distinctions and extent; from which he undertakes to prove, that Infants
are not subjects of Baptism. Though we have hitherto built upon a good
Foundation; yet if he shakes down his main pillar, it will be time to forsake
the house. But before we can come to his Arguments, we must pass by many
falsitis and prolocutions, and go through many impertinencies, which must be
born withal amongst the Patrons of Error. The first thing he deals with is, A
(pretended) false consequence, which he says, we draw from scripture, to
maintain Infant Baptism: It runs thus, The Covenant of Grace is made with
believers, and their seed: Therefore the seal of the Covenant belongs to them.
To disprove which he tells us, it is against the Law of the new Testament.

Answ. The new Testament is Christ's last will to his Church; in which he shows
forth more love then he did in his first Testament, which was made to the same
Church; and the Covenant of Grace, in the spiritual part thereof, is the same
in both: If therefore in the old Testament, which was his first Legacy, he
took Children into his kingdom, and yet now, his bowels should be shut against
them who are not then called into liberty, but a greater bondage then before.
But grace in the Covenant being unchangeable, therefore Children still remain
within Christ's kingdom, except our opposits can show us how, when, and where
they were out-lawed.

Secondly, His insisting upon the Command, Matthew. 28. Go teach and Baptize,
does not at al cross this consequence, as has been already proved; therefore
no consequence of ours is forced to oppose the new Testament.

Thirdly, But such without which his practice is not Gospel, because it shuts
up the tender bowels of our Lord Jesus in a narrower compass then ever the Law
did, and the fancies and burdens, Master Patient would put upon our
shouldiers, in that which they call the Ordinance, would be heavier then ever
the Loins of the Law were; As to that Instance he brings of Peter in Page 26.
to prove consequencies against commands unlawful, because he would have
dissuaded Christ from suffering, in these words, Far be it from thee Lord:

Answ. Instead of handling the word like a Minister, he stretches the strings
of Scripture, till they crack: what kind of consequence could this be, or from
what place of Scripture, or against what command, was this a consequence to
say, Far be it from thee Lord? Surely the most any English Grammarian can make
from thence is; That it was a dissuasive, but no consequence. However, by this
we may Judge how feeble this man's Judgment is, when he thinks God has Chosen
him as one of those, that shall confound the wise of the world, that does not
yet understand what a true, or right consequence is.

Master Patient afterward tells us, that all such consequencies and books and
arguments as are brought against commands (to prove Infant Baptism, which is
clearly implied) he may say of them, as Christ to Peter, Get the behind me
Satan, thou art an offense to me. Page 6.27.

Answ. Alas poor man, if the Physics of truth offend his stomach, which should
cure him; it is a sad sign he is near past recovery. How ever, take this
extract from his own Instance, that so far as any man shall dissuade others
from truth, and cause them to apostatize from the ways of Christ, he Acts the
Devils part, Ergo This I say not; Get thee behind me Satan but this I say, that
book by him published, in which he so bitterly reviles the good old wav of God:
for the ends aforesaid. The state would do well to have all such books, though
in Folio, put into an Index Expurgatorius, amongst the whole Rabble of
Erroneous and Heretical pieces, that have been printed in these Licentions
book-days: and so condemn them to the fire, as they have done others not fit to
be suffered. And by this means, all Protestant Churches through the world,
will know, what Religion we are of.

In Page the 27 he pretends to come nearer the consequence, and grounds
thereof, but does not close till Page ^8. And then he tells us of the danger
of the practice of Infant Baptism, that if it be maintained in all it is
dimensions upon the Ground of the Covenant it will shake the very foundation of
the Gospel.

Answ. All these are but great swelling words of vanity, fit for nothing but
to delude the simple, of which we have been slong since foretold, by the
Apostles of Christ: but to the business of the Covenant at last he comes; where
at length we shall find with what gross ignorance, he gropes about, to find a
new way, but is mistaken.

CHAP. VII. The two Covenants answered.
PAge 28. In handling this consequence, and to cut off the interest of
Children, and right to the Covenant, he reduces the method into these four
heads, as before the Controversy of Baptism was into four Essentialls.

First, To prove there are two Covenants held forth in Scripture: a Covenant of
Works, and a Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, That the Covenant of Circumcision was not of Grace, but works.
Thirdly, That none but believers ever had, or shall have a right to the
Covenant of Grace.

Fourthly, To answer such objections and Scriptures as are usually alleged, to
defend a Covenant of life in the flesh.

To prove the first of these, he brings several Scriptures: the main of which
is, Jer 31.32.33 34. but to what purpose, it will afterward appear: the words
are these. Behold the days come, that I will make a new Covenant with the house
of Israel, and the house of Judah; Not according to the Covenant I made with
their Fathers, when I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of
Egypt; which my Covenant they brake, though I was to them a husband, says the
Lord. where says Master Patient, we find an old Covenant, and a new Covenant:
the old broken, therefore of works; the new was not like the old, therefore of
Grace etc.

Answ. Before I shall come to answer the Scriptures by him quoted. I shall
briefly premise, what a Covenant of Grace is; The Answer will be this, It Is a
gracious engagement betwixt God and his people upon Gospel terms, requiring
duties from them, in promising mercy to them: what that mercy and duties be,
and how far Conditional, shall largely appear in its due place: this
definition of the Covenant, importing a Condition is often denied by our
opposites, and sometimes Granted, so that to be as a stable foundation to
build upon, I thought it most fit for this place. And according to this
definition, I shall do two things:

First, Give a brief Epitome or Analysis of Abraham's Covenant.

Secondly, The whole ensuing discourse, with all his Scriptures that he brings,
will be from hence answered, and so his weapons brought against us, and many
more added to them, shall be made use of, to prove Abraham's Covenant in every
part thereof, to be a Covenant of pure Grace; which (I am sure) as it is the best
fortification I can make to secure the truth, so the incursions that shall be
made from hence, upon his confused and new doctrine, will give a rout thereto.

Abraham's Covenant had two parts, Genesis 17.2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14.

First, Gods part: this consisted in blessings, carried on in a way of promise,
and that twofold.

1. Inward and Spiritual; I will be thy God, and thy Seeds God: to give grace
and Glory. 2. Outward and Temporal, specially in three things. 1. In
multiplying his seed as the Stars. 2. In making them blessings to families and
Nations. 3. In giving them the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession.

Secondly, Man's part; and this respected duties to be done and that twofold.

1. Inward, walk before me, and be thou perfect. 2. Outward, and this also in
three things especially. 1. In keeping to the seal or token which then was
(circumcision, as now Baptism) therefore in every Generation. 2. In keeping the
Moral Law. 3. All those Typical ceremonies relating to Worship.

By all which we shall hereafter see.

1. That here are not two Covenants spoken of. 2. That the Covenant of Grace is
Conditional.
First it has Gods part, and that consists of promises and blessings,
Spiritual and Temporal. Secondly man's part consisting of duties, inward and
outward, and all this but one Covenant. This Covenant was confirmed, First to
Abraham as a public Father: Secondly to his seed, i. e. all the heirs of
promises to the worlds end, both Jews and Gentiles.

1. By Promise. 2. By Oath. 3. By seal.
So that what was promised to Abraham, was promised to al his seed, and what
was sworn and sealed to Abraham, was sworn and sealed to all his seed. According
to this definition also we shall see a twofold admission into Covenant.

1. Into the outward privileges of the Covenant. 2. Into the inward grace of
the Covenant.
Hence also we shall have light to see, first, how hypocrites and wicked men did
then, and do now, get within the Covenant; Secondly how such as are within the
Covenant do break it, As first he that contemned or slighted, or neglected the
token or seal of the Covenant to his seed, has broken the Covenant, which
being outward they might keep.

Secondly, The breach of any part of the Moral Law, was a breach of the
Covenant, and this also might have been externally kept by all, that were
externally within the Covenant.

Thirdly, All those typical Church rites might have been kept, and the neglect
or breach of any one in the due order or manner required, was a breach of the
Covenant: for neglect of the first, Gods wrath was so kindled against Moses
that he would have killed him; for breach of the second and third Israel was also
punished with death: many instances thereof might be given. Hence also we shall
be led to an answer how the ^ovenant is called.

1. Old and so vanished away. 2. New and so remains. 3. An administration.
This being briefly premised, I now come to give in the Answer to the place by
him quoted Jer. 31.32. which he brings to prove that there are two Covenants
but grossly mistaken yet so far as we may go without breach of faith to the
truth of Christ, in acknowledging two Covenants, shall not deny him friendship,
as namely,

First, That there has been two Covenants made with man: the one of works
before the fall, in which man stood alone without a mediator, under which
covenant al mankind by nature lies to this day, which is also materially the
same with that righteous Law Moral, given to Israel from mount Sinah, though
upon other terms.

Secondly, The other of Grace made since the fall, and tendered to Adam, in the
promise of Christ, since which, the Law in any part of it, is not given as a
covenant of works, but as the Law of Christ put in the hands of a mediator,
therefore.

Thirdly, It was never intended by God, either in giving circumcision to
Abraham, or the Law to Israel, that ever Abraham's seed should enjoy Canaan, by
the law as a Covenant of works, but only (as has been laid down in the
Analysis) as man's part, of the covenant of grace.

Quest. But if that was not a covenant of works given to Israel, when God took
them by the hand, in order to bring them into Canaan, what then can be the
meaning of that place, where the holy Ghost speaks of, an old and new Covenant?
and tells us the new Covenant which he will make after those days, shall not be
according to the old, etc.

The clearing of this, with a Questian or two more, will take in all those
scriptures brought to this, and therefore I further answer.

First, The Covenant there mentioned is called new, as the Law of love, John
13.34.1 John 2.8. is called a new Commandment or Law: which yet is not new in
it self, but the same Command as was given to Israel of old Lev. 19.18 And as
the new heavens and new earth are called new Re. 21.1. And as the new Creature
is called new, which is not the annihilating the old, and creating new, but the
putting of the old heavens and old earth, into a new frame of Government, and
the old creature into a new state of grace, so the new Covenant is the same
that brought Israel out of Egypt, and contained remission of sins, and eternal
life in Christ by faith with all the blessings of this life, but so called, new,

Secondly, Because those typical ceremonies and ordinances which were man's
part of the Covenant of grace then, and related to his duty in Gods worship,
were by Christ's coming abolisht, and new ordinances under the Gospel
established in room thereof, for the promising part of the Covenant of grace,
from the beginning, has ever been clothed, with the preceptive Conditional
part, to bind up man to his duty, and walking close with God in his Ordinances
of worship. And therefore when Christ was held forth in the first promise,
immediately sacrifices were instituted, a distinction made betwixt clean and
unclean creatures, the Law of tithes and first fruits observed, blood
forbidden: familie-duties required, all which a diligent reader of Scriptures,
may easily observe, from Adam to Moses, before there was a publishing the Law
from Sinay, and so to Christ, Track it from Christ again, to the worlds end,
you have the first abolisht, a second instituted, and as then, so still; to
bind man to his duty in walking with God, but not as in a distinct Covenant of
works, but as the terms of grace, to which man is bound by the Covenant: and
thus those typical ce emonies were as old clothes, and are called beggarly
Rudiments or Rags, in which the promising part was clothed, and dressed. The
Apostle in Heb. 10. calls the exhibition of Christ in flesh, in offering up his
blood by once dying, and such manner of institutions as should be written by
him, to be the new Covenant verse 15.16: and puts it in opposition to the
Legal sacrifices verse 4. 5, therefore verse 19, 20. the second is called the
new and living way consecrated, implying, that as there is now a way to heaven
consecrated by the blood of Christ, and therefore new; so there was a way to
heaven before Christ came, consecrated by the blood of Bulls and Goats, called
old: by this then we see, in what respect the Covenant is called new and old,
namely, as relating to a new or old Church State; the first given as typical
by Moses to Israel, as Christ's kingdom; the second as substantial, by Christ
to the same kingdom; but still in the same Covenant of grace: for a Church
state is given in order to a souls enjoying, communion with God in his
ordinances, which is impossible to be by a Covenant of works, since the fall;
thus then, the bringing of Israel into a new Church State, under the Gospel,
is called a new Covenant, which God will make with the house of Israel in those
days: This gives us light, to answer also that other place Heb. 8.6, 7. by
Master Patient quoted to prove two Covenants, because Christ is called the
Mediator of a better Covenant established upon better promises: for if the first
Testament had been faultless, there would have been no place sought for the
second; but finding fault with them, he says, behold the day is come, when I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and verse 13. In that he
says, a new Covenant, he has made the first old: now that which waxes old,
is ready to vanish away. By which terms old and new, first and second, better
and worse, he would needs understand two Covenant^; one of works, the other of
Grace.

Answ. In this 8 Chap. the Apostle comes to apply what he had treated of before
in the former Chap. verse 1 now of the things which we have spoken this is the
sum. ^n the former Chapter the Apostle had been speaking of the Levitical
Priesthood and Law, i. e. the Law of Ordinances, and therefore verse 18. he
tells us, the Commandment going before, i. e. before Christ came, was
disannulled, because of the weakness, and unprofitableness of it, and gives the
reason in verse 19. because the Law, i. e. the Law of ceremonies made nothing
perfect in comparison, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we
draw nigh to God, by which he means the Gospel Ordinances of worship; called
better, because opposed to the Ceremonies of the Law, which therefore are
employed to be wrote. And that by this better hope, is meant Gospel Ordinances,
is evident; because the Apostle uses it as an Argument to the Church of the
Hebrews, to persuade them to hold fast their profession, which they were
revol^ing from ^elling them, If they should cast of the Ordinances of worship,
they could not then draw nigh to God; because they would then cast off also the
High Priesthood of Christ; so chapter 3.6. Whose house are we if we held fast the
rejoicing of the hope to the end. And ver. 14. We are made partakers of Christ
if we hold fast the confidence to the end, He here calls that the confidence,
which before he called the Hope and Confidence, and chapter 10.35. Cast not away
therefore your Confidence, As if he had said, If you cast away the Ordinances,
of worship, you stand no longer related to Christ as his house; nor have you
any hope or ground of hope, to draw nigh to God. So chapter 7.19. the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; by which we draw
nigh to God: So that the Ordinances of drawing ^igh to God under the Gospel,
are called a better hope, as they stand opposed to ^he Ordinances of worship
under the Law: which albeit they did approach to God in them; yet they were
kept thereby at a greater di^^ance, chapter 9.6, 7, 8, 9. So --

Again, let us review this chapter further, because the clearing up of chap. 8.
depends upon it. And these Scriptures being fully answered, we shall not have
much to do with the rest; we have already seen, hat the O di^ances of the
Gospel, are opposed to those of the Law And hat this is so, see v. 11. If
perfection was by the Levitical Priesthood (For under it the people received
the Law) what need was there of another Priesthood to rise after the order of
Melchizedek? What law ^as this the people received, ver. 12. It Is such a law as
was changed ^p^n the change of the Priesthood, which cannot be meant of the
Moral Law, for this is still the some and not changed; but the Law of the
Altar, which in ver 16. is called a carnal commandment, which in ver. 18. is
disanulled by reason of the weakness of it, and ver. 19 for the Law made
nothing perfect, and the reason is given ch 9 9. Because i^ was a figure for
the time present, in which were offered gifts and Sacrifices that could not
make him that did it perfect: And chapter 10.1. The Law bring but a shadow of good
things to come, can never with those Sacrifices which they continually offered,
make the comers there to perfect; for then they would not have ceased: and in
ver. 8. when he speaks of Christ coming to be offered, he draws this result
from the premises; he takes away the first that he may establish the second.

Now in this 8 chapter he draws toward a conclusion, and in the first verse:
of the things which we have spoken, this is the sum: he had before spoken of
the Law of Ordinances, and weakness thereof; and therefore in this 7. v. of c.
8. he calls it the first Covenant, for if the first Covenant had been
faultless. Why, wherein was it faulty? The Apostle had before told them, it was
faulty because it was weak, and unprofitable: and had it not been so, that law
of Ordinances would have made the worshippers perfect; And then no place would
have been sought for the second Covenant. So then by the first Covenant it is
clear is meant the Ordinances of the Ceremonial worship, and therefore finding
fault with them, he speaks in the plural number [them] Ordinances not
Covenants, ver. 8. (unless Mr Patient will make two Covenants of works then) he
says, behold the day is come when I will make a new Covenant, referring to Jer
31.3^. with the house of Israel i. e. new l^was of worship. Not according to
the Covenant I made with their Fathers, etc. And verse last, in that he says a
new covenant, he has made the first old, etc. And therefore whereas Mr P.
tells us that God gave Israel a Covenant of works to enjoy Canaan by; It is
most absurd: as by their following particulars further ap^ears.

1. Had those typical Ordinances been a Covenant of Works given at Mount- Sinai
to Israel, then it had not been put in the hand, of a Mediator. For where God
gives a people a Mediator, is supposed, he intends them Grace thereby. When
Adam was put into a Covenant of Works, he was left to stand or fall by himself
without help; since that no Covenant of Works was ever made, Gal. 4. Moses is
called the Mediator of the first Testament. Now a Will or a Testament is an act
of Grace purely.

2. Had it been a Covenant of Works by which they were to possess Canaan, there
had not been one man that ever had entered into that rest. For it was impossible
for them to fulfill it, because the power of doing, so as to answer a Covenant
of works, was lost in the fall.

3. What favor had this been to Abraham, Isaac, and so to all the seed of
Promise, to have such a flourishing promise, to possess such a fruitful Land by
a Covenant of Works, when many of the Nations of the world did possess a more
fruitful Country, and were never put to such labor and toil, such
difficulties and dangers that Israel were put to?

4. It Is against the Nature of a Covenant of Grace which God made with Abraham,
first to put him into a Covenant of Grace for spirituals, and then twenty four
years after should put him into a Covenant of Works for Temporals. So that
either believers must fall from Grace, or else stand under two Covenants at one
time.

5. Had it been a Covenant of Works made with Abraham, Isaac, and so along, as
this Author affirms, then how came the bond-womans son a type of that Covenant,
to be exempted from that Covenant of Works, and Isaac which was Sarahs son, a
type of the Covenant of Grace, and a child of Promise, to be put under that
Covenant? It could not be for any outward distinction, in outward enjoyments,
for I shmael had more of the glory of the world then Isaac, Genesis 17.21.

6. Had the mercy intended Israel, related only to externals in giving them a
fruitful Country, in blessing their corn, wine, and oil, the fruit of their
bodies, their basket, and store, as Mr. Patient affi^ms, and this to be enjoyed
by a Covenant of Works; then as a worthy Divine well observes, in somewhat the
like case, how could Esau have been charged for a profane person, for selling
his birthright? For there had been no prophane^ess in that, because
profaneness supposes a contempt or neglect of something spiritual, which is
therefore to be enjoyed upon a spiritual account, and not by works.

7 What the Prophet speaks, Jer. 31.22. and the Apostle, Heb. 8. 9. of Gods
taking Israel by the hand to bring them out of Egypt, is by the Prophet, Hos.
11.4. interpreted, compared with Mat. 2.15 to be an act of a tender Father who
owned Israel as a son; for as a father in tender love and respect to his young
child, takes him by the hand to teach him to go: so did God deal with Israel
when a child The like be did to Ephraim ver. 3. I taught Ephraim also to go,
taking him by the hand: so when he destroyed Sodom, Genesis 19.16. Whilst Let
^^gered as being unwilling to leave Sodom the Text says, he laid h^ld upon his
hand and brought him forth. And the reason is given, because the Lord was
merciful to them. So that what God did to his people in this kind (is most
clear) was from a pure Covenant of Grace, and Mercy, not by a Covenant of
Works.

8. What God did to Israel in giving them rest in Canaan, was as Canaan was a
Type of Heaven, Isa 65.9. and of the Churches state under the New Testament,
Jer. 3.18. Psalm. 105.6. For so the promise of Abraham, in giving them Canaan is
by the Prophet David interpreted to be, to a thousand generations, which
therefore must needs extend to the end of the world. For so it is called a
Covenant for ever. And had his seed enjoyed Canaan from Abraham's days, yet from
thence to Christ was but forty two generations, Mat. 1. So that if Canaan was
to be possessed as a type of heaven, then it was not to be possessed by a Covenant
of works, but by faith, so Abraham possessed it, Heb. 11.8, 9, 10. By Faith he
sojourned in the Land of promise as in a strange Country, dwelling in
Tabernacles with Isaac, and Jacob; heirs with him of the same Promise. For he
looked for a City which had foundations, whose builder and maker was God. And
ver. 15, 16. he sought a better Country, a Country whereof that was but a type.
Now what promise were Isaac and Jacob heirs of? Why that of the Covenant of
Grace, Genesis 17.8. To thee will I give the Land of Canaan. And this the Apostle
tell^ us was possessed by Faith as a type of heaven; therefore not by a Covenant
of Works.

9 It further appears by comparing, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, with Heb.
11.16. Wh^refore God is not ashamed to be called their God for he has prepared
for them a City, Where the Apostle thus argues* that had the great pro^^se to
^braham, been only of an earthly Canaan; which this Author affirms, was to be
enjoyed by a Covenant of Works; God would have been ashamed to be called his
God; it is evident therefore, that for men to affirm such Doctrines as this, is
to put an affront upon God himself.

10. It still further appears, that Abraham's seed enjoyed Canaan by a Covenant
of Grace; because what ^oses and Joshua did, who were their c^nductors, was
done by faith, and ti^ also applied to all Israel, Heb 11.27, 28, ^9, By faith,
he forsook Egypt, by faith he kept the passover, by faith they past through
the red Sea So when Joshua led them over Jo dan it was an act of faith; yea the
very conquest of the enemy there, was an act of Faith, ver. 30. therefore, for
him to affirm t^a^ fi st Covenant before largely opened, to be those typical
ceremonies; and so man's p^rt of the Covenant of Grace to be ^ Covenant of
Works, by which they were to live happ^ly in Canaan, is such not^rious stuff
that he might blush to name it.

11^ Such ^ doctrine directly opposes these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 9.4.5, 6 7, 8
speak not thou in thy heart, saying, for my righteousness the Lo d has brought
me in to possess this Land, and ver. 5. not for thy righteous^ess, do thou
possess this Land, And ver. 6. not for thy righteousness for thou art a
stiff-necked people, and ver. 7, f^rget not how thou provokedst the Lord to
wrath in the wilderness, and from the day that ye came out of Egypt even to
this day, until ye came to this place, ye have been rebellious against the
Lord, and ver. 27. he refers back to Abraham's Covenant, and makes use of it as
an argument to prevail with God in Prayer; because he had promised to give them
Canaan by grace, and not by their works, so also chapter ^0.11, 12, 13, 16. Exodus
2.24. chapter 3.6.8. and chapter 6.8. Numb. 14.23.

12. That rest the Apostle speaks of Heb. 4.1. is meant of a like rest to that
of Canaan, which Israel was cut short off for want of faith, Heb. 3.18. to whom
swear he that they should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed
not? this promise of rest is by the Apostle called a p^eaching ^he Gospel, Heb.
4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them; implying
clearly, that what was spoken in that promise of giving Israel rest in Canaan
was a preaching the Gospel to them. So that as the spiritual part of the
Covenant, which conveys justification by Faith, is by Paul called a Gospel
preaching, Gal. 3.8. ^o the temporal part of the same Covenant, Genesis 17.8.
which this ^uthor would fain make a Covenant of works, thereby to maintain his
errors, the same Apostle tells us it was a Gospel preach^ng also. By what
therefore has been said hitherto, it is a shining truth, that Abraham's Covenant
in all parts thereof, relating to spirituals, and temporals, was a full and
complete Covenant of Grace, to which circumcision was annexed, as a seal, not
as a distinct Covenant of works, in order to the possessing of Canaan; because
as has been proved, by these twelve considerations, as there has been no
Covenant of works, given since the fall, so Israel enjoyed Canaan by a Covenant
of Grace; it follows therefore that Circumcision, and all those legal
Ordinances, called the first Covenant, was no Covenant of works, but that part
of the Covenant of Grace that related to man's duty; therefore Genesis 17.14. it is
called Gods Covenant, and the neglect of man's duty in that Covenant was a
breach thereof.

Q. But if that place Jer. 31.32. with Heb. ^.6, 7. be to be understood of a
Covenant of Grace, and not of works; then how may it be said that Israel brake
that Covenant? Can a Covenant of Grace be broken?

The Answer to this, upon what is laid down in the Analysis of Abraham's
Covenant, is plain, for there is no Covenant of Grace but has Conditions,
which bind man to his duty: it was so under the Law: faith and repentance was
the condition of the Covenant then, as it is now: and because faith without works
is dead, being alone, Jam. 2.17. therefore God has given O^dinances, and the
Laws Moral to his people to keep faith alive, and man may break his part of the
Covenant; so it was with Israel, Romans 4. when the Question was put, What
advantage then has the Jew? Much e^^^y way, because to them, as to all Israel,
was committed the Oracles, and the Covenant, etc.

Here was the Covenant of Grace externally administered to all: but yet there
was but a remnant saved, and the greatest part of Israel were
Covenant-breakers; and the like we have now, and is, and must be acknowledged
by all our dissenting friends of the dipped Societies, an external, and internal
administration of the Covenant: For their confidence is not so high as to say,
that all they dip are really within the Covenant, for we see many of them turn
Apostates from every thing that is good, and prove carnal wretches; as did
Simon Magus, Judas, Hymeneus, Philetus, Ananias, and Saphira, who were all
within the Covenant visibly. If they say they baptize not upon the account of
the Covenant at all, but upon the profession of Faith; I answer, either they
baptize as visible believers, or real: if visible, then as visibly within the
Covenant; if as real, then really within the Covenant: so that still the
Covenant lies at bottom, and there is as much falling from Grace, and breach of
the Covenant upon their own principles, as is pleaded for. The like answer also
is to be given to that other clause, of Gods being a husband to them, for the
whole Nation of Israel was engaged to God as a spouse, Jer. 3.14. and so under
the Law of marriage; and therefore when they were divorced, the whole Nation
was cast off; yet one of a City and two of a family were taken to Zion, I such
as were spiritually within the Covenant, they had still communion with God v
14. so now, the whole Church is visibly under a Covenant of Marriage to Christ,
believers and their seed, and are therefore the children of the kingdom, but
yet we know the greatest part of a Church may be hypocrites, and so the
children of the kingdom may be cast out: so that it is most clear, a Covenant
of Grace in this sense may be broken in the visib e p^rt thereof, by the
v^sible mem^ers of it.

P. The n^xt I find his piece driving at, is to prove the Covenant of Grace not
to be made upon conditions, but absolute: to prove it, he takes up many pages,
though to little purpose; for what he in one place denies, in another place he
affirms; as in page 35. where he confesses Faith and Repentance the condition
of the Covenant.

Answ. If it be the condition of the covenant, then the covenant is not made
without conditions. For indeed to speak of a covenant absolute without
conditions, is to speak of that, which cannot be; for if it has no conditions,
it is no covenant, but only a tender of grace. And here lies much of Mr.
Patients great mistake, to take the tender of Grace for the covenant; and thus
he falls into the Antinomian Doctrine: and therefore as faith and repentance is
the condition, so the covenant is not concluded, betwixt God and the soul, till
those qualifications are wrought, therefore the veins of free grace are full of
riches, because as God tenders, so he gives secretly the qualifications that
lay hold upon the tender, so he did to our first Parents.

2. But besides, if the covenant has no conditions, why then does not Mr.
Patient baptize all that come, but they must give such a strict account of
their faith as before he speaks of? or why are any cast out that prove rotten?
will they make conditions themselves, when God has made none? For the very
ground of administering all Ordinances, is from the covenant as it is
conditional: and if it be not conditional, then is it made with a drunkard, as
a drunkard; and with a whoremaster, as a whoremaster; with a blasphemer and
Sabbath breaker as such: and then to no purpose is that of Paul 2 Cor. 6.14,
15. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, light with
darkness, Christ and Belial together? that place Jer. 32.40. had such
conditions as God requires. For his fear was wrought in their hearts, that they
should not depart from him: the like also Ezekiel. 16.59. Thus says the Lord, I
will even deal with thee as thou have done, which have despised the oath in
breaking the covenant^ and because he afterward speaks of my covenant and thy
covenant, therefore M P. concludes, here were two covenants; the one broken
which was man's, the other kept which was Gods. But in this also there was but
one covenant, which had two parts, Gods part and man's, which was their manner
of covenanting with God to make an oath to walk in his ways: and when they had
broken this oath; they had broken the covenant, second their part of the
covenant: see that place also, Neh. 10.29. They entered into a curse to walk in
the laws of God, that were given by Moses the servant of the Lord; The Law
given was the terms God bound them to in a way of Grace and Mercy, and their
oath or curse, declared their owning thereof; so that when the oath was broken,
the covenant was broken; therefore the deduction that Mr. Patient makes from
these Texts, that there are two covenants, is unsound and rotten, and savours
of too ignorant a spirit in the covenant of Grace. The like also Ezekiel. 36.25,
26, 27. I will sprinkle clean water upon you I will take away the heart of
stone, and give you a heart of flesh, etc. And ver. 37. I will yet for all this
be enquired of by the house of Israel; is not here a condition? whereas
therefore Mr. Patient tells us if Gods people sin. He binds himself to pardon
their sins, and to remember their sins no more; and therefore it is impossible
for a soul once in this covenant to miscarry.

Answ. Such an application as this, is fitter for a Synagogue of Libertines
then a Church of Christ, God never pardons the sin of a people, but he makes
them holy. And before he pa d^ns their sin he will make them smart, and cry out
under the stroke of his hand; how did David roar under the wrath of the
Almighty? the whole book of Psalms shows us; so Heman, and Ephraim, Manasses,
yea all the examples in Gods word, and the experiences of Gods people, they all
speak out the truth, Heb. 7.2. that Christ is first a King of righteousness,
before a King of Peace.

Therefore let such as fear the Lord remember the covenant of grace has
conditions, such as God will whip his people into; and if the Rod will not do,
his shepherds crook shall be laid on with strong blows* by this way had David
comfort, Psalm. 23. And therefore tells us, Psalm. 89.37. If Gods people sin, and
transgress his Law, he will visit their transgressions with a rod, and their
iniquities with stripes; and though everlasting love is their portion, yet that
is the way he takes to breed them up, to bring them to covenant conditions: And
though the Elect of God shall never finally fall away; yet they may and do
break and fall from the visible part of the covenant too often, though they are
brought in again, and others fall off finally, as did those primitive Apostates
already mentioned. So that place must be understood, Joh. 15.2, 4 5, 6. which
distinction Mr Patient must admit of, and can never evade it.

All the rest of those scriptures by him brought to prove the absoluteness, or
sureness of the covenant, or two covenan^s, do bear the same interpretation;
take those two for instance, Isaiah ^5.3. hea^ken to me incline your ear, hear
and your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant, etc. So Heb.
c. 17, 18. wherein G^d willing to show unto the heirs of promise the
immutability of his counsel confirmed the same by oath to Abraham; that by two
immutable things in which it was impossible foy God to lie: we might have
strong consolation: And though Mr Patient from these places concludes, the
covenant-mercy of David to be sure, and so i^mutable; yet there must be an
inclining the ear, and hearkening to the voice of God: even of such as are
really within the covenant; and to such only the covenant is sure. But now
there were many of the Church of the Hebrews that we have ground to judge were
but visibly in covenant, and so, only pretended heirs of promise, and such
were they that were falling from Ordinances that forsook the assemblies; sold
their birthright, as those also already mentioned: So that we still see the
distinction holds, some are really, some only visibly, seemingly within the
covenant.

P. Pa. 24 He afterward brings many places to prove, that the condition of the
covenant (which before he denied) is faith and repentance, and they are wrought
in the soul by God.

Answ. That the condition of the covenant is so wrought, is by us confessed, but
yet we may here see how whiffling erroneous spirits are: sometimes he affirms
the covenant to be absolute, sometimes that it is conditional, that so he might
have a starting hole to fly out at: and let me remind him here; that if he
keeps to this principle, that faith and repentance is the condition of the
covenant; he must according to the Scriptures, admit of a visible being in the
covenant, as well as of an invisible, in order to the communion of Saints in
the world; for there are many pretenders to those conditions and qual
fications, which yet by virtue of their profession cannot be denied the seals
of the covenant, because they visibly submit to the terms thereof, as is before
proved.

P. The next thing he gr^sly errs in, is page 37, where in his explaining that
Text, Genesis 3.17. of the seed of the woman, he tells us it is meant of Christ:
That God would infuse or put into the woman's seed, his created gifts of
holiness and purity.

Answ. We may see what old Springs of error this book of h^s bubbles up withal.
For by this he makes Christ only a comple^t and perfect man, as Adam before the
fall, with infused qualifications, and by this made an unspotted Sacrifice; by
which, the divine nature of Christ is taken away, that he was not God as well
as man: and the Hypostatical union (as Divines call it) is by this d^stroyed,
contrary to the whole current of Gods word; and directly opposing Joh. 1.1, 2,
3, 10, 14. And the word was made flesh, and dwelt amongst us ver. 18. So Heb.
1.2, 3. 1 John 4.14, 15. chapter 5.1.7, 10, 1. mult^tudes o Texts might be added.
Arius thy error struggles to live, when th^n ^rt dead.

2. When God says, I will put enmity betwixt thy seed and her seed we are not
to understand it merely of Christ, but of the Infant-Ch^rch seed. For so Eve by
faith understood the promise, Genesis 4.5. when S^th was born, God has appointed
me another seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew. Which Infant Seed of the Church
is as truly in covenant, was, and shall be to the worlds end, as Adult
believers, and Satan's malice is as much against them, as the other, in all
ages, as appears by Cains bloody Murder, with Exodus 1.10, 16. Mat. 2.16. Rev.
^2.2.13.17. Therefore Mr Patient in his often endeavors to cast out this seed
of the Church by confining the Church, either to Christ personally, or Adult
believers, which so often he calls the spiritual seed, does but strive to do
that now, which if he will but read those places cited, He may know who it was
that studied the same practice in former ages.

P. The 28 page, tells us that the new covenant was never entailed upon any
fleshly line or generation as the covenant of circumcision was, but was still
confirmed of God in Christ, and to such only in Christ as you find in the
promises to Abraham, Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all nations of the earth be
blessed In which there is no respect of persons in their blessings to life, but
all Nations in Christ, as well one as another are blessed, and all out of Christ
are accursed.

Answ. It has been befo e proved that the new covenant or covenant of grace,
has a twofold part or branch, the one invisible, the other visible, and both
are the covenant. The one relates to the grace of the covenant, the other to
man's duty in the use of Ordinances. And this second part, has from the
beginning run upon intail to believers and their seed; even from the days of
Adam to Christ, and so since; yea the promise which relates to the spiritual
seed, runs for the most part upon intail also, though I do not say that all the
seed of believers are so children of the promise. For as the intail visibly
took in all the seed of Abraham, Ishmael as well as Isaac, so Esau as well as
Jacob, Cain, as well as Abel, Ham and Japhet as well as Shem, yet the seed by
promise comes in by way of intayl, to the children of promise. As the covenant
was entayled from Adam to Seth, Enos, Kenan, so to Noah, Shem, Arphaxad, and up
to Abraham; and then to Isaac, Jacob, and his twelve sons, but so in Judah it
continued to Christ* see Luke 3. to the end, compared with Mat. 1. to 17. where
you shall find a spiritual entail by promise, and were it not so, what
encouragement could it be to believers to be Stoickt in family duties, had they
not a promise to rest upon, as touching family blessings? Which place in Luke
3. is so clear that Mr Patient to evade the strength and dint of Scripture,
makes this whole line to run in a covenant of works: the contrary whereto is
already proved that no such covenant is made with man since the fall; therefore
see these Texts which prove an intail, Deuteronomy. 4 37. Because he loved thy
fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, So chapter 10.5. the Lord had a
delight in thy Fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even
you above all people, compared with Rom 11.28. as touching the Election they
are beloved for their fathers sake D^ut. 30.19. Therefore ^huse life that both
thou and thy seed may live.
: Hence it is that we find the Parents says drawn forth to believe their
seeds interest in the covenant. Thus did Eve in the place before mentioned,
believe the covenant-state of S^th, as soon as born. And therefore she calls
him another seed instead of Abel. The like also we find of Lamech, Gen 5.28,
29. who concludes that though God would destroy and curse the earth; yet upon
the birth of Noah, he should be a comfort to the Church: Thus was David drawn
forth to believe. That because of that Everlasting Covenant God had made with
him, he should in time have his house to flourish, though yet God made it not
to grow, Psalm. 89.29, 34, 35 compared with 2 Samuel 23.5. The like ground of
believing is to re^ch to these days, and to the worlds end concerning the seed
of believers right to the covenant, as Psalm 102.28. the children of thy
servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee; How
long was this seed to continue? See ver 26, 27: So long as heaven and earth
should remain. Hence it is that God has promised, to be the God of all the
families of Israel, Jer. 31.1. and Isa. 65.23. That they are the seed of the
blessed of the Lord and their off spring with them. Which bl^ssedness relates
to more then externals, as by that 102 Psalm. appears. For the heaven and earth
was to be folded up as a garment and to wax old; but the seed and offspring of
his children should remain, and have greater blessings.

That place Genesis 1^.3. Mr Patient does acknowledge to be Gospel, but in such
low and general terms, that in ^ff^ct he denies it; For says he, all Nations
that are in Christ are blessed. When yet, he will not acknowledge that ever any
Nation were so blessed, no not the Jews hemselves; but only a remnant. And the
reason of hi^ mistake ^s, because he considers not that there is a v^sible
being in Christ* ^s in that pl^ce, Joh. 15 41. Abide in we and I in you; he
that abides not in me is cut off as a branch: So that he confines the meaning
of ^^e promise, in thee and in thy seed, to Christ only; contrary to the due
some of the w^rds F r by thy seed is also meant believers, and so Ch ^st mist
^dly in head and members is to be understood, Gen 13.5. look toward heaven and
tell the stars if thou art able, so shall thy seed be: Mr Patient I hope w ll
not make so many Christ's, and chapter 17.7. I will establish my covenant betwixt me
and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations; so if Abraham had a
seed in every generation which were to be a blessing thereto: So Genesis 22.17. In
blessing I will bless thee, and will multiply thy seed, and thy seed shall
possess the gates of his enemies, meaning the conquest of Canaan which could
not be in Christ personal, because the Land of Canaan was conquered many
hundred years before he came, and since it is destroyed. So in thy seed all the
Nations of the earth shall be blessed, ver 8. i e. in the multiplying of
Abraham's seed as the stars, they should at last come to be a blessing to all
Nations; by all which places it is clear that the word seed which he confines
to Christ, is meant of all believers to the worlds end: and indeed to deny this
sense of the place, is to deny that Abraham had any Gospel preached to him, as
any judicious reader may easily observe; for that which the Apostle Romans 3.18.
speaks of Abraham's faith to justification, is referred to Genesis 15.5. So shall
thy seed be, that is, as the stars of heaven for multitude, which Abraham
believing, it was imputed to him for righteousness; This Exposition therefore
being granted, the other will appear but lame and maimed.

3 The covenant says Mr Patient, is not intailed as circumcision was.

Answ. Though there has been enough said to satisfy men of reason, yet I
shall here, as in many other places, be forced to repeat what before has been
spoken: If therefore Circumcision be not a covenant of works, then it must be
the visible part of the covenant of Grace, and then it must run upon entail, as
Mr Patient here grants; Therefore let the Reader observe it has been already
proved, The covenant had two parts; one for spirituals, the other for
temporals, in giving Israel rest in Canaan, and all the good things thereof:
the first part is proved to be Gospel from Gal. 3.8. and that the second also
is Gospel, see Heb. 3.18. compared with chapter 4.1, 2 to whom swear he that they
should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not, speaking of the
rest in Canaan, which Israel was cut short of in the wilderness. And chapter 4 1.
Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us, We also fall sh^rt, For
unto us is the Gospel preached as well as to them. From whence it is clear that
Israel never had rest in Canaan by works, but by grace; and therefore it
follows, If Israel did not enjoy Canaan by a covenant of works, and yet they
did enjoy it by the covenant of Circumcision, then Circ^mcision was not of
works, but of grace: so that we see our opposites must be forced to acknowledge
the visible part of the covenant of Grace to run upon intail to believers and
their seed. Thus we have done with this first head, and have answered all his
material Scriptures; which indeed does also answer the next following, or any
t^ing material in his book, and though I have undermined his founda^ion so, as
that the whole structure is fallen; yet because I would separate the stones,
from the other rubbish, I shall therefore come to his next general head.

CHAP. VIII An answer to the second general head touching the Covenant.
Page 42. The next general head by him laid down to prove, is, That
Circumcision is no covenant of grace, but of works, called a covenant in the
flesh, Genesis 17.13. but before he comes to his Arguments, he opens the meaning
of the word everlasting, which is to be understood of the ever of the Law,
especially when it comprehends with it their seed in their generations, and
this he lays down as a maxim; to prove which, he brings Lev. 16. Number. 25.13.
Exodus 40.15. chapter 30.20, 21. all which places speak of the Levitical Priesthood,
either of the line in which it should run, or the way by which they were
instated into their office, by anointing, or the manner by which they approacht
constantly into the Tabernacle, or of the manner of their atonement for the
people, all which should remain as an everlasting statute in their generations.

A. That by everlasting we are to understand the ever of the Law only, is no
sound maxim: for though it be so to be understood in the places quoted, because
it related to the Priesthood, and Tabernacle worship; yet if that covenant in
Genesis 17. Which Circumcision sealed then, upon which God promised the Land of
Canaan as a type of heaven, remains still as an everlasting covenant, then his
maxim is broken: see therefore that parallel Text, Psalm. 105.6 to Genesis 17. O ye
seed of ^braham his servant, he is the Lord our God, he has remembered his
covenant for ever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations, which
covenant he made with Abraham and his oath with Isaac, and confirmed the same
to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant, saying, To thee
will I give the Land of Canaan, etc.

From which it appear, that the word everlasting is to be understood to a
thousand generations, i. e. to the worlds end; because the giving Israel
Canaan, was a type of heaven, and from Abraham's days to Christ was but forty
two Generations. Therefore this difference is to be observed; that when he
speaks of statutes everlasting to be observed in their generations. It Is meant
of those Statute Laws, that God gave to Israel for worship; and so as Mr
Patient observes it is to be understood for the ever of the Law. But when the
Holy Ghost speaks of a covenant, everlasting, as in Genesis 1^.15. It Is such a
covenant that is to continue* so long as the heavens and earth shall continue,
so Paul calls it, Heb. 13.20. The blood of the everlasting covenant. And this
in Gal. 3.17. was that covenant that Christ confirmed to Abraham and his seed
430 years before the Law, and called everlasting, in that place of Genesis befo
e quoted, which everlasting covenant ^o^k in an everlasting seed and is called
a Gospel-preaching to Abraham, Gal. 3.8. and by John, Rev. 14.6. is also
explained to be an eve^lasting Gospel: from hence also it is that Paul in Heb.
6. when ^e speaks of Gods blessing Abraham and multiplying his seed, which he c
lls ^he h^rs of promise, calls it his immutable Counsel, as relating to both
the covenant, and the seed of the covenant. Now if there be an everlastingness
in the covenant which takes in such a seed as it did to Abraham, then must it
continue longer then the Law, or else there must be a mutability. So again, if
the persons row covenant ng were changed, i. e. If God were not the same to
believers and their seed now, as ^e was t^en, or if believers should now
covenant only for themselves, and leave out their seed; then there is a
mutation of the covenant: therefore David in Psalm. 102.26, 27, 28. before
quoted, speaking of the infant seed of the Church, tells us, that though the
heavens and earth should wax old and perish as a garment, (which words are
qu^ted by Paul, Heb. ^.1. to a Gospel-^h rch) yet that Church s^ed should
continue, so also Psalm. 103.17 18. from everlasting to everlasting, and that by
virtue of t at everlasting covenant: therefore what feeble maxin s this new
Doctor teaches, and how ill he compares Texts we may here see:

Page 4^. The next thing he opens is these words, I will be thy God, and thy
seeds God, and that two ways; the o^e b a covenant of Grace, the other by a
cov^nant of Works; the first absolute, the second conditional, and so God gave
himself to be Abraham's God by a conditional c^v^nant of Works.

A. That this is strange Divinity, that God should be a peoples God by a
Covenant of Works since the fall, I doubt not but it will appear to sound Ch
istians, from what has been already said: I shall therefore pass it, to come
to his confused Arguments, some of which I have contracted into form, to take
the better prospect thereof.

P. H^s first Argument runs thus. That covenant that runs upon conditions, is a
covenant of Works: but so does Circumcision, therefore.

A. To which I answer, The first proposition is denied and d^sproved, and it is
by him confessed that faith and repentance is a condition of the covenant. So
that by this he affirms pro and con and may as well say plainly, that the
covenant of grace is a covenant of works, because it has conditions: therefore
his foundation is too weak, and rotten for such a building.

P. In page 45. he would prove the land of Canaan to be given to Abraham and
his seed by a covenant of works, and so would be their God, and then his
Argument runs thus. If God g^ve the Land of Canaan to Abraham and his seed upon
the condition of Circumcision, and keeping the Law; then he gave the land of
Canaan by a covenant of works: but God gave the land to Abraham upon condition
he would circumcise his seed; Therefore.

A. This has been already cleared, that circumcision and keep^ng of the law
was man's part of the covenant of Grace, in which the Church was to walk with
God, being bound up to visible duties then, as it is now: and that Canaan was
not g ven Israel by works, my answer to the preceding head makes clear, to
which I refer the Read^r, yea it is directly against these Scriptures before
quoted, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, chapter 10, 11, 12, 13, 16. Exodus 3.24. Heb, 3.18.
chapter 4.1, 2. ch 11. 8, 9, 10. yea so to affirm is to put an affront upon God
himself, and to make him ashamed of that title of being Abraham's God, Heb.
11.16. See also the twelve Scripture-considerations before mentioned.

P. In page 45, 46. he brings several Scriptures to prove that Circumcision
bound to the keeping of the Law. But not one of all those places by him quoted,
speaks that they were bound to keep it as a covenant of works, but as the Law
of Christ, and so Isreal's Gospel, in which Justification was conveyed; and
therefore when we read of the Primitive revoltings from Gospel Ordinances, to
Circumcision and the works of the law, as the Church at Rome, and Galatia did,
it was upon the like mistake of this Author, who thought the law had been given
them as a Covenant of works, which was not so intended, and by this means they
came to rest in the law, and are condemned for it by the Apostle, Romans 2.13,
17. Gal. 5.1, 2.

2. Consider, that Baptism now, binds as much to keep the law Moral and
Gospel Ordinances as Circumcision then, did bind Israel to keep the same moral
law, with the legal Ordinances; and he might with as much evidence of truth
argue, That because Baptism binds to keep the law, therefore the Churches of
Christ now are under a covenant of works.

P. page 47 he winds up thus: Abraham, as if God should say, I will be thy God,
and thy seeds God, to protect, defend, deliver and bless thee; with the
blessings of Canaan, in the fruit of the womb in thy basket and store, and with
all outward blessings, upon condition that thou will be circumcised, and keep
the law as a covenant of works.

A. A poor Argument, was it not? to prevail with Abraham when he might have
replied, Lord there are many that do possess a far greater portion in the
world, yea thou have said that my son Ishmael shall have twelve Princes rise
from him, and that he shall be a great man in the earth, yet none of them are
bound up to such strict obligations. And when thou gave a covenant of works
to Adam, he should have had heaven, and eternal happiness and glory. And shall
I be content with an earthly portion upon such hard terms? And upon this
account it is, the Author to the Hebrews does so argue. That God would have
been ashamed to be called Abraham's God, which yet Mr Patient is not ashamed to
tell the world in print that he was Abraham's God by a covenant of Works: --
Horrid stuff: --

The like answer is to be given to that place, Jer. 11.2, 3, 4, 5. cursed be
the man that obeys not the words of this covenant which I commnnded your
Fathers, When I brought them from Egypt, saying, Obey my voice, so shall ye be
my people, and I will be your God, that I may confirm the oath which I swear to
your Fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey; the Land was
given by grace, and the covenant he speaks of was a covenant of grace, not of
works; but as faith leads to works, so the covenant leads man to h^s duty, in
keeping the commands of God; it was so then, and so it is now, and in this
sense, that place is true, Psalm. 6. he rewards every man according to his
works, not for his works. And we are at this day Gods people, and be our God
upon the same terms of works, as then, See 2 Cor. 6.17, 18, come out from
amongst them, and be ye separate, and touch not the unclean thing, and then I
will be your Father, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, so that God becomes
ours upon conditions still, and yet by no covenant of works.

P. Page 48. The last thing with which he concludes this first Argument (if
such it be) is this. Abraham had a covenant of Grace made with him, twenty four
years before that covenant of works, and his happiness with all his spiritual
seed was in that absolute covenant.

A. Had M. Patients memory been good, he would not so have contradicted
himself, For first, this covenant of works he has made to begin from Adam, and
so descended to Abraham. For he has long before proved that the Law which was
given from Sinai was in force before the days of Noah, how then is that like to
hold with this, that the covenant of works was not given to Abraham? it is twenty
four years after that of Grace.

2 If he make Circumcision the covenant of works, that he means: then it
implies that Abraham had two covenants of works; one by descent, and the other
made afterward.

3 Where he tells us, the happiness of his spiritual seed lies in the absolute
covenant; I answer, what spiritual seed had Abraham if it was not Isaac? And
yet Isaac was the line in which the covenant of Circumcision was to run, and
not Ishmael, Gen 17.21. So that look what happiness the promise gave him of
Gods being his God, was conveyed in that covenant: and either Mr Patient must
say, it was no happiness to him, to have God to be his God; or else if it was a
happiness: then he must acknowledge it in that covenant. Thus we see how sadly
he is be error'd: certainly had this Doctrine been brought in the Apostles
days, he would have looked upon it as another Gospel, and it is a sad curse that
he gives to the preachers thereof.

P. A second Argument, though very improperly so called, to prove circumcision
a covenant of works, is, because it was a national covenant in the flesh.

A. The prudent Reader may easily observe what a poor shift this is to maintain
Circumcision a covenant of works; as if a covenant of Grace could not be
national: and though what has been said to prove Circumcision a covenant of
pure Grace, be sufficient; yet I shall briefly add: If the promise made with
Abraham, was a Gospel promise, in wh ch were contained national blessings, in
thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed; If the Jews shall be re
ingraffed as they were cut off; If by the stone cut out of the mountains, that
shall fill the world be to be understood the Church and kingdom of Christ; If
the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the seas;
If there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, wherein shall dwell
righteousness; If the kingdom of God was taken from the Jews and given to
another Nation:

If the Church now coming out of the wilderness, holds parallel with the Church
in the wilderness, under the Law; If the kingdoms of this world shall become
the kingdoms of the Lord Christ, if that Commission, Mat. 28. in order
hereunto, be to teach all Nations, etc. If that Nation and kingdom that will
not serve Christ shall be cut off, Isa 60.12. Then are the blessings of a
covenant of Grace national blessings; and what God intended in Abraham's
covenant was national: I need say no more.

P. In page 49, 50, 51, 52. he runs into a large field of discourse, and
over-runs the old Scriptures again (as it is usual with him) to prove, that
though the Jews had the covenant of Circumcision given them by entail, yet as
to matter of Justification they were as far off, as Pagans, and heathens: and
what Justification Abraham had, was while he was uncircumcised, and yet withal
granting, That the Jews had the advantage of other Nations, by having those
Eminent tenders of the Gospel held out amongst them. And notwithstanding that
covenant in the flesh: yet they were all sinners, and therefore there is but
one way of Justification, which is by faith in his blood; therefore
Circumcision must needs be a covenant of works, for if it had been a covenant
of Grace, it would have administered Justification with it; This is the full
sense as near as I can collect, out of such straggling discourses.

Though the Scriptures he brings in these pages to prove what he asserts were
before omitted, yet I shall here take them in, as most fit in this place,
because the running over things so often, would otherwise make the Answer so
bulkish, and therefore,

A. Though he says, Justification by faith was not given by Circumcision, i.
e. by the act done, as neither is it now given by Baptism, yet Justification
was given in that Covenant of Grace which Circumcision sealed, and so the Elect
did obtain it, Romans 4.11. He received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of Faith, that he might be the Father of all that believe, though
they be not Circumcised. So that Circumcision was the covenants seal, and not
the seal of his faith, out of which the Gentile Nations were excluded, till
that Jewish Church was cast off, so that the Jews were nearer then Pagans and
Heathens, notwithstanding any thing he affirms, because the one was under the
call of the Gospel and the tenders of Grace, when the other was a far off,
Aliens and strangers, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13. But when the Gospel came amongst them
also, then they were made nigh by the blood of Christ. The Heathens in New-
England, will any sober understanding Christian say, they are as near to a
state of Justification as those that are born and bred up, and dwell under the
sound of the Gospel? yea Mr. P. himself does contradict what he in this
affirms, in acknowledging that the Jews were privileged before other Nations,
in having such precious tenders of the Gospel, p. 49. so that we see he does
not stick fast to his own judgment in any thing. But wherein these precious
privileges should lie, or how the G^spel should be tendered, if they were not
visible under the covenant of Grace, and so nearer then Heathens, I cannot see,
nor, I am sure, he himself: for had not Justification run in the Jewish
Ordinances, more freely then it did to the Gentiles, that had them not, they
had instead of being privileged, been more in bondage and slavery then any
Nation in the world.

2. There is not any one place, or Text or syllable in the 2, 3. or 4 to Romans
or in 12, 15, 17, 18, 22. of Genesis or 3, 4, 5. Gal. that says, Justification by
faith was not given in the covenant of Circumcision, or that Justification by
faith is opposed to Circumcision, or that because Abraham was Justified, before
circumcised; therefore Circumcision is a covenant of Works. But this the Texts
say, that justification is to be had in the covenant of Circumcision, which
were it a covenant of works, would not there be found, Romans 3.1, 2, 3, 30. But

3. And because he tells us in page 55. That there is no Text in all the
Scripture more clear to prove the covenant of Circumcision to be a covenant of
works then this 4. Romans setting Faith and Circumcision in opposition, showing
that Abraham's spiritual seed, had their justification in another covenant, and
not in circumcision; I have therefore taken it into this place, because one
answer will serve both.

To clear this place therefore from this cloud of error cast upon it, I shall
stay some time, to search into it. The words are these; What shall we say then,
that Abraham our Father as appertaining to the flesh has found? For if Abraham
was justified by works, He has whereof to glory, but not before God; but
Abraham believed God, etc. And how was it then reckoned? when he was in
Circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in Circumcision, etc.

A. By comparing this with the preceding chapter, as also with chapter 5, 6, 7, 8.
we find the Roman Church that had embraced the Ordinances of the Gospel, were
then falling back into the works of the Law, and those legal Ordinances, in
them to gain justification. And therefore they would be listening after those
false Teachers that preached up Circumcision after the manner of Moses, which
was the prevailing error in that Church, and is at this day, it being so fallen
that they maintain good works, do justify. Now the Apostle to bring them off
from this error, bids them look upon Abraham, whom they acknowledged to be the
father of the faithful; and see how the case stood with him, how he was
justified; secretly implying that if he that was the Father of all believers
was not justified by works, then it would be unreasonable in his children to
think that they were; and therefore it was their duty to follow him: by which
we see Abraham is held forth as a public person in the Gospel, to which
Gospel-Churches are to have recourse, to rectify errors in doctrines of Faith;
and if upon search they found that Abraham was justified in urcircumcision,
then they should not think that Circumcision was of absolute necessity to
justification; and therefore tells them it was their mistake, the Law was never
intended by God to justify any, but chapter 3.9. both Jew and Gentile are all
under sin, and ver. 20. therefore by the deeds of the Law no flesh can be
justified, for all have sinned, and are therefore justified freely by his Grace
without the deeds of the Law, ver. 28. upon which the Romans make this
Objection, Romans 4.1. What benefit or advantage then has Abraham found, to whom
the covenant was made? The meaning is because Abraham had not his justification
by circumcision; therefore they could not see any Gospel-benefit that came by
that Ordinance at all; so much is employed in the words: the like also chapter 3.
what profit then is there of Circumcision? and it is the same objection in
effect that M. P. makes, only a little changed, For thus his runs: If Abraham
was not justified in the covenant of Circumcision, then is Circumcision a
covenant of works: both which the Apostle answers, that though Abraham and his
seed were not justified by the Law, as a law or covenant of works; yet there
was a considerable advantage the Jews had by circumcision, and chiefly, because
unto them were c^mmitted the oracles of God, and chapter 9.4. who are Israelites,
i. e a peculiar Nation enclosed by God himself from all the Nations of the
world, to them appertains the adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises, whose are the
Fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh Christ came; As if he had said, all
this heap and bundle of benefits came in to the Jews and that Nation, which no
Nation under heaven had besides, and yet for all this there were many that did
not believe, chapter 3.3. For what though some did not believe? shall their
unbelief make the Faith of God without effect? God forbid; as if he had said,
The end for which God did so much privilege them above others was, that all
his might believe; but yet some did not; implying that some did, i. e. many of
them were justified. T^erefore chapter 4. 9. he draws t^wards a result, comes this
blessedness then upon the Circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also?
how was it then reckoned? i. e. If Abraham was justified in uncircumcision,
then the righteousness of Faith comes not upon the Circumcision only: and ver.
12. To them who are not of the Circumcision only: and ver. 16. Not to that
seed only which is of the Law And then the Apostle concludes, ver. 23. that it
was not written for Abraham's sake alone that righteousness was imputed to him,
but for us also, i. e. Romans and all other Gentiles, if they believe, to whom
Abraham is as well a Father, as to the Jews.

So that this triumphant place gives not the least continuance to his opinion;
either that Circumcision was a covenant of works, or that it stands in direct
opposition to says, or that God gave a covenant of works to Abraham, to seal a
covenant of Grace, as he consequentially affirms, p. 53. Therefore such an
interpretation as he has given of this place is most unsound.

The like answer is to be given to that place, Ph^l 3.2, 3, 4. which he brings
in page 55. as an Appendix to this second Argument; the Philippians were also
revolting to seek after Justification by the works of the Law, the teachers of
which Doctrine the Apostle calls dogs, and evil-workers. And if any had cause
to boast of the law of Works, he had more; yet to him it was but dung and dogs
meat, all his privileges of being a Jew, a Pharisee, Circumcised; one that
concerning the Law was blameless. All this says Paul, I can boast of, but what
is this as to matter of justification, which is by faith alone in Christ? The
like plain answer also is and may he given to that other place, Gal. 3.3. which
Church also were back sliding into the same error, and therefore he calls them
fools, and tells them they were bewitched chapter 5.1. And if they would be seeking
Justification by works, they should find they were mistaken. For as many as
sought to be justified by the works of the Law, were under the curse. And that
no man by the works of the Law was ever justified, is evident, because the just
shall live by Faith, ver. 10, 11. And therefore he sends them also to Abraham's
covenant, For to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. And ver. 18. he
shows them the ill-consequence that would follow, if they thought to be
justified by works, For then the inheritance must be by works, that is the
inheritance of Abraham's promises, both for the Land of Canaan, and all other
spiritual blessings. If it were by the Law then it is no more of promises, But
God gave them to Abraham by promise, And not by a covenant of works, remember
that Mr P. upon this again comes with the old Objection, Wherefore then serves
the Law, If a man may not be justified and saved by the works of the Law? to
what end and purpose then was it given? The answer is, it was added because of
transgression, that is, to make sin look like sin; and thereby to engage Gods
people then, to walk close in the duties thereof, and in ver. 21. The Apostle
directly confutes Mr. Patients Doctrine. Is the Law then against the Promises,
or in opposition to the Promises? God forbid. By all which it appears that the
Law was no covenant of Works, nor is Circumcision or any part of the Law
opposed to Faith, as he would make us beheve; but this was the great mistake of
many in Primitive Churches by false teachers means. And so of all Israel, as it
is also of Mr P. that the Law was given to the Church of the Jews as a covenant
of works, which God never intended to any such end or purpose.

CHAP. IX. The next thing we come to is the several Arguments he brings in p.
53. to prove Circumcision only a seal to Abraham, answered.
I. FIrst, because the righteousness of Faith which it sealed, Abraham had it,
before the seal was given, but his posterity could not be said to believe at
eight days old: Therefore it was a seal to him, and not to them.

A. The seal was not annexed to Abraham's Faith, as Abraham's, but to Gods
covenant made with Abraham; therefore it is called the seal of the
righteousness of Faith. So that what it sealed to Abraham was, as he was an
heir of the same Promises with Isaac and Jacob, Heb. 11.9. therefore what it
sealed to him as an heir, it sealed to Isaac and Jacob, and so to all believers
as coheirs of the same inheritance, Heb. 6.17.

2. If it was a seal of Abraham's Faith only, then it must be either as it was
a weak faith, or strong faith.

1 It could not be the first, because Abraham's faith is by the Apostle said not
to be weak, Romans 4.19, 20.

2. If it had been given as a badge of honor to Abraham's Faith (as I have seen
it affirmed in a piece or C. B.) as a strong faith: then it should have been
given to Adam and Noah, who had as strong faiths as Abraham; and less
Gospel Light then Abraham had to work it.

3. There was no necessity to have Abraham's justification sealed, more then
Adams, Seths, Noah's, or any of his predecessors, especially if it be considered
what M. P. himself grants, that he was justified twenty four years before this
seal was given, therefore

4. Had it not been a seal to Isaac, as well as to Abraham, and so not only a
seal of Abraham's faith, it might have been given upon the birth of Ishmael, and
Abraham need not have staid for a son of promise, for it would have sealed as
much then to Abraham, as it did after, if it was not the covenant-seal.

5. Had it not been a seal to Isaac, and so a part of the covenant, then Isaacs
not being circumcised had been no breach of the covenant; directly against that
place, Genesis 17.10. For a seal the Apostle calls it, and a sign God calls it. So
that had it only been a seal of Abraham's Faith, the covenant had not come
sealed to Isaac; because the seal reached only the Faith of Abraham, and when
he dyed, the seal was broken off. Therefore

6. It is a clear truth, that as the blessings of the covenant were made to
Abraham by Promise, and to his seed, so Gods main drift being to make those
covenant-blessings sure to all the heirs of Promise, Heb. 6.17: he therefore
deals as a man that would be believed. First he promise^, secondly, he swears
to confirm that Promise, Thirdly, he seals what he has promised. So the seal
becomes the covenant-seal, as the oath is the Covenants oath: and what God
promised to Abraham, he promised to his seed; and what he confirmed by oath to
Abraham he confirmed to his seed; and what God therefore sealed to Abraham, he
sealed also to his seed. All which was to show the immutability of his Counsel
to the heirs of Promise, not only to such as were heirs under the Law, but to
the worlds end, as the Apostle tells us before, in the place quoted.

II. His next reason or Argument why it sealed only to Abraham is, because it
is said, he received it, that he might be the Father of all that believe. Which
could not be said of Isaac, because he was but a child.

A. Though Abraham was made the Father of the faithful, by having that seal
given him; yet he could not have been such a father without such a son, because
they are relatives, not only in the natural relation, but in the promise, for
though Ishmael was born thirteen years before Isaac was promised; yet had God
given him circumcision then, Abraham had not been the Father of the faithful,
because Ishmael was not a faithful child. So that, that which was required to
make Abraham a father of a faithful son, was required in Isaac to make him such
a son of a faithful Father: Therefore that seal that was given to Abraham as a
father, was given to Isaac as a son.

III. His third Argument to prove it a seal only to Abraham is Here is the
spirit of God affirming the sealing use of Circumcision to Abraham only, upon
a reason special to him; therefore where the Scripture has not a mouth to
speak, we must not have an ear to hear.

A. The spirit of God speaks no such thing, but the spirit of M. P. for where
is it said, it was a seal to him only? no such Text is to be sound in all the
Scriptures, for as is before said, what it sealed to him as a father, it sealed
to Isaac as a son of that Father, for the covenant related to posterity. I may
therefore say of him as the Prophet said of the false Prophets, who said the
Lord says it, as here M P. does, when indeed the Lord has not spoken:
therefore the Scripture has a mouth to speak, if he had an understanding heart
to know when and what it speaks: let such therefore who have ears to hear, hear
what the spirit speaks to the Churches.

IV. P. A fourth ground or reason he gives that Circumcision sealed only to
Abraham, is drawn from Romans 4.13. The promise that he should be the heir of the
world was not to him and his seed through the Law, i. e. says M. P. through
the covenant of Circumcision, But through the righteousness of Faith. For if
they that be of the Law be heirs, then Faith is made void.

A. 1. He here again supposes that which is denied, and the contrary proved, i.
e. That Circumcision was not a covenant of works.

2. When it is said the promise of his being the heir of the world was not made
to Abraham through the Law, The Apostle means, that it was not to be confined
and shut up to the generations of the Law only, and so it was not to his seed
through the Law only, but through the righteousness of Faith; that is, his
Patrimony came upon such high terms as would reach to a thousand generations,
Psalm. ^05. even to the Gentiles under the Gospel to the worlds end: and that
this is his meaning is clear, by the following words, For if they which are of
the Law be heirs (i. e. They and they only, but heirs they were, Faith is made
void. That is, the faith which Abraham had, by which he did believe the
multiplying of his seed in all Nations upon the grounds of the Promise, that
faith is quite frustrated, because it went no further then the generations of
the Law; And therefore it is of faith that it might be by Grace, to the end the
promise might be sure to all the seed, and then he fully explains what he said
before, Not sure to that seed only, which were of the Law, where the word
only does suppose it was sure to the legal seed, therefore it cannot be meant
of a covenant of works, for so the promise was never sure to any from the
Creation to this day, or ever shall be.

3. If the place were to be understood in his sense, namely of a covenant of
works, Then it confutes in direct terms what he has so much pleaded for in his
book. As that Canaan should be given by a covenant of works. For the promise
that he should be the heir of the world, (in which that land was included) was
not to him and his seed through the Law, i e. says Mr P not by the covenant of
Circumcision, but through the righteousness of faith. And if the Apostle says,
not by that covenant, then why does Mr P. so often affirm elsewhere it was?

Thus we see, there is nothing in all he has said, that proves Ci^cumcision
either a covenant of works or seal to Abraham only, but enough to prove it a
seal to all the heirs of promise, even whilst they are infants: All ye
therefore that belong to the covenant of Grace, fear not to give your
infant seed that Ordinance which now is the seal of the covenant.

P. The last Scripture he here brings to prove Circumcision a covenant of works
is Gal. 4. latter end, where the Apostle compa es the two covenants to Sarah
and Hagar, the covenant of Circumcision is held forth to be the bondwoman, chapter
5.1.2, 3. ch 6.13. which place does prove, the covenant made in the fleshly
line of Abraham is a covenant of Works. And that which the Gospel is set in
opposition to, For the covenant of Grace is, I will put my Law in their hearts
but the covenant of Circumcision is not in the heart, but in the flesh.

A. The diligent Reader may easily observe the palpable contradictions that are
here to be found. Hagar types out the covenant of works. Sarah types out the
covenant of grace, and the fl^shly covenant of Circumcision (as he calls it)
which is typed out by Hagar, is made in the fleshly line of Abraham which must
be Ishmael. And then he contradicts what he has been all this while
maintaining, i e. that the fleshly line is Isaac and Jacob, in which the
covenant of Circumcision was to run: and so also he opposes the Apostle Gal. 4
23 But he that was born of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh: but he of
the freewoman was by Promise; so that what Paul calls the children by promise,
he calls the children of the flesh. Thus men leaving truth making wise, God
leaves them to publish their own folly.

That place Gal. 1.2, 3. is already answered, they were such that were falling
back from Grace to be justified by works through their gross mistake, thinking
as Mr P. does, that the Law had been given for a covenant of works.

Lastly, Though God has promised to write the new covenant in the heart, yet
the seals of that covenant are written in the flesh: so it was then. For God
writ the new covenant in the heart, under the Law, and yet circumcision was no
covenant of works. But a figure of what God did within, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 2.28,
29. by which places we may see Circumcision had the same promises attending it
then to believers and their seed, as baptism has now. And it may with as much
evidence of truth, be said, that baptism is a covenant of Works, because it is
administered upon the flesh; as Circumcision was then. Therefore all his
Arguments and Scriptures he has brought hitherto to prove Circumcision a
covenant of works, have been ill drawn, and worse applied.

CHAP. X. Wherein his 3, 4, 5, and 6, Arguments are answered to prove
Circumcision a covenant of Works.
III. P: page 58. WE are now come to his third Argument, and that is, because
there is no promise of eternal life in it, but only a temporal blessing in the
Land of Canaan, as protection and provision, and the like, to prove this he
quotes Heb. 8.6: Jer. 11.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13, and 30, 13.

A. 1. That Circumcision, had no promise of eternal life attending it is false,
for eternal life was promised in Gods telling Abraham, he would be his God; it
is such a blank, that a believer may write what happiness he will in it: God
could not say more, nor a believer desire more.

2. It had the promise of the heart-Circumcision in order to prepare a soul for
heaven, as the places above cited prove. Therefore it had the promise also of
eternal life.

3. If it had not had the promise of eternal happiness, but only an earthly
Canaan, and protection therein, then in vain does S. Paul say, God was not
ashamed to be called Abraham's God, Heb. 11.16. And in vain also did he with
Isaac and Jacob walk as Pilgrims in that land, expecting a better Country, i.
e. a heavenly, Heb. 11.8, 14, 16.

4. As to those Texts he mentions, there is not one of them proves that God
only promised Abraham's seed prosperity in Canaan, though that also was
included, upon their obedience to Gods covenant, which was of Grace, not works,
as has been before largely proved We see therefore how well he has
distinguished the Covenants.

P. IV. His next Argument to prove Circumcision a covenant of works is, because
a man by laying out a little money might have bought a heathen into this
covenant, and have interessed him into all the privileges thereof.

A. The covenant had two parts, one external, relating to man's duty in forms of
worship; The other spiritual, relating to communion with God in those forms, as
has been often mentioned; into the first of these, all the persons born in
Abraham's house, or ^ought with money were to be admitted, and the reason is,
because all Abraham's family so qualifyed were the visible Church, and such a
taking into his family was a taking into the Church: which also was a type of
the purchase that Christ should pay by his blood. For the Gentiles, we e to be
brought into Church Communion, of which that was the first fruits, both to them
and their seed; for doing whereof, Gods command did bear him out. And this was
to be a standing rule to Israel when they came to be a kingdom, because the
foundation of the kingdom was laid in Abraham's family, Therefore,

2. When he says, that all so bought, were purchac'd into all the privileges
of the covenant, it is a gross untruth: for justification, and salvation were
the choice privileges of that covenant which they could not be bought into,
and in that sense Peter's answer to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee, had
been properly applied though yet in the other consideration, what he did was an
Ordinance of God.

V. P. His next Argument is, because men out of this covenant might be saved,
and such as were in it might be damned.

A. Here is still the same distinction to be noted as before, for those that
went to hell were never interessed in the spiritual part of the covenant, but
only into the external forms of worship; the l^ke instance we have in the
Apostles days, Judas, Simon Magus, with the rest of those hypocrites, and
Apostates, were all interessed in the external part of the covenant, and yet
went to hell: this likewise was the condition of the foolish virgins, who
because they had lamps lighted, thought themselves well enough, and there
rested: in this sense also are the words of Christ to be understood. [The
children of the kingdom shall be cast out.] I would a little return this
Argument to M: P. How many dipped Apostates have fallen quite away from all grace
and goodness of late years, both from them and us? Surely it cannot be denied,
but they were visibly once in the covenant; therefore all those Scriptures and
examples by him brought in, page 62, 63, 64. are by this distinction answered,
and the false varnish by him put upon them is hereby washed off, that so they
may be seen in their glory and splendour.

2. It also appears that it was the same covenant of Grace that justified Lot,
Job, and all Jobs friends that were godly, though dwelling in another Country,
that justified Abraham and his seed: for though they had not the seal of the
covenant, because Abraham was the person pitched upon, to whom it should be
first administered; yet they were worshippers of God in a solemn way of
sacrificing: the like we may charitably think now, that many in the world who
have not the same means of Gospel Ordinances, may yet have sincere hearts to
God, and be as a scattered seed of some gracious predecessors; and yet not be
within the visible pale of the covenant.

This also duly considered, is a full answer to the rest of those instances,
of David's sons, and Abraham's sons, with the whole lump of Israel, of all which
many were damned, because only in the visible part of the covenant. We may
therefore see hitherto what feeble Arguments Mr. Patient brings to prove
Circumcision a covenant of works.

VI. P. His sixth Argument for the ends abovesaid is, because this covenant of
Circumcision may be broken, Genesis 17.14.

A. Still the former distinction kept makes the answer easy and plain; for
such who broke the covenant, broke but the external part thereof; the other
part could not be broken, and in this sense also the covenant in Gospel days is
broken, and as God unchurcht Israel for breach of covenant, so he does still,
when a Church or people do apostatize from his Ordinances: The Apostle tells us
so, Heb. 3.6 Whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of
the hope firm to the end, his meaning is, we are his house if we keep to the
Ordinances of worship: implying, That if a people once cast off the Ordinances,
they have broken the covenant, and stand related to Christ no longer as his
house. I am sure that the extent of this Explication will reach Mr Patient, who
has broken the covenant of God, by casting out of his seed. And upon this very
hinge it was, That all those examples of Gods judgments upon Israel are given,
when they revolted from God, and brake this covenant, then God plagues them and
cuts them off; and when they renewed their covenant, fasted, humbled their
souls and repented, God showed Mercy; all which agrees to that remarkable
place, which proves the covenant of Grace conditional, Genesis 18.19. For I know
Abraham will command his children and his household after him, and they shall
keep the Way of the Lord, to do Justice and judgment. That the Lord may bring
upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him; clearly implying, that if
Abraham's seed did not walk close in their duties, they should fall short of
their expectations, as we afterward find Israel did.

Therefore whereas M. P. says it is impossible the covenant of Grace should be
broken, it is false. For the external part may be broken, which is part of the
covenant: but the inward part of it can never be broken.

P. Page 67. He comes to answer this distinction of the covenant as an
Objection, but so poorly, that it seems he would gladly favor his own opinion;
persons says he, may profess outwardly, to be in Christ, and so in the
covenant of Grace by profession: but because it was but a profession only, and
not in truth; therefore they profess to be in that wherein they never were.

A. We are now speaking of persons being in the covenant as the Scripture holds
them forth, to be within it; And as men may in the judgment of Charity believe
persons to be in it, in order to Communion of Saints in the world. If therefore
the Scriptures tell us there is a twofold being in it, then persons are in the
covenant that are within the visible part of, as has been sufficiently proved,
and as his own practice does acknowledge: so that in his answer to the
Objection, he rather works like a ferry^man, then a preacher; he seems to look
toward an answer, but rows the other way: therefore whereas he says, we have
an infallible rule to judge Abraham and his seed to be within the covenant of
Circumcision, because God says it, and the Objection before is groundless.

A. It has bean already cleared, that Circumcision was part of the covenant of
Grace; and therefore by this he confesses that persons are visible within it,
because the infallible rule of the word of God says it; and so was the seed he
speaks of infallible (as he calls it) within the Covenant: The like now, all
that by profession, are admitted into Gospel-Churches. We have the same rule to
judge by. That they are as really within the covenant as the seed of Abraham
was then; By which we may see the Objection stands in force, notwithstanding
those puffs of wind, he has given at it.

2. Neither does his bringing in that great Catalogue of Isreal's sins at all
help him; For though it is not denied but the most part of them were wicked and
profane, yet as a separated people God had chosen out, from the rest of the
world, to be a Church, to whom he committed his Oracles, in that sense they
were a people in covenant, and so stood till they were divorc't, and cast off
from being a people. For which see Romans 9. at large. And the reason why they
were so wicked and profane, may be gathered from that place before mentioned,
Genesis 18.19. because they kept not up family duties, grew carnal and loose in
their Judgments; and therefore looseness in practice and conversation
followed; a needful Item to all Gods people in these days.

The like answer is to be given to Joh. 8 40, 44. by all which then it appears,
that not one Argument he has hitherto brought, proves Circumcision to be a
covenant of works: we are now arrived at his last Argument, and that drawn from
the many inconveniences that will follow, if it be maintained a covenant of
Grace: therefore so to understand Scriptures, as to cross any fundamentals,
cannot be agreeable to the mind of God.

CHAP. XI. Contains a vindication of the First, Second, and Third Fundamental.
P. page 71. IF the covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham and his seed,
and those also that were born in his house, or bought with money amongst the
families of Israel, were a covenant of Grace, then it interessed all persons by
nature or practice, into the choice privileges of Adoption, sonship,
justification, the inward work of sanctification; all which i^ asserted by
those who hold Infant Baptism. And then this fundamental in Religion is denied,
That all mankind by nature are children of wrath, and that all men are not
charged under sin, both Jews and Gentiles, and that none is righteous, no not
one. But says Mr P. be it known to you, it was a truth through Israel in their
Generations, and then he brings in many Scriptures to prove that men by nature
are children of wrath, etc.

A. 1. And be it known to you again, That this fundamental truth is such that
we all vail to, and therefore, it is not so much as touched, much less rooted up
by our Doctrine or practice, in maintaining Circumcision a Covenant of Grace,
which I now come to make appear, and still by the former distinction; Therefore
I shall desire the Reader to give me his hand, that we may not break company
till the storm is over.

1 There is a twofold Adoption, and therefore 2 A twofold sonship, 3 A twofold
Sanctification, 4 A twofold Justification.
These and all these, outward, and inward: so that, by virtue of the extent of
the covenant made with Abraham, persons are born into those outward
privileges, though not into the spiritual part thereof: and thus were Israel
adopted, Romans 9.4. For it is one of the first privileges that St. Paul reckons
Israel had, to whom pertained the Adoption and the glory, etc.

By which we see that the Adoption appertained to all Israel, that is, God made
choice of them, to make them his peculiar sons and people, by taking them into
the visible pale of the covenant of grace, when all the Nations of the earth
besides were past by. So that no people, or Nation in the world could say God
was their father, but the Jews; which is the benefit of Adoption in either
respect. But inward Adoption runs more spiritually, therefore called the spirit
of Adoption, Romans 8.

Thus also, all Israel were the sons of God, for which the Scripture is so
clear. That such who deny it do but discover much ignorance. See therefore
these Texts, Hos. 4.1. chapter 11.1. Joh. 8.41. Ezekiel. 20.21. And thus they are
called the firstborn, Exodus 4.22, 23. And they had all the service of sons to
do to God in the wilderness. The like also of sanctification, when persons are
by Gods appointment separated and set a part to a holy use, of which, diverse
instances might be given, before and since Christ; so also Justification,
outward before men, as well as inward, or how else should there be any
communion of Saints on earth? Thus Hagars son, though by nature born under a
covenant of works, was a Church member. And he could call Abraham father, as
Isaac could, though not under such a spiritual consideration, for still the
in-works of Adoption, Sonship Justification, and Sanctification, have run by
prom^se, in a close hidden and spiritual way, wo^king upon and changing the
heart: And though Isaac, Jacob, and the rest of the line, were all born in sin,
as well as Ishmael, and Esau, yet the Promise takes time to work, and brings in
the Elect of God, some later, some sooner; yea, let us bring down this again to
a parallel, and compare it to the practice of M. P. Sure I am, he cannot say,
that all, he, and others with him plunged upon their profession of faith, are
the real Adopted sons of God, or real^y holy, or really justified or
sanctified, that is spiritually; But this they may say, they are visibly such,
and some may be such also spiritually; but who they be, is unknown to man, and
yet all were alike by nature born in sin, and children of wrath.

2. And thus all those Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.2. by nature children of wrath,
Romans 3.9. none righteous, no not one, are answered. This was also the equal
condition of Paul, David, and the rest born and conceived in sin; and yet, as
Abraham's seed, they were interessed in the covenant then, as believers and
their seed are now. We may then see how his heap of chaff cast upon the truth,
begins already to be blown away:

II. P. The second fundamental which he proclaims to the world, that our
practice overturns is, stability in a covenant of eternal life; for if all
Israel were born in the covenant of Grace then all should be saved, but there
were but a remnant of Israel saved, all the rest damned. Isa. 10.22, 23. Romans
9.22. And if so born, they must needs fall away from Grace.

A. As stability in Grace is a glorious truth, so neither does this touch it.
For it only makes the outward part of the covenant instable. That is a falling
away from their visible being in the covenant, for as has been said, a man may
be in the covenant, yet not in the Grace of the covenant. Thus Israel and all
those Gospel hypocrites mentioned, fell away, but the election still remained:
so the branches that were in Christ, Joh. 15. that bare not fruit, were cut off
and withered: and thus all those Texts that speak of a falling away are to be
understood. The like now; though many Apostates fall from the ways of God, yet
the covenant remains stable, and the same for ever.

III. P. The third foundation he pretends to be shaken, is the necessity of
conversion, and regeneration which is a Doctrine eminently confirmed by Christ
in the Gospel, for which he brings several Texts of Scripture: but to hold a
covenant of life to run upon the carnal seed of believers opposes this: for
then when Christ said, Except a man be born again, ^e cannot enter into the
kingdom of God, Israel might answer, that is not true, we have an interest in
the covenant of Grace already, and except ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye
in your sins. they might say again, that is not true, for we know another way ^o
heaven then by believing, and 1 John 5. He that has not the Son has not life.
This error replies, there be thousands interessed in life, without having
Christ, by carnal generation. Thus far he, with much more of the like stuff,
with which he fills three pages together.

A. Neither does it at all entrench upon this Doctrine, as falsely suggested:
therefore to clear this we are to consider, first the ground of this mistake of
his from whence it rises, as any man may easily see; namely, that the Doctrine
of Conversion, Repentance, and Regeneration, is to be preached only to such as
are without the Church, and Kingdom of Christ: for his argument runs as taking
it for granted, that such as are the subjects of the kingdom, are such in
reality, when as by the former distinctions, it is most apparent, that some are
such visibly only, and some really.

2. Therefore consider, the Doctrines mentioned are part of that Gospel, which
is the kingdoms Gospel, as Christ calls it, and has been ever preached to the
subjects of the kingdom, so it was to Israel of old; and though believers and
their seed were taken into the covenant (already proved to be of grace) yet
this Doctrine of the new birth was preached to them; which is abundantly clear
from Christ's words to Nicodemus, Joh. 3. a place by himself quoted: Art thou a
Doctor in Israel, and know not what the doctrine of the new birth means?
implying, That he showed himself very ignorant, when he knew not that which was
preached amongst Israel: adding this also, That the Ordinance of Circumcision so
frequently used, was but a Type of the Circumcision upon the heart, yea the
whole tenor of the Old Testament runs in such terms that clearly show their
blessedness lies in repenting and turning to God in pardon of sin, in setting
their delight in the Laws of the Lord, trusting in God, and setting their hope
in God, the book of Psalms is full of it. So also in those primitive Churches
planted by the Apostles themselves, who in admission of members, had a better
insight to the truth of grace upon the heart, then any since, and yet this
Doctrine they preached to the Church, 2 Cor. 5.17. Romans 2.29. ch 6.11.8.10. Gal.
5.19. Ephesians. 4.23. therefore such as think the Doctrines of Repentance,
New Birth, etc. should be preached to the world only, may hence see their
mistakes, amongst which number Mr P. is one, I shall still draw down the
parallel to his practice, which I judge to be a good way to convin^e our
dissenting friends of their error: can he think, that all that runs in the same
ra e with him, I mean into the water, that they have no need of preaching
Repentance or the new birth amongst them? surely if that be his judgment, he
discovers more ignorance and weakness then ever Nicodemus did. Therefore

3. Let us glean up his Scriptures, The reproof that John gave the Pharisees,
was not for pleading a title to Abraham's covenant as his seed, for it is
evident he bapt^zed upon that account: for had not the Pharisees claimed the
Ordinances as Abraham's seed, because the rest did so, the reproof given them
had been little better then nonsense, but he checks them for their wickedness,
in not walking as became Abraham's children. So also Joh. 8.32. The like also
Luke 16. a place M. P. much delights to name, thinking it makes for his opinion
because Dives in hell owned Abraham as a Father, and Abraham owned him as a
son, but yet for all that says Mr. Patient, he was damned.

A. There is none denies, but Abraham had more children damned then saved, yet
nevertheless such as were saved, were Abraham's children and saved by Abraham's
covenant. And it is impossible that M. P. himself should ever be saved out of
that covenant, though at present he so much slights it: The reproof therefore
that was given to Dives, was not because he called Abraham Father, as one of
his sons, but because he lived as an Epicure and a glutton, as the whole
parable makes evident. And methinks Abraham's Charity should be a sufficient
reproof to Mr. P. for his want thereof: whereas therefore he tells us we have
found out a newer way to heaven, then by the Doctrine of regeneration, it is
but a taunt, wherein he discovers by what spirit he writes and speaks; Let
therefore such ingenious spirits to whom he makes his appeal, judge righteous
judgment.

CHAP. XII. Wherein the fourth and fifth Fundamentals are maintained.
IV. P. page 79. THe next Fundamental he tells us we destroy by maintaining
Circumcision a covenant of Grace, Is the Doctrine of the new covenant, the
nature of it, and the manner of Gods making of it with the soul, in which he
writes his Laws in the heart, and pardons their sins, infuseth Faith, binds
himself over to be their God without any condition in the creature, And thus
and no otherwise, does God make a new covenant with the soul, whereas this
dream would make us believe that a whole Nation may be in the new covenant, and
yet have no work of Grace wrought upon the heart.

A. That the new covenant has conditions, has been already proved. God
neither pardons, saves, nor justifies any man, without the condition of the
covenant, which ever was, is, and will be. Faith and Repentance, which two are
of a large extent, and brings in a close walking with God in his Word and
Ordinances, and leads to a holy life, without which none shall ever see the
face of God. Look back to Abraham's covenant, was it not made with him as a
believer, Romans 4.3? what says the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, Had not Abraham been a believer,
righteousness had not been imputed to him; and that this is a condition, the
Apostle makes it clear, ver. 23, 24. Now it was not written for his sake alone,
that it was imputed to him: But for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we
believe. So that faith is clearly held forth as the condition both to Jew and
Gentile, Isa. 56.6. He that keeps the Sabbath from polluting it, and takes
hold on my covenant, Him will I make joyful in my house of prayer. For my house
shall be called the house of prayer of all Nations: what covenant is this, that
a man must lay hold of but that of free grace, which relates to his house of
prayer in all Nations? For his Gospel-house, with whom that covenant is made,
is as well called the house of prayer as the Temple: so that look how far the
house of prayer goes to that people and Nation, both the Sabbath and Covenant
goes also; so as they must keep the one, and take hold of the other.

Obj. But says the opponent, though Faith be the hand, yet it is God that
gives the hand, so that still the Covenant is without conditions?

Ans. This is still to argue pro and con. For if Faith be the hand and
condition of the covenant, then it is on the creatures side, that it is so, and
not on Gods. And the covenant is not made with any creature till they have a
hand to receive it. And though it be given by free grace, yet when it is given,
it is the creatures hand; as the hand and eye of my body, it is free grace that
gives them, but when they are given, they are my hands and my eyes. And thus the
Apostle argues, it is of faith that it may be by grace; and hereby grace does
abound, that God should give the Gospel, and Covenant upon conditions; and when
these conditions are wrought by his Grace, yet he should look upon them, as
ours; yea Mr Patient has before acknowledged, That faith is the condition of
the covenant, and therefore whereas he here tells us God infuseth faith, and
binds himself over to the soul without conditions, it is a mere contradiction;
because that faith so infused, is that condition which takes hold on the
covenant: and by this new covenant, were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David,
Solomon, Nathan, and all the people of God under the Old Testament, justified
and saved; into the visible part of which covenant, all their seed was taken,
yea the whole Nation of Israel. And that they shall be so taken in again, see
Romans 11. at large compared with Jer. 31.1. therefore for him to call it a
dream, is not only a discovery of his shallowness, but also an affront put
upon those holy worthies before mentioned, by which he does manifest it to the
world, affirming that the Covenant of Grace has no conditions, that he is a
high Antinomian, as well as an Anabaptist.

V. P. page 80. His next Fundamental is the doctrine of Justification by Faith;
which this opinion of Circumcision to be a covenant of Grace destroys, in that
it holds forth another way to obtain Justification by, then faith, which is by
carnal birth of believing parents. For if a soul be admitted into a covenant of
life thereby; I hope you are not ignorant, that justification by faith is the
great privilege of the new covenant, and really the portion of all that are in
that covenant.

A. He here affirms two direct untruths: But what is that, when there is nothing
else to be found in his whole book?

1 He tells us we hold another way of justification then faith, by carnal
birth, etc. which we abhor.

2 Another gross untruth is, That Justification to life is the real portion, of
all within the covenant of Grace.

Therefore let the former distinction be still minded; and then it is apparent,
that we affirm no more, but that believers seed have right to the external part
of the covenant of grace, which Circumcision was a part of, as has been
proved: as for the spiritual part of the covenant, namely, that justification
by faith, which he speaks of; it has ever been conveyed in a secret way of the
spirits working upon the heart: from which it is evident, that persons may be
visibly within the covenant, and yet have no real work of Grace in their souls,
so as to be justified, as those examples beforementioned do abundantly prove,
for then Judas had been really justified. Take in also the parallel; then all the members of their dipped societies, would be really justified; had we nothing
else to plead, but the sensible experience of these times; it would be enough
to show the falsity of such an assertion: for how many not only of them, but
of others also have fallen away to diabolical delusions? Thus far therefore we
see those foundations, by him pretended to be shaken, remain, notwithstanding
his high swelling language, untoucht, and unmovable: -- again

CHAP. XIII. The sixth and seventh Fundamentals maintained.
P. page 80, 81, 83. THis opinion destroys the doctrine and foundation of
Gospel-Churches. The matter thereof, which is Saints by calling, spiritual
worshippers, Ioh. 4.23. lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. persons redeemed from a vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. brought out of darkness into his mavelous light, 1
Pet. 2.9. Now this opinion brings in a whole Nation to be a Church, all born of
their body, their seeds seed in their generations. This is a setting up the
partition wall again, betwixt the natural branches, and those that are wild by
nature.

2 The manner of gathering is destroyed, and the Lords baptism neglected, and a
counterfeit baptism set up in the room thereof.

A. Though this head would require a larger answer, yet I shall contract as
briefly as I can, therefore

1 As to the matter of a Gospel Church, it is believers and their seed, which I
thus prove: the Church of Christ is his kingdom in the world, to which the
tenders of Gospel Grace and mercy belongs, it is therefore called the Gospel of
the kingdom, Mat. 13.19. before touched upon.

It was so before the coming of Christ, and it is so since. If Grace therefore
once took in children to be subjects of this kingdom, who then casts them out?
not Grace, for that is unchangeable, and thereby they were taken in; It Is the
Argument of Paul, If God justifies, who shall condemn, Romans 8.31, 34. If God be
for them, who shall be against them? If grace makes them holy, by separating
them to a holy use, who shall make them unclean, and cut them off? And that the
same bowels of Grace and tender affection remains in Christ to little babes is
clear, under the Gospel, for of such is the kingdom; he does not say of such
was the kingdom. For that indeed would have been quickly made use of as a plea
against us. But of such is the kingdom, As if he had said, My Kingdom is made
up of the same materials, as the Kingdoms of the World are, not only of men
and women, but of children also, of such is the kingdom, would it not be
ridiculous to say, there may be a kingdom without children? and that this is a
metaphorical allusion, to the kingdoms of the world is clear, not only from
the words or phrase there used, but also from other Texts, The kingdoms of the
world, shall become the kingdoms of Christ. And Abraham's covenant tells us how
it should be, namely, by multiplying of Abraham's seed in all Nations, so as
that power at last shall naturally divolve into their hands, as it is worthily
observed by an eminent Minister of these times, Mr Carter upon Abraham's
covenant.

2. Consider, the foundation of this kingdom was laid in Abraham and his seed.
For though God had his worship before, in families, from the beginning upon the
first promise of Christ, yet it came not to a kingdom-worship till the promise
was enlarged of multiplying the seed as the stars of heaven. And so Isaac was
taken in as a subject with his Father, though but an Infant-subject; and that
covenant which took in them, was the kingdoms covenant; and the seal of the
covenant, was the seal of the kingdom, which reaches as well Infant-subjects,
as their Parents. If then the foundation of the kingdom were parents and
children, then the building upon that foundation must be also parents and
children, because it is not a new but a continued kingdom, Mat. 21.43. This
being duly weighed, it will also reach to that other relation, the Church
stands in to Christ, of being his house. And so takes in the place quoted, 1.
Pet. 2.5. And ye as living stones are built up a spiritual house, etc. Look
what materials therefore were laid into the foundation of Gods spiritual house,
of the same is it carried up, till the top-stone be laid; with shoutings,
Grace, Grace; And that Gods house, under the Law, was a spiritual huuse, and
their worshippers, spiritual worshippers, is c^eer; because Israel were a sepa
ated people, from all Nations; and were also to be separated amongst themselves
from all moral and typical uncleanness; either in persons or things, in order
to a spiritual enjoyment of God in his worship, they being then as we now, to
offer up spiritual sacrifices to God, holy and acceptable, Se 2 Cor. 6.16, 18.
c^mpared with Lev. 26.22: Isa 52.11. Ezekiel. 37.27. chapter 44.7. And, the having
children in that spiritual house, did not at all diminish from the worship, to
make it the less spiritual, Isa. 56.7. the allusion of the spiritual house
under the Gospel, is drawn from the nature of Gods spiritual house under the
Law, My house shall be called the house of prayer of all Nations, It was not so
called, from the walls and stones of the Temple, though that also in a sense
might be so called, but from Isreal's meeting there, who was the prayi^g people
that God had then in the world, and the children were also carried up to be
presented before the Lord, Exodus 13.2 Levit. 12.2, 6. Luke 2.22, 23, 24, 27.
Therefore, what ranks or degrees of people there were in the house of prayer
then; the same was also the house of prayer under the Gospel in all Nations to
consist of: namely, of men, women, and children: therefore the Apostle calls
the Church the household of faith: in which are taken in believers seed: this
does also answer that place, Joh. 4. spiritual worshippers, for such they were
under the Law; and yet their children also were included. The word is there
used in opposition to this or that place, which they looked upon themselves
bound up to, though Christ was come; as also in opposition to their manner of
worship; which was then more carnal, Heb. 9.10. Truth was also opposed to the
Idol worship of the Samaritans; but nothing at all can be gathered to take away
the right of children: or that imports children not to be fit matter for a
Church, kingdom, or house of God; especially considering it was the same
covenant of Grace then that took them in, as it is now; and if it be an
immutable covenant to believers and their seed, as no sound Christian can deny,
then are believers seed still in the covenant. And thus also children may be
truly called Saints, and sanctified persons; holy, because set apart to a holy
use in the service of God.

3 Whereas therefore he says, this opinion brings in a whole Nation of
believers, it is his mistake; for till God brings them in, the opinion and
practice does not; for it is but the incorporating of the families of
believers, into Congregational Societies and Churches, unless there be so many
families as fill a Nation, and then I think without offense, they may be called
a Nation of believers; and for ought I can see, not improperly a
National-Church; neither are we hound by Isreal's practice of Circumcising, to
their succeeding generations, who had a command for it, (though I believe they
were much corrupted in that Ordinance, as appears from that place, Ezekiel. 44.7.)
therefore to baptize our children to succeed^ng generations, i^ the Parents
wicked, because the visible unbelief of Parents cuts off their seed, and their
visible believing ingraffs them in. And thus we find John repulst visible
unbelievers that came to be baptized upon the account of Abraham's covenant: so
that it appears that M. P. is a^ ignorant of the ground of our practice, as he
is of the truth of his own.

4 Neither is it the setting up again of the partition wall betwixt the natural
branches, and those that are wild by nature. For the partition wall was the
legal-Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, given to the Jew^sh Nation only: and shu^ting
out all Nations besides: so much is employed by Paul, Romans 9.4. To them
appertained the giving of the Law and the Oracles, that is, to them and none
else, so Romans 11.12. Mat. 28.19. which Commission was enlarged upon Christ's
taking away that partition wall, and copyed out according to the tenor of
Abraham's covenant, Genesis 12. In thee shall all Nations of the earth be blessed.

Therefore go teach all Nations.

Therefore also by natural branches, we are to understand the Jewish believing
Parents and seed. These were the branches of the covenant, cut off for
unbelief, His blood be upon us and our children, Mat. 27.25. and Romans 11.15,
20. because of unbelief they were broken off: What, they? The first place tells
us, Parents and Children; and ver. 17. ( and if some of the branches were
broken off implying that as Parent and seed were branches, so some of those
branches were not broken off, but still remained in Abraham's covenant, Therefore

2 By wild branches, or branches wild by nature, we are to understand the
Gentiles, Parents and seed, called wild by nature; because Israel that were
Gods Vineyard, Orchard, Garden, and so enclosed, were dressed and pruned by
Christ in his Ministry, who was the vinedresser thereof, when as the Gentiles
grew wild as a Tree in a wilderness, and so were without God in the world, thus
the natural branches were cut off, That the branches wild by nature might be
graffed in. The Sun at noon day has not so clear a light, as this Scripture
has to prove the covenant right and interest of believers and their seed. In
what therefore he affirms in page 81. that taking in of children is a setting
up the partition wall betwixt the natural branches, and b^anches wild by
nature, he shows himself more blind then that poor man that saw men as trees
walking. For by natural branches he understands only adult professors: and by
branches wild by nature, little infants; when as the word of God tells us, that
we are to understand by branches, Parents and Children. By all which, it is
apparent that he understands not what the partition wa l is, or what the
natural branches or branches wild by nature signifies. Thus far we have
examined the t uth of his Church-matter. The next thing is the form, Therefore

P. The holding of this opinion that believers seed have a right to the
covenant, makes people live in a neglect of the Lords baptism, contenting
themselves with a counterfeit baptism instead thereof and thus the Church comes
to be constituted of good and bad promiscuously; and then he calls for our rule
to justify it.

A. The Reader may here observe, to what height of spirit this man is sweld,
that he durst charge all the Churches of Christ through the world, with a
counterfeit baptism, as if the only light of this truth did shine in Rivers.
It has been already proved in answer to his Essentials, that the Lords Baptism
was not by dipping.

Therefore believe him not, yea the Lord Christ will be a swift witness against
him, that he abhors such a practice, for the reason before laid down. And
whereas be says that it makes the Church a promis^uou^ body consisting of good
and bad: I answer.

1. So does Christ himself, Mat. 13.47. where he likens the kingdom of heaven,
i. e. the Church, to a net let down into the sea, which gathered of all kinds,
both good and bad; yet I hope he will not be so bold, to say a charge of
imputation upon Christ himself.

2 It has been also proved, that such a mixture as is made by taking in
believers and their seed, is no more then what the word of God bars out, upon
the account of Abraham's covenant: and to call it a mixture is to call that
common which is clean.

3 Neither do I believe, but if their own Societies were sifted, there would be
found more chaff then wheat, and that their Congregations would not appear more
strict then ours; I speak not this by way of boasting, for I doubt, we have not
so much cause on either hand.

But let him that glories, glory in the Lord.

P. p. 82. He tells us of going in an untrodden path, because we baptize
children, and receive them into the Church as members, and yet deny them the
Sacrament. And then asks us when we will give it them? or why they have a right
to one privilege, and not to another?

A. Though a child may not be fit to sit at the fathers Table, yet he may be
fit to suck at the mothers breasts. And if you will know when they shall come
to the Lords Table, the Apostle tells you, when they can examine themselves, 1
Cor: 11.28.

Look back to Israel, though their seed did receive the seal of the covenant,
and were admitted then in Christ's kingdom, yet they were not presently fit for
the passover, which was also a spiritual feast, and a prefiguration of the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor 5.7, 8. as the Israel of God then, in which children were
included; was a prefiguration of Gods Israel now; therefore though baptism, and
the Lords Supper are both privileges of the covenant, as Circumcision and the
Passover were then; yet the infant seed of the kingdom may be fit for the one,
though not fit for the other; as the infant-subjects of the kingdoms of the
world: they are subjects, but not fit for all the privileges of a kingdom,
which consideration does answer his cavils; though much more might have been
added upon another account. As to that Scripture Act. 2.41, 42. That all that
were baptized continued in breaking bread. I answer, They were such there
spoken of, that were capable of hearing the word, and which gladly received it;
that were converted from Judaism. The like to which is practiced upon the
conversion of any unbaptised persons at this day: and this makes therefore for
us, for though their children were admitted in upon the account of Abraham's
covenant, The promise is to you and your children; yet we do not find they
were admitted to the Supper: because the same promise belonging to them and
their seed under the Law, yet the seed were not capacifyed for the Passover. By
all which, therefore it appears our path lies plain and open, that we may see
which way the footsteps of the flock have gone before us; whereas if the blind
lead the blind, they both tumble into a ditch or River. And thus both the
matter and form of a true Gospel Church is maintained by our doctrine and
practice.

VII. The last head of Fundamentals, which he says our doctrine and practice
destroys, is

P. That persons may have a right to a covenant of life, without an in-being in
Christ by faith, and is it not therefore a sad thing, that persons that profess
themselves Ministers, and to have knowledge in the Gospel, should be so blinded
as to mislead people in so weighty a point as this is, and that they should
endeavor to leaven thousands of people with such a sad error as opposes it
self against the substance of the Gospel, etc.

A. It has been the main policy of Satan in all times of Reformation, to
endeavor the subversion of the Ministry of Christ, and by all means to make
them fall as stars from heaven, because he then knows how to carry on his
kingdom, works of darkness. And if Israel cannot be overcome when they are
united to one God, in one way, in one Commonwealth; he will then divide them,
because then he knows his work will thrive in the hands of Jeroboams Priests.

We may here see what a height the false Prophets of this Commonwealth are
come to, that they can without check smite the Prophets of God upon the face,
with reviling words, dragon-like, casting a flood of waters out of their
mouths, that so their may not escape; we may doubt such words are but
preludiums to a remaining Tragedy. I speak the more in this, because I have
also seen a piece called the Kings of the East, which may be rather called the
devils pleading for a Pulpit; in which, when he speaks to the Ministers for
license to make use of them, he tells us if they will not give leave, they
shall be prayed down and pulled down. But I hope they rage the more, because
they have but a short time.

But to come to the answer:

What he has here said, is of the same nature with what he has spoken before,
and so has been already answered. Before he charged our baptism to be a
counterfeit baptism, and here again our Ministers are blind, and misleade
thousands to oppose the substance of the Gospel. What taunting bold language is
this, and how unfit for a man of his threadbare knowledge and profession? I
hope the reader will excuse me, because it is to speak a word for those choice
leaders of Christ's flock; who are as sheep dumb before the shearers of our
times.

2. The former distinction of the covenant must be still minded, and then it is
apparent, that the charge put in against our Ministry is false. I have been
one of their followers above this 12 years, I bless God, I never heard such a
doctrine delivered: That propagation gave an in-being in the spiritual part of
the covenant of Grace, which is that M. P, intends by the covenant of life.
Therefore what the Prophet said to Ahab, is not mis-applyed to him; It is he,
and such like as he, That are the troublers of Israel, That leavens the Nations
with errors. That run before they are sent: for he whom God has sent, speaks
the things of God; he speaks not the things of God, because he understands them
not, as has been made appear hitherto, he understands not the covenant of
Grace from works; what the new covenant is, the extent thereof, how to baptize,
or whom to baptize. And therefore with the false Prophets, he teaches to revolt
from God and his ways.

The Reader may by this time see, what wood, hay, and stubble he has built,
that not one Argument hitherto, either to prove our practice to overthrow the
forenamed Fundamenta^s, or Circumcision a covenant of Works, has been made
good. Therefore it is evident That they remain unmovable and untoucht,
notwithstanding those horrible outcryes, wherewith he charge our doctrine and
practice withal, page 83.

CHAP. XIV. The Third general head answered.
P. THe third head propounded to be proved by him, was, that none but believers
had or shall have a right to the covenant of Grace; to prove which, he tells us
that so soon as the seed of the woman was promised to our first Parents, after
the fall, the Lord immediately made an outward covenant of Works, which was
typical and intayled upon the flesh, out of which Christ was to come; which was
more dark till Abraham's days: then till Moses more clear: and then from Moses
it brake forth clearly; and so continued till Christ, in whom it ceased and
ended.

A. That those typical Ceremonies by him called a covenant of works, was part
of the covenant of Grace, has been fully proved; Therefore lets keep the old
distinction, and hold fast the form of sound words, to cast off which is of as
dangerous a consequence, as to strip the Bark from the Tree, and then let the
other grow if it can. Besides, note what must necessarily follow: I. God made a
covenant of works with Adam, which he broke. II. God made a covenant of Grace
after he fell: III. God made again another covenant of Works: so that here is
employed, either


1 That the covenant of Grace was incomplete, and had not a Table sufficiently
furnished, to accommodate all parts of man. And therefore he must be left to a
covenant of works for temporals, so to help out what the other wants, or

2 That man's happiness in a state of Grace, was so imperfect and unstable, that
he fell back into a covenant of works, or

3 That God after he had made a covenant of Grace with man, upon better
consideration, took that away, and re-stated him in a covenant of works, or

4 That a believer, as before observed, may be in two covenants at once, or

5 That God had rather all men should be damned, then saved, And

6 That upon Christ's coming, the conditions of the covenant of Grace, (by him
called of works) being abolisht as such a covenant. Therefore, now man either
stands loose or free from all Ordinances and Sabboths, or else the observing
the Sabboths or keeping to them must be a new covenant of works. Thus it is
apparent what a rock of error, and heresy, we should at last split upon, by
embracing such fantastical notions as this patron of plunging, would dowse us
into; Therefore let the Reader observe that Heb. 11. and he shall find the
typical worship was then made acceptable to God by believing, as our Ordinances
are now; which had it been a covenent of works, it would have stood directly
opposed to faith; therefore it was of faith, that it might be by grace. But
when he speaks of a covenant of works, then, If it be of works, it is no more
of Grace, otherwise Grace is no more Grace: And take also a brief touch of the
parallel of that administration, which was the old covenant, and so of works.

Then, as before, the Gospel-administration must be a new covenant of works.
And so what M. P. does (though only a pretender to Gospel-rule) in wading into
mill-pools and Rivers must be, as indeed it is, a branch of such a covenant of
Works. Therefore not of Grace:

P. page 87, 88. The reason why God made choice of Abraham's family, and not
Lots, or any of the rest of the godly families in the world, it was not because
Abraham was any more a believer or his Family; for then Lot and his family, and
the rest had been taken into the covenant of Circumcision, because they did
believe as well as Abraham. For this is a sure rule, If God gives a promise or
command to a person as a believer; then whosoever believes, that command and
promise belongs to them: and for this he brings the example of Joshua, I will
not leave thee, which the Apostle applies to the Church Heb. 13.5. now the
covenant made with Abraham, was therefore to show the world that Christ must
come out of his flesh, etc.

A. Though I grant that Abraham was not pitched upon as a believer barely; yet
had he not been a believer, he could not have been the father of the faithful.

2 If that had been all, to point out to the world from whence they might
expect the Messiah; then Cir^umcision might as well have been given to Seth,
Enos, or Shem, etc. and so have distinguished the whole race; yea God must
afterward have given some distinct sign to Judah; because all Jacobs twelve
sons were circumcised. So that the world would be at as great a loss, to know
in which of al these twelve the line was to run. Therefore if we do but look
into the grounds of the Promises, we shall find, there were many other main
and choice ends; as namely, By the multiplying of believers, as the stars of
heaven; who also are called the seed; they might thereby become blessings to
families and Nations. For as Jesus Christ was the great blessing, so every
believer was also to be a little blessing; According to the promise, I will
bless thee, and thou shall be a blessing: and by this means God makes use of
believers to be as his leaven, to leaven the whole lump: so that in this way
Christ's kingdom shall at last spread through the earth.

2 To make Abraham a public Father, to the believing Gentiles and their seed
since the coming of Christ, as he was to the Jews and their seed before Christ
came.

3 To seal the possession of Canaan to him and the heirs of Promise as a type
of heaven, and to give them possession of that Land in a way of conquest, Genesis
22.17. Luke 1.73.

4 To show the immutability of his counsel and purpose to the Gentiles, Heirs
with him of the same promises, that so, we in Gospel days, might have ground of
consolation in all straits and extremities, that the heirs under the Gospel
might meet with, because they also have a wilderness to go through Rev. 12.6:
and Canaanites to subdue and conquer Genesis 9.27. And a like rest with that of
Canaan to possess Heb. 4.1. Therefore Abraham is held out as a public Father
to look at, thereby to see and behold Gods variety of dealings with him, and
with his seed after him, either in war, or peace; prosperity, or adversity,
hereby to strengthen Faith in the like case: that so as David says, one deep
may call out to another at the noise of Gods waterspouts, when the billows
overflow.

These, and all these, and more then these were the ends for which God made
choice of Abraham to give the Promises unto, with the oath, and seal; all which
do substantially continue to this day, being by Christ handed over to the
Gentiles, with the old seal taken off, which as Lord of all, he had power to
do, and a new seal added in the room thereof, to the same covenant, which
amounts to no more then the taking off a seal of red wax from a covenant, and
putting a seal of white wax in the place thereof; yet the covenant still
remains.

II. To that which he says, that if a command or promise be given to a
believer, as a believer, it then (as a sure rule) belongs to every one that is
a believer.

A. That Is no true rule, therefore not a sure rule; because a promise that
suits to one man's condition as a believer, does not therefore suit with every
believers condition: neither does the end of God, in giving one believer a
Promise, reach to the same end in all believers, unless so circumstantiated; as
for instance;

God gave Abraham Circumcision as a believer. And his end was to make Abraham a
public Father: yet this did not therefore reach to all believers. For he did
not intend to make any more public fathe s then one; the like we may say of
that instance he gives of Joshua: The command and Promise given to him, was as
a Captain General and believer; and so it could not reach to all believers upon
those terms, for though he was commanded to be of a good courage, etc. and
fight, and he should not be forsaken, yet that command does not reach to all
believers; because we see many believers have fallen in the wars, and their
enemies have been the conquerors; yea such a command would then reach to women,
because they are believers: And the reason why that promise was applied to the
believing Hebrews, is because one promise has several aspects. And so suits to
several conditions, it being as a sprig of the whole bundle that suits all
conditions. So, the several cures that Christ wrought upon persons as
believers, and some in a way of promise, does not therefo e instate all
believers in such a promise, that they shall so be cured; when the holy Ghost
tells us the prayer of faith shall save the sick does this give al believers an
interest into the direct intent of that promise? there is therefore much
Christian prudence to be observed in choosing, and applying promises, to pick
out such as are suitable to a believers condition.

The Reader may therefore see, how sadly confident and ignorant this man is;
who yet, is looked upon, as the Nicodemus of that party.

P. page 86. For many pages he goes on to show that the whole line by promise,
mentioned in Luke 3. it was only an external election into a covenant of
works, and Cain, Ham, Ishmael, Esau, were therefore outwardly rejected from
that covenant.

A. It has been already proved that all the line by promise are more then
externally elected; yea so to affirm is strongly to suppose, that some of that
elect line might be damned, because thousands so elected are never saved, and
some of those so rejected might go to heaven though it is expressly against the
scriptures: the naming of which methinks should be a sufficient confutation.

As to the six sons of Keturah, which he speaks of in page 90, which were
Abraham's seed, and sent away into the east Country:

The answer is plain, that so long as they were in Abraham's family and
Circumcised, they were all Church Members and visibly in the covenant, as their
brother Ishmael was; but being turned out of the family, they lost the Church
privileges, as not being heirs of promise; as for their being gracious, we
have no ground to think they were, but the contrary. And had Ishmael, Esau, and
Keturahs sons, been kept within the covenant, there had then been no partition
wall betwixt Jew, and Gentile. For the whole Nation of Israel came only from
the line of Isaac:

P. page 91, 92. He tells us that all the Nations of the earth were to be blessed
alike in him: i. e. says Mr Patient in the spiritual covenant. And
Circumcision was but a choosing of one Nation into a Church covenant for matter
of worship.

A. He clearly confounds Abraham's covenant and blessings, for if all Nations
were equally alike blessed, as to the spiritual part of the covenant; To what end
then should God pitch upon any people or Nation to walk in his Ordinances, when
the spiritual part of the covenant was not to be conveyed in them, or if it
was, yet upon such terms, that other Nations without such Ordinances, did enjoy
as much? and then to what purpose should Israel be at such pains, cost, and
charges in their Offerings, or spend time to hear, read, pray, or keep the
Sabboths, if all these were but as shel s without a kernel? yea had it not been
a burthensom yoke? and might not Gods people have said, why shall we spend so
much time, and take so much pains, and be at such costs to worship God, when
other Nations that do none of all this, yet they enjoy as much of the spiritual
covenant, and so of Justification and salvation, yea as much of the world as we?

I appeal to the Consciences of all our dissenting friends, whether this be not
to preach up revolt, Apostasies, and backslidings, from the ways of God, and to
make the hearts and spirits of Gods people to disrelish them as an unsavory
dish? yea such a doctrine as this tells the world, that where God g^ves
Ordinances, they prove a curse and not a b^essing, whereas that holy Apostle
tells us, Ephesians. 2.12: That at that time we were without Christ, aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of Promise, having no
hope, without God in the world; And so David Psalm. 147.19, 20. he has given
his word to Jacob, his Statutes to Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation
-- Therefore when God tells Abraham, that in him all Nations of the earth
should be blessed; he intends a time and order for this blessing to work, and not
in all at once, nor in all parts at once. And so the Apostle after argues, To
you first God has sent his son, to bless you: and if the Jews first, then the
Gentiles afterward; yea when it came to the Gentiles, there was a divine order
in conveighing this blessing, falling like the showrs of heaven, sometimes in
one Country, sometimes in another. First it spreads about Jerusalem, then it
Coasts up in Africa, by means of the Eunuch: then the light grows dark, and out
it breaks in Europe, Spain, Italy, Greece; afterward again, when Popery had
overspread the earth, then it breaks out in France, Germany, Bohemia
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, England, Scotland, and Ireland: all which tells
us that Gods Ark of worship is Ambulatory, not fixed to any place, by reason of
the wickedness of a people, as Christ tells the Jews, Mat. 21.43. The kingdom
of God shall be taken from you, and given to another Nation that shall bring
forth the fruits thereof; the Lord grant we find it not true in these Nations
by sad experience, for there are sad symptoms; and chiefly when reproach and
contempt is cast upon the Ministers of Christ without check or control: thus
then we may see what desperate errors are like to come in at this watergate, if
it be not kept shut; and all for want of a right understanding of the covenant
made with Abraham. I shall not meddle with his typical election; because it
runs upon the same foot with the former already answered: that place by him
quoted, 2 Cor. 3. of the ministering of the spirit, meets also with the like
quarter, by his false interpretations of the rest; for I must profess I have
not seen throughout his whole book, any one Text brought but has been either
falsely opened, or falsely applied.

In page 91. He tells us, that Jacob in the womb was no more the seed of a
believer then Esau; which shall be easily granted, if his ingenuity will but
grant also that Jacob was more the seed of Promise then Esau; which is a
sufficient answer.

P. Page 92.93. He again harps upon the old string thus: Circumcision was not
given to Abraham and his seed, considered as a believer, but to show us that
the Messiah was to come from Abraham, not from Lot; from Isaac, not Ishmael;
from Jacob, not Esau; therefore here you may nakedly see how grossly they
mistake, that think the covenant was made with Abraham and his seed, considered
as a believer, and believers seed; therefore if a national covenant was made
with Abraham and his seed upon this reason, before, then you cannot conclude
that Abraham's covenant belongs to any Gentile; because when Christ was come,
and the ground upon which the covenant was given ceasing, the covenant also
cease: so that now to defend a covenant in the flesh, is a doctrine virtually
to deny that Christ is come: and hence therefore we may conclude that there was
no covenant of grace made with any but such as did and do believe: that
objection therefore, that spiritual privileges under the Gospel, are not less
then they were under the Law, is hereby answered.

A. I have here taken in the matter of these pages without mangling as near as
I could, because this eclipse will make truth break ou^ more glorious, and
instead of seeing the naked truth, we may see rather his nakedness, and so his
shame. Therefore

1 If the covenant had not been made with Abraham as a believer, then it had
not been made with him at all, as already proved, and so the Apostle tells us
he received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith
which he had, etc. implying that if Abraham had not enjoyed that righteousness,
he could not have enjoyed the seal of it.

2: Had it been given him barely to proclaim Christ to the world, as to come
from him, and so nothing else to be expected from that covenant then as before,
there must have been another mark found out to show, in which of Jacobs twelve
sons the line was to run. For notwithstanding Circumcision, M. P. would be to
seek, had it not been for Mat. 1. and Luke 3. -- therefore

3 We have it laid down before that Abraham's covenant in the blessings thereof
had many other choice branches: which reaches into Gospel-days since the
exhibition of Christ, to the worlds end. For which cause Abraham is called the
Father of believers under the Gospel, which could not be that we should be
Abraham's children, If the blessing of Abraham's covenant reached only to Christ,
as pointing at him; for so we must have been Christ's children, not Abraham's.

4 Then the Apostle knew not what he said, Gal. 3.14. when he tells the Church,
That Abraham's blessing is come upon the Gentiles through Christ. For if it were
only meant of Christ, then it would lose the title of Abraham's blessing. But
though Christ be come, yet the blessing is Abraham's blessing still: yea Christ
is come, that he may conveigh the blessing from the Jews to us, as heirs with
them, and not distinct from them: and what blessing it should be, called
Abraham's, which Christ should hand over to us, if not the blessings of the
covenant in all the veins thereof, is not to be understood. Therefore

5 As the promise, oath, and seal, were joined together to make the blessings
of Abraham sure, so were they all conveyed to us entirely, to show the
immutability of his counsel, and purpose to us* as it did to the Jews, Heb.
6.18. that so the heirs of Abraham's promise under the Gospel, might have strong
consolation. And upon this account it was the Apostle in Romans 4. bids them cast
an eye back upon Abraham their father, to see how he was justified, which had
it not been so, they would have been sent to Christ as a pattern, not to
Abraham; He should have been called their father, not Abraham: so, when he
tells the Galatians, chapter 4.28. (in order to rectify their judgments in the
like mistake of Just^fication) now ye brethren, as Isaac was, are the children
of the promise. It had been to no purpose, unless Isaacs promise had remained,
for they could not be children of that which was not. From all which we see
into what mistakes he is got, and how sadly bewildered with his own notions,
and upon what sl ght promises, he draws so high conclusions to make his ware
vendible. For notwithstanding any thing he has spoken, as Abraham's blessings
and covenant do not cease, though Christ be come; so neither do we deny by this
opinion of ours, that Christ is come, or do we expect another Christ to come,
as he suggests. It therefore appears, the covenant of grace is of such extent,
that it takes in thousands into the visible part thereof, that shall never be
saved; so that still the objection which he says is answered, remains in full
force and virtue, that the privileges are not straightened more then they were
under the Law: therefore as children were then in covenant, and received the
seal, so are they still in covenant, and the Gospel seal is their due, and
cannot be denied them.

P. Page 94. The new covenant was confirmed of God in Christ only, Gal. 3.17.
therefore it cannot belong unto any souls out of Christ, 1 Cor 11.25. This cup
is the new Testament in my blood: If the New Testament be in Christ's blood,
then what has any carnal unbelieving wretch to do with this Testament, that
has not faith in his blood?

A. These Texts makes full against him. For that place, Gal. 3.17. tells us
that Abraham's covenant which was 430 years before the Law, was confirmed in
Christ's blood. Therefore the Law coming after, could not make the Promises of
God of none effect: If then Abraham's covenant in which children were included,
were confirmed in that blood; this new covenant being the same with Abraham's,
as himself confesses, and confirmed by the same blood, Infants are still
within the same covenant. For the covenant is in Christ, Yea and Amen to all
the persons included in the covenant. As there is a double being in the
covenant; internal, and external: so a double being in Christ, Joh. 15.3, 4
which being well distinguished, will clear all such doubts. Some of the seed are
only in Christ externally, as Ishmael, Esau, and others; Internally also, as
Isaac, Jacob, etc; and so in the covenant, whether Adult or Infants: the like
to be said to 1 Cor. 11.25. That cup is the New Testament, or a seal of the
New Testament to all that are within that Testament. As Christ's blood typically
sealed the first Testament to Abraham and his seed, so Christ's blood seals the
New Testament to believers and their seed; of which that cup is the Sacramental
remembrance: the like also to Mat. 3 17. my son in whom I am well pleased, i.
e. as God was well pleased with Abraham and his seed by promise, that were in
the covenant co firmed by Christ's blood; so is he now well pleased with
believers, and their seed by promise in the same covenant confirmed by Christ's
blood. The same answer is to be given to all the rest of those places by him
quoted, with which he fills many pages, to prove that none can be in the
covenant of Grace except he be first in Christ.

P. In page 95. He condoles the sadness of these times. That when the means of
grace, and knowledge of the Gospel, is so plentifully held forth; yet we must
be forced to bestow such pains to prove that men cannot be in a state of
salvation, and acceptance before God in a covenant of Grace, without union
with Christ by Faith.

A. Alas poor man, he would fain be pittyed for the pains he takes, but who is
it that puts him to it, but his own erring spirit which makes him afraid of his
own shadow? Is there any of us that affirms so wickedly, that acceptance is to
be had in God, without union with Christ? If not; he deals the more deceitfully
to suggest such things, as if our Ministry did it. Therefore

2 Whereas he says the means of Grace has been pl^ntifully held forth: It
seems it is not by his opposites the public Ministers. For how can such hold
forth the means of Grace, that shall affirm such an acceptance is to be had
without such an union? which he affirms to be the principles of those that
plead for infant baptism: but blessed be God, If you have no better warrant to
justify your irregular and unnatural practice withal, and condemn ours, then
such calumnies; the experience of these days speaks aloud, who it is, that have
held forth the means of Grace, and glorious light of the Gospel. It is evident
enough from the budding and fructility of Aarons rod, of whom it may be said,
they preach with Authority and not as the Scribes, for their rods are dry and
barren; because they preach not conversion, but subversion.

I shall touch upon a Scripture or two more, leaving the rest for the Reader to
answer in his own thoughts. For indeed not one of them proves any thing he
asserts; Joh. 14.6. Mat. 7.14. He that has Christ has life, he that has not
Christ has not life; we say the same: but he that has not Christ spiritually,
may have a visible right to the covenant of Grace, as those hypocrites had, so
often mentioned. So in their own.

P. So he quotes Joh. 16. that Christ calls the unbelievers in the national
Church of the Jews, the world; I have chosen you out of the world; and their
being circumcised, freed them not from being justly so called.

A. The answer is, The words are directed to the Disciples, as a people that
acknowledged Christ exhibited, and so were Gospel worshippers. And the
unbelievers amongst the Anabaptists may as well be called the world, if the
comparison relates to one that truly believes, as the Jews were called the
world, when Christ's words related to his real believing Disciples. For the
denying of Christ to be the Messiah, was that which distinguished; because such
a denial led them to keep up a form of worship, that did directly oppose the
Gospel.

P. Another Scripture Romans 4.16. It is of faith, that it might be by grace: but
if the covenant was made to the seed; it could not be of faith, and so not of
grace.

A. Here is sad work made in his interpretations: was it not of Faith to
Abraham that it might be by Grace, to him and his seed? for shame abuse not the
Scripture so grossly: It was of Faith that it might be by grace, to the end the
Promise might be sure to all the seed; and who this seed was, he tells us,
little children, if we may draw it from Isaacs being a child, in Isaac shall
thy seed be called. And because the Gentiles shall know that the word seed
reaches them, therefore he adds, not to that only which is of the Law, etc. So
that as it was to Abraham by faith, that it might be of Grace to his seed: So
is it now of Faith to a believer that it might be of Grace to his seed.

So also he quotes Act. 15.4. He put no difference between us and them,
purifying their hearts by faith.

A. If God put no difference, how durst he do it then?

P. So Gal. 3.2, 4. we are all one in Christ Jesus.

A. How then can he answer it before God, to make us twain? For as Abraham and
his seed through the Law, were in covenant, so are believers and their seed
now: or else we are not all one in Christ, but two seeds.

P. As for that opposition he gives page 99.. That a temporal election into a
temporal covenant, was a type of the spiritual election into a spiritual
covenant:

A. It is a whimsey of his own brain, that can never be made good, and
therefore it shows a giddy spirit after notions. --

P. Again, Heb. 11.6. without faith it is impossible to please God; therefore
none can be in a covenant of Grace but such as believe. So Abel.

A. We please God by Faith now, as those worthies in that chap. mentioned did
then; for therefore the Apostle brings in them for an example: so the answer is
still the same. Look how Abraham our Father pleased God, in circumcising his
seed as in the covenant, in which there was an act of Faith, and how the
contrary in Moses neglecting the seal displeased God; so are believers to
please God by sealing their seed, and the neglect hereof provokes the wrath of
God, as it is evident from this example: by which we see that if we would
please God as Abraham did, we must then walk in the steps of Abraham: and it is
agreeable, and not opposite to faith, or grace, to seal our Infants.

Thus Christian Reader, thou may see all the Scriptures by himself quoted to
maintain his opinions: they do like the stars of heaven in their courses fight
against this Sisera.

P. The last place is Rev. 21.8. The fearful and unbelieving shall have their
portion in the lake of fire.

A. Is not this well applied to the thing in hand, or does he with one blast of
his Nostrils turn all children to hell? The Lord rebuke him; even the Lord.

CHAP. XV. The 2 Act. 3.1 Cor. 7.14. vindicated in answer to his last general
head.
Page 101, 102. WE are now come to his last head, to examine the answer he
gives to our Scripture Allegations, and accordingly to reply. The first
Scripture he quarrels with is Act. 2.39. The promise is to you and your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. --

P. To which he says, the promise is just to so many as God shall call; and by
Promise, he opens the remission of sins, and gift of the holy Ghost, and then
he makes this flourish; I pray take notice how evident the Text makes against
this error, That the covenant of Grace should be made with the fleshly line of
believers; and to confirm the meaning of the word call in his sense, he brings
Romans 8.30. and Heb. 9.15. and 1 Pet. 2.9. All which speaks of an effectual Call.

Rep. We are here to consider to whom the words were spoken: 1. namely, to the
Jews who were troubled in spirit about their condition, such who had crucified
Jesus Christ; that had wished his blood to be upon them and their children, Mat.
27.23. The promise is to you and your children: this promise cannot be meant of
the gifts of the holy Ghost, by tongues and miracles; for that would have been
no solid cure to a wounded conscience, as theirs was. Judas had such gifts, but
they could not m^ke his conscience whole, who was guilty of the same sin.

2 This Promise was to relate to them afar off, that is, the Gentil^s; it could
not be therefore such Gifts, for they ceast in that age, and the Gentiles afar
off never had them, though yet the Gentiles did repent and were baptized:
therefore by this promise, called the promise, must be meant such a promise
which they well knew, and were acquainted with; and therefore must be that of
Abraham's covenant, made to him and his seed. So the Apostle, Gal. 3. To Abraham
and his seed, were the promises made: ver. 16. not seeds as of many, but as of
one, i. e. the Jewish seed, and Gentile seed, make but one seed i e. Christ
mystical, in his political body, 1 Cor. 12.27. So here again the promise is to
you and your seed.

Quest. But what was there in Abraham's promise to cure a wounded Conscience?
For such were the persons mentioned: therefore the salve must be suitable.

A. All good things were in it, that related to Grace or Glory. I will be thy
God, what could be said more? what promise will cure a wounded Conscience, if
this will not? It Is a salve most proper to the ground of their distemper, they
had crucified God the son. And this promise tells them, he was theirs
notwithstanding For the words I will be thy God, imply personal promises: so
the father says, I will be thy God: and the Son, I will be thy God; and the
Holy Ghost, I will be thy God; a promise sufficient enough to bear up a sinking
world, suitable to Gal. 3.14. explained v. 8. before to be in order to their
Justification, the thing these Jews wanted; so that Abraham's covenant conveyed
in the bowels of it, justification by faith to sinners, and so most suitable to
the distemper. The promise is to you and your children.

2 Consider wherefore these words are brought in, namely as a strong inducement
to repent and be baptiz^d; and so it lies in the ^orm of a Motive for the
Promise, etc. As if he had said, Let this encourage you to repent and be
baptized, for the promise is to you and your children, i. e. you shall not
only enjoy blessings, but your children also, if you embrace the G^spel: For
the Apostle very well knew with whom he had to deal; and what Arguments would
be most prevalent with the Jews, and had not this been the meaning of the Holy
Ghost, the putting in the word children, had rather proved a rock of offense,
and a stone of stumbling. For what could the Jews imagine upon a free tender of
Grace to them and their children, but if they did repent and were baptized, the
extent of Abraham's promise should be the same as formerly it was to them and
their seed? especially when it came in their own Scripture dialect? The promise
is to you and your children; And to them afar off, even as many as God shall
call: -- therefore. 3 To clear this latter part from this ^bsurd interpretation
which M. P. gives, that the promise is restrained in the whole v. when he
says, Even so many as God shall call -- I

A. With Mr. Sidenham: we have in this verse an exact distribution of the world
into two parts Jews, and Gentiles; and to these two ^^rts the Apostle
distributeth the promise. Only he restrains it, ^^en he speaks of the Gentiles
afar off (For so they are called Ephesians. ^.1^, 13.) in bringing in these words,
Even so many as the Lord ^ur God shall call; which words cannot be referred to
the former ^rt of the verse, for in that he applies the promise to the Jews and
their children in the present Tense, because they were then under the call of
the Gospel, as if he had said, Repent and be baptized now whilst you have grace
and mercy tendered; for the promise is to you and your children: but when he
comes to speak of either the ^en Tribes, as M. P. will have it, or the
Gentiles, he turns the Tense in to the future; because they were yet afar off,
and not called; the promise is to them also, as many as God shall call. So that
if this clause should limit the whole verse, then to what purpose should the
Holy Ghost bring in the word children? for that had been superfluous, because
Jews and Gentiles comprehended the whole world. And then the words must have
run thus: the promise is to you Jews, and to them afar off, as many as God
shall call: or if the word children be kept in, as the Holy Ghost has placed
it; then thus: the promise is to you Jews, when God shall call you; and to your
children, when God shall call them; and to as many as are afar off, when God
shall call them; might not they have replied, why what need all this Tautology?
If the promise belongs to us upon our being called, and to the Gentiles upon
their being called; you need not tell us it belongs to our children upon their
being called: for we knew that before. But therefore the word children is kept
in to show the special privileges God has given them when the parent is
converted. And then the sense runs clear, Repent and be baptized, For the
promise is to you and your children, and to them that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, in a smooth Honorable style becoming the
Gospel: thus we see, that rather then he will make his sense stoop to Gods word
he will make the Holy Ghost stoop to his Nonsense.

From which therefore we may gather (notwithstanding his insinuating
persuasions, that this Text makes against us) it is abundantly clear that this
promise here spoken of, is that of Abraham's covenant, which the Apostle Gal. 3.
explains to be a Gospel Covenant, and was confirmed by Christ 430 years before
the Law: so that still the result amounts to this, That if it be Abraham's
covenant, it must convey the blessings of the covenant to all within the
covenant, that is, to the spiritual seed, spiritual blessings; to the temporal
seed, external privileges only: but still by one covenant.

IV. To come to the Scriptures before brought: his intent thereby was, to prove
that the promise of remission of sins, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and so
justification to life belongs to all those which God shall call.

A. He errs, not observing the Scriptures, nor the distinctions thereof. Gods
call is two fold; External, and internal: yet so as that the latter is conveyed
in the former: and sure a man must needs grossly mistake, to affirm that all
that are called are justified, and their sins remitted: for then Judas had been
justified, and Simon the Sorcerer saved (for they were both called, and both
baptized) yea all that are called everywhere to repent, would then be
justified; and all those Apostates that are in these days fallen from the
truth, would be all saved, for they were all called; so the foolish virgins
were called.

2. Let it be considered, that the promise of Abraham's covenant is here held
forth. Now all that are visibly called to embrace the covenant, are not
effectually called; though nevertheless all that are effectually called are
within that covenant. The Church at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, the seven
Churches of Asia, were all called visibly within the covenant, but we know they
were not all effectually called; we may then still see how sadly M. P. mangles
the Scriptures, when he brings proofs that relate to an effectual call, to
prove that all that are called (without any distinction) shall be justified and
saved* so that if he can but find out the word call in a Text; it is enough: no
matter how it is applied.

P. Page 130. This Text is clear to prove that those Jews and proselytes that
then heard him, and their children also, the ten Tribes, and Gentiles afar off,
the promise did belong to so many of them, as G^d should call; Therefore except
souls be given up to a spirit of delusion, will any dare to affirm that the
promise of the spirit, and remission of sins, and eternal life do belong to any
other? or will they be so ignorant to judge those promises did belong to the
generation of the Jews, though they were called or not called, etc?

A. We never affirmed that remission of sins, or eternal life belonged to any
but such as are effectually called; therefore the spirit of delusion and
ignorance, yea the spirit of impudence has seized upon him, so to affirm. But
this we say, that all that are visibly called to embrace the tenders of the
Gospel by a visible subjecting thereto, are within Abraham's covenant: for we
cannot imagine that all the Apostles baptized were really called: for the
Sorcerer before mentioned does sufficiently confute it; therefore still he
mistakes the question, which is thus, whether all that are called are really
justified?

2 Neither can it be reasonably thought, that there were no hypocrites amongst
those three thousand mentioned, and that they were all so called as he speaks
of; but the Apostles intention was to let them know, by what way they might get
in to Abraham's covenant again, from which both they and their seed were cut
off; Therefore Repent and be baptized, for the remission of sin; and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is to you and your
children, etc. That is, remission of sins, and the gift of the Spirit comes
still in the way of Abraham's Covenant, as it did before, Gal. 3.14. Therefore
if you will get into the way of the Spirits working; you must repent and be
baptized: he does not say that all baptized do really repent; for upon the
ground Mr. Patient goes, none should be admitted to baptism but such as really
Repent, and are really called, and really justified; when as yet he forgets his
own ignorance, That he is not able to discern them. Thus we have sifted all his
cavils brought against this Text, as not to countenance Infant Baptism. And
upon the whole we find it to be a tender of Abraham's Covenant, in all the
blessings of it, even to children of visible believers, either Jews or
Gentiles; Therefore the seal of that Covenant is their due Right and Privilege.

P. The next Text is, 1 Cor. 7.14. which he says we abuse, to make it speak
for Infant-holiness. Else were your children unclean, but now they are holy.
God takes persons into Covenant two ways, either by an external typical
Covenant of Works, as he did Israel, and so a people may be said to be holy by
separation, as the carnal Jew being separated from the world: and thus the
vessels of the Temple were holy, and the Priest were holy.

2 Secondly, A New Covenant holiness when God writes his Laws in the heart, and
sanctifies their Nature; and there is no other kind of holiness that relates
to the new Covenant but this; Hypocrites may have this in appearance, but the
Elect only have it in truth; therefore it is impossible, that a believers
carnal seed should be so holy by Birth. And no other sanctification the
Scripture speaks of, belonging to the new Covenant. The other was abolisht by
the death of Christ.

A. Whereas he knows no other holiness belonging to the New Covenant, but real
holiness; it is rather an Argument of his ignorance, then any confirmation of
the truth of what he says, for that New Covenant had such a holiness of
separation belonging to it from Adam, to Christ. And it is the some that we
have, only the holy things are changed: yet so, as that whatever Ordinance God
has given his Church now is holy.

Israel as separated from the world, was a holy people, so is the Church of God
now, Act. 10 13, 28. 2 Cor. 6.17. Therefore the Apostle writing to the Churches
as separated people, calls them Saints or holy ones, at Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
etc.

Not that they were all holy by an internal work of sanctif^cation, for the
Romans had many that were fallen to Judaism, and Corinth had many profane
persons amongst them; yet as they were a Church they all carry the denomination
of holy ones: so that the Church stands upon the same terms of separation now,
as then, from the world. Therefore the casting out of the incestuous person,
was as one polluted and unclean, which is opposed to such a holiness as makes a
person fit for Church Communion: Thus also it was with Israel when there was
either a Moral or Typical uncleanness, they were cast out as not fit for
Communion: thus the bread and wine in the Lords Supper, and water in baptism,
are holy by virtue of separation or institution: thus the function of the
Ministry is holy, or else every man might preach, baptize, and administer the
Supper alike. And notwithstanding ceremonies are abolisht, yet a holiness of
separation by virtue of divine institution remains still, or else the word of
God were no more holy then another Book; Nor the Gospel-Sabboth more holy then
another day: thus are the Infants of a believer holy, else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy: yea let me add, that it is impossible that any
man can be found in the faith, and amongst the rest Mr Patient for one, either
to Scripture Sabboths, or Gospel Ordinances, except they grant a holiness of
separation, both in persons and things. --

P. The words are grounded from Ezra 9. and Deuteronomy. 7. It being an express Law
for a Jew not to marry with a stranger: therefore they were to put away their
strange wives, because not lawfully married; and the children that were born of
them were to be looked upon as illegitimate. The Church upon this writing to the
Apostle to be resolved whether such of them a^ had unbelieving yoak-fellows,
might dwell together, and whether it was not unclean or unlawful; To this he
ans^ers, Let them dwell together, because now there being no Law against it,
the marriage was therefore justifyable, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified
to the believing husband, that is set apart by the Law of marriage to him
only; else were your children bastards, but now they are lawfully born. --

A. There is no such thing mentioned in either place, that their children were
Bastards. Then had Moses son by Zipporah the Egyptian been a Bastard; yea the
contrary is evident, because the Scripture calls them wives. And is it not a
wild expression to call her whore, that Gods word calls a wife? And would it
not be as strange, to think that so many Priests and Levites should be
whoremasters, which yet must be, if such an interpretation were true, as Mr.
Patient gives?

But therefore the ground of putting away their strange wives, was because
Israel was a separated people, and so not to have any affinity with strangers.
And though it was Isreal's sin, to many a stranger, yet it was not their sin to
match with an Israelite, which had it been whoredom, the very light of nature
would have condemned it, besides, this scruple did not lie betwixt Jew and
Gentile. For this was a Gentile Church, a people converted from heathenism to
profess Christ.

They had therefore no ground to think that the marriage they had before
conversion was unlawful. And had the taking in of the believer into communion
with the Church, made the unbeliever a whore or a whoremaster, and the children
bastards, or had any such ground of scruple been given, it had been enough to
have frightened the heathens from being Christians. It cannot be therefore that
any dis-satisfaction should rise in their spirits from those Texts by him
quoted, considering also the nature of the phrase, the wife should be
sanctified in the husband, and the husband in the wife; a strange word to be
used amongst heathens, that every married couple were sanctified one to
another: so likewise to put the word Holy in opposition to uncleanness of
birth, is too high a term, and such a way of speaking as is not to be found in
Scripture. Adding this likewise, that the holy Ghost would have spoken so, as
not to be guilty of tautology, for then the words must have run thus: Else were
your children bastards, and there it would have broken off; because the next
words had been superfluous, but now they are holy: so that by this we see, what
an unseemly unbecoming interpretation he gives, and what indignities he puts
upon the spirit of God, whereas if we look upon the words in that other sense,
wherein is employed a federal holiness by Abraham's covenant, which ever has
taken in Parent and child, it is a strong Argument inducing to embrace the
Gospel, and carries with it a full sail of comfort to godly parents, Else were
your children unclean, but now they are holy. Thus also this place stands
immovable, notwithstanding any thing he has said or can say to the contrary.
If therefore children are holy, by virtue of Abraham's covenant, then you that
are believers, get into the fold of Christ, that your children may receive the
seal of the covenant, baptism, which is the mark of the flock.

CHAP. XVI. Romans 11. vindicated from false glossings.
Page 110. THe next place he opens is Romans 11.16, 17. but with what evidence of
truth will be seen, when it has undergone the Test: If the first fruits be
holy, the lump is also holy; if the root be holy, so are the branches.

P. He grants that by root is meant Abraham, but yet in a double capacity;
Abraham as considered in the covenant of works. And so working Abraham is the
root of all the natural branches: and so legally holy, as Abraham was, who was
the first fruits, and the natural lump, was all Israel so holy, till that
covenant of works was abolisht by the death of Christ, and then this covenant
being put an end to, it must needs be, that such branches who were only
natural must be broken off.

2 Abraham is to be understood a root, considered as believing Abraham, in a
spiritual covenant, and so in this sense holy: and thus only the spiritual
branches are said to be holy; and by lump also, must be understood all the
spiritual seed, in this spiritual covenant; these distinctions duly noted, will
inlighten the soul to understand the place.

Rep. These are wild notional distinctions, and not to be found in Scripture:
it has been already proved; that Abraham as a believer had never two covenants
made with him* nor is there the least word of two covenants in the chapter, any
farther then that gross mistake of the Romans, who were looking after a
justification by works; as thinking the Law had been given by God to make men
righteous legally: these distinctions therefore of believing Abraham, and
working Abraham, a spi itual root, a carnal root, Abraham in a covenant of
works, Abraham in a covenant of Grace, a carnal and spiritual lump, instead of
inlightening the soul to understand the place, rise like a dark smoke out of
the pit of error, that the truth is not to be seen in them: therefore I may say
of him, as it was said of Reuben; Thou art the firstborn unstable as water,
thou shall not excel; the vanity of such stuff will appear by this that follows.

1 If Abraham in a covenant of works be the root from whence the natural
branches are broken off; then the Gentiles that are ingraffed are put into a
covenant of works; because the Apostle cleers it, that such who are ingraffed,
are put into the same stock from which the other were taken ver. 17. and calls
it a graffing in amongst them. So ver. 19. they were broken off, that we might
be ingraffed.

2 Then also when God shall re-ingraff the Jews, they must be put into Abraham
considered in a covenant of works, and so the covenant of works must continue
till this day; because there cannot be an ingr ffi^g where there is no stock,
ver. 24.

3 If the covenant of works be made the root, or Abraham in that covenant, then
the casting off the Jews from that covenant could never be called the
reconciling of the world, because the world could not be reconciled by a
covenant of works, and that the world was reconciled by that covenant is clear,
ver. 11.

4 If the covenant of works now be c^ast, since Christ's coming, as he implies,
the Gentiles could not be ingraffed into the spiritual part of the covenant,
till that was taken away; which indeed he having confessed in page 114. does
hereby contradict himself in what he has before affirmed, page 91. with many
other places, that Job and Jobs friends were all in the s^iritual covenant,
which was made as well to all nations as the Jews, and they had as much benefit
thereby as had the Jews.

5 If the ingraffing of the Gentiles, be to be understood only of the
spiritual lump as he says, then also is that spiritual lump ing^affed into a
covenant of works, from whence the natur^l bran^hes were cut off. For none of
that spiritual lump of Israel were ever c^^ ^ff, as himself confess th: thus we
may (briefly) see what ex^crable stuff he introduces by such wild notional d
stinctions.

P. In page 15 he expl^ins, Isai. ^5.23. They are the seed of the blessed of
the Lord and their off spring with them, which sait^ M. (...) me^nt one y of
the righteous offspring, i. e. such as are in the ^piritual covenant.

A. It is strange that a man should be so wilfully ignorant to g^ve a sense of
Scripture so directly contrary to the Scope and Ana^ysis thereof. For by
offspring is to be understood In^ants, as wi l a^pear by viewing the scope of
the place, which speaks of the conversion of Israel into that Gospel-state,
that shall be called the new Heavens, and new Earth: when they shall be brought
to re-inhabit their own land, under the Messiah, and enjoy the fruit of their
labors; And gives this as the reason why they should rejoice with God, and God
with them, Because they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their
offspring with them. As if he had said, though you and your offspring have
been discovenanted and cast off from being a people, scattered upon the face of
the earth; yet as you and your offspring were the seed of the blessed of the
L. i. e. of Abr. to whom all blessings were given; so you and your offspring
shall be as much ingraffed in all the blessings of Abraham, as you were before,
For they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with
them: which place does fully parallel Romans 11. when God shall ingraff the Jews
again as natural branches, into their own Olive Tree.

P. p. 116. This Text To. 11. does fully make against any fleshly covenant, or
fleshly line of believers, because from ver. 20, to 24, the Gentiles come to be
Abraham's spiritual seed, and so branches only by faith in Christ, the fat
Olive. And if the Gentiles are graffed in contrary to nature, then it cuts off
all Gentile-seed who came in by nature. And though the Jews were cut off for
unbelief, yet this opinion does ingraff the carnal seed of the Gentiles into
the midst of that unbelief.

A. That by natural branches is to be understood the Jews and their children;
and by branches wild by nature, the Gentiles and their children; has been
already proved. See the answer to page 82. And that the cutting off and
graffing in, related to Parents and children, has been also cleared. To which
I refer the Reader, only adding, Jer. 31.1. Isai. 65.23. therefore to
interpret by natural branches, only adult believers, and by branches wild by
natu e, the Infants of believers, is to restrain and eclipse the intent of the
Holy Ghost in the place cited, and supposes strongly, that all such adult
believers are really ingraffed into Christ: When as Christ himself tells us,
there may be some branches in him cut off and withered, Joh. 15.2, 4, 5, 6. And
that Infants are all damned, because all wild by nature

2 Where he tells us of ingraffing into the midst of their unbelief, is ^^lse;
for we ingraffe into that stock, Abr. from which they were cut ^ff for
unbelief. And if what he asserts in this, were true; then those believing Jews
and their children, which were not cut off, remain in the midst of their
unbelief, that were cut off. And thus we may s^e a man in his nakedness, and
yet without shame. I see I must pass over many of his absurdities, and
reiterations; because they come so fast upon me. In page 118 he again runs
retrograde.

P. If any hold believers and their seed within the covenant of grace, it is a
denying of Christ to be come in the flesh; and therefore he must needs be a
high Antichrist.

Rep. This has been already answered, and his vain confidence so to affirm
has been manifested, that it is apparent if the Reader will but take pains to
view the answer to his 93 page, it is no denying of Christ to be come in the
flesh, to maintain Infants right to the Covenant of Grace; yea it is a strong
Argument to prove Christ is come, because the blessing of Abraham is by Christ
handed over to the Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. which could not have been, if Christ
had not been exhibited in flesh; because the wall of partition could not have
been broken down; therefore M. P. lies under self-condemnation, because to deny
the blessing of Abraham's Covenant to be handed over to the Gentiles and their
seed, is to deny Christ exhibited, as that place of Paul proved, Gal. 3.14. so
that M. P. proves himself an Antichrist.

Let no man therefore dislike the truth for this Bears skin which this Author
of dipping has cast upon it. For it is the devils policy now Antichrist is
falling, to cry down all Gospel Truths for Antichristian, that so they may fall
also; but mauger all the malice of hell, the interest of Children in the
Covenant of Grace made with Abraham, shall stand and triumph, as a glorious
truth of the Gospel, when Antichrist and his children, all petty Antichrists
shall tumble together.

P. Page 118. He quotes, 2 Cor. 5.16. Henceforth we know no man after the
flesh: yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know
him so no more, which he explains thus: men were known and approved as
privileged persons in Gods Church, after the flesh; but henceforth we know no
man, no not Christ himself as interessed in the covenant of Abraham, he being a
Minister of a better covenant then that of Circumcision, grounded upon better
promises, etc. therefore we know no man after the flesh, no not Christ himself.

A. As all other places of Scripture hitherto brought, have been abused by
false explications, and applications, so is the intent and meaning of this Text
much wronged, and clouded: I shall therefore briefly clear it.

The Apostle is telling the Church of Corinth, that the Jew had no more benefit
by the death of Christ then the Gentile; for both Jew and Gentile were all
under sin, and were therefore all dead, If one dyed for all, then were all
dead. It seems many of them thought, that because Christ came from the Jews,
therefore he did bear more love to them then the Gentiles; and so it was good
being a Jew. To which Paul answers, True, if we that are Jews should judge
after the flesh according to our natural affection to our own Nation, then we
should say so too: but the love of Christ constrains us to judge otherwise,
that is, he did not look upon the benefit of this or that Nation peculiarly;
but this Christ had in his eye, Jew and Gentile were all dead: and upon this
account did Christ die. For if one dyed for all, then were all dead: as if he
had said, Christ did not intend this Jew should be more privileged then that
Gentile, though himself were a Jew: therefore henceforth know we no man after
the flesh, That is, we do not now look upon the Jew, to have any more
privilege then the Gentiles, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh,
that is, though we have known him to be a Jew, and to receive the seal of their
privileges only, yet henceforth we know him so no more, that is, we have no
more privilege now by Christ's coming from us, then the Gentiles; nor has
Christ any more income of privileges from us, then he has from the Gentiles;
ours is alike from him, and his is alike from us, and no difference. And that
this is the true intent of the words, see v. 17, 18, 19, 20. Old things are
past away, i. e. old privileges, that we claimed in Christ before others, they
are all now conveyed over to the world: and therefore he has committed to us
the Gospel of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, i. e. It was only our Nation that was reconciled, before
Parents and children called his sons, spouse, offspring, heirs; the blessings
of the covenant were ours only. But now all this is tendered to the world,
Therefore we as Ambassadors in Christ's stead beseech you to be reconciled. And
thus you have this innocent Text which has been turned against Abraham's seed
(though it harbors not a harsh syllable to babes) wrested out of the paw of the
Lion.

2 Let us view the second part: Christ himself should not be minded as at all
interessed in Abraham's Covenant, he being now a Minister of a better Covenant,
etc.

A. It has been already fully proved, That Abraham's Covenant in all parts
thereof was a full and complete covenant of Grace, and not of Works; Therefore
M. P. to say Christ should not be minded or known in that Covenant, is as much
as to say, that Jesus Christ is not to be minded as Mediator; for there is no
other Covenant that he is Mediator of but that; and if this be not a bird of
prey that flies in the Region of blasphemy; Let God Almighty and his people
judge.

Thus we may see what work ignorant men will make in preaching, that have only
a little Conscience, a great deal of Confidence, and a great Concordance.

This place also (notwithstanding any thing he has said) does vote for the
ingraffing of believing Gentiles and their seed into the covenant made with
Abraham, from which the believing Jews and their seed were cast out, therefore
( Job. 38.2.) who is this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge?

CHAP. XVII. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. with many other Texts cleared from his corrupt
interpretation.
P. Page 120. THe next Scripture he faceth, as intending to relieve it out of
our hands is, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Moreover brethren, I would not have you
ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and were all baptized
to Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink of the same spiritual drink. For they drank of that
rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ. This is another Scripture
made use of to prove a covenant of salvation to run in the flesh.

Rep. This Text was never pleaded to prove a covenant of life in the flesh; for
as we never affirmed such doctrines, so is this Text impertinent, for such a
purpose; but this we say, that this Scripture is by us brought to prove the
manner of baptising not to be by dipping; so that we see he has mistaken the
door like a blind man groping in the dark; therefore I shall wave much like
stuff that follows upon it.

P. Page 120. 121. Israel was baptized to Moses, a typical Mediator, not to
Christ, which is a main passage to be noted; and the covenant that Mose. was
Mediator of, was a covenant of works: and then he shows how the Law did type
out in that administration, our deliverance from sin, death, hell, the devil,
and what resemblance it had of these things, etc.

A. Though Israel was not baptized into Christ exhibited; yet as Moses was a
type of Christ, so they were baptized into Christ, Act. 3.22.

2. The Apostle holds forth Isreal's Baptism as a Sacrament, and brings it in
with the Manna and the Rock, which was Sacramentally Christ;

And compares these two, to the Sacraments of the Church of Corinth: who did
eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink. So that Christ
was as truly held forth in Isreal's Baptism Sacramentally, as in the Church of
Corinths baptism, and as much in the Rock and Manna amongst Israel, as in the
bread and wine in the Supper, amongst the Church of Corinth.

3 The Apostle by telling the Church of Corinth of Isreal's S craments and
deliverances they enjoyed from God [they were all baptized, and did all eat]
compares them with this Gospel Church, as an equal parallel, to let them know,
that as they had equal privileges, so the same since in a Gospel Church, would
bring down the same judgments; as it did already begin to work for their
unworthy receiving the Supper.

Now their privileges being compared as equal, and yet, Israel being all
baptized Sacramentally into Christ, men, women, and children, does clearly
import that the infant seed of that Church, to whom this example is brought,
were also baptized into Christ, or else the parallel could never hold: so that
what was done in baptising Israel ^o Moses as a typical Mediator, was but a
prefiguration of what should be done to Gods people Israel, i. e. men, women,
and children, under Christ the true Mediator; therefore this which he lays down
mainly to be observed, that Israel was not baptized to Christ, is observed to
be untrue: And as for the manner of baptising, either by sprinkling, or pouring
forth water; it is as fully held forth in this Text (as before proved) as that
they used wine in the Supper. But of this he speaks but little: though indeed
it is the main thing for which this Text is so often cond.

P. As to that where he tells us, Moses was a typical Mediator of a covenant of
works.

A. Then is Christ a Mediator of a covenant of works, and then he contradicts
what he affirmed in pap. 127: where making Abraham's covenant to be of works: he
tells us that Christ was not now to be considered or eyed, as a person
interessed in that, but a better covenant. And how a covenant of works can
stand with a Mediator, or a Mediator with such a covenant, is to me a paradox,
and not to be known I am sure on this side the water.

P. Those Teachers mentioned in Act. 15. that would impose a yoke upon the
disciples necks, were much like to those now, who plead for Infant Baptism. For
they had no warrant for what they did.

A. He appears mistaken: for our Ministers now, neither plead for Circumcision*
nor Justification by works which was the main rock, those primitive Churches
(by reason of the false teachers) were like to split upon; yea it is a thing
note worthy, that in all those primitive revolts from the truth, the false
Teachers did usher them in, by preaching up Circumcision, after the Law of
Moses; by which means they made rents and divisions in all Churches; so that,
had not Infants been Church Members, that were strongly riveted in their
Parents affections, it could have been no taking Argument to Parental-members,
to fall back to Judaism, or any probable ground of hopes to encourage the false
Teachers in their works: for upon the strain of Anabaptists they might have
done as they pleased, with their children Circumcise, or Paganize them; for
they were not to be of the visible Church til they were adult believers, and so
converted to the Faith by the word preached. And the very Text it self does
imply that children in the Primitive times were called Disciples; or else how
should it be called a putting a yoke upon the necks of the Disciples, after the
manner of Moses? It was the childrens necks, that bore the yoke; Zipporah knew
it right well: so that it is apparent, what he says of our Ministry in
comparing them to those false Teachers, is but his usual way of reproaches, in
which he shakes hands with those false Teachers mentioned, whose main work has
ever been to smite the shepherds, that the sheep may be scattered; and to
extinguish their light, that so their glowworm shining may be seen in the
dark. But I hope the light of these times, with the barking of the wolves now
abroad, will sufficiently discover them to be beasts of prey, though they go
mantled in sheeps clothing.

P. p. 124. This being premised, that Moses was a Typical Mediator; and their
baptism, and the Rock, and Manna a type of Christ: from hence the sense of the
Text is drawn plain, That as the spiritual disciple or Israelite is baptized
into Christ, so the temporal Israelite was baptized to Moses in the cloud and
sea: and they are called spiritual meat and drink by a figure.

A. He has no way to put off his false doctrines, but by turning all
Scriptures into allegorical notions: for what exposition he has here given is
as much besides the Text, and as unlikely to be true, as for me to say, the man
in the Moon is like M. P. for let us but consider, that those Sacraments were
spiritual to Israel, as Gods Church, as the Sacraments of the Gospel were
spiritual to the Church of Corinth. Now the Apostle in drawing the parallel,
does not speak of a spiritual Church in a carnal Church; or a spiritual
Israelite, and a carnal Israelite; thereby making only some to be baptized to
Moses, but tells as plainly they were all baptized to Moses. Whereas, this
whimsical notion would make us believe, there were some of Israel not baptized
to Moses: and when Paul says, they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and
did all drink the same spiritual drink; M. P. tells us directly contrary. You
see then with what evidence of truth he speaks, when the Authority of an
Apostle must vail before him: and though he says the Sacraments are spiritual
by a figure; yet if he were asked by what figure, he must either give a Parrots
answer, or say nothing; albeit he shows his ignorance to be meddling, and his
confidence (I am unwilling to call it worse) to notionallize the Sacraments
themselves; as if they were not a spiritual meat, and a spiritual drink to the
Church of God. By which we see, rather then he will have any dependence upon
the Law, he will run beyond the Gospel.

P. p. 127. Those typical signs and figures then, which typed out Christ to
come, did properly belong to the typical seed, the body of Israel, that typed
out the spiritual seed to come, in Gospel Ordinances instituted since Christ
came, which are for confirm ng, that he is come: and these belong only to the
spiritual seed in whom Christ is come already, dwelling in their hearts by
Faith.

A. Here is such a pack of distinct^ons, that were not (I believe) heard of in
past ages. It seems the spiritual Israel had no need of Ordinances; for they
did not properly belong to them, but to the carnal lump: and why then should
Abel, Noah, Abraham, and all the seed by promise, be sacrificers? why then
should David cry out after those water brooks, and even envy at the happiness
of those birds who had their nests near the Altar?

2 If the body of Israel did type out the spiritual seed to come under the
Gospel; then whom did the spiritual seed of Israel type out? either no body, or
by opposition the carnal Gospellers; for the spiritual Israel were types;
though yet the carnal Israel, or the body of Israel, it will be hard to prove
them types, especially in that nature, unless they were types of the Roman
Apostasy.

3 If temporal Israel did then type out the spiritual Israel now; then their
Apostasy, backslidings, divorce, and casting off, must type out the divorce,
apostasy, backslidings, and casting off the spiritual seed.

4 If the carnal seed in those typical Ordinances did type out none but
spiritual seed to be admitted to Gospel Ordinances; then all that are now
Church Members, must needs be spiritual, and so there are no hypocrites now in
the Church: Let the world judge whether this is not wretched stuff, which yet
is the natural consequence of thi^ unnatural distinction:

P. 128. It was not necessary, that all that were Circumcised should believe
and repent, and so be first made Disciples: but Baptism is a confirmation of
our Regeneration and our New Birth, and Union with Christ by Faith. And
therefore belongs to them only, that are regenerated and born again of water,
and the Spirit: so the Lords Supper, Let a man examine himself, etc.

A. It was necessary that Abraham should be a believer, before Israel could be
circumcised. For had not Abraham believed, there had been no such seal given to
his family; as is already proved.

2 (To let pass his Tautologies as the least of his offense) If baptism belongs
only to such as are regenerated; why was Judas, Demas, Magus, and those Act.
20.29, 30. baptized? or how shall it be known who is newborn? or can it
confirm Grace where there is none? what confirmation was it of the New Birth to
Judas and the rest? surely his words must admit of a large charity, to think
that all that are dipped have truth of Grace confirmed in them thereby.

P. Page 130. The carnal Israelite was as capable to perform every Ceremonial
Law without Faith, as truly as the Believers:

A. A man had need of a belief of the biggest size also to credit this; for the
true performance of those typical Sacrifices was not barely in the work done,
but when the worshippers had an eye to Christ, which the true believer then,
ever had. For the main ing edient to make that worship truly performed, was
Faith then, as it is now; and he might with as much truth say, that he that is
formal in Gospel-duties, either in prayer, hearing, receiving, does as truly
perform them, as he that is a true believer. It is to me a most unsavory
expression, and such loose stuff, that surely if there be any close-walking.
Friends to the truth, they cannot but reprove such loose doctrines.

P. Ibid. There is no less then a profession of Faith required in the Church of
England, before baptism; and therefore this does justify what we hold, and
condemn what they practice.

A. He begins now to fly low, to seek to streng hen his feeble practice, by
the Liturgy and Canon of the Church of England; who before does seemingly
rejoice, that he is converted both from their doctrines and practice, but what
if they do hold that profession of Faith and Repentance, should precede
baptism? so do we all. And as Faith was to Abraham, and is to us the condition,
by which all our seed is taken into covenant with the Parent: so baptism seals
the covenant, and upon this ground Peter moved his hearers to be baptized: he
backeth the motion, not barely from their own interest in the promise, as
personal believers; but upon the joint interest of their children with them,
upon their Parental believing, Act. 2.38, 39. Repent and be baptized, For the
promise is to you and your children: implying that the covenants sealed, should
run as largely as the covevenant. As it was to the grand covenant Parent of all
the heirs of promise: i. e. Abraham. Thus all Noah's children were bap^ized in
that typical baptism, with their believing parents in the Ark, 1 Pet. 1, 3, 21.
Genesis 7.1. which was upon the same covenant-account, that Abraham and his seed
were circumcised, and that a parental covenanting faith does reach the seed; so
as to incorporate them into external privileges, Gods carriage to Moses, when
he neglected his duty to seal his child, does sufficiently evince, Exodus 4.2, 4,
5, 6. and agrees with Genesis 17.14.

2 Faith and Repentance is required also upon a personal account to initiate
such as come to years, that are converted to embrace the Gospel, as Jews or
Heathens, or any other unbaptized persons. But therefore I hope that since he
has brought this instance, he will afford them to interpret their own meaning,
which they have best done by their practice, though it may be not so orderly as
he ought. However we cannot but observe in this as in the like, by searching
after Antiquities, and quoting the presidents of ancient Churches, and wracking
the books and meaning of the Fathers, as C. B. and others have done, they would
gladly get some humane Authority to countenance their Innovations. But their
fingers have been knocked off from that by worthy Mr Cobbet of New England, that
I believe they do not much care to plead humane Antiquities more.

P. p. 32. If the covenant of life belongs to all believers seed, then we need
nor want for Church Members; because all the world are the children and
offspring of believing Noah: therefore this Argument carries the right of
covenant to all the world, because they are the children of a believer.

A. We do not baptize believers children for want of Church Members, but
because it is an Ordinance of Christ. And though all the world be the
offspring of believing Noah, yet what he affirms is untrue, that therefore
Noah's Faith carries the right of covenant to all the world, upon these reasons.

1 Because God did not pitch upon Noah to make him the Father of the Faithful,
as he did upon Abraham to whom he gave the promises, Heb. 11.17.

2 Therefore as children, we are to acknowledge him to be our father, that God
has made to be so, which is faithful Abraham, to whom he gave the seal, and
not faithful Noah. And had God pitched upon Noah, as he did upon Abraham, no
question but Noah had circumcised his son as Abraham did, but

3 Had God chosen Noah as he did Abraham, yet it follows not, that all the
world could claim a covenant-right to the seal, because all the world were not
heirs of promise, as we see, the seal continued not in the race of Ishmael;
because discovenanted, though yet he was a son of Abraham. For upon the same
ground, M. P. argues all Abraham's offspring to the worlds end should have been
circumcised. But therefore Faith ingraffs, as unbelief cuts off: by all which
we see how vainly confident he is, in what he says, and affirms: Thus the
honor and reputation of that Text 1 Cor. 10. stands untoucht. For indeed
whatsoever he has brought thereupon, with which he fills twelve pages
together, is but mere impertinences; because he has taken a wrong aim from the
Text.

CHAP. XVIII. The clearing of Mark 10.13. about children being brought to
Christ with other Scriptures.
THe next place he pretends to meet us in by way of encounter is, Mark 10.13.
And they brought young children to him that he should touch them. And his
Disciples rebuked them that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much
displeased and said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not: For of such is the kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.

P. The first thing to be considered is, whose children these were, whether of
wicked or godly Parents; but by the former discourse in the chapter, it should
seem they might be wicked and ungodly Parents, because there was such mentioned
before that tempted Christ.

Rep* Be sure ill will never thinks well, and his ground to think they were
wicked, is non at all; for how often does one and the same chin Scripture speak
of three or four distinct things that have no connection with each other, the
subsequent having no dependence upon preceding discourse? it is needless to
give instances, the Scripture is full thereof. But

2 That they were believing Parents, consider these grounds: First they were
such, that in those days did visibly own Christ, and if we consult Mark 10.
fully; It was not long before Christ's Passion, when he had many enemies abroad.
And therefore danger might ensue such an action. And who would adventure to
abide the frowns of great men for Infants, were it not their own Parents, and
such also that had a face heavenward? Again he

P. Consider also wherefore they were brought to Christ, it could not be to
baptize them, because Christ himself baptized none; therefore it was probably
to cure some bodily disease or distemper, for the Text says, he laid his hands
upon them and blessed them.

A. We never brought the place to prove that Christ baptized them; but to show
the abundant love, care, and good will, that Christ bears to such little ones;
especially to take such into his kingdom. And for him to say or think, that it
was to cure them of some disease, is st^ange. For why then should such words be
added? why then should he take them up into his arms? why should it be called a
blessing them? it is a word too high for a common cure, yea to think the
Apostles should keep any off from Christ, that came to be ^ured of diseases,
smells too much of uncharitableness. It is clear therefore they were brought to
Christ for a blessing, which though it were not baptism, it might be for
confirmation after baptism, for it is likely they were baptized by John,
because the pl^ce where it was done, was in the coasts of Judea: where John had
before been bap^izing; which also gives some more probable grounds (I say no
more) that their Parents were godly; because as John pointed at Christ in ad
ministering the Ordinance, so we find these taking notice of Christ
accordingly; and that there was imposing of hands after baptism, consider, Act.
8.17, 18. chapter 16.6. sure it is Christ would have us learn something from that
carriage of his, that Infants are capable of covenant-blessings, for in that
channel all blessings run By which it is apparent that we have the stronger
ground (especially, if to it be added a finger of Charity) that their Parents
were not only godly, but the children had been before taken into Abraham's
covenant. And the seal thereof, as will further appear in the next. --

P. For of such is the kingdom of God.

Now it is doubtful whether these children had believing Parents to the fifth or
sixth generation; therefore if you make it to countenance that error of the
covenant in the flesh: that appears erroneous, in that the greatest number of
believe^s children never belonged in that sense to the kingdom of God. Adam had
a Cain, as well as an Abel. Noah had a Ham, as well as a Shem, Abraham had an
Ishmael as well as an Isaac, Isaac had Esau as well as Jacob; and so through
the Scripture, God brings forth a generation of wicked from the godly, and a
generation of godly from the wicked indefinitely.

A. That we have good grounds to judge their parents godly, has before been
made appear: but if this were all the difference, methinks a sober is more
becoming then a censorious judgment. -- By kingdom of God we are to understand
the visible Church: most properly of such is the kingdom. For otherwise it had
not been a suitable reproof, for their offense, in that it lied in their not
suffering children to be brought to him to receive an outward favor and
blessing. They could not have hindered them from the kingdom of glory, but from
the visible Church they might; therefore Christ takes them up roughly, Suffer
them to come unto me, and forbid them not. In which there is a double command,
implying much heat of spirit against such an action, and much love and tender
affection to the babes, as if he had said, do you that are my disciples reject
them, because they are children? I would have you know for time to come, they
are as capable of blessings as your selves. For of such is the kingdom of God;
my church and kingdom is made up of such, as well as of men and women. Methinks
Christ here looks with a chiding countenance upon the Anabaptists of our times,
who are guilty of the same offense.

II. P. But how wide is that which remains, from the business, where he says
the greatest number of believers seed never belonged to Gods kingdom, when as
we know the very instances by him cited, do sufficiently prove, that the seed
of believers, though they have proved vile and wicked, yet they did belong to
the visible Church and kingdom, till by casting out they were discovenanted.
Did not Cain belong to the Church as well as Abel? see Genesis 4.3, 4, 5. Heb.
11.4. So in Noah's Family, were not Ham and Japhet as well baptized in the Ark,
and so members as well as Shem? was not Ishmael as well a Churchmember in
Abraham's family as Isaac; so Esau the like as well as Jacob? These are his own
examples, by which we see from the very first preaching of the Gospel, the seed
of believers have ever had a visible right of Church Membership, till cast out;
and of such was the kingdom, and says Christ of such is the kingdom: so that
if the kingdom was of such, and is of such, then for shame acknowledge them to
be subjects.

P. If children be admitted into the kingdom of God, by virtue of a covenant of
life made by faith and generation, then this crosses the doctrine of the
New Birth, Joh. 3.5.

A. The contrary has been already proved; for if that were true, how came that
doctrine of the New Birth to be taught in Israel, by the place cited? and yet
their seed were then admitted Church Members, as now. I refer the Reader to my
former Answer to the third fundamental. As for the making a covenant of life by
birth, we abhor it, as has been often said; it is only a visible right we
plead for, and that which they ever had.

P. p. 135. The place before cited is explained by Mat. 18.3, 4, 5, 6. He that
offends one of these little ones that believe in m^, where it is spoken of
children in grace, and whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a
little child shall not enter therein, that is, such like in grace as these in
nature.

A. That the words are spoken of Infants is clear, for Christ took a little
child and set in the midst of the disciples, and tells them that such did
believe.

2 The resemblance cannot hold, for children are pettish, cross, and froward by
nature, therefore that example had been very unsuitable, but Christ shows the
right such little ones had to the kingdom; because they had faith, And
whosoever receives not the kingd^m of God as a little child; that is, as a
little child receives it; clearly implying that such children are capable of
receiving admission into the kingdom. Therefore it does not at all relate to a
parity.

P. And whereas he afterward tells us, to expound it of believers adult, is
most agreeable to the Analogy of says, and that the whole Word of the Lord
disclaims the contrary, as destructive to Gods truth:

A. The Analogy of faith has ever taken in children into the Church, and
kingdom; therefore his high language is but like a flash of lightning, and
fitter to take with children and boys, then with men of Reason and Conscience:
What he has said hitherto has been examined, and not a word in Gods book
makes against it. But the whole tenor of Scripture with much pleasant harmony
does agree to give believers seed a name in Gods house. And whereas he says
such a practice destroys the truth of God, it has been also sifted, and it
pleads to his Charge, Not guilty.

CHAP. XIX. The Word Administration carpt at by M. P. justified, and Gal. 4.
answered and cleared.
Obj. p. 137. But this which you call a covenant of Works consisting of
temporal Promises, Laws, and Statutes, is to be understood of a form of
administration of the covenant of Grace, and not a distinct covenant of Works.

P. I know this Objection some bring, but if it be well weighed, it is
inconsistent with their own Arguments, for if that be true, then was there no
covenant made with Abraham's seed, but only the administration of a covenant;
therefore ill do they affirm, that the covenant was made with them; therefore
the Administration. This Objection is false and groundless, as appears by
several express Texts of Scripture which do evidently prove it two distinct
covenants.

A. He here quarrels with the word administration, because he understands it
not, for though it be so called, by reason the spiritual part runs therein, yet
it loses not the name of a covenant; because it is man's part of the covenant,
and called Gods covenant; and yet it is Gods administration to man. For his
grand mistake is, in that he thinks the covenant of grace has no conditions,
but absolute; the contrary to which is before proved. The Rainbow in the clouds
is called Gods covenant, Genesis 9. As here circumcision is called his covenant,
but surely M P. will not deny but it is an administration, wherein Gods favor
to the world is manifested; how else can it be called a token of the covenant,
and a sign thereof; as a so is circumcision called a sign and seal, and token
of the covenant. And when God says this is my covenant, he means not a
distinct covenant from the other; but that part of the other which related to
man's duty. And so it was Gods Administration Office to the world. I need not
stand much upon this, because it is so fully spoken to before, in proving
circumcision no covenant of works. For the leprosy that overspreads all his
book, arises from that. I shall briefly touch upon this word administration,
to show the propriety thereof, as used in the Objection. The Apostle Paul in 1
Cor. 12. uses the same word in the same sense, there are differences of
administration, that is, one legal, the other Gospel, but the same Lord. He is
there showing the different estate that was betwixt Jew and Gentile in the
things of God; and therefore when he speaks to the Corinthians in ver. 2. he
speaks so as that he would have them understand the difference, betwixt true
and false worshippers, ye know brethren that ye were Gentiles carried away to
these dumb Idols, even as you were led. But afterward having showed that
Christ was to have a mystical Church-body in the world, which was to consist of
Jews and Gentiles; he tells us that in the completing of this body there are
different administrations; yet so as that both Jew and Gentile are baptized by
one spirit into this one body. So that those words, different administrations,
can relate to no more sorts of people, but Jew and Gentile; and therefore can
be but two; namely the Jewish or legal Administration, and the Gentile, or
Gospel-Administration, and the baptism of the Holy Spirit of God working in
both of them; and yet so, as that the Jews and their children, and the Gentiles
and their children make up as one seed, this one body of the mystical Church:
ver. 12, 13, 38. Gal. 3.14, 16. compared; and this different Administration
came from Christ as Lord; therefore called the same Lord, implying that Christ
as Lord gave Israel that typical Administration, and so Christ as Lord changed
it, and set up a Gospel-Administration: and in this sense is Christ called the
Lord also of the Sabboth-day; clearly implying that what change has been made
of Sabboth-seals, or any other Ordinances, it was done by the Prerogative-Royal
of Jesus Christ, as Lord thereof; for the use of that one body and Lordship of
his (the Church:) by which we see there are two, and but two Administrations;
which therefore as it may satisfy M. P. in the significancy of the word, and
yet remain as a covenant also; so does it meet with that licencious rotten
abuse of this word, in making as many several administrations as there are new
opinions in the world.

P. p. 138. He brings many Scriptures to prove that Circumcision is called a
covenant, not an administration, Genesis 17.7, 13. Heb. 8.6, 7, 8. etc.

A. Though God calls it not an administration, but a covenant, yet it becomes a
covenant made with man by virtue of administration, and the meaning is no more
but this, that Grace to man runs through those Ordinances. If Circumcision be a
covenant, it must have an administrator, or else the covenant ceases. If it be
a covenant to Isaac, then Abraham must administer it; so baptism is an
Ordinance, yet had it no administrator, it would cease to be an Ordinance: it
is true there may be a neglect of an Ordinance, as there was of Circumcision,
and yet the Ordinance continued, for they wanted not an administrator.

2 Though God called it not an administration in Genesis 17. yet Paul called it so
in 1 Cor. 12. as is before proved, and surely M. P. will not deny, but that
Paul spoke by the spirit of God when he so called it.

3 It Is also called an administration, in reference to the care and pains Gods
people are to take in administering for their Fathers estate, left in a way of
Will and Testament, which is to be made sure into that administration-office of
Gods Ordinances, both then under Law, and now under the Gospel; according to 2
Pet. 10, 11. For so an entrance shall be administered abundantly into the
everlasting kingdom. By all which therefore we see the word is proper, full,
and significant, only carpt at out of ignorance: that it remains to be a
covenant, i. e. on man's part and an administration, i. e. the way God has
appointed to convey justification to life, and both these reaches Parents and
children.

As for all those Scriptures he here brings to prove two covenants, and
therefore one of works; they have been already answered, to which I refer the
Reader, only I shall take in one or two Scriptures in which he has made sad
work, that have not been so fully answered before, because I intended it for
this place. The first is

Page 140. Gal. 4.21. Tell me ye that desire to be under the Law, Do ye not
hear the Law? For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a
bond-maid, the other by a free woman; but he who was by the bond-maid was born
after the flesh, but he of the freewoman, was born by promise, which things
are an Allegory, i. e. by these things other things are meant. For these are
the two covenants: the one from Mount Sinai in Arabia, which gendreth to
bondage, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her
children. But Jerusalem which is above is free: which is the Mother of us all.
Now, we brethren, as Isaac was, are children of the promise: but as then he
that was after the flesh, persecuted him that was of the spirit, even so it is
now; but what says the Scripture? cast out the bondwoman, and her son, for
the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free: so then
brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

P. From hence observe, that Abraham is here a type of God, and his two wives,
Sarah and Hagar with their two children, are a type of the two covenants, and
the two seeds in those covenants, and both continued in Abraham's house together
for a time. But when Isaac was born and Ishmael was found s^offing, then Sarah
the freewoman, will have Hagar and her son live no longer in the house with
her and her son.

Again Abraham had first the free woman, and last the bondwoman; the
freewoman was sometimes barren in Abraham's house, the bondwoman was fruitful;
the mystery of all is this: First God made a covenant of Grace, which proved
barren.

Secondly, He made a covenant of works in his Church, which proved fruitful;
that had abundance of seed which became his by nature without Faith, all which
time the covenant of grace and works agreed well together in Gods house: but
when the true Isaac was born. i. e. Christ; without strength of nature, but by
faith in a promise; yet still grace and works as two covenants dwelt together:
but when Christ is weaned, i. e. come into the Ministry, then all the ^ons of
Hagar, the old covenant, i. e. the Scribes, Pharisees, persecuted Christ, and
all those in him: whereupon the freewoman or covenant of grace dothtestifie,
that the covenant of works with her seed, shall no longer remain in the Church
of God, but only the children of the freewoman born by faith in a promise,
must for time to come remain in Gods house, therefore now rejoice thou barren
that barest not, the covenant of grace is become fruitful in all Nations, and
therefore Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all; and
that us or we, i. e. members of the Primitive Church be formed, from above by
faith in a promise.

From hence it is plain, there were no carnal babes in the Church: but when
Christ the true seed of grace was persecuted by the Jews; he seed of the
covenant of works, the Gospel, does plentifully hold forth the abolishing
thereof, and casting out those bond-children out of the Church of God.

Rep. To show the vanity of all this, we must track him by due parallel, by
which we shall see the mysterious depths of confusion he is un into; after
which I shall bri^fly clear up the Apostles intent from that Scripture.

1 If Abraham stands here as a type of God, and his two wives as type of the
two covenants: then as Hagar b^ought forth Ishmael to Abraham a type of God; So
must the covenant of works bring forth by strength of nature, children unto
God; and those children are as ^uely the sons of God, as those born by promise:
as Ishmael was as ^uely son to Abraham, as Isaac.

2 As Abraham's affection was, that Ishmael might be the son of promise, so is
it Gods desire that the seed of the covenant of works should be the seed of
promise.

3 As Hagar and Sarah lived together in Abraham's family a type of God, till
Ishmael scoft Isaac, so shall the two covenants and their seeds dwell together
in heaven, till the covenant of grace be scoft at, by Hagars seed.

P. Secondly, When he comes to explain himself, then says M. P. God made a
covenant of grace which proved barren, and then a covenant of works which
proved fruitful, as Abraham had first Sarah, then Hagar.

A. Did not God know the covenant of Grace would prove barren?

2 Because that covenant proved barren, therefore the other covenant was given
to God that he might have seed, as Hagar was given by Sarah, to Abraham that
was the type of God.

3 To make Abraham a type of God here, is to make him a creator: that as God
made the two covenants which were to be as his two wives; so Abraham made Sarah
and Hagar. I hope when M. P. comes to review his work, and to consider what
gross wickedness follows, in ma^ing Abraham the type of God; he will blush at
his own boldness, blindness, and ignorance.

P. Thirdly, When Christ the true Isaac was named, i. e. came nto the
Ministry, then the Scribes and Pharisees persecuted Christ, upon which the
freewoman or covenant, cast out the bondwoman and her sons, i e. the covenant
of works and her children by nature, which was the National Church of the Jews.

A. All this while he has carried on the parallel of the two covenants, till
he has cast out all the Jews and their offspring, that pleaded a right to
Abraham's covenant in the flesh: but M. P. forgets, that the Apostle tells us
there was some never broken off, nor never cast out, when as some of the
branches were broken off, Romans 11.17. and he forgets that the natural branches,
i. e. the Jews and their children, shall be taken in again, ver. 24, 25, 26,
27. which must be therefore into the o^d flock, or root, which remains.

P. Fourthly the freewoman or covenant, does now testify that the bondwoman,
i. e. the covenant of works and her children, shall never remain in Gods Church
now; but only the children of the freewoman shall remain in Gods house.

A. By children of the freewoman he understands real and true believers: so
that the inference rises thus: that in the Gospel-house and Church of Christ,
there shall be none that belongs to the covenant of works, that's abolisht, and
the seed cast out, that now the Churches are all Saints, are all heirs, all
freeborn, no hypocrites; and thus what Paul writ to the Romans, Galatians,
Philippians, and tells us that in those Gospel-Churches there were many under
that covenant, and yet Church Members, is by M. P. reproved for falsehood, for
the free-covenant of grace had cast out the covenant of works and her seed long
before.

P. Fifthly, Now rejoice then barren that barest not, the covenant of Grace is
become fruitful in all Nations; therefore Jerusalem which is above is free,
which is the mother of us all, i. e. of us the primitive Church born by faith
in a promise.

A. The Reader may remember he has often before told us, that the spiritual
covenant of grace, as it did not run upon intail, so was it made indifferently
to all Nations, and that it was not confined to the Jews. For in that spiritual
covenant, all Nations had a like share and benefit, in thy seed all nations are
blessed. Now if that be true, then this is false. For what cause has the barren
covenant of Grace to ^ejoyce now, more then it had of old, for she had her seed
in all Nations then, according to the intent of promise: or if this be true,
what he has said before is false; so that take it which way you will, he is
judged out of his own mouth.

2 To that other part, consider how many hypocrites there were in the primitive
Church, Judas with his followers often mentioned; were these born from above by
faith in a promise? thus then his own Conscience may by this time tell him, he
has been deceived and deuded in the opening of S^r ptures. Abraham was no type
of God in this Gal. 4. but held forth as the father of the Church-seed, v. 22.
And so Hagar brings forth children to Abraham as well as Sarah; the ^ree intent
of this place appears to be this

The Apostle in this chapter brings this Allegory, to convince those Galatians,
which having embraced Christ, were fallen back to the Law Ceremonial, and to
seek for justification by works. And therefore he calls them fools, and tells
them they were bewi^ched to fall back from Gospel O^dinances, to the Law; from
the spirit, to the flesh; from liberty, to bondage, chapter 3.11.5.1, 2, 3, 4. and
having used many pressing Arguments in the preceding chapter, he at last comes
in with this example of Sarah and Hagar, to show that as Hagar when she thought
to mistress it, was cast out of Abraham's family; so So the Law ceremonial, when
made a covenant of works, and the Law moral also, in that abusive sense was to
be cast out of the Church of God, both under the Law, and under the Gospel. But
as Sarah was contented to have Hagar dwell with her a servant, so in that sense
did the law ceremonial and moral attend grace, being in truth the Law of
Christ. But as a covenant of works, it could not make one heir of promise;
Therefore it was but a foolish thing for the Galatians to think by works to
merit heaven: for there was never any man saved by works, chapter 3.11. But if your
heart and affections be set that way, it genders to bondage, and makes you
fruitful to hell, and so leaves you under the curse of God, v. 24, 25. look
upon Jerusasalem and her children, that is, upon all those amongst them, that
lived under the works of the Law, and were mistaken, as you are. Are they not
all in bondage? and does not Gods wrath lie upon them at this day? ver. 25.
Then again look the other way, See to Jerusalem which is above, the Church in
heaven, or the Church that has her conversation in heaven, she is free, she
got heaven by faith, and was justified by faith, and not by works; she is our
mother, ver. 26 so before was not Abraham our Father justified by faith? And
here, Is not the Church our mother got to heaven by faith? And what, shall we
think to be justified by our works? No says Paul, it is a mistake; for the
desolate i. e. the Gentile-Church, shall have more children then the warryed
wife, i. e. the Jewish Church: therefore let the Gentiles rejoice rather, and
be thankful that God has made them more fruitful then to fall back to a
covenant of works: and then again he brings in Isaac. Look to him, For as he
was, we are children of promise. As if he had said, we are to look to Abraham's
covenant, and how the promise was made with him, and his seed. The present
condition of this Church resembles that family: though he had many children;
yet there was but one Isaac, to whom the covenant was conveyed: therefore away
with this Justification by works, cast it out, it will not make you heirs, so
then brethren we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the free. Thus you
have briefly the natural meaning of the places; after all those unheard of
parallels, and confused constructions, wherewith it has been entangled, to
make it speak for a knocking of that little nail of Infants out of that sure
place of Gods house.

The next Scripture that falls in to be considered, is Act. 13, 45, 46. when
the Jews saw the multitude, they were filled with envy, and spoke against those
things that were spoken: then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold and said, it was
necessary the word of God should be first spoken to you; but seeing you put it
away, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, Lo we turn to the
Gentiles; for so has the Lord commanded us.

P. From this Text it is clear, that when Christ the true seed was persecuted
by the Jews, and the Gospel rejected; all those children of the covenant of
works were cast forth of Gods Church; the Apostles h^ving left them.

A. Though Paul and Barnabas had left the Jews; yet Peter, James and John, who
were the Apostles of the circumcision, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. had not left them, but
continued; therefore this proves nothing at all, for the discovenanting of
children.

2 Suppose they had been wholly left by the Apostles, and so were all in
bondage with their children (as that's the drift of his words) then their
rejecting the Gospel, which caused the Apostles to leave them, was the ground
of theirs, and their childrens falling into bondage. The Apostles bringing that
Gospel to the Gentiles, supposes that upon the embracing of that Gospel, they
and their children were freed from such a bondage: or take it in his own
phrase; though the covenant of works and her children were cast out of the
Church, yet the covenant of Grace and her children are still remaining in Gods
Church.

P. Therefore whereas M. P. tells us in page 145. that the forementioned
Objection is answered, and that we have no ground in Gods word for
Infant Baptism: --

A. He has not given the least show of an Answer to the Objection, but it
still stands in force, as is by this manifest; and notwithstanding all his vain
distinctions, workings, and counterworkings, of Scriptures, to make them speak
a word of comfort to his practice, doctrine, and opinion, and of confutation to
us; they still cry out in the behalf of childrens right to the seal; as those
little ones did, who met Christ with branches of Palm Trees, Blessed is he that
comes to us in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Reader, we are
run through the main body of all his Arguments and Scriptures, what remains
behind is very little; only heats of spirit against such as will not follow
him to the Rivers side, and so like those blind men Christ speaks of, follow a
blind guide till they both tumble into the water. But because the temper of his
spirit shall be seen, I shall therefore briefly touch upon the remainder as it
comes to hand.

CHAP. XX. Contains the Answer to many Scriptures by him abused: to the end --
Page 145. HE quotes Ezekiel. 14.2, 3, 4, 5. The word of the Lord came to me
saying, Son of man, these men have set up their Idols in their hearts, and put
the stumbling block of their iniquity before their faces, should I be inquired
of by these, etc?

P. In which place you see, when souls set up an Idol in their hearts, God does
answer them according to that Idol. Therefore such as defend Infant Baptism
from a covenant of Grace in the flesh, they defend and maintain a dangerous
error, and consequently, it must be rotten and false.

A. Well argued Sir, is it not? who is it that has set up an Idol in his
heart? what all the Churches of Christ throughout the world? Surely were not
your heart swelled with pride, though yet pretending a voluntary humility, to
catch souls into your snares, you durst not spe^k such condemning words, to
abuse the way and Word of God.

P. Page 146 He gives another result, childrens baptism has no ground from the
word of God, either command or example, but only a consequence; so that it is
merely a tradition of men's setting up, in the room and place of the commands of
God, to wit, baptism of believers, and thus they make void the commands of God,
Mar. 7 7 and th^s is the very sin of those that plead for Infant Baptism, when
Gods word s^ith Repent and be baptized, and arise, why tarryest thou? be
baptized. These and many more are made void by christening of children, and
thus poor souls are nursed up in ignorance, etc.

A. It had been far better to have overturned our pract ce by dint of A^gument,
Scripture and Reason, and to have left cut all such superfluity of naughtiness,
which tend^ only to reviling these Texts have been already answered, and our
practice has appeared to be warranted from the covenant of Grace, and the
pleasing consent of Scriptures, which is undenyab e to any man that is not
partinacious in his errors; it is an Ordinance, that the Churches of Christ
stand possessed of, and does he think to persuade good men from their Religion,
R^ason, and Conscience, by telling us it is a teaching for Doctrines, the
Traditions of men? He must therefore come to a new result, and tell us when the
Tradition began, in what age or time, who was the first Author; it was not set
up by Antichrist, he is little more then of 1200 years standing. And as M.
Cobbet in his answer to Denn and Blackwood, with several others, who have
labored to find out the first rise, cleers it, to be the practice of the
Churches for hundreds of years before Antichrist rose; to conclude this, if it
be a Tradition, it was received from the man Christ Jesus, who tells us, of
such is the kingdom.

P. Page 147. He brings Lev 10.1, 2. and compares Infant Baptism, to their
offering strange fire to God, which he had not commanded, for which God burnt
them with fire from heaven. --

A. It Is a very good lesson, well learnt, but by that rule he would be put by as
a person not fit for a Minister of the Gospel; how much strange fire has he
cast up and down these Nations, such, by which he has at least endeavored to
burn down whole Churches? And how much strange water has he overwhelmed poor
weak Christians by, to the dishonor of God and his ways? God is gentle in
driving his flock, and the tender Lambs he carries in his bosom, and gives them
rest; and tells them his yoke is easy: but his opinion and practice is to
persuade the people of God that they serve a hard Master, etc.

That be they never so weak and tender, yet must they stoop to a destructive
practice, and that in the sharpest seasons, as if men and women were made of
some other mettle, and not flesh and blood. But methinks the Scripture he
brings should make him see his error. If Nadab and Abihues sin was offering up
such fire which he commanded not, then it seems God expected, they should pick
out his meaning, by comparing things rationally together; for they had no
express command not to offer such, or what fire they should offer; but fire
they were to offer* by which we see, if God gives but the hint of a truth, he
will have his children to find out the whole: so that, had we only the hint
of Gods mind touching Abraham's covenant, how it took in believers and their
seed under the Old Testament; and it being a covenant of pure grace, and
therefore unchangable; reaching to the Gentiles, and such an example as he gave
in Zacheus a Gentile, calling him a son of Abraham, and therefore salvation was
come to his house: I say such hints as these, had we nothing else to say; were
enough for us Gentiles to pick out the rest; that if they had Abraham's covenant
and blessing given, then in the same extent, and surely the seal must follow. I
only touch this by the by. It has been before cleared, that every part and
parcel of Gods word is for us, to justify our practice of Infant Baptism.

But suppose his own sense of this place were to be understoo^d concerning
Nadab and Abihu, as a reproof to us for practicing things without a command, in
so many express words, or syllables; then also it is offering up strange fire
in his sense, for Christians under the Gospel to keep the Sabbath; because it
is not so expressly commanded in the New Testament: which without any
peradventure must upon the account he pleads be his judgment; and were it not
for a curbing power, I doubt would quickly be his pract^ce. But take heed M. P.
that your heart be not rotten in this, lest strange fire or strange water make
you a like example with those persons before mentioned.

P. Page 148. He applies these Texts to our practice, Jer. 9.13, 14, 15. 1 Samuel
13.12, 13. Jer. 8 9. Because they have forsaken my Law, and walked after the
imaginations of their own hearts; therefore I will give them to feed on
wormwood, and give them the water of Gall to drink, and will consume them.
Again, therefore the wise are dismayed and ashamed, they have rejected the word
of the Lord. Therefore will I give their wives to others, etc. They have built
the high places of Tophet in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their
sons and daughters in the fire, which I commanded them not.

A. What could th^s Author say more, and how could the Scriptures be more
abused, and the powers of the Nations be more struck at? his voice speaks
nothing but Gall and Wormwood, and consumings, and giving our wives to others,
and telling us we sacrifice our children to devils, offer them to our own
inventions, set up our posts by Gods posts, and our selves in the room of God?
Is there not (think you) a young Pope sprung up in these Nations, who begins to
throw fire out of his sleeve to terrify the world? Magistrates, are you all a
sleep? I am sure you are not all Anabaptists, you own the Ordinance of
Infant Baptism. Why will you suffer it to be reproacht, and Christ therein? Do
you not see the language he gives you for offering your children to God, which
he calls to the devil? for such are Idolaters, devil-worshippers, Romans 9.20. 1
Cor. 10.19, 20, 21. Deuteronomy. 32.17. Psalm. 106.36, 37. is Satan ever the more to be
hugged in the bosom for his bringing of Scripture, when it is only to hide the
Serpents sting in the tail? Awake, awake, put on strength, O thou Arm of the
Lord. Consider what your duty is touching the first Table, and remember honest
New England.

P. The Scripture by M. P. quoted against us, is 2 Cor. 26.14, 15. of Vzza who
fearing the fall of the Ark, put his hand to it to bear it up without a
command, and King Vzziah who meddled with burning Incence, without Authority
from God. And being wroth with the Ministers of God, the leprosy rose up in
his forehead and Gods wrath brake forth upon him.

A. If these Texts by him cited, are not applied to his own heart; it is a sign
he is obdurat, and some sad judgments are like to befall him; for the places
are directly parallel to his own practice: what did Vzza do, that M. P. does
not? Has he not put to his hand to stay up the Ark of God without a command or
call to the Ministry? yea rather, is he not endeavoring to his utmost to pull
it down? What did Vzziah do, that he does not? It appertains not to thee
Vzziah to burn Incence to the Lord, Go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have
sinned. And it shall not be for thine honor from the Lord God, ver. 18. Did God
punish a King? and shall it be unpunisht in a mean man, who not only intrudes,
but also strikes the faithful Ministers and servants of God with his Censor, I
mean with a reviling tongue? but it shall not be for his honor from the Lord
God. Remember the judgment of Vzza and Vzziah, and apply it inwardly.

P. He comes now again to appeal to such as fear God, and advise them, to take
heed of such an Idol. And to any that is not blinded with the stumbling block
of their iniquity, by reason of Satan's sub^ilty, to judge how they cross the
doctrines of the Gospel, in baptising visible, graceless, Christless children.

A. This appeal is made to you that fear the Lord, you see what his four last
words speak, visible, graceless, Christless children, but why visible? was
Isaac so when an Infant, who was the seed of promise? and does not Paul tell
us, as he was, we are children of the promise? If as he was, then as the seed
of covenanting believers as he was, Gal. 4.28. see the censorious spirit of
this man, who is not ashamed to say, believers seed are visibly graceless, when
as Paul tells us they are to be reputed holy: 1 Cor. 7. Which way, says the
false Prophet, went the Spirit of the Lord from me to you, when he strikes
Micaiah on the cheek? If the Apostle tells us that children are holy, Mr.
Patient will be sure to fly in his face and say, they are graceless,
Christless children.

However, you to whom the appeal is made, receive it, and when you have done,
make your complaint to God, and be not frighted from owning those which God
owns, the King is bound to maintain the cause of his subjects. And such are
Infants. For of such is the kingdom. And God will in due time plead the quarrel
of his covenant, against all their opposers, it will be seen in this generation.

P. p. 153. He comes to lay down an Objection of such as would have no baptism
at all; which though it does not so properly relate to us that maintain it, yet

A. I shall give the Reader this hint, whatsoever he says, for dipping of
believers, it has been already answered. And therefore let me advise you to be
so far either from casting off the Ordinance, or embracing a false Ordinance;
that you keep close to that good old way of baptising the family-Infants of
Jesus Christ, and for the better strengthening of such, whose weakness may not
be able to oppose Satan's depths: as that good woman once said, she could dye
for Christ, but was not able enough to dispute for him. Besides what is before
laid down, consider Mat. 21.43. The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to another nation, bringing forth the fruits thereof. The kingdom of God
there mentioned, was the Church of the Jews who had the laws and the Ordinances
of worship amongst them; in which kingdom were included as subjects, men,
women, and children by virtue of Gods covenant made with Abraham, the father of
all Church-incorporated-believers, both Jews and Gentiles, then and now. Now
says Christ, this kingdom of God should be taken from the Jews, and given to
the Gentiles; from whence then we may easily gather, that if Gods kingdom now
given to the Gentiles, be the same for substance, with that which was taken
away from the Jews; then must the Infants of Church-believers, be also subjects
of this kingdom, as they were then; and the reason is undeniable, because it is
employed in the words of Christ. Not to be another, but the same kingdom; for
had the Jews been fruitful subjects, the kingdom had still remained with them,
and not been removed.

A second place to be considered is that of Paul. Heb. 3.5.6. And Moses verily
was faithful in his house as a servant. But Christ as a son over his own house,
whose house are we. The Apostles intent was to draw a parallel betwixt the
family of God then, and now; in both which families Christ was the son. And the
first house was as well Christ's house, as the second, Mat. 21.13. Isa. 56.7.
compared, the inference is this, that as the family of Christ in the first
Gospel-house to Israel did consist partly of children, so does the family of
Christ in this second Gospel-house, consist of the same; for it would be
unreasonable to think, that Christ had changed the family, and so cut off
children now; such thoughts represent him to be less faithful then Moses who
was but a servant.

Obj. But what command have you for your practice? these are natural
inferences, but nothing should be practiced without a command.

A. If this Objection be admitted, then as before, the Sabbath is null; because
there is not a clear New Testament command to keep it, and yet should it not be
observed, the Ordinances of the Gospel must fall. For what Ordinances can be
practiced, if there be not a time appointed by Christ that shall bind all
Christians, which yet must be found out from Scriptures compared, the
Old Testament and new, being laid together and not severed, with the constant
practice of all Christian Churches from the primitive time, so that they may as
well make the Sabboth-day Antichristian, because it wants such an institution,
as Infant Baptism, for they are inseparable twins.

2 But the Scriptures do hold forth a command from Mat. 28.19. Go and disciple
all Nations, baptizing, etc. It has been before cleared, that this command
reaches children: to which I refer the Reader in answer to his four Essentials.
But the sadness of our times is, that men have such itching ears; that
notwithstanding the Scriptures speak and the spirit speaks, and Gods Ministers
speak, yet they will not hear:

3 We that are children under the Gospel, have also a Gospel-father to look at.
For when the father of a family receives rules to walk by, and to order his
children, it is reasonable that they should submit. Now the bond of the
covenant was given as the standing rule of the house, to Abraham as the
Church-Father of all covenanting believers, both Jews and Gentiles, Rom 4.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Gal. 4.28. And therefore if he had a command to
in-church his seed whilst Infants, Genesis 17 9, 10. and to give them the token of
the covenant in their generations; then look what token or seal God shall affix
to his covenant, either of circumcision then, or baptism now; it is and ought
to be obliging to all his seed to a thousand generations, Psalm. 105.8. till
Christ shall remove it; and had not the example of Abraham as a father been
binding to the seed, the Apostle would not have turned the Christian Churches
of the Gentiles to look upon Abraham, thereby to rectify their mistakes in
doctrines of faith, To. 4 1, 2: 3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12, 23, 24. c. 11, 16, 2^ Gal.
3.6, 7, 8, 9, so that it is apa^ent that what command was given to Abraham as a
father, in the sense beforementioned, is in force to all his children: that
Objection therefore is null: -- Having laid down these things to be duly
weighed, I shall pass over many pages which he has written to such as are
against all baptism, and shall g^ve him a meeting in the other side.

P. Page 160. But some will say they are not drawn forth by a divine power to
embrace it, though convinced, to which M. P. answers, that where God gives
grace, there he does give a power to submit to all his ways, and so to this of
plunging.

A. It Is an undoubted truth, that as God gives grace, he gives power, yet Gods
grace does not lead man to destroy nature; therefore when he comes to apply, he
abuses the Scripture; it has been before proved, that dipping is not the way
of Scripture-baptism. Consider 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. and compare it with the history:
was Israel plunged in the Red Sea? the opposers dare not say it if they have
any Conscience. And yet Paul tells us they were baptized, and David in the
place before quoted tells us, how the clouds poured forth water: the like
appears from Act. 1.3. chapter 2.17. with Joel 2. compared, it is clear that baptism
was by pouring out water: to intrude such a destructive practice is therefore
against the Apostolical interpretation of the word, and against the very light
of divine or humane reason: for shall we think that he that bids us put on as
the beloved of God, bowels of mercy, and tenderness, should be so hard a
master, to command us in the most sharpest seasons to be duckt; yea, an action
that cannot be done in many Countries? for shame, harden not your hearts
against truth any longer, and be of a more tender hearted spirit to poor
deluded Christians; and do you that fear the Lord, remember that you do not
abuse your power God has given; to such licencious practice, that would ruin
the very foundations of the Gospel.

P. p. 164. Does acknowledge there may be good people not of his opinion, yet
they are not to be looked upon as a Church, unless they will be dipped.

A. He has before called us such as offer up our children to devils, and can
he have so much charity to judge such good people? these are but terms of
insinuations to gain the more upon such good people to bring them into his
strain of discipleship. He brings us again, the example of Cornelius, Lydia,
the Jailer, and then tells us the Church of Samaria was gathered by faith and
dipping: and to practice o herwise, is contrary to Christ and the Apostles. All
which is before proved false, and there is not a word in the Scriptures that
says as M. P. does, that the Church mentioned was gathered by dipping: yea so
to practice and apply it as he does is to adulterate, and so destroy the
Ordinance. Away therefore with such st^ffe, it is abominable: it is likely, is it
not; that Peter could stand a whole day in a River, to plunge 3000 souls, or
that Lydia should be duckt, before she went home? or that the Jailer should be
plunged in a deep River at midnight? were Jesus Christ preached to the Turks or
Pagans, upon these terms, by some of those dippers, or to the Jews, upon their
embracing the faith, it is the way to harden their hearts against the truth. --

P. p. 172, 173. He persuades Christians it is a sin to neglect plunging, and
if they have truly repented, they will be drawn to practice all the commands
of God, and this amongst the rest; or else they cannot be admitted as persons
that have repented at all.

A. We may here see the mystery of iniquity in its workings: It must Lord it in
the Conscience, or else it cannot stand: thus did those Circumcision-preachers,
Act. 15. there was no salvation without it, as here, there is no repentance
tr^e without dipping, it is a sin to neglect it, Christians look to your
Consciences, keep out such false-teachers, who bring upon you greater burdens
then Circumcision ever was, Christ's house will have no such washings, and if
you once let them into your Conscience, possession will be soon lost.

P. p. 174. But some will say they were baptized in their infancy, and shall
such be kept out that are good people? To which he answers, that though many
are good, yet they live in a sin, though it be a sin of ignorance to them; for
otherwise they could not be Christians. But however the Church knows it to be a
sin, therefore they ought to be kept out; and if any such be in, that baptize
their children, they ought to be cast out. --

A. The Reader may still see his censorious spirit, wherein he flies in the
face of all the Ministers of Christ, wounding their credit and esteem in the
hearts of Christians. For whosoever does knowingly oppose their dipping, and
not ignorantly, cannot be gracious, so that either the Ministry must be
ignorant, or graceless. And that their Church knows it to be a sin, and
therefore ought to keep out, and cast out such as practice it.

A. I hope you shall have no cause to threaten such with casting out: and if
you speak in the name of all the Anabaptists, when you say the Church knows it
to be a sin, I must then needs say they are as ignorant as your self, though it
is hard so to be. --

P. In p. 176. he uses another way to make us yield up to his practice, and
answers an Objection that some do make, that though it be an Ordinance, yet
many do rest in it: and therefore its better not to practice it: he grants that
many do rest in them, yet he would admonish all those that fear God to be
conformable, so was Paul Gal. 1.16 so was Peter, when Christ bids him let down
his net, so was Abraham in sacrificing his son; he disputed not, and therefore
he would have Christians suck in this as a maxim, never to dispute a command,
and so he concludes his whole with Phil. 2, 12: Do all things without
murmurings and disputings.

A. We are now drawing to an end, in all which we may see how many ways, and
wiles the Tempter has, to get within us; he uses his weapons every way, and
comes so high now, that it is a sin against Conscience to dispute it, and it
must be sucked down as a maxim, which I could easily grant, if it could be
proved that either the subject, or manner were commanded as it is by him
practiced. But he that so sucks it in, had as good suck down Ratsbane. The
instances brought are of such who had a clear command, for what they did from
Christ himself, hold forth therein nothing relating to dipping. In fine we may
say of his whole book, it is nothing else but a lump of error, and bitter
revilings against the ways of God, and Ministry of his word, wherein he has
dealt like those unfaithful spies, that went to view the Land of promise, who
by the ill reports he makes, disturbs the multitude, and sets them a murmuring
against Gods Joshuas; that so his people may either retreat back to Egypt, or
run into Babylon. His charge against us appears to be false, the truth is
cleared from the contempt and reproach cast upon it. Reader, I shall therefore
commit thee to the grace and keeping of our L. Jesus Christ. And as for such
who turn aside to their wicked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity. But peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm. 125.5.

FINIS.

