A CENSURE OF Mr. Judas Tull His Lampoon.
NOT. Tull! One of the most infamous Names in the City, whose Life is as a
continued Vacation; and though a Man professing the Study of Law, all the Year
with him, is out of Term. His whole Work is to do Nothing, or worse than
Nothing; to Lampoon Ministers, Mr. Alsop and Mr. Williams in particular, with
Storys to my knowledge he never believed, nor heard, but were the Result of a
fruitful pregnant Invention. In short, his Life is a System of Iniquity; he
would betray his best Friend, and Master too, for less than Thirty Pieces of
Silver, with Judas his elder Brother; unless the Money be told by Pence, and
this after Vows and Protestations (repeated often) of Fidelity to me all his
Days. He is a Man, though of the best Wit, yet the worst Morals. Thus is he like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, his Head of Gold and Feet of Clay. The monstrous Fables
he told of others, as well as my self; is one Reason among many? Why so many
Loath his Conversation. Let him never Repeat over the Creed in Company, least
they that hear him should disbelieve it, as much as himself, thinking nothing
true that he says. I have heard of a Seaman that was thought to be dead, being
to be thrown overboard; says he, I am not dead. Said one, I do not believe
him, he was ever such a lying Rogue.

This is the Monster the Bapts have chosen, when Minge wrote like a
Jack-Pudding, to Lampoon me like a Buffoon. They found the one feeble at
arguing, and therefore employed this stoutly to Rave to get a Penny. A Club of
them treated him from Night to Night, to make a Libel against me. How, sent
they him away? Not a fresh Man sure? He thinks he has too much Wit. -- Were
these Plungers plunged into their Liquors? No; but the Liquor were poured down
a-main. It is well the Custom here is pouring, else were they plunged in, they
would drink up a River.

In John's Baptism, That they then talked of, there is nothing belongs to them
but, O Generation of Vipers! A perpetual blemish to them and their Cause.

Not. Tull, of whose Atheism and Madness; all the City has long rung, is a
Chrispian Bapt. his Father was a Lay-Speaker among them.

In some Swearing Company, though restrained before others, Judas has sworn at
such a rate, no Gallant could out do him; this he could not deny when reproved
by some of us.

For Drunkenness: he can continue from Morning till Night. -- Woe to you of this
Club, that thus puts the Bottle to his Mouth. For another Sin, how shameful is
it, when talking of the open common Whoredoms of Mr. T. to say in all this, You
do but draw my Picture! This, I will give an Oath, I and others heard him say.

For Idleness, who will trust him? I once employed him in a Law business,
pitying his Poverty; and after he received my Money, he served me such a
Trick, that it is no wonder the Bapts themselves never care to employ him,
except it be in Lampooning the true Baptists. What he did with his large
Patrimony, and afterward went up and down like a second Cain. What attempts he
made against his own -- Fame talked much of: I once spared no pains nor cost
upon him, hoping his Reformation on fair Promises; but some men were true
Prophets who told me I would repent it. He about two Years since, being poor,
desired me to get him a Place; and after some sad Reflections, That he had
forgotten his Philology, said he could wish to become a Boy again, and desired
me to help him. I consulted his Brother, who told me, that he could not govern
himself, but must be in subjection; when I tried him a few days, and
entertained him freely, and gave him a great number of valuable Books: I told
him he was a forward Youth, and needed no Discipline here, but if he played the
Truant, and was unnecessarily absent at learning time, I would put him off; but
said I, what if you come in Drunk? You must be strapt. To which he consented,
But tho he, as well as some others once, never were like to have one strap for
his Book, yet he muched so often, I grew weary of him: And perhaps he thought,
should he be strapt as often as Drunk, it might sometimes be more than once a
day. When the poor Old Woman dies, to whom he is said to be an intolerable
Burden: who shall take care of him? will he not go up and down ready to stink
for want of good Linen, like a Brother Pot-Companion --

Not. Tull, as all know, was once a great Advocate for me about the wonderful
success of my continued pains with a few, and my Discipline also) I being paid
according to success. What he told the Dean himself is well known: He being
sometimes at my House, Day and Night, but now unsays all, and the occasion was,
I found him lately as drunk as drunkenness it self, and so abusive, that I
thought his Conversation intolerable.

A great Grecian among the Bapts, before their great Men on the Examination of
a Lad, what he had done in ten Weeks, took me by the hand and said, I beg your
pardon; I must confess, I have ridiculed the Wonders told of you: All is true,
but how such great Work is done in so little time, I cannot imagine. I will
hereafter be as great an Advocate for you, as I have been a Censurer.

In answering vain Objections against me, there is no end; who shall judge a
Man's Actions that knows not his Circumstances? I am paid sometimes more then
ten Pounds for one Years learning only, besides Table. But now to the Libel. In
short, Judas, thou and many know though some do not.

1. that Mr. Williams, Mr. Woodhouse, and others, appointed a Meeting at my
House, about Storys set on foot by Mr. B. concerning the Son of Mr. S. two
years since about Learning, and Discipline. All said, never were greater Lies
told, than those against me. I satisfied others that send for me, or come
fairly to me. This is well known.

2. What Methods I take, I can do my great work by, not without, and I have
tried all. All is done to more than the satisfaction of the best I educate, let
their Years be what they will. Who regards them in Westminster, Winchester, and
many famous Schools: He that comes to me must speak Latin or Greek in Common
discourse when he is able, etc.

3. I have consulted Aged Ministers, and learned Gentlemen for Advice.

4. Mr. Benjamin Keach a Bapt, told me that all the Bapts were satisfied when I
wrote them a Letter about an ignorant Boy, a Preacher of theirs, of
unparalle'ld Imprudence.

5. I meet with those of many Years more than twenty, that cannot read an
English Chapter and Psalms well, nor talk common Sense, Yet greedy after
Learning. They (and their Fathers too) desire they may be governed as others
are. Some of ten Years old are more wise, and orderly than some of more than
twenty.

6. I am very glad when I can get a good Usher, which sometimes I have had a
Considerable Time. Then I only teach Learning, and Discipline I leave to him.
And I wish I could always so speed. I should not endure those pains I sometimes
do.

7. No Scholars live more pleasant then mine do. I have often said it, and can
prove it.

1. That not one Sickly Lad ever came to me but he grew Healthy. Of which I
have now one great Instance.

2. Never a Vile Boy whom none could Tame or make bad only at a Common Rate,
but has been sober. Another such Instance is now with me. As great as ever was
known.

3. No Dunce, who could do nothing in many Years ever stayed here, but Learned
Considerably. One as much like a Natural as was possible for one to be, that
was none, in a few Months made and talk true Latin often according to Rule. A
Blind Person from his Infancy, That the Reverend Mr. Maudit takes care of, and
commonly Examins every Saturday in the afternoon, since July last, has
Learned, as Lillys Grammar, Cato, Fables, Ovid de Tristibus. So a Great way in
Ovid Metamorphosis, Erasmus, (Formulae Loquendi almost Memoriter, Nomen
Clatura, so) and other Books. Has construed many Scores of Chapters in Latin
in the Old and New Testament. Has made not only good Epistles, but Theams
above 2 Months. Talk true Latin Commonly all day. And Occasionally Learned the
Kings of England, with Remarkable Passages in their Reigns. The Twelve Caesar's
out of Leigh. Saturday Nights and Sabbath Day Nights. All Clarks lives in
Quarto, and many Divinity Books. -- Much more have some Learned in the Time,
and he had, if not blind. These things are not done in a Corner, Come and see.
May I say to all Sober Men I know. Not to others, that on a design shall deny
what they confess here.

Alas! Had I given this Poor un-imployed Mercenary Jack so much Money to write
against them, as they gave him to write against me, he had soon done it: He
cares for no Cause, but for Money, but I must Learn that Rule. Pity the Poor.
I stopped a Severe Letter he wrote to Dr. Ker for what he did to a Young Man, and
Justified the Doctor: As for other Stories shown up and down in the Lampoon,
which I have not yet seen I confess.

1. I have answered W. C. his Trepidantium Malleus Intrepidanter Malleatus, and
B. C. the Quaker to their Confusion, and the Satisfaction of all Men, and this
Accuser too. Let him say what he will, I care not to be told of Intervals from
Fits from them that have none from theirs Roaring when he ran to hear. (Oh)!
Men condemned to dye, was it in that Terrible Fit he feared his Turn would be
the next Sessions? He Rambles like this Brother Mr. Minge Make Water, (did he
so when Dipped as well as others.) In the Title he Names only my News Years Gift
Occasional Passages there. This is to Satisfy the Wise Bapts that shall say.
This is no Answer to the Epistle to Mr. Keath. -- In the Epistle he mentions,
The Three Particulars in my Epistle. That John declares he Plunged no one, etc.
This is to Satisfy the Mob that shall say why is not that Epistle Answered. Was
ever such a Vile Trick done till Mr. Make Water wrote.

2. This Judas had a hand in Socks and Buskins against Mr. Alsop, where he is
called Lunatic, Madman, Graceless Person, as well as I.

3. For my Religion, I have pleaded Old Protestanisms against Innovators. The
Crispians said I had written well against the Baxterians they said, I had
written well against the Crispians and the Anabaptist said I had done well
against both. And they both now say, I have written unanswerably against the
Anabaptists. And the few good Old Protestants in London, say I have done well
against them all.

Ob. But have I not done what I blamed M- Jacob for saying against the Bapts.
No, nor never thought what he said. See my Apology. It is not convenient now to
Name.

I dare Challenge any Man to tell what Baptist ever wrote so faverably of the
Bapts, as I in that Epistle to Mr. Keath, Tho I confess I am sorry none of them
talk with half that Indignation against their Bristol Reformer and Sister Roe,
as against me for my Necessary mentioning it:

For my part, I speak it Soberly I do believe. The Three Dippers lately
discovered, and many more have done, sometimes what the reforming Bristoll Rogue
did, and I will give this reason. The other Sisters were silent, and made no
Confession, till Mrs. Roe told all. Now had she been silent too, the thing had
continued as a secret -- I challenge any Bapt in that City to deny the story.

And because the learned Bapts in this City, appear not in Print knowing they
cannot answer my Epistle and therefore imply a Minge, and a Tull. I am sorry I
am forcced to Challenge them an to open Disputation, about the Three
propositions in that Epistle, That John the Baptist declares he plunged No Man
etc. And also about my Three propositions in this Book, but if they will deny
the Second, I will not swear to it, For I grew weary of Fools or Knaves. Minge
cannot hide his folly and ignorance.

Projicit ampullas and sesquipedalia verba.

Hor. de Art Poet. One would think every word in Mat. 3.11. were against
plunging.

J. John that opened the way for the Gospel; and its plain simple
Administration, could he bring in a Yoke worse then Circumcision? Must this be
taken away that signifies mortification of what all are inclined to, for a
thing that tends to, and too often ends in Uncleanness?

Indeed -- Indeed John if thou did plunge, I cannot well understand thy
Words, nor Luke the best Grecian neither.

Baptize -- Not Bapt or Plunge; for after much consideration, I now declare
'its my Opinion, that Baptizo never signifies to Plunge in all the New
Testament.

You -- What plunge the tender Sex? What those that had Pains in the Teeth, etc.

With Water -- Not in it; for some might say, Minge, Minge; and if St. Francis
whipped the Devil till he made him roar for pissing in the holy Pot, as the
Papists Fable; what do they deserve who thus do in the Water of Baptism? Show
your selves Men, O ye Transgressors, (Dippers) say it if you dare, that God
works such a Wonder to stop the Fountains of Nature in you all in your
Dippings* But if you say, this is but an Argument a posteriori, not a priori. I
Answer jocularly: I believe you find some of you, in the Water, it is from
both. Thus have you, like the Woman in the time of King Solomon, took away a
living Child, and put a dead one in its Place, taken away true Baptism, and put
in Plunging, not as in a clean Place indeed, but sometimes as in a Jakes, where
they are dipped in Waters of more sorts than one. Away filthy Beasts.

1. What good News would there be for Physicians and Apothecarys, should
plunging prevail, which Heaven forbid? Come away Mr. Doctor. One is grown
deafish, -- Come Mr Apotheccary, Another is a Barking, as if he would bring up
his Heart -- Come my Wife, my Daughter, she will die by this Cold, as others
have done. How is it so many Bapts look pale, more than others.

I was told before I saw the Lampoon (which I saw not till all before written
was done) that there was Tulls Hint of Sodomy, which he had privately hinted
also, what will they invent next. Several things I should say and do about some
other matters, are such mistakes, My Friends, are angry with me, that I replied
and expect a promise, I shall not do it again. This being, say they, a Trick to
divert you from your Invinceable Arguments against Plunging, for such, (Mr.
Fuller, Mr. Woodhouse, Mr. Shower, Mr. Keith and others say they are) I close
all.

O God, if ever I abused my Body with Mankind, this way hinted; or ever once
did any thing that had a tendency thereunto; (or ever abused my Body with any
Womankind either) Let this Sin be as the unpardonable Sin, never to be forgiven
in this World, nor in the World to come, Amen, Amen.

These Men, as Fame says, have sometimes confessed they could not charge me with
bad Morals, but only with imprudence, A high Commendation from such Infamous
Persons.

FINIS.

