The Penitent Murderer. BEING AN Exact Narrative Of the Life and Death of
NATHANIEL BVTLER; Who (through Grace) became a Convert, after he had most
cruelly murdered JOHN KNIGHT. With the several Conferences held with the said
Butler in Newgate, by the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, and several eminent
Ministers, and others. As also his Confession, Speech, Prayer, and the Sermon
preached after his Execution; with several useful Admonitions, and excellent
Discourses. Collected by RANDOLPH YEARWOOD, Chaplain to the Right Honorable,
the Lord Major of the City of LONDON.

Deuteronomy 13.11. And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you.

London, Printed by T. Newcomb for J. Rothwell at the Fountain in
Goldsmiths-Row in Cheapside, and Tho. Matthews at the White-horse in the New
Buildings in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

blazon or coat of arms of the city of London
London, Saturday Sept. 12. 1657. Reader,
THis is that Exact Narrative concerning Nathaniel Butler, which was some time
since promised to come forth by my appointment, under the hand of Randolph
Yearwood.

Robert Tichborne, Major.

To the Right Honorable, Sr ROBERT TICHBORNE Knight, Lord Major of the City of
LONDON.
My Lord,
You have done (being directed, and enabled from on high) many noble and good
actions for this City, the Government whereof is yet yours. But really (my
Lord) the right honorable act was this, your personal and frequent visiting
Nathaniel Butler, when he lay a prisoner in Newgate. His soul certainly was
precious in your eyes; and this engaged you to send others, and to go your self
to see him several times: I verily believe you will see him yet once more; not
as a Malefactor in an obscure disparaging Goal, but as an Angel of God in the
Kingdom of Christ, whither (I am confident) he is gone, and you are going.
Before he went, he desired me to give you humble thanks for all the favor he
had received from you, or by your means from others: He was very thankful to
your Lordship, and the rest of the Honorable Bench, for his Fortnights
Reprieval; confessing that Court to be both just, and merciful; Just, in
condemning his body to death; and merciful, in sparing his life for some weeks
after the Sentence, upon design to save his soul: And truly you may safely
conclude, that his soul is safe. And is not such a Conclusion a rich Requital
of all your Exhortations, Tears, and Prayers?

My Lord, I shall rejoice to see you grow and abound yet more and more in
Righteousness, Holiness, and (as the Elect of God) bowels of Mercies: which
will render you like unto, and well liked of by the LORD of Lords. To whom I
leave you, and remain

Your Lordship's Servant, RANDOLPH YEARWOOD.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THE Malefactor mentioned in this following Narrative was none of mine
acquaintance, till (for his horrid fact) he was apprehended and imprisoned. So
that it was not any Relation of mine to him that put me upon this publication;
but I undertook this work, as judging it of general concernment to all men both
good and bad.

1. As to the bad. If thou art an evil wicked man er woman, then this Narrative
(with the annexed admonitions and sermon etc.) much concern thee, to make thee
(if possible) penitent and truly reformed.

2. Art thou a gracious, good man, or woman; then thou have reason to rejoice
on carth, as God himself and the Angels of God rejoice in heaven ever one
repenting sinner, Luke 15.7. and 10. I doubt not but thou will be well
satisfied by the following Lines concerning the true conversion of a very
heinous Offender.

Now (good Reader) grant me one request, not to look upon the following
Discourses as a bare story or a piece of News, and so having read and seen it,
there is an end: But read and consider, read and pray that this great and
extraordinary passage of divine Providence may profit thy Soul, which is the
desire of my heart and Soul, to God himself. Otherwise I could not be (as
indeed I am) thy Well-wisher,

Friend and Servant, RANDOLPH YEARWOOD.

Three Conferences held with Nathaniel Butler (during his Imprisonment) by the
Right Honorable the Lord Major, under his Lordships own hand.
WHen Nathaniel Butler was first apprehended and brought before me, he was in
exceeding great burden of Spirit, full of tears, free to confess the Fact, with
all the aggravations thereof, and was sollicitous for nothing, but a few days
respit for his poor Soul, it seeming to me that nothing at that time was on his
thoughts, but what should become of his Soul.

At my first Conference with him which was about five or six days after his
Condemnation, I found him very ready to acknowledge his actual sins, and to
charge himself with them and the aggravations that did accompany them, and this
with sad tears of complaint, and indignation against himself and his sins; but
did take no notice of his sinful Nature; Which my self and a Friend with me (Mr
Griffith of the Charter house) perceiving, We endeavored by Scripture to show
him his sinful Nature, as the Root of all his sinful actions, which he
diligently hearkened to, and was affected with, but acknowledged his former
Ignorance herein, and that he had not so expressly before thougth hereof, or
been instructed hereabout, and what he heard and received at this time among
other Particulars, was so far blessed, and wrought into his soul, that to our
selves, and (as we heard) to others, he did from that Night following much
insist upon and bemoan his sinful nature, and the state of sin he was born in,
as well as, or together with those sinful acts he was guilty of.

At my second being with him, after applying the free grace of God and Christ
crucified to his faith for the pardon of his sins; I asked him whether his
heart could most willingly receive that pardon, or a pardon for his life, and
bid him consider, and tell me what his heart said in that Point: After a little
pause, he made me this Answer, That indeed he did not desire to live longer in
this world, for he had found sin so bitter a thing, and himself, so prone to
sin, that if he should live longer, and sin against God, it would be much more
bitter to him then death, and he did heartily Bless God that had brought him
to the hand of Justice, and did truly love the party, who (as he thought) was
the Instrument to discover him, acknowledging that the Devil had tempted him to
lay violent hands on himself; and after that temptation to fly beyond the Sea;
which if God had suffered him to do, and so escaped Justice, he might have gone
on in his former course of sin without Repentance, but did truly bless God that
had delivered him from these temptations; and had brought him to that condition
that then he was in, he did acknowledge with much thankfulness to God man, the
mercy of a few days between death and judgment, and that God had given him so
great a share in the hearts and prayers of his people; he did several times
throw himself on the free grace of God in the blood and merits of Jesus Christ
alone for his Salvation, renouncing all but Christ, acknowledging that he
believed to be washed from his bloody Fact, and all his other sins, by no means
but by the blood of Jesus Christ.

At my third and last time of being with him, which was the night before he
died, I endeavored to hold forth to his faith from Scripture, the glorious
state in heaven to all Eternity, that Jesus Christ had purchased and was in the
possession of for true believers, and into which such souls should immediately
enter, when they leave the body, and abide there with Christ their Head for
ever: To which he gave very great heed and attention, and though his lips said
little, yet to my apprehension his soul spoke very much, for it wrought in his
body, as if it were raised up by Faith; through what was held out to him, even
to the admiring of that grace and glory; The working of his soul, was mixed with
Tears (as I conceive) of Joy; for he mentioned nothing of the fear of Death,
though he was often minded of it, how near it was at hand, nor did I then
perceive any paleness in his face, or sinking of Spirit, (the Symptoms of the
fear of Death;) But that those workings of his Soul were reachings after that
glorious Inheritance held out in Romans 8.17. To be heirs of God, joint heirs
with Christ, which Scripture was then opened to him: And that glorious
inheritance set forth by the concurrence of several other Scriptures, with an
endeavor to give him a View by the eye of faith, of that which in a very few
moments after, his soul should to all Eternity be made partaker of in joy and
glory with Christ in Heaven, which was infinitely more then could be expressed
or conceived; and this I judge did make his Soul so work within him. After some
time in prayer, I parted with him, and almost the last words I had from him
were these, He told me, he was really offended with himself, because he hated
sin no more, which had caused him to offend God so much; he told me Satan was
busy to persuade him, That all his Faith and Repentance was false, but he had
believed the Devil too long, and he would trust him no longer, but now cast his
eternal soul on the free grace of God in the Blood of Christ alone for
Salvation, renouncing himself wholly. In this resolution and frame of Spirit I
left him: And as I am informed, (through the free grace of God) he did abide
and increase in it to his last breath. Upon the whole, I am truly persuaded
from that Work of God that I observed to be wrought in him, and the degrees of
it, that though his former life was full of all wickedness, his soul exceeding
ignorant of God, and his own sinful nature all that time, and his Repentance
and Faith in Christ very late, yet that the free grace of God (who is not
bounded to time) did make both his Faith and Repentance true, and do believe he
is with Christ in glory. I do not give this Public Attest to encourage sin,
but to magnify the free grace of God in Jesus Christ to Sinners, and I do
assure whosoever reads this, that poor soul which is the Subject of it, found
sin to be exceeding bitter before he had any taste of the sweetness of Gods free
grace in Christ. Hoping this may be of Public Use, I am free to Attest it with
my Name. September 10. 1657.

Robert Tichborne, Major.

A brief Account of a Visit given to Nathaniel Butler, a Prisoner in Newgate
upon, the Friday before he suffered, by Tho. Case, a Minister of the City of
London; wherein he made these following Observations.
THE said Nathaniel Butler expressed, 1. A deep sense of that desperate Bloody
fact which he had committed, which he loaded with all the blackest aggravations
that might be; especially with this Consideration; That for ought he knew, he
had destroyed body and soul with oue blow: He had begged and obtained a space
of Repentance from his Judges, but had not afforded his Brother one moment to
beg pardon at the hand of God. This Consideration stuck so deeply upon his
spirit, that it had well nigh sunk him into despair, had not God sent in some
relief by the hand of one that visited him in prison, in the instance of
Manasseh, who having sacrificed his sons unto Devils, and shed much other
innocent blood, upon his repentance finding mercy, did not despairingly afflict
himself with the consideration of what became of the souls of those whom he had
so cruelly murdered. Secret things belong unto the Lord, etc.

2. He expressed not only sense of the guilt of Blood, but a right Gospel-notion
of the sinfulness of sin; All sin, the least sin, not as destroying only, but
as defiling; not as contrary to the Creature in the effects of it, but as
contrary to God in the nature of it; A grieving of the Spirit; a crucifying of
Jesus Christ afresh; a most unworthy requital of the love of a crucified
Savior.

3. He discovered also that, which indeed was the thing which I came purposely
to the Prison to enquire after, viz. A right apprehension of Original sin, the
Corruption of his Nature, which he looked upon as the Fountain and Springhead
of his Murder, Theft, and all other actual wickedness bewailing them all with
David, in their first source and spring; Behold, I was born in sin, and in
iniquity did my mother conceive me, Ps. 51.5.

In a word, He had as right a notion of the state of Unregeneracie, as ever I
found in any new Convert.

4. He expressed also an high appretiation of Jesus Christ; not only for pardon
of sin, but for power against sin; not only to deliver the soul from the wrath
to come, and everlasting burning, but from the state of Nature; As a Fountain
of Holiness, as well as a Fountain of Happiness.

5. An high apprehension and admiration of Free Grace, in pardoning such a
sinner as he was: Which he expressed with much self-abhorrencie, as one that had
no regard to the Sabbath never acquainted himself with the Bible, or Catechism,
never prayed; And if a good Thought were entering his heart, he would thrust it
away from him with greatest indignation. The pardon of these, with other sins,
he admired in some such language as the Apostle did, 1 Timothy 1.13.

6. God had vouchsafed him a sweet taste of the Promises; some whereof, most
suitable to his condition, God had pitched his soul upon, which he repeated
with so sweet a relish, as a man might perceive his soul was even ravished with
the sense thereof.

7. Wonderfully did he bless and admire the goodness of God in calling such a
cruel enemy to mankind as he was, in murdering his Brother, into the prayers,
compassion, and care of so many of his precious Servants, both Ministers and
others. He did particularly acknowledge the extraordinary pains, care, and
tenderness of the Chief Magistrate of the City, to be beyond all president, or
expression.

8. Great affection and compassion he expressed to the souls of others: His
Fellow Prisoners profanenefs and desperate security he exceedingly lamented;
the ignorance and blindnefs of many that came to see him, he heartily bewailed;
They would aggravate his bloody fact, and ask him whether the sight of the Bags
were not the first temptation to the murdering of his Brother? But alas! said
he, it was not the sight of the bags, nor the instigation of the Devil, that
could have put me upon such a wickedness, had there not been a cursed nature
within me, by means whereof I was a Murderer before ever I slew my Brother and
an Adulterer, and a Blasphemer, etc. Yea, he said he looked upon that original
corruption he carried about him, a greater sin before God, then a thousand acts
of murder, of adultery, etc. because it is the fountain of them all; which I
never saw, said he, or took notice of till now that God has opened mine eyes
in this wonderful manner. Neither do the most of men and women see it; but
because by the restraining power of God; they live free from such gross and
scandalous crimes, they think themselves in a good estate, and that they shall
be saved: But alas, said he, they have the same nature that I had, and until
their natures are changed and renewed, they are accounted as guilty of all sins
before God, and as incapable of Heaven and salvation, as if they had committed
them in the greatest act; this ignorance of the generality of people, old and
young he bewailed with much hearty sense and feeling.

9. He was very firm and fixed to the Principles of the Protestant Religion,
though he had but newly sucked them in: Insomuch that being several times
encountered in Prison by some Priests and other Papists, that came to seduce
this poor dying Wretch, who told him that if he would be reconciled to the
Church of Rome. and turn Catholic (as they call it) they has power to pardon
absolve him (which his Ministers had not) and that if he would not renounce his
Religion, there was no way with him but damnation; with diverse such menaces to
terrify him, and flatteries to ensnare him: Yet the Young Man, through grace,
stood against all these Temptations, as a Rock that could not be moved, but
sent them away with a great deal of contempt and indignation. He wished the
Civil Magistrate would be watchful, and restrain the liberty, and prevent the
temptations of these Seducers; which he promised to make his humble request to
them at his death.

10. He did not at all doubt of his salvation through Free Grace, the merits
and love of Jesus Christ; though withal he did make it a very solemn Query,
Whether he might warrantably and safely cast himself upon Jesus Christ, on such
terms as God holds him forth in the Gospel to poor lost Sinners, being such a
Sinner as he had been?

11. He was not at all afraid of death, nor desirous to live; but being asked
by a Gentleman that stood by, what he would do if he should live? he answered,
He desired not life if he might have it; partly because he durst not trust his
own heart; partly out of an infinite desire he had to be with Christ, who had
loved such a loveless wretch as he was.

One expression he used was, That he was not at all angry with his sin for
bringing him to such a shameful end, the shame and death do not in the least
trouble me. He was above all these considerations, and desired that God might
be glorified in, and by his sufferings.

12. And lastly, He earnestly desired them present to join in prayer with him,
which was performed by a Minister, who was witness to this part of the
Narative. He expressed strong affections, and workings of spirit during prayer,
and much thankfulness for that Christian office.

In many of these particulars, possibly his very expressions in terminis, may
not be so exactly rendered; but a to the import and substance of every
particular, this is a faithful and true relation.

In all he spoke, the manner of his speech and countenance expressed the highest
affection that might be.

THO. CASE.

Certain Observations of Thomas Parson, Minister at Micheal Wood-street London.
BEing desired to preach at Newgate, Aug. 30. in the Afternoon (being the Lords
day immediately preceding the Execution of Nathaniel Butler) I carefully
observed him while preaching, and had discourse with him both before and after
Sermon.

While preaching, I took notine, that the man seemed wholly taken up with what
he heard, not minding the great crowd about him, that came to see a poor reed
shaken with the wind, staring him in the face as a condemned Malefactor; but he
minded the Pardon I in the Name of God offered him, (treating of the Pardoning
Grace of God) with so fixed an eye frequently did he look upon me, and so
heedfully turn to Scriptures, as one taken up with the weightiest matters, when
as otherwise it might have wrought some discomposure, to have so many such
Observers.

When with him before and after Sermon, I took notice both of his carriage and
Words, by both which, great discovery of the frame and temper of his mind might
be made.

His Carriage to my Observant and Impartial apprehension seemed to be
excellently attempered to his present condition, being sweetly submissive,
neither servilely dejected under the Apprehensions of his past sins and present
state, nor forwardly confident as though he forgot he were such a Malefactor:
His deportment did in my Judgment (not without some admiration, then, and after
in the reviewing thoughts of it, of the Decorum and suitableness of it to his
present condition) speak a well mixed and compounded sense of his own deserts,
and divine mercy; which also did his Words.

His Words might be reduced to these two main and excellent heads,

A declamation against sin, and Admiration of Grace.

Agrainst Sin he expressed the greatest Displicency and abhorrency, yea the Sin
of his Nature, that Root of bitterness, which he said men took but little
notice of: and for actual Sin abstractedly from the fruit of it, even sin as
against the holy, just, and good law of God, and as against God that had
deserved better at his hands, Professing that (as in general he had no desire
to live) so if the greatest hier should be offered him to live, if it might
occasion his return unto folly, he would not accept of life, and the World with
it; And that Sin as Sin, even the least. Sin did make his heart rise at first
thought of it, and he could spit it out with detestation, wondering that men
made no more of Sin, bewailing he was no more sensible of and humbled for Sin,
expressing how afraid he was now of doing any thing might offend God, even in
the least. Then (as all along) he was ready to take all occasions of a full,
free, and impartial confession of Sins, clothing them with their agravating
Circumstances, to make them out of measure sinful.

His high admiring thoughts of the Love and Grace of God, several ways he
expressed in a most serious affectionate manner, both in general, and in
reference to himself, and his sense of his interest in them. He was much in
Repetition with thankful wonderment of many proomises of God; some I had before
spoken of in preaching, and some others, such as set forth Gods readiness to
pardon; the freeness, largeness, and unchangeableness of the Pardoning mercy of
God; and again and again speaking in the words of Paul, And that such an one as
I should obtain mercy! Such an one as I find mercy! Admiring the distinguishing
grace of God toward him, that when other Prisoners (though in less danger
then himself of Death, whom we then heard above making a noise) were without
thought of Sin or God, God should snatch him as a Firebrand, and that in such
a way, making sin, so great sin to be overruled to his great good. He expressed
his appretiating thoughts of Gods promises, savourly descanting upon them, and
comfortably applying them to himself, saying, I could formerly find no thing
desirable in a Promise or any Word of God, it was a burden to me, but now that
the promises were the rejoicing of his heart. He said, Satan had sorely winowed
and buffeted him, but Christ was on his side: And using the words of the
Apostle, This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our Consciences, he added, God
has said, whosoever repents and believes shall find mercy and be saved; my
Conscience tells me and witnesses to me that I unfeignedly repent, and
really believe in Christ, and I am one of those Whosoever; therefore Christ is
mine, etc.

As to his Condition in general, from what I found or otherwise heard, I
conceive, there are many things very remarkable.

1. As to his sin committted. 1. That this great Sin was clearly a judicial
sin, the punishment of former Sins, for which God left him. 2. That as it was
the deserved fruit of a bad Cause, so it was the accidental cause of good
fruit, the Lord overshooting Satan in his own bow, when and by what means he
took to make sure of him, God startled and roused Conscience, which would not
with the noise of less guilt be awaked, and humbled the Sinner, etc.

Secondly, It seems to me very observeable, as to the Work of God upon him,
that it was so orderly gradual; he being first bound up partly through his
ignorance in which he had been brought up, partly through the amazing guilt
that with an overwhelming stupifying power came upon him; he afterward by
degrees, and that at last to such a measure of clearness and distinctness of
Understanding in the things of God, had an extraordinary beam of divine light
darted into his Soul: and that by degrees, his sense of the sinfulness of sin
increased (as I have been credibly informed) to a deep humiliation, not without
horror, and so ingenious confession: And then upon the alone, and most
sufficient foundation of the rich and precious promises of the Gospel, he was
raised up to the apprehension of mercy, and at last of his particular interest
in it.

3. The hand of the Lord upon the hearts of his People, Magistrates, Ministers,
and other Christians in some measure evidencing the thoughts of God toward the
poor man, to be thoughts of Peace and good will: In that favor he (so high an
Offender) found to have time of repentance and reconciliation, who himself gave
none to his Friend: In the means afforded him, and manifold helps for his
spiritual advantage, which he, in my hearing took notice of with admiring
thankfulness; Sermons, Visits, general pity of Gods people, in the
importunate enlarged fervency of Ministers and Christians in praying for him,
scarcely to be paralleled in the memory of men.

THO: PARSON.

Some PassAges between Nath. Butler and a Friend of his that came to visit him,
which have been omitted in the other Conferences.
Friend, HOw do you Nathautel?


N. Butler, Very well blessed be God; only I must tell you, that even now here
were with me some Popish Ladies, who asked me concerning my Faith, and what
Religion I did intend to die in: I told them in the true Protestant Religion of
the Church of England, They answered, if I died not in the Roman Catholic
Religion, I could not be saved, and pressed it with several Arguments. Pray
inform me therefore what is this Popish Religion.


Fr. It is such a Religion, that dares not trust in Christ alone: without
mingling their own merits, with the merits of Jesus Christ.


Nath. That is saddest Religion in the world for me; I shall never be of that
Religion! (clapping his hand on his breast) for I am the vilest wretch that
lives: I have not a good thought to trust to: I must be saved only by the
merits of Christ, if ever I be saved.


The same Friend watching with him, the night before he dyed, wished him to
think of the free mercy of God in Jesus Christ, that God should call him at the
eleventh hour. He answered, I desire to be vile in mine own eyes, and admire
free grace.

About five of the clock that morning he was to suffer death, he was raised to
a high pitch of joy, and cried out, Oh sirs, help me! Help me to glorify God!
show me how to do it! I cannot do it enough! I cannot contain my self! yet
suspecting himself, he asked those about him, Was it so with you? and with you,
when God wrought on you?

They replied, it was. Oh then said he it is right, blessed be God: Come let us
sing the 100 Psalm, which he sung with much alacrity.

About an hour after they knocked off his shackels; now said his Friend, Come
Not. now thy shackles are off, I will get thee out, and thou shall run thy old
course, and have money enough, and take thy fill of lust and pleasure again:

He seriously replied, Really, Really, Really, (clapping his hand on his
breast) if I know my own heart, I would not for ten thousand worlds lose the
opportunity of this morning. I am now going where I shall never sin again.

So leaving the dark Dungeon, wherein he was Prisoner, in order to his
execution, he uttered these expressions to his friends about him; O this dark
Dungeon! The best Room that ever I came in; and this contemptible Bed, the best
that ever I lay in!

AN EXACT NARRATIVE Of the Life and Death of NATHANIEL BUTEER; With the several
Conferences held with him by the Right Honorable the Lord Major, and several
eminent Ministers; As also his Confessions, Speech, Prayer, etc. together with
the Sermon preached the Evening after his Execution.
BEfore I enter upon the Narrative, give me leave very briefly to premise, how
Nathaniel Butler behaved himself before this Murder committed, viz. That he
was a very lewd Young man, being addicted to diverse sins, which he himself has
freely confessed. For instance,

1. He was a great Company-keeper, and given to Gaming very much; whereby he
gained money, and several Watches of Young men, one whereof he restored to the
Owner, after his Conscience was awaked, in prison

2. He enticed some Servants to purloin from their Masters, and sell the Goods;
then would he and they go together and spend the money among themselves.

3. He lived in Fornication, frequenting the company and the houses of Harlots;
in so much that (as he himself under his own hand informed me) he judged, this
very sin of Whoredom did draw him on to that of shedding blood. Concerning
which fact I shall now speak; as also concerning his carriage in Prison, and at
his Execution, being an Eye and Ear-witness thereof.

THis Nathaniel Butler came from Alton in Hampshire, where he was born; and at
the time of his Apprehension, was an Apprentice with one Mr. Goodday, a Drawer
of Cloth in Carter-lane, London; during which time he became acquainted with
one John Knight, an Apprentice also in the same City. These two were much
together, but especially when Mr. Worth ( John Knight's Master) was gone to
Bristol-Fair; then did these two young men lie together several nights at Mr.
Worth's house, at the Rose in Milk-street; where in the shop, on Wednesday
morning being the 6. of August 1657. Nathaniel Butler seeing some Bags of
money, he was thereupon tempted to take away the life of his Friend and
Bedfellow, that he might securely convey away the Money which he had now seen
in the Till of the shop. After they had been abroad that day, at night they lay
again together, the bloody design running still in the mind of Butler; he
intending about the dead of the night (for so he expressed himself to me) to
destroy the Young man by cutting his throat: Accordingly he took his knife in
his hand, but his heart would not suffer him to do it; then he laid down the
knife again, yea he took up, and laid down hi sknife several times (so he told
me) before he acted his cruelty: But in the morning very early he did indeed
fall very violently and inhumanely on the Youth, who lay harmlesly asleep upon
the bed. The first wound not being mortal, awaked him, whereupon he strugled
and made a noise (not considerable enough) which was heard into another room of
the same house. Then Butler chopped his fist into the mouth of the Young man, and
so they two lay striving and tumbling very near half an hour, before the fatal
blow was given; but at length he did most barbarously murder the Young man,
giving him a very ghastly deadly wound, cross the throat: And then he went
down, taking away out of the shop a sum of money in two bags, being about One
hundred and twenty pounds: And so with his double guilt of Robbery and Murder,
leaving his bloody Shirt behind him, and a Lock of his own Hair in the hand of
the dead Young man, which Hair was pulled off in their striving together, one
to commit, the other to prevent the fact; after he had so done, he went to his
masters house in Corter-lane, where he privately laid the Money in a new Trunk
that he bought with part of the Money. This Murderer abode for certain days,
that is, from Thursday to Saturday, at his Masters house unsuspected, following
his business at home as formerly.

Many thoughts and jealousies were working in men, who should be the Murderer:
And in a few days, one in Milk-street (the street where the Murder was done)
knowing that Butler used sometimes to be with the Young man who was now
murdered, went to Butler's Master's house in Carter-lane, and spoke with him,
by whose words and carriage he supposed he might be guilty, and so caused him
to be apprehended: But yet for some small time, the said Butler denied the
Fact; but at length confessed, That he, and he only did it. After his
apprehension, he was brought before the Lord Major of London, to whom he
declared the Murder, and the Circumstances of it, crying out for a little time
for his soul, and much lamenting his sin. That night he was committed to
Newgate, and there lay exceedingly startled about the state of his soul, saying
often, What will become of my poor soul! What shall I do to be saved! beginning
now to see the sinfulness of sin. Whom I may compare to Manasseh in three
respects. 1. As to matter of fact; for Manasses shed much innocent blood, 2
King. 21.16. so did he shed (too much) innocent blood. 2. He something
resembled Manasses in his imprisonment, mentioned 2 Chr. 33.11. As Manasses was
taken and bound with fetters, so was he clapped in the Hole or Dungeon of
Newgate, with heavy irons about his legs. 3. Manasses and he were one and the
same in this sense, that when they were in affliction, they besought the Lord
God, and humbled themselves greatly before the God of their fathers: For this
great Offender could often say, He could never be humbled enough.

Upon the 13 of August, when he was arraigned at the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
he pleaded Guilty to the Indictment, with very much shame, confusion of face,
and sorrow of heart: And on Friday the 15. of August, he demeaned himself very
humbly before the Bench, heartily submitting to the Sentence of Death that then
passed upon him, saying, He had destroyed the Image of the Eternal GOD;
alluding (as I verily believe) to those words in Genesis 9.6. -- For in the image
of God, etc. After his Sentence, he was conveyed back to prison; penitently
acknowledging, that he had neglected the good Word of God, and therefore was
the longer kept off (through ignorance of the Gospel) from closing with Christ
Jesus. But after a few days discourse with several Ministers and others, who
opened the Scriptures to him, he began to understand (through the grace of God)
the Word of Grace. And though he had many good Books brought to him by diverse
visiting Friends, yet he chiefly looked into the holy Scriptures themselves,
and found very much advantage, light and peace by these following passages out
of the Old Testament, viz.

2 Samuel 12.9. Where Nathan spoke sharply to David, for despising the
Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in the sight of the Lord, in killing Vriah
the Hittite with the sword -- Verse.13. David said to Nathan, I have sinned
against the Lord; and Nathan said to David, The Lord also has put away thy
sin. From hence he understood the readiness of God to forgive confessing,
repenting sinners, though they are guilty of innocent blood.

Job 33.27, 28 He (the Lord) looks upon men (Oh that men would look after the
Lord!) and if ANY say, I have sinned and perverted that which was right, and it
profited me not; he (that is, the Lord) will deliver his soul from going into
the pit, and his life shall see the light.

Isa 45.18, 19. -- I said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return to the Lord, and he will ABVNDANTLY pardon. The
word abundantly, he used to pronounce with an emphasis; for, he saw (his eyes
being now anointed with spiritual eye salve) that he had multiplied sins
exceedingly, and that he stood in absolute need of the Lords abundant,
multiplied pardons: whereof he had good hope through this good word of Isaiah.

Ezekiel 18.23. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die, says the
Lord God, and not that he should return from his wases and live?

30. -- Repent and turn your selves from all your transgressions; SO iniquity
shall not be your ruin.

31. Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed,
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel!

32. For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies: wherefore turn your
selves and live ye.

Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord (here the poor Prisoner
would note to his comfort that a repenting sinner hadnot only the Word and
Promise of God for forgiveness, but the Oath of God to give such a finner the
greater assurance of pardon) I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked turn from his ways and live: Turn ye. turn ye (see the
importunity of God with poor sinners for the good of their souls) from your
evil ways. For why will ye die O house of Israel!

Micah 7.18. was a place pleasant to his soul. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the reranant of
his heritage? He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in
mercy. Verse. 19. He will turn again (as one does when his anger is gone) he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast
ALL their sins into the depth of the Sea.

Now I shall give you a short List of some New Testament Texts, whereby the
Lord conveyed Counsel and Consolation to this doubting staggering poor Wretch.

Matthew. 18.11. -- For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost.

Joh. 3.14, 15, 16. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him, should
not perish but have eternal life; For God SO loved the WORLD, that whosoever
(this word [whosoever] he he spoke with joy) believes in him, should not
perish but have everlasting life: Now (says Nathaniel Butler) I am one to whom
this word speaks; and therefore God gave the Lord Jesus Christ for my soul; I
believe in him, and therefore I trust to live eternally through him, according
to the gracious terms of the Gospel.

John 6.37. -- and him that comes to me I will in no wise (here he would
repeat and reiterate these words in NO WISE CAST OVT, in NO WISE, in NO WISE)
cast out:

1 Timothy 1.15. This a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.

1 Timothy 2.5, 6. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due time.

In hearing, reading, and conferring upon these (and many more) Scriptures, he
would often say to me and others, these are good Scriptures, brave Scriptures,
are they not brave Scriptures? He would make very diligent and frequent search
into his soul, concerning the sincerity of his sorrow, and would not easily
believe that his repentance was true, or that he had right to the precious
promises of the Gospel. But by much speaking to him by many good people, that
he would apply Christ, and also by seeking unto God for a spirit of Faith for
him, he did begin to act a faith of recumbency and adherence, being (as he
often said) persuaded that the Lord Jesus Christ was able to save to the
uttermost, and willing to save such as come unto God by him; yet he could not
come up to that full assurance of hope and confidence, as he desired, and we
also desired heartily on his behalf. So that sometimes he would break forth and
say, How can I that have been gurlty of all sins whatsoever (almost) as Murder,
Fornication, Theft, etc. challenge or apply a pardon? He was much afraid of
running upon either of these two Rooks, that is, presumption or despair; I told
him that diffidence and despair was the strongest presumption against God,
saying to him, Is it not presumption for a man to dis: obey God, and not to
believe him? Now the command of God in his glorious Gospel is, that men weary
of, and heavy laden with sins should come to Christ, that they might find rest
to their souls. The design of God (said I) in the Scriptures is not to give
some feeble weak hope of pardon, but a lively hope, and a firm expectation of
salvation, to all that mourn, and really repent. Which so wrought upon him that
for the space of some days before his suffering death, it pleased the God of
all comfort to give him joy and consolation, and sometimes strong consolation,
insomuch that he would at times express very great inward gladness, which all
that knew his former mournings were glad to see, and glorified God for giving
him the joy of his salvation; for he was so satisfied concerning the favor and
mercy of God towads him in Jesus Christ, that he rather now desired death then
feared it: as seeing death through Jesus Christ without a sting.

On the Lords Day toward evening the Lord Mayor (to whose Conference I refer
you) went the third and last time to visit him (for the next day he was to die)
and my Lords advice very much refreshed his spirit, it being his Lordships
design to speak of Heaven, with the glory and joy of that Kingdom, and to
establish the Prisoners thoughts thereon.

After his Lordship had left him, he seemed to be very cheerful in his spirit,
blessing God, that he should put it into his Lordships heart to condescend so
far as to pray, and confer with such a despicable poor wretch as he was,
heartily thanking his Lordship for his abundant love.

That night being his last night, I kept him company in Newgate, so did diverse
others; continuing with him in the Dungeon, or Hole (for so the Keepers call
it) till toward midnight, conferring with him, and endeavoring to comfort him
to the end; he delighted all the time of his Imprisonment, in Christian
Company, and spiritual Discourses; but in his last night he was very much
carried forth to spend himself about spiritual things: So that we judged it
meet to leave him alone a while, lest being altogether without rest and
refreshment in his body, he might thereby be made unfit for the service of the
next day, intending then to declare what the Lord had done for him, and to
speak also by way of Counsel to those that came to see his execution.

When we had withdrawn for two or three hours from him into the Lodge, (some of
us observing in the mean time that he did slumber, and as we supposed that he
slept also) then we all returned to him, he lying covered upon the Bed in his
clothes; when we came again about him, he raised up himself, and fell afresh to
his former good Discourse.

Then I sat down by him, and did read the 14 verse of the 51 Psalm, Deliver me
from blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my salvation; and my tongue shall sing
aloud of thy righteousness. I then divided the Verse into these two parts:

1. David's prayer, Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, etc. 2. David's
promise and engagement to God upon the granting of his desire, And my tongue
shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
Then I made these Observations from the words of David, Viz.

1. Obs. Not only a wicked unregenerate man, but a gracious godly man may
(possibly) commit a most horrid murder. David was blood-guilty.

2. Obs. The sin of Murder is a very dangerous sin wherever it is found:
Deliver; [now that word implies danger, Deliver me,] if David murder, he is
in danger of damnation.

3. Obs. 3. Prayer is a work for a person guilty of blood; Deliver me; this
David said by way of desire and supplication, yea most of this Psalm sets forth
David's prayer which was preferred upon the account of his bloodshed. Prayer is
the best way to obtain deliverance from blood-guiltiness.

4. Obs. From those words, (O God, thou God of my salvation) that, There is
salvation in God for men that have shed blood, if those men become penitent and
beg that salvation.

This Note did refresh Nathaniel very much.

5. Obs. From the Promise. And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness,
that men who know what it is to have the guilt of sin (guilt of blood or any
other sin) taken away, will certainly sing aloud of Gods righteousness,
faithfulness, truth.

And indeed this poor man did magnify God and sing aloud of his righteousness,
making mention of his, and his only; he desired us to sing Psalms several times
with him, and to rejoice with him, which also we did.

About five a clock he fell into such a rapture and ecstasy of consolation as I
never saw, nor (I believe) any of my fellow-Spectators; for he would shout for
joy that the Lord should look on such a poor vile creature as he was: He often
cried out, and made a noise, and indeed did not know how to express, and
signify fully enough his inward sense of Gods favor, saying, Must he be an
heir, an heir of God, and a joynt-heir with Jesus Christ, a fellow Citizen with
the Saints, etc. He could not bear such a glorious discovery. Now that his joy
was right Evangelical joy, appears thus, in that mourning and bitterness went
before it; yea, he rejoiced with trembling, and could exceedingly often say
that he would yet have a deeper, and a more through sense of sin; he could never
be sufficiently abased before the Lord.

Now the time was at hand that he should be carried forth to Execution, but he
thought it was not near enough; for he asked several times, What a clock is it?
I demanded why he enquired so concerning the time of the day? Would you gladly
die? said I. Yes, yes, says he, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ which is best of all. About seven the Coach came to carry him away; the
Keeper knocked off his Irons, and now he was a freeman indeed; for the hand of
Grace had before this time taken away the Fetters and Bolts about his Spirit
and Conscience. I went with him in the Coach, and by the way his great desire
was as he passed through the Streets to fix his heart more fully on God, and to
think with more intention and firmness of mind upon the riches, the
unsearchable riches of Grace. In a short time having passed through many
thousands of people, many of whom prayer for his soul, and showed compassion
otherwise to him; he came under the Gibbet which stood in Cheapside just over
against the end of Milk-street, where he had done the murder, he went up the
Ladder, the Executioner standing above him, and I below upon the Ladder: When
he was tied to the Gibbet, he began to speak to the people, having a Speech
written, which he purposed to have read through; A true Copy whereof follows
verbatim.

Beloved Friends,
I Am here a miserable Creature, and had not God of his infinite Grace and
Mercy looked upon me, as sad a spectacle of misery as ever your eyes beheld, by
reason of my wicked and sinful life. And now by the justly hand of God I am
come here to die justly for my sins: And it is my desire that all that see me,
or that hear of me, might learn this most true Lesson from me, that have not
learned it from the Word of God in the Scriptures, That the wages of sin is
death. I have been a very great sinner, and as I think, the greatest of
sinners: And my desires are that my repentance may be greater then my sins;
Which I am afraid is impossible to be without the infinite mercy of God, who
has graciously promised to accept the will for the deed. The particulars of my
sinful life, I have, for all those who shall be pleased to look into it,
gathered together, and given to my Lord Mayors Chaplain, and entreated him to
have it printed for a timely warning to all other young men, especially to the
Apprentices of this City, that by my harms, they may through the Grace of God
learn to beware.

Good people, That which I shall speak unto you is but little, because my
strength is now but weak: Indeed I wish I had more strength, that my words
might reach not only unto the ears, but unto the hearts of every rebellious
and disobedient Child and Servant in this great City, yea, throughout the whole
Nation: And my counsel is, that every one would take heed of the beginnings of
sin. I remember when I first was enticed unto evil ways and practices, I was
tender and fearful of them, and trembled to think what those ways might bring
upon me; but I neither hearkened to the Word of God, nor the voice of mine own
Conscience, which exceedingly checked me, but resolved to go on therein, and
through the Devils enticements joining with my wicked heart, by degrees I grew
more bold and hardy in evil ways, every day more then other, and at last came
to be so far hardened in sin and wickedness, that evil ways and actions were
as familiar unto me as eating and drinking was.

Truly Sirs, This is very true, and this I speak by sad experience, to warn
every one that they would hearken either to Gods Word, or unto their own
Consciences, when they are first checked for their sins: Therefore good people,
as you love your own Souls, take heed of the beginnings of sin, and kill sin
betimes before it grow too strong for you. If I had done so, I verily believe,
and think that sin had not at this time thus killed me, as now it will
certainly do. But seeing it is so, that I am here brought a poor distressed
Captive unto my death by the Tyranny and cruelty of sin; it is my desire that I
may through the gracious assistance of God be enabled to do a greater mischief
unto sin by my death, then sin has done unto me in bringing me to this death,
which will I hope but kill my body only, although it be a bitter, cursed and a
shameful death: Oh hearken to what I have said unto you, and let me for that
purpose humbly beg of all that either hear me or shall hear of me; and oh that
I could prevail with every young person, to cast away sin betimes, to check it
in the first beginning. I do seriously think there is no such course to destroy
the growing of it in the hearts of men and women as that would be.

Sirs, I am now a dying man, and truly if I knew of any better way to ruin sin
then other in mine own observation. I would surely now tell you. For I bless
God I can say it truly, that I am a real enemy to sin, because sin I find is
such a great enemy to God, to all Mankind, and particularly, I have found it my
greatest enemy that ever I had. Oh that I had taken this counsel, which now
through the great goodness and grace of God I have given to you; certainly it
would have prevented the growth of sin in this poor, sad, and now sorrowful
soul of mine: Certainly, I had not now been here as I am, to suffer this cursed
and shameful death which I am justly to suffer both from God and Man for my
most foul, horrid, and bloody sin.

The taking away the life of him who was unto me as dear as my Brother; which
sin, I hope God for his Son Jesus Christ his sake, has in mercy to my poor
Soul forgiven. This sin this bloody sin, I hope the only wise, merciful,
gracious and good God has sanctified for the everlasting good of my poor Soul.
He who is able to bring light out of darkness, and good from the greatest
evil, can by his infinite goodness bring from this sin of mine, which is the
destruction of my Body, the eternal salvation of my Soul. This is a Mercy never
to be forgotten by my friends; that although I have been so unhappie as to
stain their Names and Reputations here, yet I hope through the grace, mercy,
and goodness of God I may be their joy and rejoicing hereafter. Oh this sin
that the Devil was suffered to tempt me to commit, my wicked heart consenting
thereunto! I have observed since my imprisonment, this blood-guilty sin, was as
a punishment of my other sins which I went on in without considering whither I
was going. Had I truly and timely repented of my former sins, I verily believe
and am fully persuaded I had prevented this; this foul, this horrid sin, for
which I can never be too much affected nor afflicted. Yet nevertheless, this
sin I hope through the grace of God has been a rousing, and an awakening sin
to me; it has caused me to call to remembrance all my former sins, and to be
humbled for them, and I hope through the gracious assistance of God I have
truly repented of them all. I thank God for his mercy, I can truly say, that I
am now another manner of Creature then formerly I was: Formerly God came not
into my thought with any joy and content; but now to think of God is exceeding
precious to my soul: To think of the name of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ
is the chief joy and rejoicing of my soul. This is some change, and I think a
great change, and I hope a good change; formerly I sinned with great delight,
and now through the grace of God I delight not in any sin; nay, I can truly say
more, I do now through Gods grace hate and loath sin; and this I know to be
true; for I do even hate my most beloved sin, The sin of Uncleanness, which I
do advise all Young Men to watch and pray against; and for the more effectual
prevention thereof to live very temperately and soberly, making no provision
for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. This sin, I bless God for his grace,
I can now truly say I hate it, I hope if I were to live as many years in the
world as I may do moments, I should through the grace of God never commit more:
And the sin of Lying which formerly I made no conscience of, I think I can
truly say now through the grace of God thar I truly hate it as a wicked sin,
and Lying now is so base an evil in my sight that I could not be hired to tell
a lie, no not I hope if I had the promise of my life givenme, which in my
condition is the greatest gift which man can bestow upon me; yet I hope, even
for my life, to save it from this terrible death, I should not be tempted to
sin against so good a God, who has given me the hopes of an eternal life, and
delivered me from a thousand times a more terrible death; nor against my
blessed Redeemer, who died to take away my sins and who has thus graciously
looked upon me, so vile, so wicked, and so miserable a sinner as I have been;
and has showed mercy upon me, not for any worth that is in me, who am the
unworthiest of all men, but for his own names sake, because mercy pleases him:
To whom therefore be glory for ever, Amen.

I have now declared unto you the grounds I have of my hope, that I have made
my peace with God through Jesus Christ, and have obtained through his grace and
mercy my perfect reconciliation to God, and my blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ. I
shall in the next place in deep humility, as being very sensible that I have
wronged very many, and therefore I do here humbly beg my pardon from all the
World, for all the wrong and injury that I have in any kind done unto any one:
And indeed I should be glad, if I could, to make restitution to every one: but
that I am not able to do; and therefore I must content my self with begging
their pardon and forgiveness, which I do here desire from every one, man, woman
and child, even for Jesus Christ his sake, whom it is that they themse ves must
all fle unto for his pardon, or else be miserable for ever; and as they desire
the Lord Jesus should forgive them all their wrongs done against him, so I hope
they will for his sake forgive me all mine committed against them. And as I
have desired my pardon and forgiveness from all the world for the wrongs and
injuries which I have done; so I do here desire to declare, and that freely and
with all my soul, that I do truly forgive all the World for all the wrongs that
I have suffered from every one therein, even those evil Companions of mine
which have in any kind been the Devils instruments in tempting me, and thereby
have brought me unto that evil which here I am now to undergo, even the losing
of my life: Confessing it was more mine own evil and sin in consenting to do
those wicked actions which have occasioned me now to be here to suffer, then
theirs; and I am more to blame my self in being here, then any other
whatsoever. I am fully satisfied, that through Gods assistance I might have
resisted the temptation, and avoided that evil I have done; so that that the
true cause of this my present misery is wholly mine own; though I intend not
hereby to excuse the Devil nor any of his Instruments. I therefore here once
more advise all young men and women to take heed of the beginings of evil, and
to take heed that they never forsake God, nor his ways and counsels; for I have
found that there first began my ruin, neglecting Gods Word, and not regarding
his counsels given me there, he left me to mine own ways and unto mine own
counsels, to follow them, as a just punishment for my great wickedness in
leaving God, and the directions which he had given me for my good. And as I
desire to forgive every one, so it is my heary prayer, that God for Christ's
sake will forgive them for all that is evil in any of them. And let me say this
to magnify the infinite goodness of God, who oft-times makes a poor Creatures
extremity to be his own opportunity: I might now have been going from this
place to Hell, had not the mercy of God prevented me, which I hope he has done
for his own names sake, and for his dear Son Jesus Christ his sake, who is my
blessed Redeemer, who has purchased life and salvation for all humble,
penitent, and believing sinners, of whom I hope I am one, who defire to
manifest the truth of my Faith by all the means which God has enabled me; and
where I am not able to do what I would, Phope God in mercy will accept the will
for the deed.

I have now almost done: As I have been a wondrous greast sinner, and God has
showed forth wondrous mercy to save me; so it has pleased God to show forth
wonderful kindness to me, in stiring and moving my Lord Major to move the Bench
to give me so large a time of Repentance; and not only so, but his Lordship
has used great means not only in sending me the assistance of good Ministers,
but he also came twice himself to visit me, and prayed with me; which kindness
of his I pray God to reward a hundred sold into his bosom. And here I desire to
bless God as for the time and means for repentance, so for the grace and heart
to repent which all were effects of the wonderful love of God toward me so
vile and wicked a sinner as I have been.

I have great reason also in all humili y to thank the good people of this City
for their many prayers to God for me, and for their kind visits of me: I hope
they will believe that God has heard their prayers on my behalf, and will visit
them, even every one of them that in love to my poor soul have visited me in
this my great necessity. And it is my desire and hope, that the good people of
this City may by this experiment be so encouraged, as never to cease seeking of
God for his grace for any sinner whatsoever, who of his infinite grace and
mercy has had respect unto so wicked, so vile and sinful a Creature as I was,
out of whom I hope I may truly say, he has cast forth legions of sins, and
left in me none behind to hinder my access unto God by Jesus Christ.

I have now done: What shall I say more? Lord teach me what to say, that I may
glorify thee, who have thus glorified the riches of thy mercy upon me, a poor
vile Creature; as a close of what I have to say, and so therewith to close up
my life, my wicked and sinful life, and withal go into a life where I shall
sin no more, offend God no more, but be in an estate of blessing and praising
God for ever and ever. And therefore unto that God of all grace, who is able to
keep that which I shall commit unto his trust, and to preserve me both sold
and body; into thy hands, O merciful Father and blessed Redeemer, I commit my
soul; humbly beseeching thee to remember that good word whereupon I desire to
rest and wholly cast my self, even the sure word of thy faithfulness, O blessed
Savior! from whose sweet lips dtopped this sweet saying, That whosoever comes
unto him, he will in no wise cast out. This blessed saying has been, and at
present is the joy and comfort of my soul. And for this body of mine, which
has been a body of sin, it is now through grace become the Temple of the Holy
Ghost. And as the blessed Apostle Paul believed, and therefore he spoke; so I
believe, and therefore speak; That he that raised up the Lord Jesus, shall
raise me up also by Jesus, and present me unto God without blame.

I have done. Good people, all you that have had the patience to bear me thus
long, let me humbly beg your prayers with me, and for me, That he which has
begun a good work in me, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Nathaniel Butler



After he had read some part of this Speech, the people pressing and making a
noise, I told Mr. Sheriff Milner, that I humbly conceived it best for the
Malefactor to forbear reading any further, the people not being able to hear
because of the noise, and that he should rather speak briefly from his own
breast without book; whereunto Mr. Sheriff consented, and the Prisoner put up
his written Speech, and spoke then with a very loud voice, and with abundance
of tears, to this effect:

That he would humbly desire the Magistrates of London to look after the
suppression of Popish Priests and Jesuits; for some of the Popish party had
been with him in prison, persuading him (but in vain) to die in the Roman
Catholic Religion. Then he addressed himself to Masters and Servants,
advising and pressing them strongly to be both very watchful and careful in
their several capacities; Masters to look well after their Servants, and
Servants to serve their Masters in singleness of heart; admonishing and
exhorting all men to fear the Lord, saying, If you love your souls, leave off
evil ways, and be warned by mine example: But if ye will keep your sins, and
hope for pardon, God will keep his pardon, and you shall keep your sins.

Having finished his Speech, he then called on the Lord by Prayer, entreating
the people to join with him: He prayed with an elevated voice, and with many
tears, this Prayer following.

O Merciful GOD! which according to the multitude of thy mercies do so put
away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no mnore:

Open thine Eye of Mercy upon me wretched Sinner that I am! who most earnestly
desire pardon and forgiveness of all my former sins, and particularly for my
late horrid Blood guiltiness.

Lord, if it be not too late (and I trust no time is too late for thee to show
mercy) wash away this blood of my Brother, which sticks so close to my soul, in
the blood of my Savior (O let me call him so!) which was shed for my sins, and
the sins of the whole world.

Let not the voice of my murdered Brothers blood cry louder for vengeance, then
the blood of our crucified Jesus be heard to cry for pardon.

Give me, Lord, a truly penitent heart; and then accept of that penitent heart
of mine, which is thine own gift.

Given me, plenty of brinish tears; but first steep and wash those tears of
mine in the wounds of thy Son.

Make me here to abhor, and loath, and judge, and condemn my self; that in thy
great day hereafter, The great day of the Lord, I may not be condemned
eternally both body and soul.

Renew in me, most loving Father, whatsoever has been decayed by the fraud and
malice of the Devil, or by mine own bloody carnal will and frailness.

Cause me to set all my sins before my face, and then do thou cast them behind
thy back.

Cause me to spread all my sins before thee my God, as Hezekiah did the the
blasphemous Papers of Rabshekah; and then do thou blow them away with the blast
of thy holy Spirit.

And forasmuch as I do humbly and earnestly desire to put my trust only in thy
mercy, Impute not unto me my former or latter sins; the sins of my body, and
the sins of my soul; sins of omission, or sins of commission; sins which I have
done to please my self, or others; sins against the First, or against the
Second Table; against thee my God, against my Neighbor, or against mine own
Sonb.

Let this first death of mine, which I am now ready to pay in satisfaction to
Man's Law, be acceptable in thy sight, O God; and so do thou deliver me from
the second death.

Deliver me from my Blood guiltiness O God, and take me yet into thy favor,
through the merits and blood shedding of thy most dearly beloved Son, Jesus
Christ.

Amen! Amen!

Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from my blood guiltiness! who
shall deliver me from this body of sin and death!

Lord have mercy upon me a sinner!

Christ have mercy upon me a sinner!

Lord have mercy upon me a sinner; A Merciless, a Profane, a Thieving, a Bloody
sinner!

Lord, though I had no mercy upon my Brother, yet do Thou have mercy upon me:
For, Lord, I have so much the more need of mercy for my soul, by how much I had
so little mercy upon his life.

Lord, I confess with horror of soul, that I killed him suddenly, giving him no
time to prepare for death:

Yet, Lord, I must confess to thy great glory and goodness, that Thou have
given me time and respite to repent before I die.

He then desired me, as I stood upon the Ladder, to pray for him; which I also
did, he joining therein very solemnly. I then having done prayer, asked him how
he did? He told me, he doubted not of doing well; he laid all behind him, and
would go to Christ alone for life and salvation; saying, Now I am lanching into
the Ocean of Eternity! Then he delivered to me the written Speech, desiring the
Executioner to forbear Turning him off, till he lifted up his hands and said,
Lord Jesus receive my soul! I then took him by the hands, and took my leave of
him. After he had stood still a little while in a way of Ejaculations, with his
Cap over his eyes; he lifted up his hands, and said the words aforesaid: Then
the Executioner did his office, and he was a dead man in a few moments: And in
a few moments more, who knows which of us will not be dead men also? Oh
consider therefore, all you that yet are alive, the following Admonition.

An Admonition to all persons whatsoever, especially to Parents, and Children;
Masters, and Servants, etc.
TO Parents and Masters of Families; hear what the Lord faith to you, Ephesians.
6.4. (...), it is a putting of a thing into the mind, an urging and pressing of
it, an informing and instructing the mind. Leigh. crit sac^^ Now this Text
tells you of two very great faults, viz.

First, In case admonishing of Children and Servants be totally omitted;
where is then your obedience to God, who leaves their Education to your care?
Nay, instead of giving good advice and examples to Youth, you many times (I
mean many Heads of Families) rather ruin them, by living without Knowledge and
without Conscience your selves. Oh consider this, and acquaint your selves with
God and with Jesus Christ, that you may be able to acquaint all committed to
your nurture with the fame God and with the same Lord Jesus Christ, the knowing
of whom is the excellency of knowledge.

Secondly, A word to men of care (but of very little care) in this thing: I
grant you use prayer, and you read Sermon-notes sometimes, and the Scriptures
themselves among your people at home; but how often? and how earnestly is that
exercise? Alas, once it may be on the Lords day, and then no great regard had
how they profit, or whether they profit or no, so that something be done,
though nothing come by it by way of benefit to their Souls. It Is a wonderful
weakness in many great Professors of Religion, who will pray and beg of God
strongly upon their knees for Light, Knowledge, Grace and Holiness to be given
to their dear Children, and to their Servants; and yet these very persons will
contribute little or nothing besides good wishes toward the conversion and
welfare of souls, that (by their importunate supplications) seem to be precious
in their eye. If praying be all you have to do for your Family, what mean then
those many Scriptures that command the doing of many other duties besides
praying with, and praying for your people? and if prayer only be not enough,
why do you only pray? Indeed it is well done, to wish well to them that dwell
with you (though it be part) it is the least part of your duty; does not the
Lord look for much more from you? does he not charge Fathers, and Mothers, and
Masters to instruct, rebuke, correct their Children and Servants, and to call
them to account concerning their profiting in Gospel knowledge? I am confident
the carelessness of you in these things is that which renders Preaching so
unprofitable. What will it profit you, or yours, to hear Sermons, and after
that never to hear more of them? Take heed of ignorance and idleness;
ignorance, in not knowing what ye ought to do; and idleness in refusing to take
pains with your people.

Mal. 3.16. Formerly, They that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and
the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought on his name. But now how seldom
do we see Families conferring among themselves, Husband and Wife speaking of
God and of Christ, that Children may learn. Where is a Master and Mistress, or
Master and Dame that now adays drop one gracious word in the hearing of their
Servants the whole week or month, nay (it may be) the whole year throughout?
is it any wonder then for young ones and inferiors to fall into evil ways, when
you that are elder, and their Tutors and Governors, walk so loosely and
unchristianly before them? Will you now search the Scriptures, and know your
work, and do it entirely? will you be faithful and true to all those Souls the
Lord has entrusted you with? and take heed least their present miscarriages,
and their after-condemnation be (and it will be, unless you do all that belongs
to your part) charged upon your account. Nathaniel Butler has given me under
his hand, that if he had continued with one Master to whom he was turned over,
he believed he never had come to such a pass as he did. The day is coming, when
it will come to pass that God shall set your sins and defaults in order before
your faces. And dare you then accuse God, or can you excuse your selves, when
in truth it shall be laid to your charge, that such a Son, such a Daughter,
such a Manservant, or Maidservant had never done so wickedly in one kind or
other, they never had faller into the ways of the Devil, nor fallen under the
wrath of God, if we who had the nurturing, oversight, and admonishing of them,
had done our duty.

O remember the counsel of Christ in these two, Scriptures; That of Paul to the
Ephesians, 5.4. and latter end lately touched upon, Bring them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord: That is, teach them to know, and love, to
serve and fear the Lord; give them such nurture and instruction, such spiritual
matter for their minds to work upon, as the Lord prescribes by the Scriptures.
The other Text of very great use and service to Masters, is in Col. 4.1.
Masters, give to your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing that also
ye have a Master in Heaven. It Is not only just and equal to give food and
raiment, or knowledge or understanding in a Trade, to your Servants; but it is
just and equal for you to give good counsel to your Servants to serve God; and
till this be, you are unjust men, and unequal in your ways, unconscionable as
to the souls of your Servants.

It Is a very honorable character that the most High himself gives to Abraham,
Genesis 18.19 For I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord -- Abraham did not command
his Children and Servants to honor him, and serve him only, (for so most men
are apt enough to lay their commands upon children and households) but his
command required his Relations to walk in the way of God. If men would follow
Abraham herein, what orderly, holy and reformed Families would then be found in
the Land? I hope that these Scripture-passages, and passages of providence also
(one whereof, and indeed a very sad one, you have seen in the foregoing
Narrative) will touch your hearts, and engage you to look after this, that you
and your Children, you and your Servants be henceforth found in the way of the
Lord.

Many Masters are very like the Egyptian Taskmasters in two respects, which
are both remarkable, viz.

1. The Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor, and they
made their lives bitter with hard bondage in Mortar and in Brick, and in all
manner of service in the field; all their service wherewith they made themserve
was with rigor, Exodus 1.13, 14. O the rigor and bitterness that some servants
abide during the time of their serving some men! how many merciless, harsh,
cruel Parents and Masters are more like Egyptians then Israelites, more like
Turks then Christians by their cruelty, provoking (directly against the
Gospel-Statute) Sons, Daughters, and Servants to do that which without
unreasonable provocation they would never have done.

2. Too many Heads and Rulers of houses seem Egyptians rather then Christians,
not only in exacting service from their inferiors with all storminess and
bitterness of spirit, but likewise in this sense (more wicked then the former)
that they will not (so far are these men from pressing their servants to serve
God) suffer them to go and serve the Lord; do not some upbraid and revile,
threaten and discourage Servants, and Sons and Daughters, if they look after
goodness and exactness of life? Exodus 7.16. And thou shall say, The Lord God of
the Hebrews bath sent me unto thee saying, Let my people go that they may serve
me in the wilderness; and behold, hitherto thou would not hear. I beg of you
these two things. 1. That you would be content when your children and servants
do perform to you reasonable service. And 2ly that you would exhort and beseech
them by the mercies of God to present their bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable to God, which is to Godward their reasonable service. But least I
should not prevail with you, I shall therefore direct my counsel and admonition
to children and servants themselves that in case your Overseers see not their
duty, or do it not; yet your selves may make conscience to carry it so toward
God and all men that ye adorn thereby the Doctrine of God our Savior.

Young people, hear what Christ commands, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your
parents in the Lord, for this is right; this is well-pleasing unto the Lord.
Gol. 3.20. The Lord is angry at, and displeased with disobedient Sons and
Daughters. Ephesians. 6.5.6, 7, 8. Servants (says Paul a servant of Christ) be
obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, (for as to soul
and conscience Christ only is Lord and Master and in this sense we are
forbidden to call any man Master, Matthew. 23 8.) with fear and trembling, in
singleness of your heart, as unto Christ: Not with eye-service as men-pleasers,
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; With good
will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men, Knowing that whatsoever
good thing any man does (though never so mean a servant) the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.

Obj. But some servant may say, My Master is a very harsh froward man, or else
I could willingly serve him in singleness of heart.

Aus. Thou art bound by the Gospel to obey and be in subjection to such a man,
if he be thy Master, 1 Pet. 218, 19. Servants be subject to your Masters with
all fear, (of neglecting their lawful commands) not only to the good and
gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it,
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? but if when ye do
well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For
even hereunto ye were called; because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us
an example that you should follow his steps; Who did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth; Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. I confess it were well for Masters (for woe to them that are
naught and froward, making their servants to suffer words, and buffetings and
other abuses wrongfully) and well for Servants if they could serve men gentle
and good; but however, they serve a God and Savior that is good, and that will
reward all that suffer less or more for his sake: As my advice to you is that
you would honor and obey, and be faithful in all things to your Masters, so I
beseech you shun all sins, and all appearance of evil, but especially flee
from idle companions. Prove. 13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise,
but a companion of fools shall be destroyed. Riotous deboist, drunken,
swearing, cursing, whoring wretches are fools in the sense of Scripture; and
seeing it is self-destructive to be a companion with such persons, will thou
walk any more with such? drinking to drunkenness, Dicing and Carding are things
of evil report, and very evil things; they lead likewise to other evils.
Nathaniel Butler was a great Company keeper, and a great Gamester, and what did
he grow to at the last? 2. Flee (2 Timothy 2.22.) youthful lusts. Flee
fornication, 1 Cor. 6.18. But before a man will flee from any thing, he must
see that thing to be dangerous; Now that Fornication, Uncleanness and Whoredom
is dangerous, I demonstrate thus, (whereby it will appear every way
destructive) that it 1. Endangereth Reputation, it is a dishonor to the name
and person of a Man or Woman, Deuteronomy. 23.17. There shall be no whore of the
daughter of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel: Thou shall not bring
the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog into the house of the Lord thy God
for any vow; for even both these are abomination unto the Lord thy God. Romans
1.24. Wherefore God gave them up unto uncleanness through the lusts of their
own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies among themselves. Heb. 13.4. Marriage
is honorable in all, and the bed underfiled (implying the defiled is shameful)
but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. 2. Endangereth substance, Pro.
29.3. Who so loves wisdom rejoices his father, but he that keeps company
with harlots, spends his substance. How many have spent fair Estates by
following this filthy sin! Many spend their own substance, and that also which
is not their own (but their Masters or Parents) upon impudent wicked whorish
women; it is a disgracing and an impoverishing sin; who sees not this by
experience oftentimes? 3. Following Harlots will lead thee to Hell, will
provoke God to take vengeance on thee, Jer. 5, 7, 8, 9. How shall I pardon thee
for this? thy chidren have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods;
when I had fed them to the full then they committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in Harlots houses (the vengeance of God will rout and
miserably destroy such troops, when he sets himself in array against them) they
were as fed horses in the morning, every one neighed after his neighbors wife:
Shall I not visit for these things? says the Lord, and shall not my soul (woe
then to their souls) be avenged on such a Nation as this? Prove. 7.25, 26, 27.
Let not thine heart decline to her ways. go not astray in her path, for she
has cast down many wounded (wounded in their credit, wounded in their Estates,
and wounded in their Consciences) yea many strong men have been slain by her.
This is a bloody, wounding, slaying sin. Verse. 27. Her house is the way to
hell, going down to the chambers of death.

To live in chambering and wantonness is the way to lie down in the chambers of
death. Remember the two young men named in the Narrative, who were lately
bedfellows above ground, and now are become chamber-fellows bellow; for the
fear of the Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be
shortened; break off then speedily from all sin, as you hope for long-lasting
life here, and for everlasting life hereafter.

Obj. We can repent, and mourn, and pray hereafter: For did not Nathaniel
Butler live a long time wickedly, and repented in a short time at the last?

Answ. Do not think that you can repent when you please; if you put off
Repentance, you put it to a peradventure, 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing
those that oppse themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to
the acknowledging of the truth. Do as David did Psalm. 119.20. who made haste
and delayed not to keep the Commandments of God Delays in matters relating to
life are most dangerous. I hope no man nor woman will presume that the Lord is
any way obliged to wait upon them so long as they please; indeed it pleases
him to wait to be gracious, but who knows how near to a period the time of Gods
attendance on sinners is? Acts 17.30. And the times of this ignorance God
winked at, but now commands alt men every where to repent. 2 Pet. 3.9. The
Lord is not slack concerning his promise (as some men count slackness) but is
long suffering to us ward not willing that any should perish, but that all (as
Acts 17.30. men every where) should come to repentance. The Gospel of God, and
the goodness of God are gone forth for this very end, to lead men to
repentance; but if sinners refuse to repent, then after their hardness, and
impenitent heart (under the Gospel, goodness, and long-suffering of God) they
treasure to themselves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. 1. God has a
day of grace for every poor sinner; 2. He has a day of wrath for men finally
impenitent. Think on it; is it not a thing proper and likely to provoke God
against you to swear in his wrath, you shall never enter into his rest, seeing
men despise his goodness and do receive his grace in vain?

Nathaniel Batler being Executed in Cheapside over against Milk-street End,
about eight or nine in the morning, (a Multitude of People being Spectators) he
was afterward cut down, and his Corpse put into that Coach which brought him to
Execution; and from thence conveyed to Gregory's Churchyard London; where about
Noon he was burled. That Evening at S. Gregordes Church, a Sermon was preached
by Mr Randolph Yearwood the Lord Majors Chaplain; (there being a great
confluence of People,) The Substance whereof, take as follows:
I JOH. 3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer, and ye know that no
Murderer has eternal Life abiding in him.


THE Apostles intent in this Epistle was (and indeed my design in this Sermon
is) to promote true love in men's hearts toward one another: His Arguments are
many, which he propounds as so many provocations to love. Consider these
seven.

1 Arg. 1 John 5.9, 10, 11. He that says he is in the light, and hates his
brother, is in darkness, even until now. He that loves his brother abides in
the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hates his
brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whether he
goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes (as though he should say)
Love surpasses hatred, as far as light excels darkness.

Arg. 2. Men are not of God, but they are the children of the Devil, unless
they love as brethren. This is plain and manifest, 1 John 3.10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother, 1 John
4.7. Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God: and every one that
loves, is born of God --

Arg. 3. He that Ioveth not, knows not God, for God is love, 1 John 4.8.

Arg. 4. A man otherwise cannot clear up his love to God, 1 John 4.20. If a man
say, I love God and hates his Brother, he is a Liar. For he that loves not
his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?

Arg. 5. 1 John. 4.10.11. Herein is love, not that we loved God: but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God
so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

Arg. 6. If you love the Brethren, ye have passed from death to life, 1 John
3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren.

Arg. 7. The last Argument is drawn from the dreadful estate of a man that
loves not his brother, 1 John 3.14. He abides in death, he is a murderer, he
has not eternal life abiding in him.

And now I am returned to the words which I intend to handle.

Whosoever hates his Brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer has
eternal life abiding in him. Here we have two things very remarkable.

1. A description of a Gospel-murderer (for in the sense of our Law, mere
hatred does not make a murderer) Whosoever hates his Brother is (what is he?)
a Murderer. 2 A declaration of the damnable state of such a murderer. And ye
know ('it is a known case) that no murderer has eternal life abideing in him.
Let us consider the first of these two truths, in the words of the Apostle,
viz.

Obser. 1. Whosoever hates his Brother is Murderer.

It is requisite to say something by way of Explication to this truth, and then
by way of Application.

Whosoever] ((...), every one) every malicious man without exception, whether
he be reputed good or bad, holy or unholy, if he hates his brother he is a
murderer; if he be rich or poor, high or low, Magistrate or Minister, whosoever
he be, if he hate, he is here included in the indictment of murder. [Whosoever]
is a term of universality.

Hateth] By hating two things are hinted in Scripture.

1. A comparative respect. This first is plain in Genesis 29: 30. And he went in
also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more then Leah -- 31. And when the
Lord saw that Leah was hated, -- that is, was loved less then Rachel.

Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and
Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters; yea, and his own life also,
cannot be my Disciple.

Now it is not lawful properly and indeed to hate a man's self or his Relations,
though he might gain heaven thereby. Observe, Luke the Evangelist says, cap.
14.26. If a man hate not -- brethren -- he cannot be Christ's Disciple; and John
the Apostle affirms, Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer -- So that we
must take the term [hate] in some places to signify a less degree of love: so
in Luke. He that loves not Christ more then himself, more then his Wife or
Children, more then Brethren or sisters cannot be my Disciple; as suppose a man
must either forsake Jesus Christ, or else his natural and near relation; this
for saking of them, and cleaving to Christ, the Scripture expresses by hating
of them; not that men hate, or may lawfully hate their Friends, but they love
them less then they love the Lord Christ, So Matthew. 10.37. He that loves
Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me; and he that loves Son or
Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.

2. Hating is taken for a very strong disrespect, and a mighty implacable
disaffection in the heart of one man toward another man's person; insomuch that
a man cannot find in his heart to say well of, or do good unto another; but he
can find in his heart to speak all manner of evil, and act all manner of
mischief, hurt and wickedness against another. This is our Apostles sense; He
that hates his brother, i.e. he that shows no pity or compassion to, but
prejudice, cruelty, and indignation against his brother, is a Murderer. This is
utter hatred, according to that in Judge. 15.2. -- I verily thought thou had
utterly hated her. --

[Brother] 1. Natural brother, Mat. 4.18. And Jesus walking by the sea of
Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and Andrew his brother.

2. Kinsman and Countryman, Romans 9.3, 4.

-- For my brethren and kinsmen according to the flesh, who are Israelites.

3. A Christian, one obedient to Christ, Mat. 12.48 49.50. -- Who is my mother?
and who are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand toward his Disciples,
and said. Behold my mother, and my brethaen: for whosoever shall do the will of
my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother. Heb. 3.1. Wherefore holy
brethren, partakers of the holy calling --

4. Any humane creature, man, woman or child, Mat. 7.3, 4. And why beholdest
thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye (meaning in the eye of any other
person) but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye Or how will thou
say to thy brother (to any man) Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye? and
behold a beam is in thine own eye! Acts 17.26. And has made of one blood all
nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth.

[Is a Murderer] That is, in his desire and design, and in God's sense and
esteem, who searches the heart. As a man that does not commit the act of
Adultery, is an Adulterer nevertheless if his heart lust after a woman, Mat.
5.28. So if a man never lay violent hands upon another, yet if his heart
disaffect and hate him, he is a Murderer.

[ And ye know that no Murderer (whether he be a Murderer in the sense of this
Scripture, or any other) has eternal life abiding in him.] that is, has the
promise of eternal life, or the evidence of it abiding in him. Do not conceive
from this clause, that a man who was at any time guilty of blood by murdering
another, or hating another, cannot be saved, or enter into life; for Manasseh,
David, and others were blood-guilty, but upon repentance were pardoned. I doubt
not of Nathaniel Butlers life eternal (though he did destroy and take away the
life of his Brother) because God gave him repentance and humiliation. The
meaning is this; No Murderer has eternal life abiding in him, if this man
abide in his malice, hatred, and under his murder impenitent and stupid.

Is he (whosoever he be) that hates another, a Murderer? Then,

Use 1. Examine your selves. Is Hatred so heinous a sin? How may we know then
whether we are not haters of any man? Now Hatred is manifested thus:

1. By refusing to rebuke thy brother or neighbor for his sin. Lev. 19.17. Thou
shall not hate thy brother in thine heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
brother, and not suffer sin upon him. Prove. 13.24. He that spares the rod,
hates his son.

2. By keeping (without cause) at a distance from men, Genesis 26.27. And Isaac
said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me and have sent me
away from you? If ye cry, Away with him, away with him, to banishment,
imprisonment! Away with such an one out of my sight! I cannot endure this or
that person in my sight! Thou art an hater and a murderer. See Judge 11.7. And
Jephtah said unto the Elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me, and expel me out of
my fathers house?

3. Warlike language. Genesis 37.4. They hated him, and could not speak peaceably
to him. When men cannot give one another a good word, what is this but malice
and hatred in the heart? Genesis 49.29. The archers have sorely grieved him and
shot at him, and hated him. Bending the bow, and shooting bitter words, speak
out bitterness and hatred within.

4. Lying in wait for, rising up against, and mortally wounding another. Deuteronomy.
19.11. But if any man hate his neighbor, and lie in wait for him, and rise up
against him and smite him mortally that he die, etc. Rev. 17.16. These shall
hate the whore and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh
and burn her with fire. Harsh usage shows hatred.

Try your selves by these and other Scripture-signs, and try impartially.

Use 2. Exhort men to lay aside their sin. See what the word charge upon it.

1. It Is from the Devil (as love is of God.) 1 These. 4.9. Ye are taught of the
Devil to hate, 1 John 4.11, 12. This is the Message that ye heard from the
beginning, that we should love one another, not as Cain who was of that WICKED
ONE -- meaning as Cain was a man of cruelty and hatred, so he was of the
Devil; hatred is all hatched in Hell! O then retain it no more in your hearts.

2. It proves a man to be yet unregenerate, Titus 3.2, 3. For we our selves
also were sometimes foolish and disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in MALICE and ENVY, hateful and hateing one another. But
after that the kindness and love of God ((...)) appeared etc. Its too too
apparent from this passage that the kindness and love of God has not wrought
kindly upon men's hearts so long as they live in malice, envy and hatred; how
can a man be a cut throat and a Christian at the same time, a man of hatred and
a child of God?

3. Thou art a murderer. I have here transscribed some suitable passages of a
very reverend Godly man (I mean Mr. Joseph Caryl) who in his excellent
exposition upon the 5th Chapter of Job and 2 verse, speaks thus concerning
wrath. So in like manner wrath is said to slay a man; first because it thrusts
him headlong upon such things as are his death; he runs wilfully upon his own
death; sometimes by the dangerousness of the action, when a casual sudden
death surprises him; sometime by the unlawfulness of the action which brings
him to a legal judiciary death. Secondly his wrath is said to kill him because
his wrath is so vexations to him that it makes his life a continual death to
him, and at last so wearieth him out and wastes his Spirits, that he dies for
very grief, and so at once commits a threefold murder. First, he murders him
intentionally, against whom he is wroth. Secondly he really murders his own
body. And thirdly he meritoriously murders his Soul for ever, except the Lord
be more merciful then he has been wrathful, and the death of Christ, heal
those wounds by which he would have procured the death of others, and has (as
much as in him lies) procured his own.

This is true of hatred as well as of wrath, for he that hates his brother is
a Murderer.

1. He murders his Brother whom he hates; hatred is a wishing and seeking for
(at least in heart) the slaughter, death and destruction of his Brother; when
the Apostle John affirms, whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer; his
meaning is he is a Murderer of that Brother whom he hates, and he is so
because he hates him.

2. He that hates his Brother is a Murderer, more then once; he does not only
murder his brother but himself -- by bringing eternal death upon himself for
hateing his Brother: he that murders himself is (felo de se) a Self-murderer,
is manifest from these words; and ye know that no murderer (meaning a malicious
man) has eternal life abiding in him. To be a murderer is,

1. A crying sin, Genesis 4.10. And he said, what have thou done? the voice of thy
Brothers blood cries unto me from the Ground. If men would think, what am I
doing, now I am hateing my Brother; I am murdering in Gods account, and murder
is a loud sin: Surely then we should harbor no hatred. Murder,

2 It is a very reproachful shameful sin, considered in the act that follows
it: to prove a man guilty of wilful murder renders him a shame to himself, a
blot to his relations: thou that hate, art a murderer! O be ashamed of this
shameful hatred.

3. Murder is a sin that sets the vengeance of God against a man, the very
Barbarians believe that vengeance and death will fall strangely and speedily on
Murderers, Acts 28.4. And when the Barbarians saw the venomous beast hang on
his hand, they said among themselves (very confidently) no doubt this man
(meaning Paul) is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet
vengeance suffers not to live. Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and unbeleeving and
abominable, and MVRDERERS, (heart-murderers and hand-murderers) and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all Liers, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the Second
death. It Is not torture enough for a Murderer to die only once; God has
designed for him a second death, an eternal death; no Murderer (remaining a man
of hatred) has eternal life abiding in him; the Devil himself will as soon be
saved as he that hates his Brother. Rev. 22.15. For without are Dogs,
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers -- malicious angels (devils) and
malicious men (devils incarnate) must be excluded together; heaven is no place
for men of hatred and malice.

Three Objections.

Object. 1. But (some may say) It Is no danger to hate a poor man, Prove. 14.20.
The poor is hated even of his own e Neighbor; but the rich has many Friends;
no man (nor God himself, as some men think) minds the poor man.

Obj. 2. A man surely may hate him that speaks evil, that prophesies
damnation against me, as in 1 King. 22.8. And the King of Israel said to
Jehosophat, there is yet one man (Macaiah the son of Imlah) by whom we may
enquire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning
me, but evil.

Obj. 3. He hates me (says another) he is mine enemy; may I not hate him?
Matthew. 5.43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, Love your enemies -- or
else you will prove your own worst enemies; for it is death (the second death)
to hate a poor man, an enemy, or any man.

Is hatred a Man-murdering sin, and a Soulmurdering sin? Then take heed of
helping on this hatred any way. As there are ways to provoke to love (which few
love to walk in) so there are tricks and devices of the Devil to drive on the
design of hatred in men's hearts, that he may drive men to destruction. Decline
(especially) naming men by this or the other name of reproach. D. Hall, late
Bishop of Norwick, who was a very worthy, learned and godly man, in a small
Treatise of his, called Pax terris, p. 44. speaks thus; Damnentur ad imum usque
barathrum illa nominum opprobria, Lutheranorum, Calvinianorum, Arminianorum,
Puritanorum, Praelaticorum, Presbyterianorum, Independentium, quae fidei
ejusdem professoribus vulgo objectari solent. i. e. Let those terms or names of
reproach and disgrace (says he) of Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians, Puritans,
Prelaticals, Presbyterians, Independents, which are commonly objected to the
Professors of the same faith, let them be condemned to the lowest hell. I am
confident they were coined there, and they prove an occasion of much hellish
hatred among Christians.

It Is often known that one man hates another merely because he passes in the
world under one or other of these dividing names, whereas (it may be) the man
deserves no such name; but if he do, I am fure it is not fit nor Gospel-like to
leave loving a man of a different mind in some circumstantial matters of
Religion. You will not be able to come off in the day of account by this plea.
Indeed I hated such a man, and I thought I did well, for he was called an
Episcopal man, or a Presbyterian, or an Arminian, or Anabaptist, or a
Schismatic and Sectary. The Lord God will demand, Was not such a man thy
brother, was he not thy neighbor (nay, did he not fear my name?
notwithstanding this or that nickname maliciously put on him) and should
thou have hated thy Brother, thy Christian Brother, a man that lived in all
good conscience by thee, considering this startling Text, Whosoever hates his
Brother is a murderer, and ye know (O then hate no more!) that no murderer has
eternal life abideing in him.

Lastly, We see the excellency of Love, in 1 Cor 12. ult. -- and yet show I
unto you a more excellent way. (...)) It Is the way of life; as hatred puts men's
lives in hazard and jepoardy; so love looks after the saving of life; it
permits others to be in peaceable possession of their own lives; and then love
to brethren is an evidence of that man's life eternal, that loves his brethren,
1 John 3.14. We know we have passed from death to life because we love the
brethren. Hatred is deadly and perillons to men every way, and love is of a
soul-protecting tendency; Love is excellent and lovely in this respect. A
Philanthropie in us, a love to men, as men; and a love to regenerate men as
such, assures our hearts we are in the pathway to heaven; as malice and hatred
is the highway to hell, from which the Lord of heaven deliver your souls.

It Is the way, the highway to Heaven, a man never goes after God till he walks
in love, Ephesians 5.1, 2: Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children, and
walk in love, as Christ also has loved us. So long as men (caled Christians)
live in bitterness, wrath, anger, and clamor, evil speaking, and in malice,
they are the Children of the Devil, for him they obey; but when we are kind one
to another, TENDERHEARTED, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
is ready to forgive us; this God-like, and Christ-like life, this love-life is
a lovely evidence of our following God our heavenly Father, as dear children;
and of following our dear Lord and Savior. Consider Ephesians. 4 end. and Ephesians.
5.1, 2. and I hope that context will make smooth, and sweeten your rough and
bitter spirits toward each other mutually.

A Recollection of the sum of two Discourses between S. T. and N. B. in Newgate
on Thursday Aug. 13. and Thursday Aug. 20, 1657. both continuing several hours.
HAving by the Providence of God upon due occasion and call, bin with N. B. as
an eye and Ear witness (among others) of the wonderful grace of God to him in
his last days, to the rejoicing of my heart; and being desired and pressed to
contribute some thing to the Narrative by those worthy persons concerned in the
publication thereof, I shall do it very briefly, according to my best knowledge
and remembrance.

My first address unto him was, to know what serious sense he had of his
heinous sin, and his souls condition?

In answer to which, he did in a very mournful manner, largely lay open the
strong convictions he had upon his conscience of the sinfulness and
damnableness of his sin, ennumerating (himself) the several aggravating
circumstances thereof with the time and manner of his conviction, which began
not until his imprisonment and fetters began. For albeit he was followed and
filled (as he said) with distraction, amazement, and disquietment, from the
time of the fact, making him restless in all places; Yet he told me he had no
solid conviction of his sin, until he came to be alone in his Chains, like
Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33 11.12. his prejudgment of the sentence of death, brought
in the thoughts of an eternal after-estate, and then said he, my conscience
was enlightened and a wakened to see my self in the glass of Gods law, and under
the judgment of eternal death, which wrought such horror, consusion, and
astonishment, that made me cry out in the bitterness of my soul, as one under
the wrath and tertors of the Almighty; Moreover said he, the thoughts of this
second and afterdeath of my poor soul, did blot out of my remembrance the
death which was approaching.

Hereupon I began further to apply to him after this manner, That in this your
present condition, there are two things of greatest concernment to your soul.
First, that you be rightly regulated in your repentance. Secondly, rightly
directed the way of believing in Christ. I shall endeavor to make both plain
and practicable.

1. Not to swell the Narrative with the rehearsal of what I offered him about
a true and right conviction of sin, (not of this notorious sin only, but of
others also,) and the corrupt root and fountain from whence all sprang, with
the nature and necessity of a Gospel-repentance, pressing seriousness and
sincerity upon him, this not being a time to Trifle, much less to dissemble,
about the weighty concernments of his soul, a false and a feigned repentance
being as bad as the sin it self, with more the like, as occasion was offered.

N. B. Answers very sensibly, in these and such like words following not in a
continued discourse, but in an Intercourse of speech.

N. B. Oh says he, not only this one heinous sin, but multitudes of other
sins, are set in order before me, as well small as great; and the smallest
appears great to me, as being against a holy God and an infinite good; I
never thought such things to be sins, which I now see to be sins. Oh what an
ignorant dead Creature was I before! I now apprehend the filthiness, and feel
the hardness of my heart; my heart is discovered to the very bottom; the whole
trade and course of my life is brought to my remembrance, (and wringing his
hands the most of the time) Oh now says he, I discern I was in a miserable
and damnable condition before I committed this foul fact. Others think
themselves in a happy condition because they are not under the guilt of my sin,
and under the same sentence, but alas they are lamentably mistaken, as I also
was. Now do I apprehend the sinfulness of my thoughts and secret immaginations,
as well as outward actions: And all this and much more expressed with such a
manner and measure of earnestness, as did apparently signify, that the
two-edged Sword had past and pierced through the very powers of his soul,
discerning (and abilitating him to discern) the inward thoughts and intents of
his heart. Oh says he I dare not lessen my sins, nor extenuate my great sin,
they are against the righteous law and holy nature of God; and frequently in
our discourse he would intermix this speech of David's, with hands wringing, and
strong affection, against thee O Lord have I sinned, against thee, even thee, O
Lord, have I sinned and done wickedly, and Lord Pardon mine iniquity, for its
exceeding great. Psalm. 25.11. And when I proceeded upon the parts of
repentance, and contrition as one great branch of it, he said. That he did
heartily repent to his utmost as before the Lord; and did hope the Lord would
break him more. Oh says he, its the grief of my heart I can grieve no more,
and though my heart is broken, yet I am sensible of hardness yet remaining (and
by way of concession to my words) saying, Oh, its not a time to Trifle indeed.
I know my heart is deceitful, but I desire nothing more then a through and
faithful discovery of the deceitfulness of my heart by all that come to me,
that I might not mistake and lose my soul; and amongst other deceits I desire
to avoid this of resting upon any repentance of mine, but upon Christ only for
salvation: but I hate sin heartily, not only for that it has brought me to
this misery, but also for its filthy nature; and because against a holy and
merciful God.

2. The second thing I endeavored to manage, was, the possibility of pardon
and salvation, notwithstanding the magnitude and multitude of his sins, which
when I began to speak, his heart was raised to an earnest expectation and
attention, rejoicing to think there might be a door of hope I proceeded to
three or four considerations to evidence his sin pardonable, and his soul
salvable. First, because there was more grace in God to forgive, and more
virtue in the blood of Christ to save, then was in his sin to damn him.
Secondly, because God in the Gospel had determined all sins of all sorts
pardonable, except only [the sin] against the holy spirit, Math. 12.31. 1 John
5.16. which for sundry reasons he could not possibly be guilty of; this I did
inculcate the more, that he might sted fastly and firmly believe the record
and testimony hereof, before he went further, unto which he did profess a full
and sound assent, gathering herefrom hopes that he might be saved, and exulted
in those hopes.

Thirdly, that God had recorded eminent examples in his word of showing his
mercy, to such sinners who had committed the same sin, and that with a higher
hand, viz. Manasseh. 2 Kings 21.16. compared with 2 Chronicles. 33, 11, 12, 13. I
did endeavor to enforce the Parallel, about the means and manner of Gods
humbling, by the same fetters of affliction; upon which he said, Oh I bless God
for this affliction, I bless God that I was discovered and taken; I might have
run out my course in sin, and directly to hell, had not God taken this course
with me. Oh I would not exchange my present imprisonment with my former liberty
in sin for all the world. I hinted also the Murder of David in the matter of
Vriah, and David's prayer again, Psalm. 25.11. which he said Mr. Samuel Jacombe
of Lumbard Stret had preached on in the Prison, which did much help his hopes,
and he voluntarily called to remembrance the Jews who murdered Christ, Acts
2.36.37.38. and made a comfortable improvement thereof.

Fourthly, I alleged that the Gospel did pronounce and proclaim pardon of
sin; and eternal salvation upon true repentance, and believing on the Lord
Jesus Christ; and there was no visible bar to exclude him more then any other
in world: the substance of this faith lying in this, that if upon the sight of
his lost condition by sin, and upon a firm assent to the record of God
concerning his sons being an only and all-sufficient Savior, he could but cast
himself upon the mercy of God, and roll his sinful sincking soul upon the
Lord Jesus as a foundation, heartily hateing sin, and abhorring himself, and
cleaving to Christ's righteousness, he should be certainly and undoubtedly
saved, according to Mat 11.28. Joh. 6.37. Acts 16.31. Esaias. 55.7. also 1 Timothy
1, v. 15. he hereupon brake out. I see my self undone for ever, without the
mercy of God in Christ's blood. I know not whether to go but to Christ, [but
intermixing interrogatively] is there mercy for me? Is there hope for such a
one as I am? well, I will adventure my soul upon this foundation, I am
resolved I will trust and hang here, [adding that common Phrase] I can but
perish, I can but dye, and if I do, it shall be in trusting upon Gods grace and
Christ's righteousness, but I will hold fast that word, John 6.37. he has said
those that come, I will in no wise cast out: I do come to him, and I will
cleave to him; surely he will not cast me off. I told him that upon this
Gospel ground, he might soundly and surely gather to himself comfort; and if
his repentance and faith (thus far) were but sincere, he might assuredly
conclude upon the faithfulness of God, and truth of his Gospel that he should
be saved, the which I endeavored to make plain and practicable to him also.

The Lord was pleased so wonderfully to enable him by his spirit to lay hold
upon, and embrace these considerations, that his heart was filled with Joy and
Peace through believing, in so much that he was in such a brearhing panting
Ecstasy, that he put his hands upon his sides, and cried out, Oh my heart will
break! is there hope for me? is there salvation for me? Oh what comfort is
this, I never felt nor tasted the like before! I formerly thought there was no
comfort but in my sinful way, nor no joy but in sinful pleasures, with much
more the like; and to the amazement of several persons present.

But in the midst of this Joy, correcting himself, he breaks out, Oh what is
become of the soul of him I have murdered, to whom I gave no space to repent!
I told him that was indeed a high aggravation of his sin, and therefore should
be improved to humble him the more; but withal, the state of the others soul
was to him a secret, and all his distracting thoughts about it, would
contribute nothing to the other or himself; and therefore that he should spend
the rest of his time and thoughts about his own soul: finally and principally,
Manasseh might as well have had doubtful thoughts about the multitudes of
souls, whose Innocent blood he shed in Jerusalem; but this hindered not his
pardon. Oh says he, what a mercy is it that I have space to repent, that I was
not served as I served him! I might have escaped apprehension, and some way or
other have died suddenly in my sins. He took much notice of the patience of
God, and of the tenderness of the Lord Major, from whose visits and
Instructions he had reapt much benefit also, that his souls condition was so
much upon the hearts of such who knew the weight of sin, and the worth of a
soul, to be instant with God for him.

Oh but says he, I am afraid of Presumption, lest I should take comfort too
soon. I told him that as a person might be presumptuous in crying peace, whiles
going on in sin; so might he, if he were not sincere and sound in his
repentance, and faith: but if that were true, he could not be presumptuous in
concluding and applying the promise of the Gospel to himself; nor on the other
hand could he presume too far in coming to and resting upon the grace of God
in Christ, but the more he did, the more accepted. He said, I am sure I am
humbled for my sins, as in the sight of God, and I would be more; I do abhor my
self and my sin, that if I had opportunity I durst not commit sin against so
good a God to offend and dishonor him; and mentioning that Text. 1 John
3.20.21. my heart does not condeme me of hypocrisy in this; and hereupon hiis
heart was greatly raised again to a strong confidence in God. I do hope, says
he, (according to that word Phil 1.6.) that God has begun this work and will
perform it to the day of Jesus Christ: and whiles I do live, I will trust in
him, and seek to him, and yet not rest on any thing. Some Papists have come
(says he) and told me I must be a Roman Catholic, or no salvation; but alas
what works have I to rest upon, but my murder and my other many evil works
before, that would sink me for ever, but for the mercy of God on which I trust!
Others doubt, says he, I dissemble; but alas what will that avail me now? the
Lord knows, I do discover what I can of persons and their sins, that I may do
the utmost good I can in preventing sin against God, and the ruin of others
souls: and I have a heart to do more if I could for God before I dye.

Finally he expressed much bope and comfort and joy several times in a panting
breathing manner, and that Mr. Yearwood had been an instrument of great
refreshment to him in his frequent Visits; to whom I refer the Reader for a
more perfect Narrative; he often expressed not only his willingness, but desire to
dye, both because of that just law of God, [blood for blood] and because he had
such good hope through grace, that his sin and sorrow should both have an end,
much admiring at his gift of memory to retain all spoken to him, and also
wondering at the change in his heart, and his comforts and joys, as being new
strange things to him, greatly wondering and magnifying God that he should take
the occasion upon this his most foul sin, to bring him to a sight of all other
sins and save his soul. The Lord grant it may have the like effect on others in
the same pernicious paths; and that especially young men may hear and fear, and
be converted and healed.

FINIS.
A SERIOUS ADVICE TO THE CITIZENS OF LONDON, By some MINISTERS of the GOSPEL in
the said CITY: Upon occasion of the HORRID MURDER And DREADFUL DEATH OF
NATHANIEL BUTLER, An high Malefactor
Beloved in Christ,
AS we thought it a great duty lying upon us, before the execution of the
sentence of death upon Nathaniel Butler to lay out our selves to the utmost for
the promoting of his spiritual and eternal good; in frequent praying with him,
in constant praying for him; in endeavoring to convince him of the superlative
greatness of his sins, and in spreading of the freeness of the grace of God in
Christ before him, according to the penitential workings, we observed in him.
So (having done our duty to him, (who is dead under the stroke of justice) and
as we hope with some success too through the grace of God, for which we bless
him) we humbly judge there is a further duty incumbent upon us, unto you the
inhabitants of this famous City, who have been spectators of this Tragedy, in a
serious recommending of this providence to you and the duty which it calls for.

Psalm. 9 16. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes. And surely
this latter Age (though an Age full of sin) has not set before you a more
dreadful instance of man's sinfulness, and Gods justice (though in the end
sweetened much with mercy) then that which in and upon this notorious Malefactor
has been laid before your observation. And therefore we cannot here be silent,
but must take this advantage with all humility and affection to your souls
good, plainly to open our hearts to you.

By some (we know before hand) we shall be slighted and censured as men too
busy, and may be, as men too credulous; but in the presence of God we can say,
our aim is public good and the discharge of our consciences, and therefore we
are not discouraged.

And we are not wholly without hope, but that some benefit may be reaped from
these few lines, which here with all sincerity we do present upon that late
providence which has been before you.

Exodus 14.20. That providence we say, which like the Cloud is on one side very
dark, on the other side very bright; very dark as to man's sin, very bright as
to Gods mercy.

It Is the daily and inward grief of our spirits, God knows it, that our Ministry
is so successeless, that we see so little fruit of the word preached by us,
that in a City where there is such plain and powerful preaching, such horrid
sins should be committed; Ezekiel. 19.14. This is a lamentation and shall be for a
lamentation. But possibly some secure sinners may be a little startled and
awakened by this terrible judicial hand of God; and so a word setting in with
this providence may be more effectual then many in an ordinance. We cannot but
comply with the will of God in the use of all means for the furtherance of your
salvation. And oh! that God would so bless this dispensation that you all may
hear and fear and sin no more.

Touching the sad occasion, we will not enlarge upon that: the heinous murder,
the abominable uncleanness, the wicked theft, of which Not: Butler was guilty
(of the former but once, which we speak not by way of extenuation; for that is
too much, of the two latter very often) as also the shamefulness and
dreadfulness of his death: these we pass over, as being very well known to all
of you. Neither shall we interest our selves in any narrative of the workings
of God upon his heart, during his imprisonment, and at his execution; (though
herein we could speak much as being (for the most of us) very often with him in
this time, and narrow observers of him.) Nor shall we expatiate upon some of
those great truths of the Gospel, which this famous instance does lead us to;
Namely that sometimes it pleases God in the sovereignty and prerogative of his
grace to ceaze upon the greatest sinners; and out of the coursest rubbish to
erect the monuments of his unlimited mercy. 1 Timothy 1.16. The Lord does
sometimes take the vilest wretches, and hangs them out as patterns of his
infinite love that the freeness of his grace may be admired, and the greatest
of sinners may be encouraged; but still in the way of Faith and Repentance, we
do not, we dare not limit the Grace of God, as to exclude this Notorious and
Bloody sinner from it; nay we have good hope, that through the infinite Mercy
of the Father, and the All-sufficient Merits of the Son, he is accepted to
eternal Life. Indeed, when we consider the horribleness of his sin, the
greatness of his joy, after a short humiliation (yet deep and through we hope)
we easily conjecture, that some will question both the prudence of any
publication, and the truth of his Conversion. But we will meddle with neither
of these leaving men to jude of the former and God alone (who searches and
knows the heart) to judge of the latter.

Waving therefore all these things, our only design and business in this
application, is to press upon you (the inhabitants of this City) to some of
whom we are more nearly related in our respective Charges) the several duties,
which do naturally result from this Providence.

We would exhort you in the first place, To be thankful to God for his
Restraining Grace; which though it be short of his Renewing Grace, yet it is with
all thankfulness to be valued: Oh! bless the Lord, who keeps you from those
sins which this poor Wretch was guilty of, that you are not Adulterers,
Thieves, nay, Murderers and Malefactors, to be punished by the Judge; this is
the Lords mercy. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes you to differ from others? Have not you
the same Names? Have not you the Seed and Spawn of all wickedness in you? And
should God leave you to the baseness of your own hellish hearts, would you not
also run to all Excess of sin, and that with Greediness too? When you read over
this sad Story, we beseech you lay your hands upon your hearts, and say, What a
mercy is it, I was neither the Murderer nor the Murdered!

We desire you to mourn over the crying sins that are to be found amongst us.
Oh! the Scarlet sins that swarm in London, even in London! Swearing,
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Profanation of the Lords Day, Contempt of the Gospel,
and of the Ministry thereof; nay, even Blood-guiltiness is to be found amongst
us! Should not your Souls, like the Soul of Righteous Lot, be vexed within you
for these things, 2 Pet. 2.7? Should you not all come up to be Ezekiel's
mourners, in the remembrance of them, Ezekiel. 9.4? Especially, considering that
these things are done in times of Reformation, and in a place of Vision, even
in London, where the Light of the Gospel shines so gloriously; where the Words
is Preached so plentifully and powerfully, even there these abominations are to
be found. Will you not lay them to heart?

And what reason have you to admire the patience of God to this City? It Is a
wonder London is not made a Sodom, that desolation does not seize upon your
houses, that you are not all swept away with the Beesome of sudden
destruction, that you are not hung upon the Gibbet as Spectacles of Gods
vengeance to all the Nations round about! What? so much provocation, and yet
the City to stand! Oh the Patience and Long-suffering of God! Doubtless, if God
had not a Remnant amongst you, who seek him daily, and fear his Name, you had
been laid desolate long before now. Isa 1 9.

We need not from hence to stir you up to submit to Government, and to bless
God that you live in a place where Laws are Executed. What a Chaos? what a
Wilderness of wild Beasts should we be, if Malefactors were not punished? What
Confusion, Cruelty, Barbarousness, would overspread all, if by wholesome Laws,
and the care of good Magistrates in the Execution of them, we had not some
Boundaries set to the Lusts of men? whether would the heart of man run, if
there were not some rein upon it? It Is sad the Law of God will not keep men from
sin, but seeing it will not, it is mercy we have the Laws of Man: Many are afraid
of the Gallows, which have no sense of Hell.

This great Sinner is represented to you as an eminent instance of the Grace of
God, and so we hope he was. It Is very necessary therefore, we should here insert
a Caveat against the abusing of this Grace of God. How apt are we with the
Spider to suck Poison, where with the Be we should suck Honey? How many will
be apt from hence to encourage themselves in sin, and to say, Let us sin, that
Grace may abound, Romans 6.1. Or, let us sin, for Grace will abound. Man is not
more prone to any thing then to catch at eminent Acts of Grace, and to make
that Fuel to his Lust, which God intended only to be Food to his Faith. And
never was there any age wherein there was more of this Spirit of Presumption,
then this wherein we live; insomuch, that upon this very account, some of us
were very inclinable to think, That 'twas better to have the story of this man
suppressed then published. But since providence has so ordered it that it does
see the Light, we cannot but annex to it an Antidote against presuming.
Sinners, do not pervert this Grace of God; God lets you have it, to keep you
off from the rock of despair, not that you should run upon the rock of
presumption. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. If you sin you may have mercy, but if you presume
to sin, can you then expect mercy? Grace rejected may yet save you (though that
will cost you dear) but oh tremble to abuse the grace of God to encourage you
in sins!

God sometimes gives some rare instances of his grace to notorious sinners that
none may despair, but he is very choice in these that none may presume. It Is
true, upon repentance the greatest sinner shall find mercy, but how do you
know, that God will give you repentance? How many are in the same condemnation
that this offender was, that die without any such work upon them? we
affectionately beseech you and warn you, not to turn this grace of God into
wantonness.

These things we hint in general; More particularly we shall address our selves
to you in the several capacities wherein you stand.

You the Right honorable Magistrates of the City, with all submission, and yet
with all boldness we exhort you to do your duty. It Is not enough for you to
punish sin when it is before you, but you are to endeavor the preventing of it,
you see what is the sad fruit of Alehouses, Whore-houses, and such places, we
hope your zeal will yet continue, nay be heightened in the suppressing of them.
Down with them, Down with them, spare them not; they are the Devils Shops, and
let him have no Free-Trade amongst us: If you will, none shall have so many
Customers as he. How many Laborers drink that away at these houses, which
should maintain their wives and children with bread? How are the youth of this
City debaunched at them? where they have their Gaming, Cheating, Whoring; and
what not? Oh let your Reformation be severe and throughout in this particular!
But herein blessed be God, we have great cause as well to commend as to quicken
your zeal. We heartily wish that those who have power in the Suburbs of the
City, would be as active in the restraining of sin as you are; that those
places and persons which you will not endure in the City (the naming of which
would soul our pen) might not be held up and harbored there; otherwise it will
be small advantage to smother Whores out of one Hive, when they have another
ready to receive them.

We hear and fear it is too true that Priests and Jesuits (those Romish Locusts)
do swarm amongst us in the City and Suburbs: We beseech you for the sake of
Jesus Christ, and for love to the Gospel, to put forth your power to the utmost
for the discovering and suppressing of them: And the rather, because they and
their party are so bold, as to intrude themselves upon prisoners condemned to
die, to pervert them from the true Religion, (for this attempt they were bold
to make upon N. B. before he was executed.)

We should also speak to our selves, and to our reverend Brethren in the
Ministry. Does not this providence speak something to us? Should we not from
hence be stirred up in our several congregations, more vigorusly to reprove
sin, and to deter men from sin? Whither will sinners go, if we let them alone?
Let our preaching be lively, quick, powerful, by Gods blessing, it may be a
means to prevent these abominable practices; However let us do this and then let
our hearers do what they will, their blood shall be required at their own
hands. Ezech. 3.18, 19. We shall be free from it. Let us beat down drunkenness.
Adultery, etc. and such scandalous sins; and while we labor to preach down
unbelief, let us take heed that presumption and gross sins do not break in upon
us with a mighty breach.

Should we enlarge upon these things, we should be tedious. Our principal
intendment was to speak a word to you, the people and Citizens of the place
which we shall dispatch with all plainness and brevity. And here we will only
take the liberty of advising you in the Notion of Governors and Governed.

You that are Governors, (we mean Governors of families) give us leave to set
in with this providence, and to stir you up, to make more conscience of the
Family Duties and engagements that lie upon you, in reference to your children
and Servants. Probably (if things be not mis-repesented) had there been a
conscientious discharge of these duties in the Family, where this young man
lived, he had never come to this sad end. But we had rather awaken then
censure; Was not that a brave resolution of Joshua? I and my house will serve
the Lord. Josh 24.15. Genesis 18.9. Can you have a better Evidence of sincerity
toward God, then a faithful coming up to relative and Family Duties? Do not
parents that send up their children to you, put a great trust into your hands?
Are not their children dearer to them then all their outward comforts, and
shall they miscarry under you for want of care? Will not their blood be
required at your hands, if they perish through your neglect? will it not be sad
to have children and servanns to rise up in judgment against you and to bring
in evidence at the great tribunal of Christ? Lord my Father never minded me!
Lord my master never regarded me, I might sin, he never reproved me, I might go
to hell, it was all one to him, will not this be sad? will not this be sweet to
you, when you come to die to be able to say, Lord I have walked in my house
with a perfect heart? Psalm. 101.2. Have you no love to religion, to propagate
it, and to provide for it is flourishing when you are dead and gone? Does not
your neglect of family duties make all the endeavors of our godly magistrates,
and of godly ministers to be ineffectual and frustraineous? God has put it
into their hearts to do good, but it is but little, they can do in public,
because you are so remiss in private. And it is the desire of our souls to beat
down sin but we groan under the sense of sad disappointment, and this is one
reason of it, what we do at the Church is undone by you again in your Families;
No setting on the word, no praying over the word etc. Oh that these things
might be as so many spurs in your sides, to quicken you to family duties.

Set up prayer in your Families; There Is a curse pronouned upon the Families,
that do not call upon God. The Lord be merciful to the thousands of Families in
the City, where there is scarce a purger by the master of the family, from year
to year. How can such hope for the blessing of God to be upon them, who, though
he gives mercy freely, yet he will be sought unto for it? Ezekiel. 36.3, 7. How
can such look for Gods bounty, who deny him his worship? Does not prayer
procure all your Family-comforts, and sanctify all your family-comforts?
Morning and Evening call upon God; and call in your servants, let them not want
the benefit of prayer; 'twil be poor to feed their bodies, and to starve their
souls. If you eat together, by all means pray together.

Catechize your children and servants; instruct them in the fundamentals of
religion; would you keep them from error in the Head, from looseness in the
life, make conscience of this duty. How excellent, how necessary, how
profitable is this ordinance, and yet how sadly is it neglected, we may in a
great measure blame you for the many Heretics, and erroneous persons, with
whom we swarm in these days.

Read and open the Scriptures to them, but do this with all humility and
sobriety, or else there will be danger. These are the Magazine, the Treasury of
all knowledge, able to make you and yours wife to Salvation; Let the word of
Christ dwell richly in you; and in all that belong to you

See that they frequent the public Ordinances let them follow you to the house
of God, not out of state, but in love to their souls; and when they are there,
see they keep there, that they do not run out again to Alehouses and Taverns
(as too many do, to our grief and your shame be it spoken) when a public
Ordinance is ended, call them to an account, see what they remember, wherein
they profit, how they relish the word; this is to do good indeed to their
souls.

Keep them to a strict observance of the Lord's Day; you will not let them
trifle away your day, then you will hold them to their work; Oh! let them not
trifle away the Lords day. Why do your children and servants stand gazeing at
your doors upon the Sabbath? Call them in, put them upon reading wholesome books,
and other exercises which are proper to the day; be not partakers of their sin.

What ever liberty you grant them at other times, hold them to a close
sanctification of the Sabbath. And spend this day with them, in prayer,
repetition, singing of Psalms; This is to make your Families as so many little
Churches of Jesus Christ. How little conscience do the generality of you make
of Sabbath bath-duty; we might sadly bemoan this before the Lord. For your
selves you can make that day which is a day for Physic for the soul, to be the
Day for Physic for the Body; you cannot spare time all the week long, you will
take it upon the Lords day. And for your children and servants, let them walk
in the Field, play in the streets, sleep in their beds, or drink in Taverns,
it is all one to you! Will God bear this from you? Certainly, this will be
bitterness in the end.

Do not indulge your servants in idleness, that is the bane of youth, the
Devils inlet to all temptations.

An idle person is like tinder that will take every spark that falls upon it,
let them be out of employment, it is a thousand to one, but presently they are
in some sin. And yet those that know how to use their Liberty, let them have it
sometimes for lawful recreations, but this we leave to your prudence.

In the pursuit of your own pleasures and conveniences have a care of your
Families; Many of you go to your Country houses (we condemn you not for it)
but what becomes of your servants? As Eliab said to David, with whom have you
left those few sheep in the wilderness? Whilst you are in your pleasant gardens
gratifying your selves in your creature-enjoyments, who takes care of them that
are left behind to pray with them, to instruct them, to see they sanctify the
Sabbath; the health of some Masters bodies is the ruin of their servants souls.

Set them in all things a good example, if they see you can strain in
defraunding others, they will easily come to strain in the defrauding of you; let
them see you fear to sin and that will be an awe upon their spirits against sin.

Take your Apprentices out of religious Families in the Country; Many of you
are punished with vexatious servants, you may thank your selves for it; you
take your Apprentices by the pound, not by good education, who will give most,
not who will deserve most, and you smart for it afterward.

But how do these Heads swell upon our hearts, though we do but name them!
These are some of the things which we should present to the serious
consideration of you, who are Governors Families; and the Lord make them
useful to you.

In particular, it is of great use to prevent much wickedness to look to the
keys and doors of your houses and to have them in your own custody not in your
servants that so an occasion of sinning may be cut off from those that seek
such occasions as most fit for their pernicious designs,

Keep up Discipline, or rather restore it again; How is it fallen in these
times, how is it almost lost amongst us in the City; The reins which your
predecessors held with a very strict hand, are very loose in yours; many of
your servants will do what they list, and you let them alone; we do very much
lament the low ebb of Discipline and Government and judge that to be one Cause
of the many disorders which are among us; we heartily wish it may be restored
in Church, in State, in Families, if this be wanting, all things run up to
strange confusion.

A Word to the Youth and Apprentices of this City, and we have done. Oh that
you would hear us now, least you mourn at the last, and say, How have we hated
instruction, and our hearts despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of
our Teachers, nor inclined our car to them that instructed us. This Great
Offender was one of your Rank, had he taken the advice of Gods Word, his sin
had not been so great, nor his punishment so terrible. Of all, we fear, our
counsel to you will be the most successless; Youth is rash, inconfide ate vain
proud, but sometime or other you will remember what we say.

Take heed of lesser sins. Little sins will make way for greater sins; if you
sip of sin, youll be drunk of it at last. How modest is sin at first, but when
it is gratified, it grows impudent. This poor man lately executed, first he
began to game, then to steal, then to Whore, and then to Murder.

Be careful of your company: associate with them that fear God; say unto them
that are vain and wicked, Depart from us, for We will keep the Commandments of
God, Psalm. 119.115. Bad company is the way to corrupt and spoil you: Can a man
touch pitch, and not be defiled?

Read the Scriptures much; by them you must stand or fall to all eternity; when
we walk by you in your Shops, we see many have their Play-Book in their hands,
but few have the Bible in their hands; the Shop-Book is open, but the Bible is
shut.

Entertain high thoughts of Holiness and holy men: The froth of your wits runs
out too often in jeering godliness; but take heed, that's not a thing to be so
dealt withal. Many of you count sin to be gallantry, and Religion but a low and
disgraceful thing. God convince you of your folly.

Frequent Public Ordinances, especially upon the Lords day, because you have
not opportunity so to do upon the week days. You Will find more comfort in the
Word and Prayer, then in all your youthful delights.

Keep the Sabbath; You, have six days, let God have one; can he have less?
God out of special respects to servants, has instituted and sanctified this
day. How can you hope to keep an everlasting Sabbath in heaven, if this Sabbath
on earth be profaned by you. Many go to Tiburn lamenting the profanation of the
Lords day, as that which ushered in all their wickedness.

Every day spend some time in private prayer; it is but rising a little the
earlyer, and going to bed a little the later; you shall never be the worse for
that time you spend in the Service of God.

Be, subject and obedient to your Masters; study how to please them; bear with
their passionate infirmities: Do not purloyn but show all good fidelity, that
the doctrine of God our Savior may be adorned, Tit. 2.9, 10. Be diligent in
your Callings; if you be idle, Satan will get an advantage. The sitting bird is
easily shot, and the standing water gathers filth.

Love those that curb you, and restrain you in ways of sin; they are your best
friends: it is better to beheld in, then to have a wicked liberty; it is better
to have lust restrained then satisfied. Be not angry with those who cannot see
you damn your souls, and let you alone.

Enter upon the ways of God betimes, the sooner the better: Shall the devil
have the best draught, and shall God be put off with the Lees and Dregs: Eccl.
12.1.

Live always as in Gods sight, and know, if you sin, God will certainly sind
you out one time or other. Alas how many ways has God to bring the most
hidden works of darkness to light; sometimes by startling men's own consciences
to an accusation of themselves, sometimes by awakening some of their accomplices
to the discovery of the rest. If you sin together, you shall smart together.
Let this sad example never be forgotten by you for this: Those that were
Confederates in sin, are made instruments and occasions of misery each to
other. Look not upon sin in the pleasure of it, but in the danger of it: The
Wine sparkles in the cup, but 'twill be poison in the belly. Fear the strokes
of God more then the strokes of man; What Is a fetter, a dungeon, a gallows to
hell fire? Mortify a spirit of pride Never such pride amongst the youth of the
City as now; What vanity in apparel, what superciliousness in carriage, what
contempt of Authority? Oh, be clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Give not way
to imaginaay, speculative heart sins; Murder in the heart, will soon be Murder
in the hand; uncleanness allowed in the thoughts, will come to bodily
uncleanness at the last. Keep Satan at a distaace, if he get in, he will be too
hard for you

To sum up all: A dreadful spectacle of Gods Justice, and of the fruit of sin,
bath been lately set before you, we beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus Christ,
break off from all your sinful ways by repentance; One is smitten that many
may fear; He Is a warning to you, take heed lest you be made a warning unto
others. If you would avoid his end, walk not in his sins; as secure as you are,
if you will allow your selves in that which is evil, you do not know whither
the devil will carry you in a way of sin, or to what God will bring you in a way
of punshment. Stand in aw therefore and sin not, Ps. 4.4. Flee youthful lusts,
2. Tim. 2.22. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he sal, 1 Cor.
10.12. Every day pray that God will keep you from and strengthen you against
temptation: Say not, it is not possible I should ever be so vile as this
Malefactor was; Alas, if God leave you you will be as bad as he. Blessed is the
man that fears always. Prove. 28.14. In all things so carry your selves
according to the rule of the Word, that you may neither fall into the hands of
men, nor into the hands of God, which is far the most dreadful. It Is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31.

That Governors and Governed may thus discharge their duties shall be the great
design of our Ministry by Gods assistance, and our constant prayer at the
Throne of Grace.

September. 11. 1657. Edmund Calamy. Arthur Jackson. James Nalton. Tho. Jacomb,
Robert Hutchison. Thomas White. Thomas Parson. Thomas Doelittle. Simeon Ash.
Thomas Case. Will. Tailor. Roger Drake. Geo. Griffith. Matthew Poole. Dan.
Batcheler.


Finis.

