MAN'S FURY SUBSERVIENT TO GODS GLORY.

A SERMON preached to the Parliament at Margarets Westminster Febr. 20. 1656.
it being a day of public Thanksgiving.

WITH The Addition of an Applicatory Discourse about the Mutual Animosities of
Christians, which was omitted for want of time when the Sermon was delivered.

By JOHN WARREN, M. A. Minister of the Gospel at Hatfield Broad-oak in Essex.

LONDON. Printed by J.G. for Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, at the black
Bear in Paul's Churchyard, near the little North door. 1657.

CELSISSIMO, HONORATISSIMOque SENATUI, TOTIUS
ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, IN PUBLICIS CONCILIIS REPRAESENTATIVO,
CONCIONEM HANC QUALEM QUALEM NUPER APUD EUNDEM HABITAM IN HUMILLIMAE
OBSERVANTIAE ET OFFICII MONUMENTUM

D.D.D. Servorum Christi Minimus, JOHANNES WARREN.

A SERMON Preached before the PARLIAMENT, FEBRUARY 20. It being a Day of
THANKSGIVING.
PSALM. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of wrath
will thou restrain.


THe Psalm is for the day, Eucharisticall, a Psalm of Praise, and has, as many
learned men conceive, a Prophetical Respect to the great Deliverance of
Jerusalem from the Assyrian Army, and the miraculous Destruction of that
Adversary by the hand of an Angel, of which we read 2 King. 19.35. Indeed some
passages in the Psalm seem to look a little that way, Non est ut pro certa
aliqua historia assignanda ad quam hic psalmus respiciat, anxie laboremus.
Muscul.
and the Septuagint have added to the title these words, [(...)] a Song against
the Assyyrian; which it is like has carried some Interpreters: But whether the
Psalm were calculated purposely for that point in the circle of Providence or
no (a question in which I labor not) it may serve indifferently for the use
and comfort of the people of God in all ages upon all rejoicing occasions,
especially such as respect their preservation against their enemies.

In the Psalm we have Ecclesiae omnium aetatum psalmus est intelligendus.
Moller.
1. Materials of Gods Praise propounded in the 10. first verses. 2. An
Exhortation to it subjoyned, ver. 11.


The Matter of praise here gathered up may be reduced to two Heads, 1. Gods
gracious Presence and Manifestation of himself in his Church, v. 1, 2. 2. His
eminent Appearance for them against their Adversaries, v. 3, to 11.


In the Latter he is celebrated under a double habitude, 1. Of a Mighty
Champion, discomfiting the Enemies, v. 3, 4. to 8. 2. Of a Supreme Judge
deciding the Quarrel between them and his people, v. 8, 9, 10.


And in his Judgment observe, 1. The publicknesse of it, It was heard from
Heaven. 2. The Majesty of it, It impressed fear and silence on the earth, v. 8.
3. The Effect of it, The salvation of the Meek on earth, v. 9. So the people of
God are often called in Scripture: O that the Character were more agreeing to
us in these days! 4. The End and Design of it expressed in the manner of an
Epiphonema, a Rhetorical closure to the rest, in the words which I have
chosen, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, etc.


Though the word (...) be usually causall, Explication.
yet is it many times, and especially in the beginning of a Sentence, apertive
only, and little more then expletive, as Prove. 30.2. and so our Translatours
with others render it here, Certe furor hominis, Surely the wrath of man, etc.
But if we read it Quoniam (as Hierom and many others do) and so run the sense
of the former part of the verse into the latter, it may seem very convenient,
thus, Because the wrath of man shall praise thee, thou will restrain the
remainder, or excesses of it; and so it makes the praise of God the final
cause of his restraint upon the wrath of man. However the import of the words
is the same both ways.

The wrath of man] is not so well understood in a passive sense (according to
the Chaldee) for the wrath of God upon Man as in the Active signification, Vide
Musculum in locum.
as it notes wrath subjected in man, and so the word Man is to be limited (or
extended rather) to wicked men in their wrath against the godly, and so the
word Man and Men is often used, as Mat. 10. Beware of men, i. e. of Wicked men.
And Psalm. 9.19. Let not man prevail, i. e. Evil men, etc.

Shall praise thee] It is a Tropical Expression, in which the Production of the
Effect is imputed to that which does but administer some kind of cause or
occasion to it [ Verbum quod actum ceu effectum denotat de occasion ejus
aliquando intelligendum est. Glassius.
] So Judas is said to purchase a Field, Acts 1.18. because he provided the
Money. And Zedekiah is said to burn Jerusalem, Jer. 38.23. Dignitatem tuam
illustrabit hominum injuria. Cic. ad Lentul.
(see the Margin) because (as our Translation has it in the line) he occasioned
it to be burnt. So the wrath of Man shall praise God. That is, it shall afford
matter for his praise, and occasion men to praise him.

The remainder of wrath] may be taken for the people of God that outlive the
wrath of men, (...)
as Joel 1.4. The remainder of the Palmer worm signifies that which the Palmer
worm has left: so Iunius and others understand by the remainder of wrath, the
godly that escape the wrath of wicked men. But our English Bible goes the
plainer way, taking The remainder of wrath for those excessive Eruptions of it
which might redound to the dishonor of God, or which are more then he will use
to his praise: The remainder of wrath will thou restrain.

Maldonat, etc. Pontif.
Restrain.] The word [(...)] signifies to Gird, and is here used for a coercive
girding, such as that of Peter when he stretched out his hands, and another
girded him, Joh. 21.18. i. e. bound him as a prisoner, or tied him to the Cross
(as some will needs have it.) Yet they that take it for a corroborative
girding, and refer it to the godly, whom the wrath of enemies leaves
undestroyed (as Junius and others do) in the result resolve the words into the
same sense; viz. That the wrath of man shall by the overruling hand of God be
made to conduce to his praise: and that it may do so, and not proceed to his
dishonor, he will restrain it from excesses, and confirm his people against
it. So much for Explication.

In the words thus expounded, note, 1. The Evil Affection of men to the people
of God. They are angry with them -- The wrath of man. 2. The good Event of that
Evil. It shall praise God. 3. Gods Restraint upon it to that end. The remainder
of wrath thou will restrain. --


Of the first of these, The evil affection of men to the godly. And it gives us
ground for this Doctrinall Observation,

That there is much fervent anger in the hearts of men against the people of
God.

That I may give an account of the sense of this Doctrine, and its deduction
from the Text, I must speak briefly, 1. Of the Subject of this Anger, Man. And
then 2. Of the Affection it self, as inherent in that Subject.

1. For the Subject of Anger, It is Man: the heart of man is its Receptacle,
there it lives and dwells: and so its called in the Text, The wrath of Man:
which words are spoken,

Insultingly, as some understand, implying an Encouragement to the Godly, in
that they are but Men that are angry with them. It is not the wrath of Almighty
God, but of poor weakly Man; Appellatur (...) quod omnibus diebus vitae suae
doleat.
as David prays God to let the Enemies themselves know that they are but Men,
[(...)] poor sorry man, as the word signifies, Psalm. 9.20.

Man is spoken collectively for Mankind, and so it implies the vast number of
them that are angry with the people of God, even the whole body of Mankind. For
though the godly themselves are some part of Mankind, yet they are so few that
the species is in a manner entire without them. As our Savior tells his
Disciples, Joh. 15.18. That the world will hate them. Themselves were some part
of the World; but alas, their number was so small, that it made no considerable
substraction from the total of the world, and therefore the world is spoken of
as whole without them, and wholly against them, according to that of Mat.
10.22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. That is, almost all men;
there will scarce any be found that will not hate you. What is the Sea the
less if you take out a few Hogsheads of water? Nothing to speak of. The
Vintage is counted whole though some gleanings of Grapes be left behind. So the
wrath of man against the godly, is the wrath of the generality, almost the
universality of men.

Man is spoken Patronymically. In Hebrew it is the wrath of Adam, for the
Children of Adam, the untransplanted Branches of that old Stock. Unregenerate
men are mere Adamites, and so metonymically Adam, as Israelites are called
Israel. Look how Believers ingrafted into Christ are called Christ, 1 Cor.
12.12. so unbelievers and wicked men are fitly called Adam, as those that abide
in him (as fallen) in his spirit, and in his condition. And thus the Doctrine
proceeds concerning the multitude of unregenerate and wicked men, that there is
much fervent Anger in their hearts against the people of God. Yet it is here to
be noted, Note.
that all wicked men do not at all times, nor all in a like manner and degree
exert their anger against the Godly, though they all have it in them. Even the
unregenerate Father against the godly Son, and the unbelieving Son against the
godly Father. Mat. 10.35. So much of the Subject, the hearts of men.

2. Ignescunt irae and duris dolor ossibus ardet.
The Affection inherent in this Subject is Much fervent Anger. All Anger is
hot, it is a soul-enflaming passion. The Egyptian Hieroglyphick for Anger is an
heart upon a gridiron with burning coals under it. Anger is hot; but the Anger
here spoken of is of the hottest kind. The word in the Hebrew text signifies
properly Heat, and sometimes the Sun for its burning heat. It notes that Anger
which the Greeks call (...) and (...) because it heats and burns the heart:
Junius translates it Aestus, Plat*
and others furor hominis, The heat and rage of man. So it is very fervent.

And there is also very much of it in the heart of man. In the latter part of
the Text the word is in the plural number, the remainder of wraths. (...)
There are heats and treasures of Wraths in the hearts of wicked men against
the godly. A stock of wrath that can never be spent up, they are always angry,
and always ready to be more angry at them. And so much is also employed in the
word [(...)] which elsewhere notes abundance. Malac. 2.15.
Thus you see there is much hot and fiery anger in the hearts of wicked men
against the godly. No wonder though they trade in Fireworks and Sulphurous
engines, when they have so much fire burning in their bosoms. Thus much for
the sense of the Doctrine, and to show you how it is seated in the text.

For further confirmation of this point, Proof.
see Psalm. 124.1, 2, 3. If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now
may Israel say, If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose
up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled
against us. The Church complains of the fury of enemies, that it was so hot and
fierce, that if he that took their part had been any thing less then God, they
had been utterly swallowed up and devoured. But when was this? perhaps at some
one time when they were more then ordinarily provoked: Nay many a time (says
the Church, Psalm. 129.1, 2.) many a time have they afflicted me, and that from
my youth up. Ab ipsis Ecclesiae Natalitiis. Ever since God had a Church upon
Earth, wicked men have had a fire of Anger in their bosoms, ever and anon
flaming out against it. For thy sake we are slain all the day long, was the
Churches complaint in David's time, Psalm. 44.22. and Paul applies it to his
days, Romans 8.36.

Now there are two principal causes of this Anger, in which we have the reason
of the Doctrine, I shall but briefly touch them.

1. The malignity of Man's Nature. This is the Internal and Material Cause of
all the Wrath which wicked men conceive against the Godly: the very fuel
whereon this fire feeds and is maintained. And therefore is wrath justy
reckoned up among the rest of the fruits of the flesh in the Apostles
Inventory, Gal. 5.20.

2. The Malice of Satan first against God, and then against his people, makes
him an industrious Agent in kindling and blowing up the coals of this fire in
the hearts of wicked men. As James says of the tongue we may say of the heart
of man, that in its anger against the godly, It is set on fire of hell. Poets
talk of fire stolen out of Heaven; but this fire is brought from Hell, and
like the Vestal fire always kept alive by the vigilance of the evil one. Satan
has an old grudge against God ever since the day when he fettered him in chains
of darkness, and does what he can against him and his, Gestit retalia^ in
populo Dei iram Dei sibi irrogatam. Cocce jus in Nahum.
by himself and his Instruments by way of revenge, whence (as some think) he is
called the Avenger. (In Hebrew the avenger of himself) Psalm. 8.2. because he
loves to be retaliating upon the people of God the anger which God has executed
upon him.

Now there are two seasons in which the wrath of men, through their own
Malignity and Satan's Malice, is especially intended against the godly, times
when it flames out more vehemently, as they say of Aetna and Vesuvius, There is
always fire burning in them, yet there are some special times of their more
vehement eruption.

Reformation in matters of Religion. In 2 Chronicles. 31. we read much of the zeal
of Hezekiah and his people in destroying Idolatry, and restoring the Worship of
God to its native purity. And then it follows in Chap. 32.1. After these
things, and the establishment of them, Sennacherib King of Assyria came and
entered into Judah, etc. And God takes notice of him that he came in a great
rage, 2 King. 19.27. As it also appears by the railing of his servant Rabshekah
before the walls of Jerusalem. And to this Invasion some learned men (as I said
before) think this Psalm has a special respect. I do not say that Reformation
is always the thing which immediately offends wicked men, but it is that which
vexes Satan, and makes him provoke and stir them up against the people of God,
and then he finds them out some ground or other of a quarrel, such as will best
fit their humor, and is most agreeing to their interest. Sennacherib did not
make Hezekiah's Reformation the professed ground of the quarrel, but his
rebellion, because he had withdrawn himself from his allegiance, and served him
not, Isaiah 36.5. On whom do thou trust that thou rebellest against me? As if
he had said, I come not against thee for thy Religion, nor because thou have
demolished the Altars at which the people were wont to worship, ver. 7. But
because thou have made a defection from my Sovereignty and Government: But that
Satan (who is the general instigator of Gods peoples enemies) had the greatest
spite against the King and his people for their reformation in matters of
Religion, is manifest enough. How did the wrath of Rome burn and flame even up
to Heaven in the days of Luther's Reformation in Germany! and what mischievous
plots and devices the Anger of that party has put them upon against this
Nation in times of Reformation, it is very well known. The Spanish Armado, in
which that Monarchy acted against England, ad extremum virium, was formed in a
time of Reformation. And the Conspirants in that Hellish plot, which we may now
call The former Powder Treason, themselves assigned the Laws of Parliament
against Idolatry, and Seducers to it for the cause of that invention. Some
years ago God put it into the heart of Authority to revive the design of
Reformation, which for a long time before had not only not gone forward, but
receded, till we were insensibly drawn back almost into Egypt again. But ever
since that day, it is a wonder to see in what an heat the world has been
against the people of God in England, what raging, railing, fighting, and
violence have they endured from enemies at home, and from forraigners almost in
all points of the compass. We may say as David, and with as easy an
hyperbole, All Nations have compassed us about, and kept us in on every side.
But in the name of the Lord we have hitherto either subdued or defeated them.

At present when one of the greatest Potentates in the world is in the height
of preparation against us, yet ever and anon there is one Contrivance or other
on foot in our own nation for the destruction of them whom God has most
signally owned among us. It were an absurdity for me (Right Honorable) to give
you a report of the late horrid design against his Highness immediately, your
selves next, and then those for whose protection and government God has raised
up him, and gathered you together. We that are at a distance derive our
knowledge of it from your selves: But this observation among others may be very
easily made upon it, That the grand (...), the Contrivers and Promoters of this
and such like Stratagems do very well know how many heads are for the present
standing on the shoulderrs of that one single person, at whom they take their
aim, as sometimes Caligula wished all the Romans had but one neck, that he might
cut off all their heads at one single stroke.

Obj. But some may interpose; Here is indeed an evident appearance of the wrath
of man in these attempts: But where is the Reformation? Alas, the zeal of
Reformation is almost extinguished among us, and it is not like the Adversary's
indignation should take fire from thence.

Ans. And yet you see many times how great a matter a little fire kindles. It
is true, the hideous Blasphemies, portentous Delusions, abominable Doctrines,
and cursed Practices of many among us witness to our shame, that pure Religion
is far from that Power and Sovereignty in the Nation, which is due to it. But
yet in public Endeavors, though there has not been enough done to make us a
people thoroughly reformed, (God only can do that) There has been enough done
to make the Adversary angry with us as a people under sail toward the land of
Reformation, though we move but slowly by reason of contrary winds. The
removal of an oppressive power in matters of Religion, and many corrupt
impositions thereby enforced, under which the best part, the very soul of the
Nation groned; The ejection of many scandalous and ignorant men, from the place
of the Ministry; The Provision made for encouragement of men faithful in that
work; The Redemption of the Sabbath, the Lords day, the observation whereof is
the very pulse by which you may make a judgment of a peoples temper in all
Religion, from profanation, formerly maintained by a Law, in which there is
hopes that you Honorable Senators, will do more and more worthily then those
that have been in your capacity before. Nehemiah says of himself, that he
commanded the Gates of Jerusalem to be shut in the evening before the Sabbath,
chapter 13. 19. I am very much persuaded that you might do God good service in
causing the gates of our Cities and Towns to be shut up in the morning after
the Sabbath, I mean in removing or promoving to more distance, our Monday Fairs
and Markets, in preparation for which many tradesmen hold themselves under a
kind of necessity to steal away a great part of the Sabbath. These and such
like things are good assaies to a public reformation; and though in some men's
eyes they may seem small matters, yet are they enough to make the Adversary
angry. But till the day of Gods power dawnes upon us, in which he will make us
a willing people to yield our selves unto the Lord, and enter into his
Sanctuary (as Hezekiah speaks) The Sword and the Mace will never effect a
thorough Reformation.

soloecisme to wicked men, they think God is out of his way, and mistaken in
the course of his Providence (as Joseph thought his Father Jacob was in
blessing his two sons) because he does not always lay the right hand upon
their heads. When Judah began a little to bear up in Asa's days, and had put
themselves into a military posture, presently comes Zera the Ethiopian with a
thousand thousand men against them, 2 Chronicles. 14.8, 9. When the Jews at their
return from the Captivity, began to build the Temple, their enemies were angry
with them, but when Sanballat heard that they builded the wall, that they were
like to come to some strength, and safety, and interest, he was angry, and took
great indignation, Neh. 4.1. Wicked men think it meet that the heirs of Heaven
should continue always in Wardship here on earth, and that they should be
their Guardians. Like Pharaoh and his servants they think they do very ill at
any time (if they (...) hinder it) to let the Children of Israel go from
serving them; and therefore when they see them going presently they pursue them
with all the force they can make. Such is their Malice against the Godly, that
they cannot endure to see them in any degree of safety and enlargement, much
less of power and interest in humane affairs, they never walk at ease but when
they have the necks of Gods people to tread upon, Isa. 51.23.

Again, besides this envy of the wicked at the prosperity of the people of God*
That condition commonly brings such temptations with it as draw the godly into
many provoking sins, and so he has occasion given him to let their adversaries
loose against them. Yea when the godly prosper in the world, many persons that
have nothing of godliness in them, will be crowding in among them daily. Every
one that can but make any shift to patch up a form of Christianity, will
presently get his name lifted among the Saints, and himself into their
fellowship. These quickly grow light and loose in their notions and
conversations, and thereby taint the rest. So the mixed multitude (as it is said
Numb. 11.4.) sins against God, the Gospel brought under reproach, and the name
of God blasphemed, and then wrath comes forth upon the whole Congregation. I
remember what was reported of some eminent persons that staid here in the time
of the war, though they were very heartily addicted to the other part; when
some that were intimate with them asked why they went not over to the quarters
of their friends, They answered, They could do their friends more service by
staying where they were. So wicked men do Satan more service, and the people of
God more hurt by being professors among them, then by setting themselves
professedly against them. And so much of the seasons, when the wrath of man
especially breaks out against the people of God. I proceed now to the use of
the point.

And first, sinful Anger and Animosities of the people of God among
themselves. I know this is a beaten subject, but the Doctrine in hand permits
me not to pass silently by it. I say it rebukes the sinful anger of Gods
people, because I know there is a godly kind of Anger, though I know not so
well where to find it. Our Savior in censuring him that is angry with his
Brother without a cause, plainly implies that there is a cause why, and so a
time when a man may be angry even with his Brother; and the Apostle commands
Anger and forbids Sin in the same breath, Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not. Now
we are very apt to think, that if there be any thing good in any kind, our own
is of the best sort; That if we are angry with our brethren, we have just cause
to be so, and do well to be angry, as Jonah thought when he was angry with God
himself. But indeed, if the matter be strictly examined, there is hardly a
rarer commodity among men then good anger. We read in Scripture of many men
that were angry, but seldom of any that were well angry.

Irasci debemus prapter contumeliam Dei, propter injustitia^, etc. Roll. in Ephesians.

Videndam est (...). Non ob lanam caprinam, aut res leviculas, sed justas ob
causas; ut si cultus Dei, si religio, si patria, si parents, etc. laedantur,
violentur aut contemnantur. Hereb.


Good Anger therefore is to be attended,

Ratione 1. Objecti. 2. Egressus.

1. Anger is good in respect of the Object, when it is excited by sin. Sin is
the proper formal Object of Anger. Gods Anger is only at Sin, and Men for
Sin, and so should ours be: Ephesians. 5.1. Be ye followers of God as dear Children,
and walk in love. We should so love our Brethren, as not to be angry with them
for any thing but that which angers him. As godly Sorrow (2 Cor. 7.9.) so godly
Anger is [(...)] according to God, when a man is angry at that which
displeases God, and angry as he (though but after the manner of men) is often
in Scripture said to be angry. But is our Anger such? Is it not evident that we
are often angry with our brethren for that which we know is not sin? And
ordinarily for things in which we do but suppose them to be sinners?

Cains anger, because God showed more regard to Abel then to himself, and (it
may be) prospered Abel in his flock more then him in his tillage. Yea, if a man
does but commend the person whom we dislike, it is enough to make us angry with
him too, as Saul was in a rage against Jonathan because he spoke good of David;
and yet he is a very bad man indeed, of whom we may not truly speak something
by way of commendation. Nay is it not a matter of Anger to us if a man does not
speak as much evil and as bitter words against others as we our selves do? men
must reproach with us those whom we reproach, and revile with us those whom we
revile, or we shall be angry with them. Is this to be angry at Sin, or will you
call this good Anger?



1. Sometimes we are angry at that which we do but suppose to be sin in our
brethren, as their lawful liberty, yea sometimes their very duty. We are
offended at them as if they had sinned highly against God, in that wherein they
have not exceeded the bounds of the liberty which God allows them. Nor (it may
be) of the duty which he injoynes them. Thus Moses was angry with the sons of
Aaron, Lev. 10.16. for not eating the Sin-offering in the holy place, as if
they had sinned beyond all defense. And yet when Aaron had plainly opened the
matter to him, and showed him the reason of it, Moses was content, v. 19, 20.
That Anger might well have been spared for a fitter occasion. So the weak is
angry with him that eats flesh, Romans 14. And so the Jews were offended with
Peter for eating with the Gentiles, Act. 11. Though it was not his liberty
only, but his duty to do it. Of this sort are most of our angry prejudices
against our brethren in point of opinion, mere mistakes; we think their
principles corrupt because they do not use just our terms and notions, when
upon enquiry they prove as sound in the Faith as our selves; and count them
dissenters who are of the same mind with our selves, if we were but cool enough
to hear, or willing to understand one another. It was Theodosius his penance
enjoined by Ambrose for a rash piece of cruelty, that always when he condemned
an offender, he stould stay thirty days before he executed the sentence: And
by this means upon wiser second thoughts many a man's life was saved. O how much
of our anger might be prevented, if we would but take time to consider the
cause before we admit the passion! It Is an easy matter to grow hot against a
man for his opinion, his action, or practice which we allow not; but it is not
always so soon proved to be sin, unless we think our selves fit to be other
men's Oracles, and count it necessary that their judgments should be
immediately determined by our own. But we are presently angry at a venture, if
men seem to vary from us. Were we as free of our purses as we are of our
passions, we should be the most generous people in the world. And yet if Christ
himself misreckon it not, a man had better part with many sums of money for
nothing, then be once angry with his brother without a cause. He that is angry
with his brother without cause shall be in danger of the judgment, Mat. 5.22.

2. Again, Sometimes we are angry with our brethren for sin when we do but
vainly suppose them to be in it, or guilty of it. So Eliab was angry with David
for pride and naughtiness of heart, which he supposed brought him to the army,
and made him neglect his calling; when if he had been calm enough to consider
it, he might have found another cause of his coming, 1 Samuel 17.28, 29.

Thus when we see men willingly undertake public employments, presently we
judge they are proud, and do it for honor; or covetousness, and do it to
enrich themselves: and this supposed pride and covetousness of their hearts
suffices us for a cause of anger. Do we observe men kind and courteous to
enemies? presently we think they fall into a compliance with them. Do men carry
themselves gently and tenderly toward erroneous persons? immediately we
suppose them to be of their party. Or if we see a man peaceably moderating
between dissenters, endeavoring to bring them to a good accord among
themselves, he is condemned as a Mongrel, an Ambodexter or a Neuter, a man that
is any thing, and nothing in his principles. Thus we make men sinners in our
own conceits, and then grow angry with them, or (which I doubt is more usual)
first we are angry with them, and then we imagine them to be sinners. Shall we
call this a good Anger? Or do we well thus to be angry?

ratione egressus, when it uses good means to exert and put forth it self;
otherwise, let the cause be what it will, the anger is naught. Good Anger
expresses it self in Christian reproofs and admonitions, and makes a man
vehement in persuasions to reformation: yea, vents it self in prayers and
tears for the offending party. It Is said of our Savior that when he was angry
with the Pharisees, he was grieved for the hardness of their hearts, Mar. 9.5.
And when he could not but be angry with Jerusalem for killing the Prophets, and
stoning them that were sent unto it, he beheld the City and wept over it. Lu.
19.41. You that are angry with your Brethren, have you plainly admonished them?
or do you indeed hate them in your hearts? It Is Gods own Antithesis, Levit.
17.19. If you have not done the former, you are guilty of the later, In this
sense the Philosophers words agree well to good anger, that it is (...). Arist.
Rhet.
and he that hates his Brother is a Manslayer. O that men would seriously
consider it! Again, have you mourned over your offending brethren, and prayed
for them in relation to their sin? If your Anger be good, it will make you
mourn in earnest desires for them with whom you are angry, that their sin may
be pardoned and removed. But do not your hearts tell you that you are angry
many times for things of which you cannot for shame complain to God? You dare
not, you dare not tell those angry stories to God in prayer, which you will
passionately rattle over to your friends behind the offenders back. Again, Have
you used the properest means to reduce the offending party, and to gain him off
from that which you conceive to be his sin? This is to some purpose, there is
some wisdom in such anger. But from whence come the wars and fightings that
are among professed Christians? not from any pious Zeal, or good Anger, but
from your lusts that war in your members, Jam. 4.1. What must we think of
that Anger which spends (or rather feeds) it self in brawlings, raylings,
bitter invectives, and biting language? God will not justify such anger, no
not in Moses himself, though it be occasioned by sin. Hear now ye rebels, said
the good man once in his haste, but he had better have bit his tongue and held
his peace; God gave him a sad remembrance of it afterward. What kind of anger
is that which vents it self in backbitings and evil reports? What kind of Anger
is it which makes men interpret the best and worthiest actions of their
brethren into crimes and points of naughtiness? even such as that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, when they condemned our Savior as a friend of Publicans
and Sinners, because he pitied them, and took opportunities to do them good.
What kind of Anger is that which makes men desert, yea obstruct one another in
good and necessary undertakings, and so open a door to public enemies, rather
then come to an accord with their friends, though in never so commendable
designs? Yea, what kind of Anger is it which engages men in secret Contrivances
against their brethren, to disappoint them, to work them out of power and
interest, to set them at variance among themselves, and strengthen the hand of
a common enemy against them, and put it to the adventure whether they can stop
the Water and stay the Mill when they have ground their own Grift? I do but
name these ugly things, each of them deserves an hours declamation. But will
you count this a good anger? It Is earthly, sensual, devilish.

You see what Anger is here reproved, and withal how little good anger is in
the world. Now to enforce the reproof, consider two things:

Edom as a shameful thing, that when strangers cast lots upon Jerusalem, he,
though a brother to the Jews by extraction, was as one of the strangers, Obad.
11. Thou that art peevishly angry with thy brother, what an odious thing is it
that when strangers revile him, backbite him, practice against him, thou
should be as one of them.

imprudentiall thing it is for Christians to be at variance among themselves,
when the world is set against them all. Truly it argues a very mean spirit in
our enemies, whoever they are at this time, that they are not ashamed to bestow
their anger on a people so divided among themselves as we are, an object more
proper for their scorn, or for their pity, if they had any good nature in them,
then for their anger. Indeed there has been hitherto a presence of God among
his poor people, holding them up above contempt, otherwise they are to be
pitied of their friends, and scorned of their enemies for their childish
divisions. We read of ten plagues on the Egyptians in Exodus, but there is an
Eleventh elsewhere threatened, worse then all the rest, Isa. 19.2. I will set
the Egyptians against the Egyptians. If the Israelites be set against the
Israelites, Christians against Christians, what can the hardest hearted enemy
desire more? If our enemies will but be at the charge to lay in powder, they
may light their matches at our own Fires of Contention to blow us up. And
doubtless they had done it long ere this time, if the providentiall care of God
for us had not strangely disappointed them in many a probable contrivance. Yet
it is something to consider how guilty we are of tempting men to the loss of
their lives and ruin of their families, besides the sin it self. So divided an
house would entice any man alive but a real friend to overturn it. So much of
the first use.

Doctrine serves as an Argument to persuade all Gods people to use their best
care and diligence to prevent the eruptions of the wrath of wicked men. Such is
their fury, that if once it breaks out it knows no bounds, especially in a time
when the loss of power out of their hands, and of many high-flown hopes and
strong attempts to recover it, has made them like Bears robbed of their whelps.
Fire straightned a while rages more furiously when it gets a vent.

You, Honorable Senators, in the first place be exhorted to use the properest
means to obstruct the rage of Gods enemies against his people. You know how the
wrath of man is kindled against us abroad, and you see what fireworks are
secretly carried on at home. It Is easy to judge whose hand is in them: I hope
I shall not need use many words to persuade you to do God that service, your
selves that right, and the poor family of Christ that favor, to lay out the
power which God has put into your hands in propelling the fury of wicked men,
that it break not out into a flame upon us, I think your coming together at
this time holds some Analogy to that we read in 2 Chronicles. 32.2, 3. may it prove
as happy in the event. I would not solicit you to any thing unrighteous in it
self, nor any thing really dishonorable to the nation: but certainly it will
be no grief of heart to you in time to come, to have used all lawful and
becoming means to guard the nation and the godly in it against the rage of
angry men. God is my witness I wish no evil to any man, but that provision be
made for public safety against known adversaries. After so much experience of
their malice, and so many warnings given us by their (hitherto abortive) Plots
and Projects, can we yet confide in their ingenuity? Sic not us Ulysses? But I
am no Statesman that I should take upon me to propound the way of doing what I
exhort you to: Be it humbly submitted to your wisdoms, as the wise God shall
direct you.

Next, to all that fear God I offer this exhortation: Be persuaded as you are
Christians, to use the best means to stave off the wrath of man, And in that
capacity I dare prescribe to you.

Live holily toward God. The wicked is his sword, Psalm. 17.13. And while you
keep close to him in the way of holiness, you may expect he will confine it to
the scabbard. When a man's ways please God he makes his enemies to be at peace
with him, Prove. 16.7. He shall have enemies no doubt, but God will beat and
bruise them down before him, till they shall be glad of peace: we have seen
much of this in our experience as bad as we are; O what might we have seen if
our ways had been more pleasing to God! The sins of Gods people are
encouragements to their enemies to devour them, Jer. 50.7. All they that found
them have devoured them: Their Adversaries said, we offend not, because they
have sinned against the Lord; and when the sins of the people of God came under
their observation, they think they do God service in destroying them. It is
Holiness (Honorable and Beloved) that I press you to, not a fashionable
dress in Religion, or a conjunction with men drawn up into this or that form,
which is most in credit, but the real subjection of the soul to the Authority
and power of Godliness; and this I propound as a good way to safety among men.
Follow peace with all men and holiness, Heb. 12.14. Though Holiness will make
men angry with you, yet (which may seem a Paradox) it is the way to overtake
peace.

Harmless to all men. It is the Apostles exhortation, Phil. 2.15. Be harmless
as the sons of God in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation. Indeed the
word is Hornlesse, (...), Be not like Beasts that push and gore their fellows
when they have got them in a corner. Do violence to no man, though you have the
sword in your hands: Be not oppressive, be not injurious to the worst of men,
when it is in the power of your hand to do them hurt. David says of his
enemies, They came about him like bees, Psalm. 118.12. A man may pass through a
great swarm of Bees, if he goes calmly and quietly along; but if he beats and
lays about him, he is like to have many stings in his skin quickly. A man may
walk much more safely among adversaries, if he walks quietly and harmlesly
among them; but if he be rough and violent he shall find them as angry as Bees,
as we use to say. David overcame Saul at last by sparing him when he had him in
his power, and disarmed him by sending him his spear again.

Kind to all, not only to the good, but to the evil, that you may be like your
father which is in heaven. We have a brave invitation to this duty: Romans 12.18,
19, 20. If it be possible, as much as in you lies live peaceably with all men.
Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, etc. -- If thine enemy hunger, feed
him, if he thirst give him drink, for in o doing thou shall heap coals of fire
on his head, that is melt him if he be ingenuous, or else burn him at the last.
Christians, you never had, and if you should live these hundred years, for
ought I know are never like to have a better opportunity to put this duty in
practice then now. Many of you are full of the goods of this world, and many of
your enemies are hungry, feed them; they want raiment, clothe them; they are
reduced to extreme necessity, relieve them. You will say we have little
encouragement to this, we see their malice is invincible. This is but a poor
objection: put on courage and charge them with love again; be not overcome with
evil, but overcome evil with good. I am speaking to you now as in the capacity
of Christians only, not of Magistrates. But (say some) in so doing we may be
thought to flatter enemies, and to dislike our former heartinesse in a good
cause against them. I answer, You have ways enough before you to manifest your
constancy and fidelity to your principles, if you will; but if any man will
refuse to act in good and just designs for his friends, such a one may thank
himself if he he suspected and misinterpreted in his charity to his enemies.
Truly it is a very bad nature which may not be overcome by kindness. I believe
the Devil (as bad as men are) has a pretty hard task of it to move them to
violence against those godly men that have used them kindly in their need.

Behave your selves wisely toward them that are without, Coloss. 4.5. The
Apostle propounds this as a way to redeem the time, that is, to redeem it from
the evil of it, and make it better. A wise carriage among men serves to make
the worst of times much better to the godly then otherwise they would be. David
makes very good shift to live quietly by behaving himself wisely, 1 Samuel 18.5.
Yea he made Saul, though his mortal enemy, afraid of him, because he behaved
himself wisely, ver. 15. When our Savior sent out his Disciples as Sheep
among Wolves, he bid them Be wise as Serpents and innocent as Doves. (I have
spoke of the latter already.) Doubtless Christians by their froward, rude, and
unstudied carriage toward wicked men do many times make them much more their
enemies then otherwise they would be.

earnest prayer for protection. This is of excellent use even when other means
fail. David complains of his Enemies, Psalm. 109.4. For my love they are my
adversaries. What should a man do next in such a case? If Love and Kindness
will not overcome an Adversary, what will? But if it procures a man enemies, or
makes them more his enemies, what can he do then? I Will tell you (says David)
what course I take, I give my self to prayer. The Hebrew is short and sweet, I
to prayer, That was my fefuge presently when other helps failed and proved
inefficacious. Were the spirit of Prayer in as much vigor among us now as it
was some years ago, we might confidently expect it would as powerfully keep
our adversaries down now as it brought them down then. These and such like may
be good means to keep the fire of man's wrath from breaking out into a slame
upon us; but yet if it should get an egresse, as I confess its very like it
will ere long, Christians be not discouraged, let not your hearts be troubled.
There are indeed very threatening clouds gathered over our heads, and there is
much danger, unless we could accord better in the means of prevention, that
our Cities and Towns must feel the fire again shortly, our Streets be washed
with blood, our Fields made fat with the bodies of the slain, and our selves
and those that are dearest to us be made the subjects of such cruelties as were
lately acted upon the poor English in Ireland, and the Protestants in
Piedmont. But I should draw too many black lines upon the face of this days
Solemnities, if I should more fully speak my apprehension of the state of
things. God grant us many more Thanksgiving days.

But yet Christians, be not terrified at the wrath of man, be it never so hot;
it is and shall be so managed by the power of God, that in all its issues and
results it shall contribute to, and promote his praise. Surely the wrath of man
shall praise thee. This is the second thing propounded to your consideration in
the Text, and (I confess) the principal Doctrine of it; but I must handle it
very briefly, having exceeded in the former.

The wrath of wicked men against the people of God is very tributary to his
praise.

I shall first prove it by some instances in which the wrath of man against the
godly turns eminently to the glory of God, and then conclude in a word or two
of Application.

Hamans anger made him tenter his wit and policy to contrive that wicked plot
against the Jews, which gave God the glorious opportunity of turning his
mischief upon his own head, and so came up the famous Solemnity of the days of
Purim. Esth. 9.20. It is an ancient practice of the people of God to keep days
of Thanksgiving for the disappointment of Plots against them; and thus we came
by the opportunity of this days praises. The wrath of man makes holy day to
God. So some learned men translate the latter part of the Text, After the 70.
Reliquiae irarum diem festum tibi agent. The Seventy translate the word (...)
by (...), The secret cogitation of the heart of man shall praise thee; That is,
as some express it, either the enemies shall acknowledge, or the thing it self
shall declare, that in their most secret and subtle contrivances against God
and his people, he has been too hard for them. The profoundest Plotters shall
be forced to confess that there is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel
against the Lord.

Pharaoh pursued Israel to the Red sea, that they might there take a view of
the Salvation of God. For this cause was his heart raised up to this bold
attempt, that God might show in him his power; and hence came that Rhetorical
and High-strained Song of Moses, Exo. 15.

Vessels of Honor; and if they were not very rugged and rough-handed, they
would not be so fit for the turn. When a marching Army is pursued or attended
with a powerful enemy, it serves to bring in stragglers, and to keep the Body
close together. Truly it is a sad thing to consider how far Christians range
abroad from their Colors, though we have every day an allarm given us by the
Adversary. But if the Lord suffers their wrath to break out upon us, it will be
the likeliest way that I know to fetch us in from our extravagancies, to cure
us of our pride, our wantonness, our mutual discontents, and sinful anger
among our selves, and make us love one another like the Disciples of him whom
we call our Master. If these shakings of the Rod which we may every day
observe, prove not effectual to reduce us to a better rate of Christianity,
God will not always stand at shall I? shall I? but lay it on to purpose, or
else how shall he secure the honor of his own name? We pray him for his Names
sake to spare us: and this is our last Refuge we are come to, our last Prayer.
But alas, the Argument turns head against us, there being a kind of necessity
upon him to use some effectual means to take us off from those things which
openly reflect disgrace upon himself, and if nothing else will do it, this must.

Mal. 7.28.16.18.
then to wear out the Saints of the most High, which made those brethren in
cruelty, Dioclesian and Maximianus to alight from their Imperial Thrones, and
betake themselves to a private life, out of a sullen discontent and vexation of
spirit (as Nicephorus reports it) because they could not extirpate the
Christians. Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis; semen est Sanguis
Christianorum. Tert. Apol. adversus Gentes.
So Papists oftentimes complain Rhetorically, that they find the Heretics (as
they call Reformed Christians) like another Hydra, when they have taken off one
head many more succeed it. The undaunted confidence and invincible patience of
the godly under persecution makes much to the glory of God.

Joseph to the Government of Egypt, and the Translation of the Israelites
thence into the land of promise, the exaltation of Daniel and Mordecai in the
captivity, and restoration of the Jews from it, receive their greatest
beauties and embellishments from the variety of Humane obstructions through
which they forced their way. Our greatest Romancers could never yet find a more
effectual Medium to take their readers, then by leading on their ultimate
designs through so many impediments, as may often make them seem impossible. So
in all the amazing changes and revolutions which our eyes have seen, there is a
grand design of God uniformly carried on for his people through an incredible
variety of men's counterworkings; all which shall serve to make it the more
glorious in the Issue. Neither must we expect that Satan and his instruments
will ever leave off their secret plots and open oppositions, till the work upon
the wheel be wrought off, and then it Will turn very much to the glory of the
whole design, that men shall view it from the beginning in all its progresses,
and see how many times through the malice of adversaries, and otherwise, it has
been at the next step to utter loss and disappointment, and yet still
recovered, kept alive, and brought unto perfection.

Scorpions, and at every blow mind their former cruelties. Here, Take that for
your inhumane rage against my people at such a place, and that for your
barbarous usage of them at such a time: Now see how good it is to be
imprisoned, beaten, tortured, burnt, and sawn asunder. Thus the enemies
themselves are often constrained to acknowledge with Adoni-Bezek, the righteous
hand of God upon them in the day of Inquisition. They that set up the Statue of
Sennacherib when his sons had slain him, after his fatal expedition toward
Jerusalem, compelled him, though he was dead, yet to speak these words to all
spectators, Whosoever looks upon me let him learn to fear God: God is glorious
in his apparel, when it is all stained with the gore blood of his enemies,
because it is the day of recompense, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. the day of recompenses
for the controversy of Sion, Isa. 34.8.

Bishop she had spoiled a Preacher. It may too truly be said concerning us,
that when we were in a low estate, and under the lash, we were an humble
people, a praying people, a mutually loving people, and in a word, a people
that lived like Christians; but since we have been made free, and great, and
potent in the world, we have been spoiled for Christians, and are become a
people vain and light in our minds, a people that dare boldly believe or
unbelieve any thing, which will make any man vain in his conversation; A proud
and haughty people, even to the justification of them whom God abased before
us; Covetous, ambitious, hard-hearted, and in Religion, generally careless,
cold, and undetermined. Has God delivered us so many times, and saved us for
this? Truly, to speak after the manner of man, as Moses says of God, Genesis 6.
that it repented him that he made man, We may say, God may well be ashamed of
all that he has done for us. Is it not pity that his enemies should reproach
him in pointing at us, and say, These are the Lords people? Ezekiel. 36.20.
Do you see them? these are the Saints; do you observe what their Religion is,
and how well it teaches them? Do you see what it is to be godly? I know that in
the failings of Gods people, the logic of Adversaries is such, that they will
infer an ell from every inch, but it is just matter of lamentation tous that we
have given them so much occasion to blaspheme.

Let the earth be removed (if it must be so) and the mountains cast into the
midst of the sea. Let the Saints be thrust again into prisons and dirty
dungeons; Let fire and faggots come in fashion again, and bloody persecutors
return to their old trade; yea let that Tragedy of Piedmont be acted over in
England (we are too angry among our selves for the most part, to see how near
these things are in probability upon their march toward us) But let it be as
the Lord pleases, certainly it shall be no worse. And though men be never so
enraged, he will out of their greatest fury make admirable provisions for his
own glory. And if God thinks his Glory well worth the whole charge of Creation
and Providence, why should not we reckon our light Afflictions well bestowed
upon it?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. lin. 10. read Assertive. p. 4. marg. r. (...), p. 7. marg. r. (...).
p. 9. marg. r. retaliare. p. 14. l. 22. r. listed. p. 16. marg. r. videndum. p.
19. l. 1. r. covetous. p. 25. l. 22. for O r. So. p. 30. marg. r. Mat. 7.28.

Saturday the 21. of Februar. 1656.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Thanks of this House be given to Mr.
Warren for his great pains taken in his Sermon preached yesterday before the
Parliament at Margarets Westminster. being a day set apart for public Thanksgiving;
and that he be desired to print his Sermon, aad that he have the like
privilege in printing the same as has been allowed to others in like cases.
And that Major General Haynes do give him the thanks of this House accordingly.

Hen: Scobell Clerk of the Parliament.


