THE SPEECH Of Captain HENRY WARREN At the place of Execution near
Wapping-Dock, on Thursday last, being the fourteenth of this instant October,
1652. With his Prayer immediately before his death, And a perfect Narrative of
all his proceedings at Sea, in relation to the late King, Parliament, and the
Dutch Fleet.

Published according to Order.

LONDON: Printed for G. HORTON, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1652.

The Speech of Capt. Warren on Thursday last, being the 14th of this instant
October, 1652. at the place of Execution near Wapping-Dock.
ON Thursday being the 14 of this instant October, Captain Warren (according to
the sentence denounced against him) was brought to the place of execution,
being attired all in white; and great was the concourse of people, both by sea
and shore, who with much grief of spirit, beheld this Object of pity and
compassion: for, indeed, his death was extremely lamented, not only for his
singular services performed both for King and Parliament; but also for his poor
distressed wife and children, now in tribulation at Horsey-down: He had been
about 15 years in the service, and received his first Commission from the late
King; but since the eclipsing of his Regal power, the command at sea (as well
as by land) received a Translate, and was soon reduced to the obedience of the
Parliament; by virtue of whose Authority, and Commission, he was empowered to
act in the behalf and defense of this Commonwealth, and with great faithfulness
and integrity, did he perform the Trust reposed in him; insomuch, that the
Chattam Fr^gar was commit^ed to his charge, and for many years had he the
conduct of her, during which time, several prizes he brought in to the English
Harbors for the States; but the last he took proved his Overthrow; for laying a
Frenchman aboard bound from Bourdeaux, laden with Wines, after he had secured
the Vessel, the operation of the Vintage grew too potent and mighty, and soon
possessed him with such a spirit of indiscreet Valor, that coming within sight
of the Dutch fleet, he seemed to bear up to them, and threatened to lay their
Admiral aboard: This Resolution he vowed to pursue, contrary to the advice or
desire of the other Officers and Seamen; insomuch that Mr. Smiths Mate
belonging to the Christopher, being aboard, went to him, and told him, if he
atempted any such thing they were all lost men, and that none but madmen would
yield obedience to any such command; whereupon the Captain being in a passion,
cocked his pistol, and as the Mate was turning off from him, shot him quite
through the back; which the Boston perceiving, hasted up to the head of the
ship, saying, O Captain what have ye done: He answered, One Commander in a ship
is enough, and any one that dare contradict me, I Will serve them all so: One and
all cried the seamen; whereupon they presently secured him, and tacking about,
brought him to Rye, from whence he was conducted to the White Lion in
Southwark, and from thence to the place of execution, according to the Sentence
denounced against him at the last Assizes; where he deported himself with
exceeding great Remorse of Conscience, and about 11 of the clock in the
forenoon began his speech to the people, as follows:

Christian Friends,

I Am this day made a spectacle to God, and a sad Object to the people; and
although there be but a little between me and Death, yet blessed be God that
which bears up my heart, is, there is but a little between me and Heaven; no
more then the Ladder between me and the Savior of the World. I am now from our
Neptune Ocean sailing to the Ocean of Eternity, through a rough passage to my
Haven of Rest, through the Red Sea unto the promised Land: Jacob was old, yet
knew not the day of his death; yet blessed be the Name of the Lord, in the
prime of my years, I know the day of my death, the kind of my death, and the
place of my death; but this is my comfort, I am making a double exchange; and
am filled with abundance of tranquillity and peace of mind, and much serenity
and joy of spirit, being confident that I have made my peace with God; and that
he has sealed unto me a remission of all my sins. I have humbly besought mercy
for the last blood that I spilt, and my desire is, That all Officers may take
warning by me what they do in heat of blood; Blessed be the name of the Lord
that he has given me a heart of repentance, and a believing faith, and that he
has stood by me in all my imprisonment, and strengthened and supported me; And
though I am now come to an untimely end, death is not a terror to me, God is
not a terror, therefore death is not dreadful; O welcome Death, welcome Ladder,
welcome Gibbit, welcome all, because they will send me to a mansion in my
Fathers house. I have done, desiring only the help of your prayers, that God
would give me continual supplies of divine grace to carry me through this great
work I am to do, for I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure
is at hand; and so God bless you all.

Captain Warren's Prayer, at the place of execution, immediately before he was
turned off the Ladder.
O Most eternal and glorious Lord God, I thy poor and unworthy Creature, do
here humbly prostrate my self before thy sacred Majesty, beseeching thee
through the merits of Jesus Christ my blessed Savior and Redeemer, to have
mercy on me, and to wipe away all my sins and transgressions; Have mercy upon
me, O God, according to thy loving kindness; and according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. Oh! Wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me with hysop, and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. For thy name sake, O Lord,
pardon mine iniquity, for it is great. Remember me, dear Father, O according to
thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake. Turn thee unto me, and have
mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted. Look upon my affliction, and
forgive all my fins. O keep my soul and deliver me; for in thee I put my
confidence, and thou only, O God, art the Rock of my salvation, and a strong
Tower of Defense; Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; save me, for thy
mercy sake. O hide thy face from my sins, and cast me not away from thy
presence. Mine eyes are unto thee, O Lord God, in thee is my trust, leave not
my poor soul destitute. Hear me, O Lord, and send forth thy light, vouchsafe
from Heaven one smile I beseech thee; lead me into the land of uprightness, for
thy names sake. And dear Father I beseech thee that thou will be pleased to
strengthen me with thy blessed spirit in this great Work, that so I may freely
and willingly submit to thy Will; O Lord, remember my poor afflicted wife and
children, O look down upon them with the eyes of pity and compassion, I beseech
thee, for Jesus Christ his sake. O guide, bless, preserve, and keep them, I
beseech thee, for the merits of our Lord and blessed Savior sweet Jesus. Let
their lives be precious in thy sight, and remember them in this their day of
tribulation; be thou a strong Tower of Defense to save and deliver them; and
remember, I beseech thee, most gracious and glorious Lord God, that thou have
promised to be a Husband to the widow, and a Father to the Fatherless; And now
Lord, I beseech thee, strengthen me even in this hour of temptation; have mercy
upon them that would not have mercy upon me; and Lord forgive them that would
not forgive me; Yet I bless God that has heard the voice of my supplications,
in taking away the sting of Death; for to me it seems not terrible; Therefore
blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, AMEN, AMEN.

Having ended his speech, he desired that a Psalm might be sung, which being
done, he prayed again very fervently; but he was not very copious: Then he said
the Lords Prayer, and immediately after he took his leave of his friends,
desiring them to commiserate the sad and deplorable condition of his poor wife
and children, and more especially to pray for him, during his passage through
the Vale and shadow of Death. Then going up the Ladder, the Executioner put the
Rope about his neck, and desired to know the sign: He answered, when I lift up
my hands do thy office; and casting his eyes up to Heaven, saying, Lord Jesus
have mercy upon me, O thou Son of God that take'st away the sins of the world,
and shed thy dear and precious blood for me, speak peace unto my poor soul; and
then lifting up his hands, he received the fatal Turn; and having hung for the
space of an hour, he was afterward cut down, and carried over the water.

FINIS.

