The DUCKERS Duck'd, and Duck'd, and Duck'd again, Head, and Ears, and all
over; FOR Plunging, Scolding, and Defaming. Occasioned By a Message brought me
by an Anabaptist.

THUS, ^f you stop not the Press, Four Men will swear Sodomy against you.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of Learned, Pious Anabaptists; who confess
I have given their Cause of Plunging a dreadful Blow.

WITH Friendly Address to Mr. Philosensus, whose Mistake in thus joining this
Greek and Latin word together, helps me to a Thought against Plunging.

That it not only tends to, but actually does deprive some Men, but especially
Women, (on their own Confession) of their Senses when Baptized, (as they call
it) and therefore is not, cannot be an Ordinance of Christ, but a Human, or
rather Diabolical Invention.

With more Arguments against Plunging.

By Trepidantium Malleus.

^ONDON, Printed for John Marshal at the Bible in Grace Church Street, 1700.

The Duckers Duck'd, and Duck'd, and Duck'd again; Head and Ears, and all over,
for Plunging, Scolding, and Defaming.
WHen my last Sheet against Plunging in Baptism was put in my Hand to be
Corrected, in order to its true Impression, came a Bapt. (vulgarly Anabaptist)
to me with these Words in his Mouth. If you stop not the Press you are undone,
and will repent it, Four will Swear Sodomy on you. To whom I replied, I will
hasten my Work the sooner, and challenge any of my Accusars to face me, etc.

Now, Reader, They that would conceal Sodomy to serve their Cause, no wonder if
they do a Brother or Sisters Whoredoms, or their own.

But why was not this Sodomy charged on me before I wrote my Epistle to Mr.
Keith against Plunging? I was intimate with them long before. Not a Word said
to me of any such thing. So some dealt with Dr. Oats when he discovered the
Popish Plot, etc. To name no more. Let God and Man judge between me and them.

Because I mention known Stories, no Man can deny; must therefore such false
ones be invented on me?

There were 3 Fornicating Bapt. Speakers discovered in one Year in this City,
and how many more such may be in one Year more, who knows? These were Topping
Men among them, I think they will never be without many such till they leave
Plunging their Sisters; woeful is the Dedford Story last Year! I am not more
assured, that Baptism is from Heaven, then that their Plunging is from Men. And
that whatever their Sophistry and Equivocations be, they know as well as we,
their great Men* many of them.

1. That many die of this Disease. If some know not, many of our Ministers, and
People do, it is not convenient to be particular here.

2. That many of them Evacuate in the Water Piss, is a Scripture Word, and
plain English; and therefore I say Piss there. Another thing is not a
Scripture Word, and therefore I will learn of the Holy Ghost to express
indecent things decently. The Story of a Woman dipped a little after
Childbirth, and what was seen in the Water, and that she (I think) soon died,
is often talked of.

Now, suppose when Christ has appointed Wine in the other Sacrament, One
should take Vinum benedictum so; as I knew a Man in a Surgeon's Shop, that did
on a Mistake, and should say this is Blessed Wine, and Vomit in the Cup, were
not this an Abomination? As great, or greater is this I am now speaking of.
That when God commands Baptizing, Pouring, or Sprinkling with Water, a safe
thing, Men should plunge Head and Ears, and Piss there, etc.

Had not this been an amazing thing to Sober, Grave, Serious Maids, and Matrons
when they came to John's Baptism, to be dealt with as a company of Froward
Scolds? Now you that thirst after my Blood, as if you hoped, as did your
Fathers Forty Years since, to see the Blood of the black Goats running in the
Chanals; I pray must not yours run there too, many of you who are become
Black-Coats now? Yea, such as have no Learning go up and down with a little
land, black Clothes and Coats, which puts me in mind of the Proverb, Bos cum
clitellis, or a Jack an Apes in a Doublet. I remember when Mr. Flavil wrote
against Mr. Carry (that intolerable Plagiary) Oh the vile Stories they invented
on that famous Divine! Mr. Carry about that ^ime went to Exeter, and Preached
two of Mr. Flavil's Printed Sermons, which when discovered cost him about a
half Years Sickness. He must go there no more to show the Gifts God gave him
without Learning and Study: ^n abominable Cheat! Playing with God and ^an! They
that love not Presbyterian Bap^^^ms love in this way Presbyterian Sermons.

When at first they grew numerous, how few ^^uld say, they were Converted by
their Preaching? They commonly dated their Conversion, or Reformation under the
Ministry they disserted.

For my part I care not for Reading but Thinking, I read nothing, but muse on
this Argument.

Now, as Brother Minge's Name brought me one Argument against Plunging. That
they piss there; who dares say, it is not often done? Many Men know when they
go to swim they often do, no Man doubts it.

Well, Mr. Philosensus that seconded Mr. Makewater with a Libel, has brought
another Argument to my Mind against Plunging; for this is a mad word, made up
of Latin and Greek. Philosensus must be a Man without sense, I use it against
Plunging thus; That it takes away the use of Men and Women's Sense or Reason,
whilst they are Baptized, as they falsely call it. I am sure this is true,
especially in Women, and those of tender Natures, and is confessed by them. Now
what a horrid thing is this? I would I were as sure of some of them that they
ever found their Senses after, as I am sure they then lost them.

To see a young, beardless, snivling, ignorant Boy, or an old Cobnose Ignorant
Lubber in the Country, dip Sister in the Water, and handle her ungainly, and
for our Tradesmen to come to a Disputation, and say as one in the West That
though Infa^ts did not eat any of the Flesh in the Passover, they might of the
Broth? (The Broth of a roasted Lamb) lik^ Brother Shrewsbury, being an Opponent
lately before 5 hundred People about the change of the Sabbath day; asked his
Brother Alloin what he meant by implicitly, whether in plain words? No matter
whether such an impudent Dunce be a Socinianizing Person or no. How was I
ashamed, as well as others, to hear Three hours spent in mere Tattle. Yet such
must Write Polemical Divinity. Some write Hymns, and tell us of the Female Sect
for Sex, etc. And how Grace makes them more lovely then Top-knots, and these
must be sung in the Meeting. oh!

Some before Dipping make it their main Work to inveigh against our Baptisms
with a Gapy Mouth, and run in with their Boots without Fear or Wit.

These were not so Prudent as a Brother of this City; who when he had long
haranged for Plunging, said, I am not use to do it, and am not so well disposed
for it, -- I will therefore desire another to do it. -- Which made a good Grave
Friend of mine that saw it loath their Baptisms after.

They shall tell us, That such a Jesuit said, We know the ancient Simplicity
is kept up among the Anabaptists, but we all do what we do for Gain. As if
Jesuits would not tell the Quakers, or any others so; turn themselves into any
Shapes? Though by the way the Story may be as false as that a Bishop said so, and
so to a Brother about Baptism, when on Examination it was made evident the
Bishop never saw the Man. This Villainy was not done in a corner* so they say
the Churchmen tell them you have gotten the right end of the Staff of us about
Baptism; when perhaps not a word true. But such Stories of the Clergy make
Additions to the number of their Prosylites, and that is enough.

And often we are told of Plunging in the Time of Austin. -- For my part I
cannot believe every thing some say of those Times, but this I know.

They were then very Corrupt in their Notions about Baptism. It was put off
till they thought Death approached. Now I remember Austin in his Confessions,
Aegrotans Baptismum quaesivit. In one Chapter, Signabar ante signo Crucis (This
is nothing with you if the Church of England urge it for the sign of the Cross)
and condi ebar sale. (This is nothing with you nor them, if a Papist urge it
for his Crisme. I offer more Arguments against Plunging.

1. If in lesser Duties it be a golden Rule in Matters of Worship, a Law of
Nature Antecedent to the Command of Paul, That all things be done decently. --
Then Plunging in so great an Ordinance as Baptism, with clothes on or off is
Vi^e and Detestable.

2. If God will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, then it is Unlawful to Plunge
Persons tender, and laboring with many Distempers.

3. If Persons as soon as Converted by the Word may be Baptized, but cannot be
Plunged, (especially in some Places) then Baptism is not Plunging.

4. It is Unlawful to Baptize naked young Men and Maids, old Men and Women,
before mixed Spectators; as a thing Immodest, Unclean, Barbarous and Ridiculous.
Then Plunging them so is Unlawful, and to Plunge them with Clothes on is to
Baptize Clothes as well as Persons.

5. If the Ancients often Baptized Men, embracing Christianity on their
Deathbeds, then they Plunged them not, even in Times of greatest Superstition,
who sometimes in many things over-did, and therefore no wonder if in the use of
more Water then need.

6. If Houses cannot be had, or good Fires, and warm Beds nigh Rivers, or such
Places of Baptism, which is often so, then Plunging without these is Barbarous
and Unlawful. I aver Plunging is a notorious Breach of the 6th, as well as the
7th. Commandment.

7. If there be great danger that Brother and Sister should meet together
sometimes in the same warm Bed, as they did before in the same cold Water, then
this Plunging is Unlawful.

8. If he that is washed, as our Lord said to Peter, need not wash the whole
but the Feet only. Then it is Folly to say, the whole Body must be washed, not
the Face only.

And because I am asked by some wise Men, where I find the word Bapto, to Dip
or Plunge, used in the New Testament? Let them turn; he that dippeth with me in
the Dish, -- send Lazarus to dip the tip of his Finger. -- His Garments dipped
with Blood, etc. In none of these is the word Baptize used, which corroborates
my Argument.

And now Brother Bapt. for you know that Cain was Abel's Brother, though he
sought his Life, (and had it too) but not in so barbarous a way as you sought
mine.

1. For he stabbed him not in his Name and Reputation, though in his Body. Never
charged him with Sodomy, but hated him, as you me, because his Deeds were good
(as our Baptism) and his own Evil (as your abominable Plunging.)

2. He added not Perjury to his Wickedness, never got four Men to Swear falsely
against him; yet as Cain was Abel's Brother when he contrived Mischief against
him, as well as when he did not, so you may now as well as when I called you
once Brethren, and you, as far as I know sought not my Ruin. You call one
another Brother, some of you have called me so, I you Friendly.

Well Brother Cain, had you done your Work, I doubt not but God and Conscience
would have sounded in our Ears Day and Night, What have thou done? The Voice of
thy Brother's Blood cries in my Ears from the ground, and now art thou cursed,
and you had gone up and down as Cain the Elder once did, till you on the top of
a Ladder had Preached my Innocence.

Come Cain, get four Men more to swear that I Plunged you, one as much as the
other.

Whereas I am charged by some, that I once justified Corpus Theologiae, a Body
of Divinity, to be true Latin, I say it still Volumns may be so called, Corpus
juris, and by the way Corpus Sartorum, The Company of Tailors is good Latin
too, Is (...) 2 Acts 17. False Greek? for so I am charged, I am not willing to
name by whom.

Let Brother Collins himself, Brother Keach and the rest say (as I,) and I will
believe them. That if ever they abused their Bodies with Women since they were
Plungers, they desire God ^o make it as the unpardonable Sin, never to be
forgiven in this World, nor in the World to ^ome. Amen, Amen. Mr. Philosensus
being put ^o it closely by one (who offers to give it on Oath) said, That he
believed I was an honest Man, and guilty of no bad Morals. (Yet He ^alks of the
Four Swearers) Bapts in many pla^^s where I have lived never doubted my Morals.

These Men after the Portsmouth Disputation were about to prove a worthy
Disputant there ^n Print a lewd Man. I do believe when the ^apts tell Stories
of such sick Persons Dipped ^hey came home well, gone out with a Staff, and ^^me
home without any, etc.

They are Lies, or Tricks; some can be sick, and well when they please. Any Man
of Sense may espy a Cheat here.

Whence is it, that if any wild Notions ^pring up. This People are sooner
infected then others; and turn more Socinians then others, etc.

Once the Presbyterians were Baals Priests, etc. Dogs, and Cats were sprinkled
in detestation of Infant Baptism, as that worthy Divine, Father Slater in this
City mentioned in the Pulpit, and the Bapts denied. He proves all by a Sermon
before the House of Commons, Preached by that Stupendous piece of Sense, the
ever famous Obediah Sedgwick, Authority Sufficient.

To Mr. Philosensus. Sir, I am yet SAM. RECONCILABLE.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any more Libels come out against me, (not else) I am ready with an Epistle
to the King of Sion, St. Matthias, David, George, Knipperdolling, and the rest
of the Twelve Apostles, with a Character of them; as Men, as Christians, as
Speakers, proved from good Authority, my own Obseavation, and common Experience.


