THE LAST Speech and Confession OF NICHOLAS WARREN, Who was Executed on Friday,
October 16th. 1696. For Murdering of William Pitman, this being a True COPY of
the Paper delivered by Him at the Place of Execution.
GOod People, I am by the just Judgment of God brought hither to Suffer, and
fearing I may not be heard by many, for the sake of those that Survive me, I
leave this Paper with the S -- ffs, to be disposed off according to their
Discretion for the Public Good, with this Declaration, that what is contained
therein, is really true, as the Great God is my Witness.

I. I do freely forrgive all the World, and particularly those that have raised
Malicious Scandals and false Aspersions upon me; and among those, Mr. B -- A --
the Master of the Ship, who has, as I have been Informed, reported many
Notorious Falsities of me, to the hindering (as I have reason to think) some
farther intended Mercy to me from Man, but as I hope, my Good and Gracious God
has forgiven me, a poor Sinful Creature, much greater Sins then Man can have
Committed against me; so I heartily forgive all my Enemies, Persecuters and
Slanderers, all that have done me any Wrong, and as I heartily ask Forgiveness
of all I have Injured, and I beseech God to forgive all as I do, with Horror
and Detestation, and great Sorrow of Heart, I Confess that I did shed the Blood
of the Man, for which great Sin I justly suffer for, but yet I must say, I had
no Premeditated Malice against him; but on the contrary, a kindness for him,
but having Drank hard, and then Quarelling, I rashly brought my Self to this
End, for which I pray God forgive me.

But what has been Reported, of being a Buckenere, having treated Men
Barbarously, and having killed other Men besides this, which is utterly false,
for which I Praise and Glorify my God. But yet I must Confess, that I have
been a very grievous Sinner, and should God deal with me accordingly, I must
Perish Everlastingly. But all Glory be to him for his Merciful Assistances, I
am sincerely Sorrowful, and I am truly Penitent for all and every Sin that ever
I have Committed, against God or Man, and am thereupon full of Hopes, that my
long Suffering and most Compassionate (though much offended) God, has for the
sake of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, pardoned all my Sins, for I believe
there is Virtue enough in the Blood of my Crucified Redeemer, to wash away the
foulest stains off of my Soul, and that he that has made me Penitent* will save
me for His Mercy Sake. And that I may do all the good I can to those that
Survive me I earnestly beg and entreat you all, both Young and Old, to beware
of all and every Sin, and most especially of Idleness, for the Devil then is
most Busy, and generally most successful in his Temptations, for want of
improving your precious time. For time indeed is precious, though not though^
so of by many. People are apt to fall into idle Company, and with the^ fall to
hard Drinking, and Drunkenness is the inlet to all other Sins; thenc^ proceeds
Whoredom, Adultery, Debauch Songs and Tales, Lies, Sabbath breaking Cursing,
Swearing, Blaspheming, Quarrelling and Murder, an without a true and
seasonable Repentance, Damnation will certainly fo^low, to prevent which, for
God's sake, who does not delight in the Death of a Sinner, for Jesus Christ's
Sake, that has shed his Precious Blood for Sinners, and for your Mortal Souls
Sake, return to your offended God by unfeigned Repentance, Reedeem your
precious time you have lost, keep Holy the Sabbath Day, read the Holy
Scriptures with Care and Diligence, shun Idleness, and Idle Debauch Company,
hate Drunkenness, and Abominate Whoredom. Pray for God's Grace and Mercy, at
least Morning and Evening, give God the Glory of his Mercy, and do your utmost
endeavors to walk before the Lord in Holiness of Life, learn from the Temporal
Judgment of God upon me, to beware of Sin, and learn from the Comfortable
Experience I have of God's Mercy, not to dispare if you run on in Sin, you may
not repent, but if you repent now, you will escape Eternal Damnation, as I
steadfastly believe through Jesus Christ. I do freely forgive all the World, and
all those that I have wronged or abused, if I did know, I would make
Restitution if I could, but since I cannot, I hope they all will forgive me, as
I hope the Lord will forgive us all; therefore I bid this Sinful World Adieu,
wishing that all People would mend their Lives, and turn to the Lord, for fear
his Anger should arise. Into the Hands of the Lord I commit my Spirit,
beseeching thee O Lord to speak Peace to my Soul, and say, Soul be of good
Comfort, thy Sins be forgiven, that likewise O Lord in the Moment of time, say
O Lord, come this Day shall thou be with me in Paradise, and so farewell this
Wicked World.

Nicholas Warren.
PRay my Brethren have a care of Slandering and Backbiting, and raising Lies,
for I have all these raised on me; I may well say, the Mouth of the Wicked, and
the Mouths of the Deceitful are open against me with a lying Tongue, they
compassed me about also with words of Hatred, but O Lord, I beseech thee,
forgive them, for they little think that they must appear before thee O most
Righteous Judge, then there will be no false Oaths, nor no Money for Life, but
the Book of Conscience will be the Evidence and the Jury, and thee O Lord Jesus
Christ will be the Judge of Judges, and all Flesh alive. So farewell False
World, for there is no Content in thee Adieu. Ezekiel Chap. 22. Verse 12, 27,
Zephaniah Chap. 3. Verse 3. Micah Chap. 3. Verse 9, 10, 11.



Bristol, Printed by Will. Bonny in Tower-Lane, 1696.


