The Poores Advocate.

In 8 Parts. Showing, what an incomparable favor it is to the Rich: that there
are Poor to accept of their Charity, had they the wit to know it. Wherein is
also made plain, that bounty and frugality is the best and surest way to
Plenty: With many other rational, and strong inducements to make men liberal;
were it but for their own ends. Being enough (with the blessing of God) to
change even a Nabal into a Zaccheus.

By R. Young, Florilegus.

Who most earnestly begs of all rich men especially, and that for the Poors
sake, for Christ's and the Gospels sake, but most of all for their own (even
their bodies, names, estates, precious souls and posterities) sake; to lay to
heart, what is herein propounded to them out of Gods Word, touching the poor:
and then certainly, they will neither spend so excessively nor heap up wealth
so unmeasurably as they do; when millions of their poor Brethren (for whom God
would become man and die to redeem) are in such want, that I want words to
express it.

Open thy mouth, and plead the cause of the poor and needy,

Proverbs 31.9. Above all things put on Charity, Colos. 3.14. Was not my soul
grieved for the Poor, Job 3.14. He that has pity on the poor, lends unto the
Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him again, Proverbs 19.17. God
is not unrighteous that he should forget your work and labor of love which ye
have showed toward his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do
minister, Heb. 6.10. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your
bosom: for with the same measure that ye mete withal, it shall be measured to
you again,

Luke 6.38. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase: so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses
shall burst out with new wine,

Proverbs 3.9, 10. There is that scartereth, and yet increases; and there is
that withholdeth more then is meet: but it tends to poverty, etc.

Proverbs 11.24. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, but he which
sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully, etc. 2 Cor. 9.6. to 15. see Isai.
32.8. The liberal person shall have plenty, etc.

Proverbs 11.25. He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Pro. 28.27. In the
days of famine they shall have enough, Job.20. I have been young, and now am
old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed bagging bread. He
is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing,

Psalm. 37.25, 26. Whosoever stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also
shall cry himself, but shall not be heard,

Prove. 21.13 He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy,
etc.

James 2.13. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels: for I was an hungry and ye gave me no meat, etc.

Matthew. 25.41, 42, 43. Printed by R. and V. Leybourn, and are to be sold by
James Crump, in Little Bartholomews Well-yard, and to be lent gratis at the
Blue Pales over against the High Constables, short of Shore-ditch Church,
leaving two pence until they do return them. 1654.

THE POORES ADVOCATE, In 8 Parts.
Showing, what an incomparable favor it is to the Rich: that there are Poor to
accept of their Charity, had they the wit to know it. Wherein is also made
plain, that bounty with frugality; is the best and surest way to plenty, with
many other rational, and strong inducements to make men liberal; were it but
for their own ends. Being enough (with the blessing of God) to change even a
Nabal into a Zacheus.

By R. Young Florilegus.

Who most earnestly begs of all rich men especially, and that for the Poors
sake; for Christ's and the Gospels sake, but most of all for their own (even
their bodies, names, estates, precious souls, and posterities) sake to lay to
heart, what is herein propounded to them out of Gods Word, touching the poor:
and then certainly, they will neither spend so excessively, nor heap up wealth
so unmeasurably as they do; when millions of their poor brethren (for whom God
would become man and die to redeem) are in such want, that I want words to
express it, Jam. 2.1.3. and 5.1, to 7. Proverbs 21.18 Luke 16.19, to 31. Mat.
18.27* 0 36.

Open thy mouth, and plead the cause of the poor and needy,

Proverbs 31.9. Above all things put on Charity,

Colos. 3.14. Was not my soul grieved for the Poor,

Job 30.25. Give, and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down,
and shaken together, and running over shall men give into your bosom: for with
the same measure that ye mete with all, it shall be measured to you again,

Lu. 6.36 Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all
thine increase. So shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
burst out with new wine,

Proverbs 3.9, 10. There is that scatters, and yet increases; and there is
that with holds more then is meet: but it tends to poverty, etc.

Proverbs. 11.24, 25. He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, but he
which sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, etc.

2. Cor. 9.6. to 15. See Isai. 32.8. He that gives to the Poor shall not lack,

Proverbs 28. 27. I have been young and now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. He is ever merciful and
lends, and his seed enjoys the blessing.

Psalm. 37.25, 26. See that remarkable place, Isai. 58.6. to 13. And Psalm.
112.1. to the end.

THE POORES ADVOCATE. The first Part.
CHAP. I.
HArd times, and harder hearts call for Theams of, mercy: and require both the
tongues and pens of Chrysostom: who for his frequency therein, was called, The
Poors Advocate, The Prelate of mercy, etc. Now that this subject is seasonable,
none I presume will question: And that the mattter and manner may suit with the
subject or argument, and to the end that none might challenge me, for handling
a good cause ill: (which was holy Jobs case) I have in this Treatise for the
Poors good, taken more liberty then in any of my former. For besides slipping
of Flowers, from ancient Fathers, Councils, Philosophers, Poets, Orators, etc.
to set in this my mean Garden; (as the children of Israel, by Gods appointment,
borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, toward the
making of the Tabernacle: Or as Solomon fetched Algummum Trees from Ophir, when
he built a House unto the Name of the Lord) I have also watered my Garden from
that Fountain, pruned Sciens from that Orchard, and taken a good part of my
seed, from that plentiful Granary of Mr. JOHN DOWNAME'S Plea of the Poor.

Nor let any think, but as Solomon in building the Temple; made most excellent
use of Hiram: so may I the like of this Reverend Author. All have their
several gifts from God, and therefore they may justly be improved to the honor
of the giver. Truth, says St. Ambrose, (By whomsoever uttered) is of the Holy
Ghost: and so ought to serve the Church of God. Every man's wisdom and learning
is Gods; and his children have right to such their fathers blessings,
wheresoever they find them.

And so much by way of Preface.

WHen Virtue came down from Heaven, (as the Poets feign) Rich men spurned at
her, wicked men abhorred her, Courtiers scoft at her, Citizens hated her; and
being thrust out of doors in every place, she came at length to her sisters
poverty and affliction, and of them found entertainment; where she has abode
ever since. But Chariy her Niece, finding that every one (in this last Age)
even from the least unto the greatest is given unto covetuousness, Jer. 1.13.
That all gape after gain. And that how to get, is each man's dream from Sun to
Sun: she has taken her wings, and is quite flown out of the World, without
hope of ever return^ng, as our Saviors words seem to imply, Matthew. 24.12.
Because iniquity shall increase, love shall wax cold.

It is said, Luke 18.8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on
the earth? So when the Son of man comes, shall he find Charity on the earth?
I fear no. For as now we have a great deal of faith (such as it is) and but
little or no Charity; (such as it should be) so then will he find neither
Faith not Charity.

When Abraham's servant saw the charity, courtesy, and great care which Rebecka
showed to him and his; being a stranger: it is said, He wondered at her, and
held his peace! Genesis 24.18, to 22. It were a wonder indeed! to see the like in
our days. Be not forgetful (says the Apostle) to lodge strangers: for thereby
some have received Angels into their houses unawares, Heb. 13.2. So did Abraham
and Lot, and many others: but for all this possibility of happiness; few will
put it to the venture: And were they indeed Angels, without Angels in their
purses to pay for it; they should find but cold entertainment.

Again, our blessed Savior tells us, He that receives you, receives me; and
he that receives me, receives him that sent me. And that, Whosoever shall
give unto one of these little ones to drink; a cup of cold water, only in the
name of a Disciple: Verily, I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward,
Matthew. 10.40, 41, 42. But for all that, should Christ come to Rich men in these
days, in his own person; as he did to the woman of Samaria; and demand a small
matter of them; he should receive but a flowt, and a churlish denial as then he
did, John 4.7, to 13. They will rather hazard the loss of such a friend as
Christ himself: then the least loss by a friend of his sending. In Deuteronomy. 16.17.
Every man is commanded to give, according as God has blessed him. And so in 1
Cor. 16.2. And a man would think, that upon whom God bestows most of his
outward blessings: of them he should receive the greatest inward thanks. But it
would amaze a man to see! How many Rich men, whom God has blessed with mighty
estates, together with all that heart can wish; perhaps raised them from
beggars, to be the best in their Parishes: and yet like beasts or blocks; they
are so far from returning the least thanks to the giver; that (notwithstanding
our so much means of light and grace) they have not the least knowledge, or
fear, or love of God in them: but even hate him and his people, and oppose all
proceedings that may promote the glory of God, and the Churches good. In so
much that their unthankfulness, has striven with Gods goodness for the
victory: as Absolon strove with David, whether the Father should be more kind
to the son, or the son more unkind to the Father. They have been fatted with
Gods blessings, and now they spurn at his precepts. Resembling the Leopard, who
wrongs him most, that gives him most fodder.

But, o the sordidness of these swine. In reason we may well afford our
superfluities, where we owe our selves and all that we have or hold. And that
by how much we receive more blessings then others: we should (...) more
thankful then others, but it-seldome proves so with these Nabal* these natural
bruit beasts. Beat with me, for it is not possible to express, either their
baseness or blockishnesse. It is to be observed, that generally men are most
thankful in a mean or middle condition. As when David had but two Tribes, he
was most thankful; yea, he was never so tender, as when he was hunted like a
Partridge, 1 Samuel 26.20. Jonah was at best, in the Whales belly. And daily
experience teaches, That as we grow rich in temporals; we grow poor in
spirituals. Yea, not seldom have good men (in our apprehension) been lifted up
so high with their wealth and greatness: as to lose the sight, both of the
ground, whence they rose, and of the hand that advanced them. For as fat men
are more subject to diseases of the body; so are Rich men to those of the
mind. It Is the misery of the poor, to be neglected of men: Prove. 19.7. it is the
misery of the rich to neglect their God. The full gorged Faulcon will not know
her Master, or turn unto him. Many receive Millions from God, yet are not so
thankful; as they who have received nothing but from hand to mouth. The poor,
says Christ, receive the Gospel; though the rich are more bound.

And the truth is, pride and forgetfulness, is commonly all the return we make
to God for his blessings, as a world of instances prove, of which these are
pregnant, and well worth thy turning to Jer. 22.21. Job 22.17, 18. Psalm, 10.4,
5, 6. Deuteronomy. 32.15, 18.

Whence it is, That the Lord so often fore-warneth men to beware lest they forget
him, and their hearts be lifted up so soon as he has blessed, and advanced them:
for which see that notable place, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12, and 8.11, to 15. for I am
so tied to brevity, that I cannot stand to repeat every Scripture.

CHAP. 2.
ANd indeed this is the main reason, why the best are not always the
wealthiest, but the contray. For when the Al-wise God does foresee, that men
will serve him as the prodigal son served his father: who only prayed until he
had got his patrimony, and then forsook him and spent the same in riot, to the
givers dishonor: even as the cloud that is lifted up, and advanced by the Sun,
obscures the Sun: in this case he either denies them riches in mercy, as he
denied S. Paul in his suit, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9. and our Savior himself, Mat.
26.39. or grants them their riches in wroth, as he did a King to the
Israelites, Hosea 13.11. and Quails wherewith he fed their bodies, but withal
sending leanness into their souls, Psalm. 106.15.

First, that the best whom God loves most, are not always the wealthiest:
appears by a multitude of examples, together with plentiful experience. It is
recorded that the Mother of Christ at her Purification; was not rich enough to
bring a Lamb for her Offering. Job from rich became poor to a Proverb. David
even after he was anointed King; was put to many a hard shift even for
victuals, which made him send to Nabal for relief. Christ himself had not
twenty pence to pay tribute, until he had borrowed it of the fish. No he had
not so much as a house to dwell in, or a pillow of his own to sleep on, as
himself professes, Luke 9.57, 58. Joseph was forced to serve and aft^^ to
become under-keeper of a prison. Ruth was compelled to glean, to keep her self
and her mother Naomy, from starving; Lazarus was driven to beg of the Rich
Glutton. And many the like mentioned in the eleventh to the Hebrews, and more
in Ecclesiastical History of the Primative Christians, under the persecuting
Emperors. They were poor in this world, that they might he rich in faith: and
heirs of the Kingdom, which God has promised to them that love him, James 2.5.

Secondly, and so on the contrary: God not seldom gives most wealth to those
that are worst: and to whom he loves least. Yea, he has always for the most
part; planted most wealth and riches, where he has reaped least fruit of
graceful actions. The Tabernacles of robbers do prosper, and those are in
safety that provoke God, whom God has enriched with his hand, Job 12.6. The
wicked live and wax old, and grow in wealth; their seed is established in their
sight, their houses are peaceable without fear; and the rod of God is not upon
them, their bullock genderth and fails not, their Cow calveth, and casts
not her Calf; There are no bonds in their death, but their strength is firm,
they are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued like other men,
their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart can wish. They
take the Tabret and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ: they spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down into bell, with a great
deal more to like purpose, as you may read. Job 21.13. Psalm. 73.3. to 21.

To which I might add a world of examples: The Cananites had the only fruitful
land in the world; it flowed with milk and honey: yet the Lord loved them never
the better, but when he saw good, he cast them out. So now the Turk, and the
King of Persia, professed enemies to Christ; have the primest Principalities in
all the world. Even bloody Haman, the worst enemy that ever God and his Church
had; abounded with wealth, and honor for a long time; yea, his command reached
almost to Heaven: yet all ended in shame, beggary and confusion.

Briefly, Laban, and Nabal, and Esau, with most of the Kings of Israel and
Judah; of whom few were good, (as it has fared with the most and greatest
Potentates of the world ever since) likewise the Rich Fool in the Gospel, and
the Rich Glutton, and the Rich man that turned his back upon Christ, when he
was willed to sell all, and give to the poor, Mark 10.21, 22. all these had
wealth, riches, and honor in abundance: yet God loved them never the better,
bad they were, and prosperity did more mar then mend them. He was not the best
Disciple that carried the bag: Christ committed his purse to Judas, whereas he
gave his holy Spirit to his faithful Apostles; had not he been a wise Disciple
that should have envied this great favor done to Judas? and have stomached his
own mean condition. So foolish are they, who (measuring Gods affection by
temporal benefits) are ready to applaud prospering wickedness, and to grudge
outward blessings to them, that are incapable of any better. Nevertheless, as
that Fool Haman deceived himself in construing the Queens invitation of him to
the Banquet; as a matter of especial grace, when indeed she did it only to
accuse him, Ester 5.12. and 7.2, etc. so men flatter themselves, and think it a
matter of special grace and favor; when God gives them abundance of these
outward things: and hereupon they grow proud; when he not seldom gives them
these things, as Jael gave Sisera milk and lodging, Judge. 5.25, 26. Or as Ebud
gave that present to Eglon, Judges 3.17, 21. For unless his blessing, and
special grace go along with it: there is not a more compendious way to alienate
a man's heart from God, then to wallow in worldly wealth, as the Psalmist in
sundry places observes. See Psalm. 73.3, to 21. Job 21.13. The wickeds table
[though swimming never so much with dainties] is their snare, and their
prosperity their ruin.

Wherefore prize not thy self by what thou have, but by what thou art: for he
that makes a bridge of his own shadow, cannot but fall into the water. Yea, it
behooves every wiseman, to imitate the Deer: who is ever most fearful, at her
best feeding. And indeed why should any man think himself better, for what he
has? when the Devil offered our Savior, all the earth to worship him, Matthew.
4.8, 9.

CHAP. 3.
TRue the godly are sometimes very rich, that is, when it is good for them, and
when God sees they will use riches to his glory, and the good of others: As we
read that Abraham was very rich, Genesis 13.2. and 24.35. And Lot, Genesis 13.5, 6.
And Job, Job 42.10, 11, 12. And Solomon, 1 Kings 4.20, to 26. and 10.26. 2 Chronicles. 1.15 And as these, so no question but it should be the portion rather of
the godly, then of the wicked; were it good for them: for godliness has the
promises of this life, as well as of the life to come. Yea, all temporal
blessings that can be named, are promised to the godly, and their seed; and to
them only, as both the Old and New Testament does plainly, and plentifully
prove. The reward of humility, and the fear of God: i^ riches, and glory, and
life, Proverbs 22.4. The Lord will withold no good thing, from them that walk
uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee
thine hearts desire, etc. Psalm. 37.3, to 7. Fear ye the Lord, yea, his Saints:
for nothing wants to them that fear him. The Lions do lack, and suffer
huager, but they that seek the Lord, shall want nothing that is good, Psalm.
34.9, 10. Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him: because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight; 1 John
3.22. What rare and precious promises are these? to which I might add very
many of l^ke nature, of which, see Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 7.11, to 16. Isai. 65.13.
Psalm. 21.2, 3, 4. and 144.15. and 112.1, 2, 3, and 37, 29. Ier. 17.25. 2 Chronicles.
26.5, and 27.6. 2 Samuel 8.14.

In fine, Let us first seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteouness, and all
other things shall be ministered unto us, or come in as it were upon the
bargain, as our Savior has assured us, Matthew. 6.33. Talis est ille qui in
Christo credit, die qua credidit qualis ille, qui universam legem implevit;
says Hierom, We have a livery and seisin, of all the precious promises, both
in the Law and Gospel, in the first moment of our faith. Yea, even an earnest,
and partly a possession of Heaven it self: Ephesians. 2.6. Neither are these
promises made only to the obedient themselves: but riches, and al earthly
blessings are entailed upon their seed also, Psalm. 112. His seed shall be
mighty upon earth, the generation of the righteous shall be blessed, V. 2, 3.

Nor is riches, and outward prosperity promised to the godly, and their seed as
others usually enjoy them, that is single and barely, but they have a promise
of them, with a supply and addition of all other good things, that may make
them every way happy, as that their prosperity shall be durable and lasting,
That with riches they shall have credit, honor, and promotion with long life
added. That they shall be happy and prosper in all they have or do: as having
God their protector, who with mercy is said to compass them about on every
side, Psalm. 32.10. That they shall be freed from all fears and dangers, and
obtein victory over all their enemies; together with death, hell, and the
devil. That they shall be freed from the Law, and likewise from sin, and the
penalty thereof. That they shall have peace external, internal, eternal. And
joy, even the joy of the Holy Ghost: which is both glorious, and unspeakble.
That they shall not only persevere, but also grow in grace, and true wisdom.
That all things whatsoever, shall make for their good. That both their persons
and performances shall be good and acceptable; which before were wicked and
abominable. That by the prayer of faith, they shall obtein of God, whatsoever
they shall ask in Christ's name, and according to his word. And in fine, all
other good things, that can be named; whether temporal, spiritual, or eternal:
are by the promise of God entailed, upon them that love him, and keep his
Commandments, and upon their seed, as I could plentifully, and most easily
prove, would time and place permit. So that what is spoken of Melte, a Tree in
Mexico: namely, that it serves for weapons, needle, third, sugar, honey, balm,
sueker, wine, cords, parchment, linen, perfume, apparel, that it cures the
stinging of Serpents, and the French Disease, with its very ashes; and many the
like, is more true of grace and holiness: yea, as if it had a kind of
almightiness in it, it can do all things, as might be further shown of faith
and prayer, in the Servants of God, recorded in Scripture. Yea, which is more
then all, faith and prayer can even bind the hands of the Almighty: as in the
case of Moses praying and prevailing for the Israelices, Exodus 32.10, 14. Nor
is all this, that God has promised to those that serve him, so great a matter
comparatively; as that we need wonder at it, or once question the same: For if
he spared not his own Son, but delivered him to death for us; how shall he not
with him freely, give us all things also? Romans 8.31, 32. It is the Apostles
argument. Great, yea, too great things are they for us to receive; but not too
great, for the great and good God of Heaven and carth to give: all the fear is
on our part, whether we be such to whom the promise is made. For all Gods
promises are conditional And though of these outward good things, he has
promised abundance: yet it is upon the condition of faith and obedience: as
appears by all the forementioned places; so that if we be not wanting in our
duty, and obedience to God; God will not be wanting in any good thing to us:
Not can we look that God should make good his promises, if we make them void,
by not observing the condition, as that we may do by our distursting him. If we
will not dare to trust God upon his promise so confidently as we would a
friend, or some great man that is able and honest.

Besides, the Lord has promised, that there shall be no want to them that fear
him; and that no good thing will be withold, from them that walk uprightly,
Psalm. 34.9. and 84.11. where observe two things, there shall be no want to
such, and such shall want no good thing: so that he must be such an one, to
whom the promise is made; and he must also be sure, that it is good for him,
which is promised. But oftentimes it is not good, for a man to abound with
earthly blessings: as strong drink is not good for weak brains. Yea, if any
thing be wanting to a good man, he may be sure it is not good for him: and then
better that he does want it, then that he did enjoy it, and what wise man will
complain of the want of that, which if he had, would prove more hurtful then
gainful to him? as a sword to a mad man, a knife to a child, drink to them
that have a Fevour, or the Dropsy. No good thing will God withold, etc. and
therefore not wants themselves, which to many are also good, yea, very good
things, as I could reckon up many: want sanctified, is a notable means to bring
to repentance, to work in us amendment of life, it stirs up to prayer, it weans
from the love of the world, it keeps us always prepared for the spiritual
combat, discovers whether we be true believers or hypocrites, prevents greater
evils of sin and punishment to come; It makes us humble, conformable to Christ
our head, increases our faith, our joy and thankfulness, our spiritual wisdom,
and likewise our patience, as I have largely shown in another Treatise.

To conclude, All good things were created for the good, and therefore are they
called goods; because the good God created them for good men, to do good
withal. Therefore, as Jacob got the blessing, so he gate the inheritance also:
to show that as the faithful have the inward blessing, so they have the outward
blessing too; when they will do them good, and cause them to do good. Yea, in
this case, even as the sheaffs fell before Ruth: so riches shall fall in our
way, as they did to Abraham and Lot, and Jacob, and Job, and Joseph, upon whom
riches were cast they knew not how; but as if God had only said, be rich; and
they were rich straight. But that this is the true and only way to wealth and
happiness, needs no more proof then that which is recorded of Solomon, 1 Kings
3. 2 Chronicles. 1. where the Lord appearing to him in a dream, said, Ask, what I
shall give thee? And he asking only an understanding heart, to discern between
good and evil; that he might the better discharge that great place, whereunto
God had called him; wherein Gods glory, and the peoples good, was his principal
aim and end: Hear what the Lords answer is. Because this was in thine heart,
and thou have not asked riches, wealth or honor, nor the life of thine
enemies, neither yet have asked long life, but have asked wisdom and knowledge
for thy self, that thou might judge my people, over whom I have made thee
King: Wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee; and I will give thee riches,
and wealth and honor, such as none of the Kings have had that have been before
thee, neither shall there any after thee have the like, etc. 2 Chronicles. 1.7. to
13, 14, 15. Lo, the true way to wealth, honor, and happiness, is; to desire
grace, that we may glorify God, and d^ good: for clearing whereof, I Will give
you a similitude, A man spies a fair apple on a tree, has a longing desire to
it; whereupon he falls a shaking the tree with all his might: at length it not
only comes down, but many other come down to him together with it. Which point
being dispatched, I should in the next place show; why the godly are not
always, nor often rich, notwithstanding these promises: and why God withholds
these outward blessings from his own people, in great love: only affording them
all things that they have need of. For our heavenly Father, who knows us
better then we know our selves; and what is good and fit for us, (even as the
Nurse knows better then the Child, and the Phifician better then the Patient)
knows too well, how apt we are; to abuse these his mercies, and that we cannot
abound with earthly blessings, but we grow proud and surfeit of them; a^ we see
Solomon himself did: who was the Wisest (next to Adam in his innocence) that
ever lived. And likewise how happy it is for them to be kept short.

And contrarily, how God gives them to the wicked in his wrath; whereof,
Eccles. 6.1, 2. is one instance. And how miserable they are, who swim in
wealth, want ng grace and Gods blessing upon what they do possess. But of
these and many the like, I shall speak afterward. In the next place my endeavor
shall be, to show Rich men, what rare opportunities they have, to do themselves
and theirs good with their goods; if they had but an heart. And I wish in the
words of Jotham to the men of Sechem, Judges 9.7. That all Rich men would now
hearken unto me: as they would have God another day hearken unto them. For
certainly, if they would but seriously consider, what rational and strong
inducements, what rare and remarkable benefits, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal propound themselves, to those that (according as they are commanded)
will do good with their goods while they live: (for of all other grace^, the
grace of Charity and Bounty, has the most, and primest promises of reward, to
us and ours, both here and hereafter:) I should not doubt of prevailing, with
the flintiest heart under heaven, to delight as much in giving, as ever he did
formerly in getting; were it but only for his own ends: for which see Part 4.
for what concerns the reward of this excellent virtue; I intend to keep till
toward the conclusion of all: as a dainty dish, for the closure of a homely
feast.

CHAP. IV.
NOw because method to the matter, is as fashion to apparel, and form to
building. As also, for my better proceeding, and the Readers more clear
understanding of what follows: I will reduce what I have to deliver upon this
Subject, to one of these heads. Viz.

1 The necessity of this duty, 2 The persons of whom it is required, 3 They to
whom it must be performed, 4 What, we are to give: 5 How, we are to give: 6 How
much, we are to give: 7 When, we are to give: 8 Why, we are to give: 9 The
means enabling to it, 10 The ends to be propounded in it, 11 The impediments
that hinder it, 12 The Remedies, 13 The Uses.
These thirteen comprize the whole matter, and therefore shall limit my speech,
and your patient attention. So the journey being made known, we set forward in
order.

The first particular, that requires to be taken up and viewed is, the
necessity of this duty.

Now that to give to those that are in want, and to help and relieve those that
are in misery and distress; is a duty enjoined, and not left to us as a thing
arbitrary and indifferent, appears in many particulars.

First, these works of mercy, are absolutely required; and straightly enjoined
in the Law of God; which is the rule of righteousness, and with great
earnestness pressed and urged in the Gospel; as the fruits of our faith, and
testimonies of our love to God, and our neighbor.

Precepts out of the Old Testament, enjoining the same, are such as these. Thus
says the Lord; Deal thy bread to the hungry, leave for the poor, that he may
eat. Bring the poor that are cast out into thine house, when thou see the
naked, see that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh. If thine enemy hunger, give him bread to eat: and if he thirst, give him
water to drink. Thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy
poor brother: yea, though he be a stranger, or a sojourn^^, but thou shall open
thy hand wide unto him, and shall surely give or lend unto him sufficient for
his need in that which he wants, that he may live with thee. Beware that
there be not a thought in thy wicked heart, or that thine eye be evil against
thy poor brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the Lord against
thee: thou shall surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou
give unto him, Deuteronomy. 15.7.10, to 16. Levit. 19.10. and 23.22, and 25: 35.
Isai. 58.6, 7. Prove. 25.21. with many such places.

And the like in the New Testament, as Give to him that asks thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou away. Give alms of such things as
ye have, etc. He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none: and
he that has meat, let him do likewise. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, etc.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. See that ye abound in this grace,
also: namely, in a liberal contribution toward the poor, Luke 3.11. and 6.34.
and 11.41. Romans 12, 20. Matthew. 5.42. 2 Cor. 8.7. to which I might add plenty;
for the Scriptures no less abound in precepts of this nature; then silver did
in the days of Solomon.

Yea, this duty is charged upon us with such strictness: that if we have not
any thing to bestow, we must by our labor get somewhat to give, unto our poor
brethren; whereby they may be relieved in their necessities. And if we have no
superfluity, we are charged (if their wants be extreme) to sell our goods, and
possessions; that we may have to give unto them, Luke 12.33. As we see it also
practiced in the Primitive Church, Acts 4.34.

Now has God so strictly commanded this duty; and shall not we make conscience
thereof. The Lord by Moses, but spoke to the Rock, and it gave water to the
thirsty Israelites: he but commanded the clouds to rain down Manna, and the
wind to bring them in Quails, for the satisfying of their hunger; and they did
so. Yea, he but bade the Ravens bring bread, and flesh to Elijah; and they did
it. And shall we be harder then Rocks? more insensible and rebellious then the
senseless Clouds? more inhumane then the Ravenous fowls? Certainly, they that
obey not the voice of their Maker, and Redeemer: are more stubborn then the
very Wind and Sea, Matthew. 8.27. Worse then Lions, Dan. 6.22. Or Bears, 2 Kings
2.24. Yea, less compassionate then fire it self, Dan. 3.27. Again, Is it not
he (as Hannah speaks) that makes poor, and makes rich? that brings low, and
lifts up? that raises the poor from the dunghill, to set them among Princes?
and makes them to inherit the throne of glory. Do we enjoy all things through
Gods blessing? and can we think to keep our riches by disobeying his
Commandments? But

CHAP. V.
SEcondly, God has not only commanded it but so, that without it there is no
being saved. There needs no other reason of our last, and heaviest doom; then
ye have not given, ye have not visited. For at the great and dreadful day of
judgment, the upshot of all, or main point which Christ shall scan will be:
you have, or you have not showed mercy to his poor members, Matthew. 25.35, 36,
42, 43. Mark it, I pray you; for so does the reward of everlasting happiness,
through the free grace and goodness of God belong to these works of mercy;
that the doing, or neglecting them, is accompanied with eternal blessedness,
or endless misery: for the sentence of absolution; or condemnation shall be
pronounced either for, or against us, accordingly as we have performed, or
omitted them. To those that have fed the hungry, clothed the naked, visited
the sick, etc. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, from the foundation of the world: and contrariwise, to those that have not
done these works of mercy, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his angels. But for the further confirming of this;
hear how terrible Saint James the Apostle of mercy is, to those Monsters among
men, that live without bowels, James 2.13. There shall be judgment without
mercy, to him that shows no mercy. To which may be added that of our Savior
with the same measure that ye mete with all, it shall be measured to you again.
Luke 6.38. And that of the Wise man, Who so stops his cares at the cry of
the poor: he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard, Prove. 21.13. In
vain they cry to us for charity, and for mercy we shall cry in vain to God.
Thou have not been merciful, says Basil, and thou shall not find any: thou
have not opened thy gates to the poor, and Heaven gates shall be shut against
thee: thou have not given them a morsel of bread, and the bread of life shall
be denied thee. But to add weight to the former Scriptures. Our Savior has
given several imstances, that we may the rather lay it to heart. Dives would
not give Lazarus a crum of bread here, to assuage the pinching hunger of his
body: therefore Lazarus shall not give Dives a drop of water hereafter to
quench the thirst, and cool the heat of his scorching soul. And the like in
that cruel servant, Matthew. 18. who for want of showing mercy to his fellow, as
his Lord had done to him; was delivered to the tormentors, and cast into hell:
Verse 28. to the end of the Chapter, which I would wish all cruel and
unmerciful men to read, and lay to heart; if ever they look to be saved. As
take notice, I beseech you, and for ever remember; that although his Lord had
immediately before been moved with compassion to loose him, and forgive him the
whole debt: yet now he has his pardon cancelled, because he would not show
mercy, as he had found mercy; this new sin of his called all the rest to
rememberance. O that all cruel, and unmerciful Naballs would hear, believe and
lay this to heart, before they feel the truth of it, in those everlasting
flames with Dives and that unthankful and unmerciful servant. And certainly,
were not men stark mad, or at least dead drunk with the love of their money:
the very consideration of this alone, would be a sufficient motive to stir them
up, to the doing of these good works, though there were no other reason: for if
we either love Heaven, or fear Hell; if we would be everlastingly rewarded, or
would not be everlastingly punished and tormented; If we desire with
unspeakable considence and joy, to appear before our gracious Savior, and to
our inestimable comfort, hear that blessed sentence, or would not be astonished
and perplexed with that horror and guilt, which shall make us to cry out to
the Hills and Rocks to fall down and cover us, from the presence of our
terrible Judge: we will spare some thing from our superfluities; yea, if need
require, even from our necessaries, that we may relieve and cherish the poor
distressed members of Jesus Christ.

And thus we see that unmerciful men shall be cast into Hell, not only for
hurting the poor, but for not helping them: not for taking away their bread,
drink, and clothes; but for not giving these things unto them, which shows what
a few, what a very small number of them that call themselve: Christians shall
go to Heaven, according to those sad Predictions, Matthew 7.13, 14. John 5.19.
Revel. 20.8, and 13, 16. Isaiah 10.22. Romans 9.27 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 4.4.
Ephesians. 2.1, to 4. Phil. 3.18. John 8.44. and 14.30. And yet there is scarce a
man of us, but thinks, or at least hopes that he shall be saved; so deceitful
are our hearts, and so subtle is Satan.

CHAP. 6.
BUt Thirdly, lest what has been said should not be sufficient to convince
men, of the necessity of this duty. Lo, God the chief Owner^ has only
entrusted men, as his servants and Stewards, with what the^ have; not giving
them full authority to dispose thereof at their pleasure^ but has limited them
to employ the same to those uses, which he hat^ appointed and determined in his
Word, for his honor and service; (...) which this is one of the chief, that
they give some considerable portic^ of them, to the relief of the poor.

Men may flatter themselves, and pretend their goods are their own, ^^d
therefore they may dispose of them at their pleasure, and choose ^hether they
will give ought to their poor neighbors or no, be their ^ants what they will:
But they shall one day find: that their riches are ^ot absolutely their own;
but Gods talents, which he has committed ^^to them, not to mispend them in
satisfying of their wordly and carnal ^^sts; but to employ them to the best
advantage, for the honor of their ^aster, and the good of their
fellow servants, according to that of the ^^postle, ^. Peter 4.10. As every man
has received the gift, even so let him ^inister the same to others, as good
Stewards of the manifold grace of ^od. And the like, Luk, 16.12. Where our
Savior having exhorted us, (...) make us friends of the unrighteous Mammon
adddeth: And if ye have ^ot been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own? plainly intimating that the riches which
we possess, ^^e not our own but Gods; and only entrusted unto our disposing,
as Stwards (...) his family. As Stewards, I say, to dispense and lay them out,
and not Treasurers to lay them up and hoord them in our Chests. Or if as
^easurers, yet not to reserve them for our own use; but for the service of
(...) Sovereign, and the good of our fellow servants. We are not Owners, ^^^^r
Almaners, Stewards not independent Lords of what we do possess. We ^^ve only
the use and disposition of what God has lent us.

He that is the great Lord and Master of this great family (from whom the
highest cause, riches and all other good things are derived unto us, d^every
inferior creature) has ordained all for the common good, ^^d commanded them
to be communicative. The Moon borrows her ^^^t from the Sun, not to keep but
to give the same unto the dark corners the Earth: the takes from the Sea, that
she may give to the lesser ri^es. The liver ministers blood to the heart, the
heart ministers spirits to (...) brain, the brain to the whole Microcosme. So
my pen your substance, ^^d what ever gift or talent any one has, are all given
us for one end, to (...) good withal. We have every one our talents more or
less, how hap^^^ are we if we improve them well, to his honor that gave them.
Now ^^d is honored, when as we bestow the wealth which he has committed ^^to
us, according to his appointment. It is the honor of a good Master, ^^^n by
his care and providence the house is so well governed, that every ^^ficer
performs his duty in his place, and all the Family have food ^^venient, with
all other necessaries belonging to them. To which pur^^^ our great Lord and
Master, has preferred some to be his Stewards; ^^^o whom he has committed his
goods: not that they should appro^^te them to their own use, but that they
should wisely, justly and cha^bly dispense and dispose of them, for the good of
all the household. (...) howsoever by virtue of their high place and office,
they may take themselves as it were a double portion, and that which is
sufficient not only for nature, but for the due maintenance of their person,
an^ not for necessity alone, but also for their honest delight; (unless it b^^
that this their allowance be necessarily to be shortened, to supply the
ex^^tream necessity of others, who need their help) yet their Lord and Master
requires of them that they communicate so much of their goods, a^ they can
well spare from these uses, to relieve and sustein others of the^
fellow servants; who want such things as are needful for their relief a^^
maintenance. Which who so neglect, and either riotously spending an^ wasting,
or nigardly and miserlike keeping and hoording up these goods do suffer the
poor to starve for want of necessaries: they do herein exceedingly dishonor
God, when those who are without, see the servants of hi^ family perish for want
of food. And let such know, that a day will come; when as like Stewards they
shall be called to a reckoning, and b^ forced whether they will or no, to give
an account before God, his Saint^ and blessed Angels; how they have used their
Lords talents. According to that of our Savior, Luke 16.2. Give an account of
thy stewardship, for th^^ may be no longer Steward. And if we have incrased,
and doubled them by delivering them to these bankers the poor members of Jesus
Christ; then shall we hear that comfortable sentence pronounced by our Lord;
Well done, thou good and faithful servant, thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things, enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord, Matthew. 25.21. But if contrariwise we neglect those charitable uses, which
our Lord has enjoined us, and neglecting the poor, do spend our Masters goods
in excess and riot; if then, instead of feeding the hungry, and clothing the
naked, we bring in account so much spent in dainty fare and gorgeous apparel,
so much in stately buildings, and costly furniture, so much in rich jewels and
needless vanities, so much laid out on Hounds; Horses, Hawks, and Harlots, so
much consumed in gaming and revelling, in Plays and Interludes, so much spent
in needless Suits of Law, in giving bribes; and entertaining rich friends; and
in a word so much prodigally, foolishly, and wickedly wasted in the pleasures
of sin, and voluptuous delights; or so much miser-like hoorded up and hid in a
napkin: then shall we hear that fearful sentence, which will make our hearts to
ache, and our joints to tremble: Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou said,
thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I have not
strewed; thou ought therefore to have put my money to the Exchangers, that
then at my coming I should have received mine own with advantage; take
therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him that has two talents, and
cast ye the unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25, 26, 27, to 31.

And certainly, we must unreason our selves, before we can think that God has
caused this inequality of estate amongst men: because he respects the rich,
and neglects the poor: and would have them pampered with all superfluities,
and delicious dainties; and the other starved with want and penury: but hereby
he would exercise the diverse graces which he has given to his Church and
people: as namely, the charity, liberality, and fidelity of the rich in
dispensing of his talents; and the faith, affiance, and patience of the poor;
that being approved, both might be crowned at the day of Christ's appearing,
according to that of Basil, Why, says he, do thou abound with riches? and
he want necessaries? Surely that thou might receive the reward of thy
faithful dispensation, and he also after many conflicts and victories, might
have the reward and crown of his patience.

The wealth of the rich, is given them to supply the necessities of the poor;
as the wealth of the seven plentiful years, supplied the want of the seven
barren. Our cups run over with David's, Psalm 23.5. and why run over? but that
they may run into others empty vessels; that the poor may partake of our
redundancies. He gives us all things richly; and this is to enjoy, not to
hoord, much less to waste. Is it fit that some should be hungry in Gods House,
and others drunk, as at Corinth, 1 Cor. 11.11. and not rather that our
abundance should be a supply of others wants: that there may be equality, 2
Cor. 8.10, 14. As in the case of Manna, which was a type of this; The Lord
would not allow that those who had gathered much, should keep and hoord up
their super fluity: but he enjoined them to communicate of their greater store
to them who had gathered less, the which the Apostle applies to the giving of
alms out of our abundance, to those that want, 2 Cor. 8.14. That now at this
time your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance might
be a supply for your want, that there be equality, as it is written: he that
gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack.

And thus you see, that justice binds us to give alms, because we are not the
absolute owners, but only Stewards of Gods gifts: for it is required of a
Steward that he be found faithful, in laying out to every one, according to the
mind and will of his Lord and Master. But see this further demonstrated for.

CHAP. VII.
FOurthly, to some part of thy goods, each poor Neighbor has an absolute
right: as you may see, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. and 24.19, 20, 21, 22. Leviticus 19.
Five particular things were appointed for the sustenance of the poor and the
stranger: to wit, three things out of every Corn-field in Israel: first, a
corner of the field; secondly, the gleanings, Devit. 19.9. thirdly, the
forgotten sheaf, Deuteronomy. 24.19. fourthly, all the single grapes, that is, the
grapes which grow single, and not in clusters, Lev. 19.10. lastly, a part of
all the tithes of every third year, Deuteronomy. 14.29. and 26.12. Besides the poor
needing the help of our goods are called the owners of them, Prove. 3. Withold
not the goods from the owners thereof, verse. 27. they are the owners of thy
superfluities, and it is but just to give every man his own, Neither is it more
of bounty then of duty: our alms is not more a gift, then a debt: which makes
Augustine say, that other men's goods are withheld, when superfluities are
possessed; and that to be uncharitable is to be wicked and unjust. To which
accords that of Basil; It is the bread of the hungry which mouldeth in thy
cubbord, it is the Coat of the naked, which hangs useless in thy Chamber or
Wardrobe; they are the Shoes of him that goes barefoot, which lie rotting by
thee; it is the silver of the needy, which rusteth in thy Chests: and so many
thou do injury, as thou can and do not relieve in their wants and
miseries. Yea, Ambrose says expressly, That it is alike faulty and
blameworthy; to take from the right Owners, and to deny necessaries to the
poor; when we have abundance. And therefore know, says he, That thou spoilest
so many of their goods, as thou deniest relief unto when thou art able to give
it. In which regard, the Apostle James speaks thus unto rich men; who neglect
this duty: Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. Your riches are corrupted, and your garments moath-eaten: Your
gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasure together
for the last days, James 5.1, 2. But that of the Wise man, Prove. 3.27. is so
express, that there needs no more to prove it a duty. Withold not good from
them to whom it is due; when it is in the power of thine hand to do it.

Will thou then be just, and pay every one his own; be sure to give a
considerable part of what thou have to the Poor: for they have a right to it,
and as good a right as we have to the rest: because it is ratified and allotted
unto them by the same authority; as their portion, Leviticus 23.22. Deuteronomy
24.19, to 23. For if we have right to the main estate, because God in his
bounty has given it unto us: then they have right also to the overplus which
we may well spare, by virtue of the same donation. If we are but Stewards put
in trust by the owner of all things, who has given or rather lent us the goods
of this world, to the end we should do good in this world: let us look to it
that we faithfully discharge our trust; that so we may have our quietus est,
when we give up our accounts. For God will one day say unto the unmerciful; Why
did you not give things that were mine by right, yours only by use and
dispensation? whereof you were not Proprietaries and Lords, but accountant
Stewards. And let all rich men look to it, for such play the thieves; who
having received much wealth from God, to this end, that they should communicate
the same for the relief of others, do appropriate it to their own use. For as
the Steward of a Noble man's house, receiving great sums yearly of his Lord to
this end, that he should disburse and lay it out for the keeping of his house,
and maintenance of his family; should therewith buy and purchase lands for
himself, or prodigally misspend them in banqueting and belly cheer, gaming,
and revelling; gorgeous apparel and sumptuous furniture, and in the mean time
suffer his fellow servants to starve, and perish for want of food and apparel:
or as if the Kings Almoner, should thus misspend the money and treasure
entrusted unto him, for the use of the poor: they would be counted no better
then thieves amongst men: so if they who being placed in these Offices by God,
do misspend his rich talents after the same manner; they shall one day be
arraigned as notorious thieves, before his judgment seat; and receive the
sentence of condemnation, for robbing both their Master and their
fellow servants, whom they have defrauded of their Masters allowance.

CHAP. VIII.
NOw if th^s be true doctrine, if to give a considerable part of what God has
entrusted us withal to the Poor, be a debt, it would be well considered, How
many rob the Poor of that which is their due. As o the reckoning! that many
rich men have to give at the great day of accounts for this sin, which (not for
want of Ignorance) they deemed, or rather dreamed to be no sin.

Nor are they guilty of theft alone, but also of murder: for not to relieve
them according to our abilities; and according to their necessities is to
starve them: because we deprive them of the means where by their lives might
have been preserved, according to that, Ecclesiasticus 34. The bread of the
needy is their life, be that defraudeth him thereof, is a man of blood, Verse
21. For whereas in the sixth Commandment, God forbids murder: he forbids
also the neglect of the means, whereby the life of our neighbor might be
preserved and sustained. In which regard, Ambrose doubts not to say; Si non
pavisti, occidisti. Thou have killed the Poor, if thou have not f^d them. And
aga^n, This is to kill a man, when we deny unto him, the means of preserv^ng
his life. For he is alike the cause of the faling of a staff, who p^lleth away
his hand which held it up, and he who ^^keth and casts it down^ and he alike
is the cause why the fire goes out, that withdraws the (...) which should
nourish it: as well as he that casts water upon it. The Lamp is put out, as
well by not putting oil into it; as by blowing it out: and a^^n is as w^ll
guilty of his brothers death, if he feed him not in his necessity, as if he
should kill him by violence. He that can save his neighbor from drowning and
will not: is a wilful murderer. Many of these have not bread enough to heal
their hunger; take heed thou be not guilty of their famish^ng. Yea, look upon
their necessities, as thou would have God look upon thine.

Here ends the first PART, the other seven follow. Imprimatur, Thomas Gataker.
If any shall ask, why this Treatise is cast into so many several Divisions,
and sold single? I answer, even for her sake that sells them, and others that
buy them; it faring with Books offered, as with Briefs: for let the charge be
great or small; men's bounty shall be still the same, and many peny-Books, will
sell for one of two pence or three pence price.

These Books are to be had at James Crumps, in Little Bartholo mews Well-Yard.
And at the blue Pales, over against the High Constables short of Shoreditch
Church.

THE POORES ADVOCATE. The second Part.
By R. Young, Florilegus.

Imprimatur, Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. IX.
ANd so much touching the necessity of this duty: I come now to the second
Part, or member: viz, the persons of whom it is required. For I take it for
granted, that what has been said will be sufficient, to persuade some to give;
as being so necessary a duty: and therefore it is meet, I should next prescribe
a few Rules touching it.

Viz.

Who, what, what time, and where: How, why, what helps there are.
In which particulars, they may be pleased to imitate Zaccheus in his living
Legacy: which was

1 Free, I give. 2 Present, I do give. 3 That which is worth giving, goods. 4
Just, my goods. 5 Large, half my goods. 6 Well, to the Poor.
How be it for the more full discharge, of what I promised in the beginning: I
will follow the order therein laid down in thirteen particulars, whereof one is
already dispatched; namely, the necessity of (...) duty. Secondly, the next is,
The persons to whom the duty of giving appertains: and they are all of any
estate and degree whatsoever: when they meet with poorer then themselves; at
some times, and in some cases.

But principally, this duty belongs unto Rich men: Charge them (says the
Apostle) that are rich in this world: that they do good, that they be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. The
more God has bestowed upon thee, the greater is thy debt of thankfulness; and
the greater thy due of obedience. Rich men must not only give a portion of
their wealth to good uses; but also in some fit proportion to their means. For
the Apostle would have Rich men charged, to be rich in good works: even as God
has given them all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. None are so bound
to be rich in good works, as those that are rich in the goods of this world.
For God has given them all sufficiency, in all things: that they may abound to
every good work. The thicker and greater the clouds be, the more rain descends
from them; and unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.
Who were ^i^ter to entertain strangers? then Abraham and Lot; whose substance
was so great, that they could not dwell together. And which of the
Bethlehemites should have been kind and bountiful to poor Ruth? if not Boaz; a
mighty man of wealth. Job in his great estate, had been unexcusable: had he
suffered the stranger to lodge in the street, and not opened his doors to the
traveller. And it had been no small shame for the great woman of Shunem, and
for her husband: if they had not showed themselves hospital to Elisha, as often
as he passed by. And if Gaius was such a one as they say; a most wealthy
Citizen of Corinth: he had good reason to be the host of Paul, and of the whole
Church: that is, to entertain usually in his house, all Christians resorting to
that City.

And hence it is, that the Apostle would have the Corinthians out of their
abundance; to supply the wants of the faithful that were in poverty, 2 Cor.
8.14. And that Saint John says, Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his
brother has need, and shuts up the bowels of compassion from him; how
dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3.17.

CHAP. X.
BUt forasmuch as men are rich or poor, not alone simply, but in relation unto
others: a man is to be esteemed rich, not only when he abounds with worldly
wealth, but also when he is compared with one who is much poorer; and
accordingly is to communicate of that which he has, to the relief of those who
are in greater necessity. As for example, he who is of a mean and poor estate:
must give alms when he meets with those that are in greater need, and even
those that are in great need, must communicate such as they have unto them, who
are in extreme necessity, and in danger presently to perish; unless they have
some help from others. Thus he that has but a mere competencie, to supply the
necessity of nature and estate: is to give something out of it, to relieve
those who want necessaries belonging to nature: and those who have only
sufficient for nature; are bound to give unto them, who are in great and
present extremity: unless the like necessity be imminent to them-themselves.
For the rule of justice and charity requiring; that we should love our
Neighbors as our selves, and do unto them as we would have them do unto us:
Does in the equity thereof require, that we prefer the life of our brethren,
before our estate; and that we should endure small wants, to preserve them from
suffering those which are great and dangerous. So that not only they who abound
in riches, but even those also who are of mean estate, are bound to perform
this Christian duty: as appears by the Prophet Elias: who required it of the
poor Widow of Sarepta: and by the Apostle Saint Paul, who among the good works
and qualities necessary to a widow, that would be maintained out of the
Church-treasury; requires this in express terms. If she have lodged strangers.
And albeit he did know and acknowledge, that the Hebrews had been spoiled of
their goods: yet nevertheless he sent them this exhortation; Be not forgetful
to entertain strangers, thereby showing that poverty did not dispense with
them, or free them from the performance of this duty: but that they were still
as before obliged, to practice the same according to their present ability. The
deep poverty of the Macedonians kept them not from sending to their power, yea,
and beyond their power; a liberal and rich contribution to the poor Saints at
Jerusalem. And the Baptist requires, that those who have two coats part with
one, and that they who have meat do likewise. That is, if he meet with those
that are in extreme necessity; these things being not necessary, to the
preserving of his own life and estate: he does not say, he who has but one
coat, must leave himself naked, and give it to him that had none before: but he
that has two, not only, be that has five or six, or half a score, or one out
of a whole Wardrobe: but one out of two. He that has one more then his own
need requires. And our Savior commands us, to give alms of such things as
we have: be they more or less, better or worse, Luke 11.41. And if we have
nothing to spare out of superfluity: we must sell that we have, and give alms
in cases of great necessity: and if we have nothing to sell, we must work with
our own hards, that we may have to give unto him that needs, Ephesians. 4.28.

An example hereof we have in the poor widow, which was so much commended by
our Savior Christ, for casting into the treasury her two mites, which was all
her substance, Mark 12.43. Here (as Angustine speaks) was a very little money,
but a great deal of charity. Likewise in the Apostles, who wanting silver and
gold, gave such as they had to the poor Criple; restoring him by miracle to the
use of his limbs, that so by his labor, he might get his own living, Acts 3.6.
And in our Savior Christ himself, who though he were so poor, that he lived
upon what others out of their love and duty ministered unto him, as appears,
Luke 8.3. yet he himself gave alms to those, who were in greater want; as we
may gather, John 12.6, 8. To which purpose, Ambrose says, That the
commandment of mercy is common unto all Offices and degrees, neither is the
Publican, or Soldier, the Husbandman, or Citizen, the Rich or Poor excepted:
but all are to be admonished, that they be ready to give unto him that needs.

CHAP. XI.
ANd therefore let none excuse their neglect of this religious duty; because
their means is small: but rather let this move them the more carefully to
exercise it: as being in respect of them, an act not only of charity, but also
of Christian policy: seeing this is the means whereby being poor, they may
become richer. For there is that scatters, and is the more increased: and
there is that spares more then is meet; and comes to poverty, Proverbs
11.24. And our Savior promises, that if we give, it shall be given to us
again; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, Luke
6.38. Whence it is compared to sowing of seed, 2 Cor. 9.6. and to trading. Luke
19.13. Now no man will in seedtime excuse himself for not sowing his seed;
because he has but a small quantity to spare, above that which he is to spend
for his sustenance that year: but this makes him the rather to cast it in to
the ground; that being multiplied, he may have also enough the year following.
There is none refuse to trade, because their stock is small: but so much the
more diligently they do it; that it may be increased. And therefore seeing
alms giving, is our Christian sowing and trading: let not our small means make
us neglect it: but to practice it with more cheerfulness. And so much the
rather, because we shall not only reap an earthly crop; but have also an
heavenly harvest, which will never fail us, of which in the reasons.

Neither let any man say, that this only belongs unto those who have much to
give: for that their alms are so small by reason of the meannesse of their
estate, that they have no hope it will be respected: for the Lord says not,
Give much, but he commands to open the hand wide: whether it be great or
little, and he measures the deed by the will, and the outward act by the
habit, and internal virtue: he looks not so much, Quid datur, as ex quo: not
to the greatness of the gift, but to the quantity of the store, out of which
it is given, and the largeness of the heart: which out of a little can spare
somewhat. And therefore the affection of the giver, makes the alms precious
and estimable, or vile and contemptible in Gods sight in which respect no man's
gift, as one says, is accounted small; who gives it out of a great and
liberal mind: seeing our piety is not to be measured by our outward wealth,
but by the inward riches which lies hid in the heart. It is true indeed, that
rich men give greater gifts, and mean men less, in respect of the matter or
thing given: but there is no difference in the fruit of the work; where there
is no want in the affection of the workers. For as Ambrose says, It is the
heart and mind of the giver, which makes the gift rich or poor, and that sets
the price upon all these spiritual wares. An example whereof we have in the
poor widow, who casting into the treasury two mites: was adjudged by our
Savior to have given the greatest gift, because she had the largest, and most
liberal heart; which made her to give (not like others, out of their
superfluity; but) even out of her penury all she had: as also because the rich
giving out of their superfluity; rely upon their own abundance, as sufficient
to bear them out in their bounty: whereas they who being poor, and yet give out
of their penury; do in their almsdeeds (by a lively faith and affiance)
depend wholly upon Gods providence and promises.

So that (as the Apostle speaks) if there be first a willing mind: liberallty
is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has
not, 2 Cor. 8.12. As what was Rebekaes hospitality, so much extolled by
Chrysostom? but water cheerfully afforded to Abraham's servant, for him and for
his Camels: And what does Christ require of them, that can give no more to his
poor strangers? but a cup of cold water only: protesting withal, that if they
give but so much, they shall in no wise lose their reward, Matthew. 10.42. If but
water, but a cup of water; but a cup of cold water be not slighted: as a cold
entertainment of a stranger; but be thought enough to make a poor man
bountiful, even by the best prizer of all things and actions: who can exempt
himself from this duty, under pretense of disability. Is not water a cheap
provision? a cup of water, a small quantity? and a cup of cold water soon made
ready? Let no man therefore (says Saint Hierom here, and Saint Augustine
elsewhere) plead poverty in this case:

Now what greater encouragement can there be, unto them that have little, to
give somewhat of their small store, to those that stand in need? seeing their
work is as much esteemed, and shall be as richly rewarded; as those who give
much out of their greater store. (Yea, God will be sure to increase that little
we have: if we are willing to give of that little:) If a poor man had a
gracious promise, from his Prince; that if he would lay out a few pence, at his
appointment; he should have a reward equal with his greatest Nobles; who have
in the same respect disbursed sums of great value: how readily would he part
with his small pittance? for the assuring of such rich hopes. Or if a Merchant
out of his love and bounty; should offer a precious jewel to sale, setting his
price not according to the inestimable value of the thing sold; but according
to the proportion of their ability who come to buy it, so that they who will
give somewhat out of a little, shall as soon have it; as those that will give
much out of their rich estates: how would poor men crowde to come to such a
bargain? and with their speed prevent the wealthy, in running to such a market:
but here is the like case! yea, so much better as heavenly jewels and rewards
exceed those which are earthly; and things permanent and everlasting, excel in
worth, those which are mutable, and but of momentany continuance.

Which being so, let none exempt themselves from giving, that have
wherewithal: and in case they have no better, let them afford courteous
affability, and loving language, together with their prayers to God: which
proceeding from the heart; is (as Augustine affirms) enough to make a poor man
hospital in the sight of God; and to procure for it a blessed reward. Yea, let
such above all others, practice here the French Proverb at the least: Have
honey in thy mouth, thou that have not money in thy purse. But espec^ally, let
Rich men (for this duty or work especially belongs to the wealthier sort)
like full Cisterns, let go the cock of their bounty, to the relieving of the
thirsty: for it is charged upon them in special, saying to the rich, Give in
charge that they be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.17. And so much touching the
persons that are to give: only I should add a caution or two.

For we are not to understand hereby, that all may give alms that will: but
they only who are qualified, and fitted for it, unto which is required, that
those who give have right unto the things, thus bestowed: so as they may give
their own, and not that which belongs unto others: as also that they be left
(by the positive laws of men, grounded upon Christian equity) to their liberty,
that they may dispose of that which is their own; having age, judgment and
discretion to perform this duty in some good manner. But for satisfaction
herein, I refer the Reader to Master Downames Plea of the Poor, Chap. 11, and
12. because I would not exceed. Yet let me give this hint, as the Husband shall
do well (if he be not a Nabal) to acquaint his Wife with what he gives: so the
Wife shall do well (if she have a Nabal) to persuade her Husband; in this as in
all other Christian duties; to draw together: that so joining in the work, they
may not be separated in the reward. And then in case she cannot prevail with
him; to take heed of defaming him: a good wife will not lay the foundation of
her own credit, in the ruins of her Husbands Honor.

CHAP. XII.
THirdly, from the parties of whom, we come to show the persons to whom this
duty must be performed. And herein we must make a discreet election of objects
for our bounty: that what we do give may be we^l bestowed. To which end, let
your liberality have no object but the Poor and Needy: otherwise your minds
are not rich, Isai. 58.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 15.11. 1 John 3.17. Ephesians. 4.28. 2 Cor.
8.14. Luke 3.11. And amongst these, (if our bounty cannot extend to all) we
must choose out those who are in greatest necessity; and especially such as are
most honest, and religious. For negligence and carelessness, whereby men give
they care not to whom: shows that it is prodigality, and contempt of their
money rather then their charity toward the Poor, or their love unto God that
moves them thereunto, nor is this their giving more unprofitable, then it is
foolish. For what wise Husbandman, is so free in sowing his seed, that he
casts it indifferently into all grounds fallow and manured: yea, upon the
highway, and hard Rooks, where it is sure to be lost and come to naught.

It is our Saviors injunction, When thou make a Dinner or a Supper; call not
the rich, but the poor to thy table: that is the poor rather then the rich. But
we are so far from observing this rule, that contrarily we feast the rich,
without any regard of the poor. Yea, it is a shame to see, how most men (yea,
almost every man) turn the alms they should give to the poor, in to feasts for
the rich: Never more at the table, but never less at the door; never more
sumptuous in clothing our selves, never less care for others. Rich men do
good turns to themselves, as they play at Tennis; tossing the ball to him that
will toss it to them again; seldom to the poor: for they are not able to bandy
it back. Pride cuts, and Riot shuffles, but betwixt them both, they deal the
poor but a bad game. Only the rich in faith, like full ears of Corn; humble
themselves to the poor earth in charity. Riches gather many friends, but the
poor is separated from his neighbor, Proverbs 19.4.

In all our great feasts, the guests which Christ spoke for, are left out: He
that is ready to fall, is as a Lamp despised in the opinion of the rich, Job.
12.5. But what says Hierom? It is a kind of sacrilege, to give the goods of
the poor, to such as be rich enough: let the hungry bowels commend thy charity,
not the paunches of those that are almost bursten with abundance. For as
Pythagoras says,

Alms distributed unto the indigent,
Is like a medicine given to the impotent.
But to the unneedy man to make his dole:
Is like the ministering of plasters to the whole.
Wherefore, When thou make a Dinner or a Supper, call not thy friends, nor
thy brethren, neither thy kinsfolk, nor thy rich neighbors, lest they also bid
thee again, and recompense be made thee: Neither entertain merry companions,
parasites, jesters, or tellers of news; as is usual at great men's tables: for
this is no charity or hospitality, though it be commonly graced with that
title; but it is good fellowship, or some such like thing as learned Expositors
aver. It was the saying of an ancient Philosopher, that the riches of many
great Housekeepers are like Figs, growing on the brim of a deep downfall: for
as Crows, and not men fare the better for these, so base fellows, and not
worthy men have the benefit of those. And a late Divine writes, that
entertaining of Nimrods, Esaus, Ishmaels, and those devouring Dromedaries,
their followers: is but a mock-poor, or rather the poison of hosp^tality. We
read that Abraham and Lot received Angels in the likeness of men; a great
honor of hospitality: but these rather receive Devils in the likeness of men.
Nor do they seldom prove to their entertainers, like the sword which cuts the
scabberd that preserves it; or the Ivy which eats up the tree, and undermines
the wall that supports it.

CHAP. XIII.
IT was hospital^ty when Abigail relieved David and his followers, with two
hundred loaves, two bottles of Wine, and five Sheep ready dressed; with other the
like. When Shobi Machir, and Barzillai brought beds and basins, and earthen
v^ssels, and diverse kinds of victuals for him; and for the people that were
with him, hungry and weary, and thirsty in the Wilderness. When Job did not eat
his morsels alone, but made the fatherless eat thereof, and warmed the poor
with the fleece of his sheep. When the Israelits in their feasts and good
days, sent gifts to the poor, and portions to them for whom nothing was
prepared. When Martha, and others received our Savior into their houses; and
gave him kind entertainment. Finally, it was hosp^tal^ty which God required of
them that would keep a true religious fast, Isai. 58. To deal their bread to
the hungry, to cover him whom they saw naked, and not to hide themselves from
their own flesh: and unto which Christ exhorted his Host, Luke 14.12, 13, 14.
When thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind:
and thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just. So that if we
would be blessed in our bounty, the poor must be the object of it; For they,
(and not those before spoken of) are the ground, in which the seed of
beneficence must be sown, if ever we mean to reap an harvest of happiness.
They are the bankers, to whom we must deliver Gods talents; if we would have
them increase in our Masters estimate; and so receive the gracious reward of
our faithful service. Finally, these are Gods Factors, unto whom if we deliver
our goods; the Lord himself will acknowledge the debt, and will surely pay us
with great advantage.

Whereas they, the streams of whose bounty do run another way; may well impair
by their expenses their present means; but they cannot thereby increase their
future hopes: they may perhaps among men, have the praise of their munificence
and liberality; but they shall not by God, be approved for their cost: nor when
they give up their account, be blessed in their bounty.

Or in case thou do keep some days of feasting and joy, for thy friends and
rich neighbors, as the Jews did, Esther 9. As God gives us leave and liberty,
according to the places and times where^n we live; and according to our estate
and calling, to make such feasts of civility and gratitude, of peace and
reconciliation, of friendship and acquaintance; as Abraham made, the same day
that Isaac was weaned: As Isaac made to Abimdech and his followers; A^ Laban
made at the Marriage of his Daughter; As Samson made at his Wedding; As the
sons of Job made one to another, and their sisters. And as Saint Ambrose now
and then, to the Governors and Consuls of Millain. But always with this
proviso, that we be not disabled by them, from being bountiful to the poor and
needy; be sure to observe two things. First, exceed not like Nabal, who being
but a private man, made a feast like a King. But rather imitate Socrates, who
when he had bid many Rich men to Dinner (his wife Xantippe being ashamed of the
small and mean preparation that he had made) said; Be content wife, for if our
guests be sober and virtuous men, they will not dislike this cheer: and again,
if they be riotous and intemperate, we are sure they shall not surfeit.

Secondly, in case thou make a feast, as the said Jews did; be sure thou
forget not to do as they did, let the poor have part with thee, Esther 9.22.
whom if we remember effectually, and to some purpose at such times: then all
these Feasts shall be clean unto us: as Saint Augustine discourses in his
second Sermon, de Tempore. It was a good Law the Romans had, That no man
should presume to make a public Feast: except before, he had provided for all
the poor in his Quarters, as Patritius reports.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt of Poor there are two sorts; Gods poor, and the Devils: impotent poor, and
impudent poor: The poor upon whom we should exercise our beneficence, is the
honest labourer, and the poor householder; who either through the greatness of
their charge, or badness of their trade; crosses, losses, sickness, suretiship,
or other casualties; being brought behind hand, are not able in the sweat of
their face to earn their bread: or the blind and maimed, the aged and
decrepit, the weak widows, or young orphans: which are either past their
labor, or not come unto it: these are principal objects of bounty, and he that
is godly and discreet; will rather give to those that work and beg not, then to
those that beg and work not: For according to the Apostles rule, They that will
not labor must not ^at: but rather the law is duly and with severity to be
executed; which though it may seem sharp, yet it is full of mercy to the honest
poor, who might be more liberally relieved, if these idle devourers did not eat
up their portion, and would above all be merciful to those miscreants; if by
wholesome severity, they might be reclaimed from their wickedness; seeing
hereby they should be pulled out o^ the jaws of the Devil, and preserved from
falling into fearful condemnation. To which purpose Augustine says, It is
better to love with severity, then to deceive under show of lenity: and to
withold bread from the hungry, if being sure of his victuals he neglect
justice; then by giving unto him, to make him rest securely in his
unrighteousness. The sluggard that will not labo^ur in Summmer; Solomon says,
shall begin Winter, and have nothing. Nor is every lewd lazel of the canting
Commonwealth, a fit altar whereon we may offer the sacrifice of our
alms-deeds: but such as are so through necessity, and not of choice. For there
are many sturdy beggars, and vagrant Rogues; the blemish of our Government, and
a burden to the Commonwealth: which kind of poor, are not to be maintained
in their wicked courses: For to feed them is to fat vermin, to feed Mice and
Rats, and Polecats; yea, it is to feed vice it self, to whom they make
themselves servants, and therefore most wisely and equally do our Laws punish
with a mulct; those that do relieve such Vagrants: for these are not the poor,
but the wo^st robbers of the poor; we may rank them with Usurers, Inclosers,
Ingrossers, and oppressing Landlords: For this is the reason why the poor
indeed do want it; because these connterfeits do snatch it. Men that labor
hard, often lack bread for their families: while these that refuse all work,
are full.

As work they will not, he that before he gives them relief sets them to
labor; shall never after find them at his door: Such beggars are thieves and
robbers; because they steal their labor from the Church and Commonwealth,
which is as profitable as land or treasure; and take the meat out of their
mouths which are the true poor. Among these beggars, I martial the riotous
spend-all, as well as the lazy get-nothing.

Affected poverty is odious, that which is of Gods making justly, challenges
our relief, a poverty of our own making deserves no pity. He that susteins the
lewd, maintains and feeds not his body but his lust. Now considering Gods Law,
that every man should eat his own bread, and that he who will not labor,
should not eat; and that our indulgence is the nurse of their idleness; (who
though they be idle Drones that feed upon the common spoil; get m^re by lying
still in a corner, then an honest poor man does by his labor) we make their
sin our own by maintaining them. And they that look for a reward of their
charity toward them: shall be answered with, Who required this at your hands?

Besides, they come to pilfer, not to beg; and only then beg, when they cannot
pilfer. Again, these are Rogues bred, the greatest part whereof are an
uncircumcised generation; unbaptized, out of the Church, and so consequently
without God in the world: they have nothing in propriety, but their licentious
life and lawless condition: they have no known father or mother, wife or
children; but a promiscuous generation, who are all a kin; and yet know no
kindred; nor house, nor home: no law but their sensual lusts, or some wicked
orders of their own making, fit to maintain them in their inordinate courses.
Men without Religion, Order, Ordinances, Faith, Hope, etc. Or if baptized,
scarce any of them ever come to know what Christianity means: the Church and
they are everlasting strangers; only they wait without when the Sermon is done.
Yea, they be generally given to horrible uncleanness, they have not particular
wives, neither do they range themselves into Families: but consort together as
beasts. Or if they do marry, it is without a Minister or Magistrate: and so
divorce themselves without a Canonist, they need no Ecclesiastical censures,
they excommunicate themselves from all Assemblies, etc. I speak not to harden
your hearts, but to rectify your hands.

CHAP. XV.
TRue, we must see none perish for want either of food, or raiment. Job 31.19.
Saint Peter, would have the believing Jews, to honor all men: and Saint Paul
commands the Galathians, to do good unto all men: and commends the Corinthians,
for their liberal dist^^bution not only to the Saints, but also to all men: and
prays for the Th^ssal^nians, that the Lord would make them to increase and
abound in love, one toward another, and toward all men. And therefore as God
causes his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall; even upon Rebels and
Rep^obat^s: so we must do good unto all men, even those that are unworthy, if
in extreme necessity. And we shall sin no less in not giving, then they shall
do in their unworthy receiving: for as they commit a kind of sacrilege, in
diverting our bounty from those who are truly poor unto themselves: so we, if
we keep in our hands the goods of the poor unbe^^owed, under the color of
these pretenses; our keeping of them, is no less sacrilegious, then their
receiving them.

A good Christian like a good stomach, will deal something to the weakest and
remotest members: that they may the better do their office. And indeed, why are
we set at the upper end of the table? but that having well cut to our selves,
we should set down some to them that sit below; that they also may eat and be
satisfied, and praise the Master of the Feast.

Yea, admit they be Foreigners, or indeed Heathens; for even every man is thy
neighbor, though a wicked man or an Heathen, that needs thee. And in reason,
if Aliens and Infidels were to be ha^boured by the Jews, under the Law; how
much more ought they to be received and entertained by us Christians, under the
Gospel?

Objection, Yea, but they are ill-condition'd and unthankful.

I answer, does not the fault rather lie in thee? perhaps thou think it such
a mighty business, when thou give them a little money or meat: that ever
after they must be thy slaves, and think they can never crouch, nor be thankful
enough, or if otherwise, all are not so: therefore give to them that be
thankful and well-condition'd; and lay not the blame upon those, who are
innocent, as Basil speaks, Ne transferant culpam in insontes. Secondly, One
man's fault, must not dispense with* another man's duty: thou art unthankful to
God, yet he gives; so must thou. Yea, they are therefore called alms, because
we also give them to those that are unworthy. And again, only the want and
penury of the poor man, makes him fit to receive an alms, etc. Neither do we
give to the manners, but to the man: nor do we take compassion on him for his
virtue, but for his misery. Sixthly, let us know, that if God should take the
same course with (...); as we do with the poor, and examine our merits and
deserts, before h^ would bestow his gifts upon us: we should never have our
requests granted, but hopelesly perish in our wants and miseries. Lastly,
consider, that though the poor be unworthy to whom thou give: yet God is
worthy for whose sake thou give. And if thou give in obedience to his
commandment; though it be cast away in respect of the party who receives thy
alms: yet not unto thee who bestowest them; and though in respect of their
unthankkfulness and wickedness, thou may justly complain with the Prophet in
another case: that all that thou have done for them, is in vain: yet thou
may also conclude with him, that thy judgment is with the Lord, and thy
work with thy God; who will in no case suffer it to go unrewarded.

Yea, but they are such as have wronged me.

Answer. Christian beneficence requires, that we should give not only to those
that are ungrateful and do us no good; but also to such as are enemies and do
us hurt: and so full of mercy and Christian Charity ought we to be; that our
good deeds (as occasion serves) must not only extend unto our poor neighours
and strangers; but even unto our enemies, according to that, Romans 12.20. If thy
enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give him drink: An example whereof we have
in the good Prophet Elisha; who would not suffer the Aramites to be smit with
the sword; but contrariwise caused them to be relieved in their necessity:
whereby he so won their love, that they came no more to invade the land of
Israel. Yea, give to such to choose, for so shall thou show more charity; and
have a greater reward: for we are commanded to feed a hungry enemy, and have a
blessing promised for it in special, and this is to imitate God, who loved us
when we were his enemies.

CHAP. XVI.
HOwbeit if we will walk by rule, though we do good unto all; yet must we not
unto all alike: for to the distressed Saints, and members of Christ; such as
show forth holiness, Orthodox and sound Christians; we must double our
liberality as Elkana gave Hannah a double portion; For if we are even for
natures sake, to succor a sinner: then much rather are we to relieve a Saint;
because besides his humane nature, he has also a certain divine nature in him.
He is not only a creature, but a new creature: not only a son of Adam, but a
child of God; and a fellowmember with us of Christ's mystical body. Therefore
we ought herein to imitate God, who though he be good to all, Psalm. 145.9, 14,
to 17. yet not to all alike, 1 Timothy 4. who is the Savior of all men, specially
of those that believe, Verse 10.

Again, what more seemly then where God gives his Spirit, and best gifts? there
to multiply our chief collations, whence those several expressions of the
Apostle, distributing to the necessities of the Saints, Romans 12.13: Do good
unto all, but especially to the household of faith, Gal. 6.10. And of our
Savior Christ, In that you have done it to any one of these; ye have done, it
to me, Matthew. 25.40.

Therefore, as Joseph gave better entertainment to Benjamin, then to the ^est
of his guests; because he was his brother; not by the fathers side only; as
they were: but also by the mothers: so we should make more of those, which are
children with us, not only of the same God by creation, but also of the same
Church by belief and profession: And as there is another manner of use of
things holy, and of things common; of the Lords day, and of the other days of
the week: so a difference is to be made between true Protestants, and other
common Christians.

Again, as liberality must be showed generally to all; specially to the
faithful: so more specially to those that suffer for their profession of the
Gospel, and true Religion. Whence Asa and Hezekiah Kings of Judah, received
willingly those strangers that came to them out of Israel; when their Kings
would have constrained them to commit Idolatry. But most chiefly and above all;
to Ministers and Divinity Readers, persecuted or banished for teaching and
defending the faith of Christ. As who deserved more to be fed by Ob^diah? then
those hundred persecuted Prophets of the ^^rd; 1 Kings 18.13. How could the
widow of Sarepta, have better bestowed her slender provision? then in
sust^ining poor, hungry, and half starved Elias. And why? it is for Gods sake,
that they are killed all the day long, and counted as sheep for the s^aughter,
Rom, 8.36. But withal, heed would be taken, that instead of true Prophets and
Orthodox Ministers; we entertain not seducing Heretics, and false teachers:
who like the Scribes and Pharisees do plant error and superstition; and
supplant true Religion* Concerning whom we have this negative precept of Saint
John; If there come any unto you, that b^ing not this doctrine: receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed; 2 John 10.

Nor can we be too circumspect in this case, for they are mo^e pernicious to
the soul; then traitors are to the State: They be like Horsleeches which suck
blood greedily; not to ease, or cleanse the patient, but to satisfy their own
bloody thirst, under a color of feeding* and curing men's souls; they impoise
and kill them; in stead of converting they pervert their hearers; dealing with
them as an ill Physician wi^ his Patient: that purges away the good humors,
leaving, the bad behind or as V^rmine do by Po^^try, that suck out the best
blood from them: and leave only the refuse; their notions being worse, then so
many infections bits: for as those cause all the wholesome food a man has
eaten, to be vomited up again; so it self is cast up withal: whereas their
false doctrines drive out the truth; as one nail drives out another and stirks
fast in the room. Falsehood after truth is like Aloes strewed upon honey: a
little whereof takes away all the former sweetness. Yea, such a seducer shall
be able in one week to undo, and make void, whatsoever a faithful Minister has
built up, and established in the hearts of his hearers, with great pains in
many years: whereas what they plant is like to last; for they so ranckle and
fester the affections of their hearers; that they leave no probability of their
being reduced. A seducers teaching, is like Circes potions; too strong for all
antidotes; and the condition of their Proselytes, like the Kings Evil, that
none but God himself can cure. And one main reason is, they are no sooner fallen
in with these false teachers; but the Toad of prejudice against their true
Pastor is engendered in their brains: Yea, now they have such base thoughts of
all Orthodox Ministers, that they turn the deaf ear to whatever they shall
speak. It is a chief principle in the art of seducing, to wind themselves into
favor; by working the more worthy into disgrace: and having so done, the next
is ^o interdict them hearing in all public Assemblies; and reading Books that
are not made by them. A cunning tric^ to keep ignorant souls from starting;
which they have learnt from the Pope; who will not allow the Laity to read the
Bible, or hear the word preach^: And the Turk who denies to his subjects both
all kinds of learning and dispute about religion. And this is the cause why
scarce one of a thousand, that once falls into the clutches of a false teacher;
ever returns again. But of this by the way only.

In the next place, there is r^spect to be had, to what a man has been: as it
a godly man be fallen into decay, that has been in great prosperity; in case
he keeps his wonted integrity: to him we should be the more bount full and
respective; which is but to do as we would be done by: for we are both more
sensible of our present misery, by remembering our former happiness: and also
more tender and delicate, and so less able to bear it. The memory of former
happiness, makes the present misery more deplorable; which like dead beer, is
never more distastful then after a banquet of sweetmeats. For Bajazet, to
change his Seraglio for a Cage: For Va^erian to become a footstool to his proud
foe: (...) calainities able to sink a soul deep in sorrow!

I might further show in sundry particulars, in what order we ought to proceed,
in doing these wor^s of mercy, in cases of extreme necessity: and how we ought
to prefer our ^^ives (next unto our s^lves) before all whatsoever, our parents
before our children, and these with the rest of our family, before all others;
our spiritual kindred and benefactors, before them who are only of our kindred
in the flesh; our k^^dred before common friends and neighbors; and these
before strangers, and strangers also before enemies. So that if our liberality
cannot through the straitness of our estates, extend to all sort^: then must we
stretch it as far as we can, according to this order. Which is to be understood
if they be in other things alike; that is, in want and poverty, and like in
piety and honesty: for otherwise we must relieve those who are our enemies,
being in extreme necessity; even before our own children, being but in ordinary
want: and those who are religious and virtuous, being further off; before those
who being vicious and graceless, are nearer unto us. And so when we are linked
unto any, in many bonds and relations: we are to prefer them before any of
those, to whom we are bound in some one particular, if they be not our parents,
or under our own charge and government: as a godly kinsman before one who is as
religious, but nothing a kin unto us: or a kin unto us, but not so virtuous and
religious; a kinsman, neighbor and benefactor; before either a kinsman or
neighbor, or a benefactor singly and alone.

And how in such also as we are conally obliged unto: We may without partiality
put a difference, As it is said: John ^1.20. The Disciple whom Jesus loved; the
Word by whom all things were made, loves all he made, yet men, more then
unreasonable creatures; and his Saints more then other men, and his chosen
Apostles more then other Saints, and John more then other of his Apostles: and
^e may safely do in this case, as our Savior did. But I pass it for fea^ of
surfeiting my Reader.

Neither let any dream, that th^^^st of Saints whom Christ most deerly loves;
are so exempt from misery, that they may not want or be in necessity: nor
mis-judge of them, in case they fall into great poverty; as Jobs friends did of
him when they saw him so sorely afflicted. For the Apostle lays it down as a
duty, that we should distribute unto the necessities of the Saints, Romans 12.13.
So that even Saints, may be in so great necessity; as to stand in need of
relief. And our Savior tells us, that the wicked at the last day; shall be
indicted and arraigned, cast and condemned; for not relieving Christ in his
members, Matthew. 25.41, to the end, so that it does there appear, that even
those who are so deer to Christ, that their case he accounts his own; may
nevertheless in this world be in a needy condition, viz hungry, thirsty,
naked, sick, and in prison, Romans 8.35. Famine and nakedness, are also in the
catalogue of those many evils, which befall not only the worst of men, but the
best that live: Heb 11 Howbeit by so much more are wicked men, in the greater
want; by how much they are destitute of those things, that can least be spared:
namely, grace and Gods favor: this is the disconsolate condition, of thousands
of poor people in the world.

CHAP. XVII.
ANd so I pass from the third general, viz. the persons to whom we must give;
to the fourth which is what we are to give. Wherein two things are chiefly
considerable: the first is, that what we give must be our own, and the second
that it be worth the giving.

First, let what thou give be thine own goods, justly gotten; Zaccheus did
not give until he had first restored. It is the chiefest charity, to do justice
to every one: so resembling Marcus Curious, a noble Roman, a man of singular
wisdom and honesty: who having vanquished the Samnites, Sabines, and King
Pyrrhus; divided to every one of the people, forty acres of land, and as much
to himself and no more.

None more charitable then Job, yet if he had not been an upright and just man
also, Job 1.8. his charity had never been esteemed of. For to rob some, and
relieve others: is to offer unto God the hire of a whore, or the price of a
dog, as the Scripture styles it: both which are abomination to the Lord; Deuteronomy.
13.18. according to that, Proverbs 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked, is
abomination unto the Lord. And God himself professes, I the Lord love
judgment, I hate robbery for a burnt-offering, Isa. 61.8. And as he hates it
for a burnt-offering; so likewise for a work of mercy, Matthew. 6.1. Yea, he that
brings unto God, such an alms or offering of the goods of the poor, does as
one that kills the son, before the eyes of his father, as it is Eccles.
34.20. Nor is it less abominable and odious, or otherwise esteemed of honest
men. As when Henry the Third King of England; had sent a load of Freeze to the
Friar Minors, to cloth them: They returned the same again, with this message;
That he ought not to give alms of that, which had made so many poor, neither
would they accept of that abominable gift! how much less then will the
righteous God? Yea, this is so clear a case, that Selymus the Great Turk, could
see it by the dim light of corrupt nature: For when upon his deathbed, he was
moved by Pyrrhus that great Bashaw; to bestow that abundance of wealth, that he
had wrongfully taken from the Persian Merchants; upon some notable hospital for
relief of the poor: he commanded it rather to be restored to the right owners,
which was forthwith done accordingly. It was a brave resolution in David: who
when Araunah would needs have given him the threshing-floor, answered; Not so:
but I will buy it of thee at a price, and will not offer burnt-offerings unto
the Lord my God, of that which cost me nothing, 2 Samuel 14.24. And the same
should be every Christians practice: For justice and mercy, must be matched
together, according to that, Micah 6.8. Deal justly, and love mercy. And as
mercy must lay out, that which is given to the poor: so justice must first
bring it in.

The next thing to be considered in this partition, or division; is the diverse
kinds of alms, the which are principally three: giving, forgiving, and free
lending. But because I intend only to speak of the first of these, as most
conducing to the project I intend; it shall suff^ce only to name them. And so I
proceed to the quality of our alms: namely, That what we give be worth giving.
In which respect it is required, that we give to the poor things wholesome,
cleanly, convenient, and comfortable for the sustentation of their lives. For
as many of Christs-poor members, are so neglected; that many a dog is better
provided for then they are: So there are many that will give unto them such
base and sluttish food; as they would scarce offer unto their dogs. But do
these (think we) think them children of the same Father? Yea, members of the
same body, whereof Chr^sti^s the head? and partakers in hope of the same
precious promises with themselves? Or which is more, that in them they lend
unto the Lord? who j^s^ly scorneth our base refuse; yea, we lend to Jesus
Christ himself; and will we give unto him swill and swines meat? who has given
himself unto us, and vouchsafes to nourish our souls and bodies, with his most
precious body and blood! O consider this! ye that so basely esteem of the poor:
and let what you give be worth the giving: It is an honorable and generous
custom, that the Jews have: who give to the poor the b^st of what they have:
because God is to have the best; and what is given to the poor for Gods sake,
is given to God. It is to be feared, that those Jews will one day, rise up in
judgment against the most of Christians in this last, and worst Age.

It is an uncharitable charity, when men will give nothing to the poor, but
what they cannot make use of themselves. The mouldiness gives their bread, the
Fly gives their meat, the Moth gives their garments: but will Christ accept of
these for his poor members? No, he that accepts, and highly rewards a cup
of cold water, given for his Names sake; where is no better thing to bestow,
Mark 10.42. will strictly call thee to an account, for spoiling of his good
creatures.

God has given you much goods, to the end you may do much good: but you
withold them from the owners thereof, Proverbs 3.27. until they are unfit to
give, and every way unwholesome to use. But with what measure ye mete, Christ
will measure to you again, Matthew. 7.2. You give his friends, brethren and
children; the refuse of what you have: And he (when you shall stand in the
greatest need of all) at the last day; will give you the refuse of what he
has: viz. Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25.41.
Mind and remember that. And so much of the fourth general.

CHAP. XVIII.
FIfthly, as touching the manner how, what we give must be with alacrity and
cheerfulness; and not grudgingly: whence it has the title of giving given unto
it. As a gift is a free and liberal action, done willingly and cheerfully, and
not grudgingly and repiningly: the which the Lord forbids, and condemns,
Deuteronomy. 15.10. but requires the contrary often. See 1 Pet. 4.9. Be ye harborors
one toward another, without grudging. And the like, 2 Cor. 9.7. Every man as
he purposes in his heart, so let him give: not grudgingly, or of necessity,
for God loves a cheerful giver. Whence that short and pithy exhortation, Be
given to hospitality, Romans 12.13. 1 Timothy 3.2. wherein the Apostle speaks, as
Menelaus in Homer: few words, but very fit; express emphatical and
significant. For he says not here, as elsewhere, Be not forgetful to entertain
strangers: nor as Saint Peter, Use hospitality; but Be given to hospitality.
Yea, he says, not exercising, but pursuing hospitality, as Chrysostom notes
upon the place. For the word in the original, signifies eagerly to pursue and
follow it.

Christians must be given to hospitality; like Job, Abraham, and Lot: For as
the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians to follow that which is good, and the
Hebrews to follow peace with all men, and Timothy to follow after
righteousness, and the Corinthians to follow after charity: So does he exhort
the Romans to follow after hospitality. Which virtue is also by St. Peter,
commended to the believing Jews, and by St. John, commended to Gaius, and
Demetrius; and the contrary vice blamed and reproved in Diotrephes, 3 John 5,
6, 8, 9, 10, 12.

It is said, Romans 12.8. He who shows mercy, let him do it with cheerfulness.
And this the Lord chiefly respects and rewards: for so it is said, Prove.
11.25. The liberal soul shall be made fat; not the hand, but the soul and
heart. An example whereof we have in David, who was accepted for his readiness
to build the Temple; though he never performed it in act, but only had a desire
to build it, 2 Samuel 7. And in the particular case of giving alms: that if there
be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not, 2 Cor. 8.12. which chearfulnes was practiced, by
the faithful the of Church of Corinth: who were so forward in ministering to the
poor Saints, that the Apostle professes it needless to remember them of it, 2
Cor. 9.1.

A bargain is valued by the worth of the thing bought; but a gift by the mind
of the party giving: because of gifts, the mind is the best part. The gra^e of
a benefit is voluntarinesse, the freeness of the mind, and the opennesse of
the heart. Therefore Saint Paul commends the Corinthians, for that they were
willing and forward, 2 Cor. 8.10. Gods people are a willing people, Psalm.
110.3. And it is a brave thing, to be like Araunah: who had but a subjects
purse, yet a Kings heart. Wherefore do not afford thy riches, and withold thy
self, which was Cains crime: for he offered to God sua, non se; (as one says)
his goods, not himself: and therefore God rejected his oblation, Non tua des,
and te ipsum detineas: as Augustine speaks. God commands us to love mercy, not
show it only: he likes not that our alms should come from us, as drops of blood
from the heart.

It is not enough for us to do good, and to be rich in good works: unless we
be also ready to distribute, and willing to communicate: as it is 1 Timothy 6.18.
Besides, his outward works of mercy, are from an inward habit: and therefore it
is no more painful or grievous unto him to do them; then it is for the eye to
see, or the ear to hear: Yea, rather they are the delight of his soul, and it
is his meat and drink thus to do the will of his Father. Works of mercy, should
not need to be drawn out of us through the importunity of suitors: but kindly,
naturally, and readily flow from the heart, and inward fountain of bounty and
benignity.

Alms should flow from us, (as water out of a spring, as light from the Sun, a^
honey from the comb) and not squeezed from us as juice out of an Orange, or
verjuice from a Crab; so that we be glad of an opportuni-of doing good as the
Cow of yielding her milk: even seeking earnestly after an object, that we be
glad of an opportunity of showing mercy.

And he that does so, shall easily hear of some that labor hard, and yet
cannot get clothes to put on, nor bread to eat: that have rags for their
raiment, and scarce straw to lie upon: that drink water, and live on wort,
leaves, or pulse, ye^, on grains like a hog, or scraps like a dog: yea, let us
but go into some back lane, (as it is our duty, to visit the poor; that their
misery may the more affect our hearts; for things seen more feelingly affect
us. James 1.27. Matthew. 25.36.43. and we shall thereby be better able to make
good choice of objects: and the better know how to fit our alms to their
necessities, and join spiritual alms with our corporal, which will treble the
benefit, that it may make us more humble and thankful, and occasion us to burst
forth into praising of God, who has dealt far otherwise with us: to teach us
temperance and frugality; that we may have the more to give, etc.)

Or send our servant, and there he shall hear the children crying for hunger,
and the parents out-crying them, because they have no food to give them: some
lying in straw for want of beds, others drinking water instead of better drink;
another sort near starved with hunger for want of bread: or escaping that,
quaking and shivering with cold for lack of fire. Now relieve these, and those
that are yet unborn shall bless you, and bless God for you; and indeed no want
is so worthy of relief, as that which is loathest to come forth.

Neither cease there, for as the fountain sending forth its streams; first
fills one empty hole as it runs, and then goes into another: and never
cease, till it has filled all: so the fountai^ of the righteous man's bounty,
never cease to communicate the streams of his beneficence: but after he has
supplied the wants of one and many; he still seeks after more. Yea, I have
read that the Turks, are wont to send their servants abroad, purposely to
hearken among their neighbors, which of them have most need of victuals,
money, raiment: who shall condemn Christians!

CHAP. XIX.
AS what will many a rich Citizen say, (living in the heart of the City) we
know none in such want, and think also that they speak reason: for if you
observe it, the same shall be their plea hereafter, when they shall be
arraigned at the bar of Gods justice, for their abominable and detestable
cruelty. They will even answer Christ himself; Lord, When saw we thee an
hungry, or naked? Matthew. 25.44. they know no such thing, they know not, that
there are out-Parishes, so oppressed with poor; That the inhabitants are not able
(were they willing) to maintain a tithe of them. They know not what a number of
their brethren, there are kept at Tunis and Angi^r, under Turkish slavery; in
such a lamentable and sad condition, as if they were already half in Hell: who
^^gh^^^^th ease be ransomed, would rich men hearken to the grievous moans o^
their wives, or parents, that would daily come to solicit them in their be^a^f,
had the any hope to speed; they know none of this, and many the like that
scould name: as breeding up poor folks children, at least providing that they
may be taught to read and placed forth, thousands whereof are brought up, and
fitted for the gallo was only and for Hell: Nor will they inquire, nor come
where they might have seen and informed themselves, Luke 9.23. They are
willingly ignorant, but this will not be sufficient to keep them from being
hid, Depart, y^ou^sed, into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41. The righteous
considers the cause of the poor, and will seek ou^ for opportanities of doing
good: but the wicked regard not to know i^, Prove. 29.7. For it, thou did,
at least if thou were known to be a mercifulman; and not taken notice of for a
Churlish Nabal: thou would daily have such objects of charity propounded to
thee, as might justly move thee to deprive thy self of necessaries for their
relief; were not thy heart of stone, and thy bowels of brass.

I profess it amazes me! that such men's consciences will permit them a minites
rest. Nor do I wonder at any thing more, then at the seeming comfort, and peace
of conscience that some have: in that they abound in wealth, faring (like
Dives) deliciously every day, having all things in excesser, while they see,
and hear of so many that are in great extremity and want. As they cannot choose
but hear sad stories, of the great extremity of some who beg not.

Obsection. But here some (that they may the better excuse themselves) will
say, If it be so, how comes it to pass, that professors of Religion, do not by
their example teach us this lesson? for we see they are as covetons and
miserable as others: for whereas some of them have thousands, I see but little
good they do. And indeed this is an Objection that I cannot tell how to shape
an answer to it; save only that there are many professors of religion, that are
not possessors of it. They wear indeed Christ's livery, but are none of his;
neither do they know God, nor the power of Religion. For if they were indeed
converted, and had the Spirit of Christ: they could not but be merciful and
liberal, witness Zaceheus, and they in the second and fourth of the Acts. So
far forth as we are godly, we are imitators of the godly nature. But in nothing
do we more resemble God, then when we are bountiful and beneficial to all that
need our help. God delights in mercy more then in sacrifice, Hosea 6.6. And a
merciful man is stricken to the heart with the miseries of others; and is
compelled to help them if he can. The power of religion and godliness lies in
the practice of it, James 1.22. By this shall all men know ye are my Disciples,
if ye love one another, John 13.35. Every one that loves is born of God, 1
John 4.7. If we love, we will not suffer, nor can we endure they should want,
whom we love.

Again, God whose our riches are (for only our sins, can we challenge as our
own) commands us to be pitiful and merciful, 1 Pet. 3.8. Luke 6.36. Micah 6.8.
Christ was so, 2 Cor. 8.9. Isai. 25.4. Matthew. 15.32. Mark 8.2, 7. And his
precept to all believers is, Learn of me, Matthew. 11.29.

Believers did so, in all ages, Cornelius gave much alms to the poor, Acts
10.1, 2. Paul did so, Acts 24.17. Dorcas was full of good works and alms deeds
which she did, Acts 9.36, 39. The good woman in the Proverbs stretched out her
hands to the poor and needy, Prove. 31.20. Job was a father to the poor, Job
29.16. and 31.16, to 21. Zaccheus was a miserable, wretched, and covetous
extortioner: but when he was converted, he became as liberal. Half my goods I
give to the poor, Luke 19.7, 8, 9. The Primitive Christians sold their
possessions, and goods; and parted them to all men as every one had need, Acts
2.44, 45. and 4.22, to 38. 2 Cor. 8.14, 15. The believing Corinthians were
willing, even above their power, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4. And the like of Abraham, and
Lot, and Boaz, and many others mentioned in the word. And indeed all that are
truly converted and godly. The righteous shows mercy, and gives, Mat. 5.7.
Col. 3.12. Psalm. 37.21. So that if a man be uncharitable and unmerciful; he
cannot be of the number of the faithfin, however he may slatter himself. And
indeed how are we like Christ and his people; if we have not the same mind,
and spirit, and heart they had: if we walk not in their steps, and do not as
they did? It was the very end why Christ gave himself for us; that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works, Titus 2.14. And therefore, If we have not given our
bread to the hungry, and covered the naked with a garment; God will not own us,
let our profession be what it will, Ezekiel. 18.16. And no marvel, for if we be
uncharitable, we obey not but flatly deny the Gospel, 2 Cor. 9.13, 14. and
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.

Thus I might proceed and make it also as plain: that he who has no true
charity, has no true faith, no true wisdom, no well grounded hope, peace of
conscience, or any other saving grace whatsoever. And that all such a man's
religion is vain, impure, false, hypocritical; where mercy to the poor is
wanting as a companion: nor has he any right or title to any of those gracious
promises, which are tendered by Christ in the Gospel, but I think it fit, to
presume no further upon your patience. So having answered these two Objections,
I proceed.

CHAP. XX.
IN the next place, look not always to be solicited by those that are in need,
or by others in their behalf: The liberal man does daily seek out occasion, to
put his charity in practice. A man given to hospitality, will not stay, till
the needy obtrude themselves upon him, and crave entertainment, but he will
seek, and invite them as Abraham did. Nay, he will in a manner compel them, to
enter into his house, if out of modesty and bashfulness they do refuse it. As
Lot pressed upon his guests greatly, and the Shunamite constrained Elisha to
eat bread in her house. Thus the faithful have done, not only when there were
no Innes to receive and lodge strangers; but also after Innes and Taverns were
erected, as appears by the example of Lydia, who besought and constrained Paul
and his companions, to take lodging at her house, Acts 16.15. and of the two
Disciples going to Emmaus; who taking Christ for a stranger, constrained him to
tarry with them that night, Luke 24.29. It must then be the benefactors care,
to prevent with his readiness their suites, who need his help; and like the
Astrologer, he must divine at the wants of the poor before they lay them open,
imitating the Sun which gives light, heat and vital in fluence, without
entreaty. He must be like the inhabitants of the land of Tema, who brought
water to him that was thristy, and prevented with their bread him that fled:
yea, he must labor to be like our heavenly Father: Who as the Psalmist
speaks, not only gives us our hearts desire, and withholds not the
request of our lips; but also preventeth us with his blessings and goodness,
and often gives before we ask, Psalm. 21.2, 3. Wherefore what thou want in
thy hand, supply with thine beart. For,

Who kindly does small gifts bestow,
Outpoyses great with churlish show.
He gives well, that gives willingly; A Mite freely given makes a poor widow
liberal, as we may see by our Saviors estimation, or valuation, Luke 21.3, 4.
God loves both a cheerful giver, and a cheerful thanksgiver, 2 Cor. 9.7. With
God it is not how good? but how well? and with what will we do it? Man judges
by the worth of the gift, God by the mind and ability of the giver. Yea, with
ingenuous men, not the gifts worth; but the givers will is chiefly stood upon.

Besides it is of singular use in the bestowing of benefits: for as it makes
the gift much more acceptable? Nam illud beneficiam jucundum vi^turumque in
animo scias, quod obviam venit. That benefit is most delightful, and will
longest live in the mind of the receiver: which stays not till he comes to
seek it; but comes out to meet him in the midway. For it is a torment, and
heavy burden to an ingenuous mind, to crave: the which so presses the heart,
that oftentimes it makes the blood to come into the face: which, who so with
his readiness preventeth, doubleth the gift. And if this be omitted, the
benefit loses some part of its grace: because it is purchased with pain; and
comes not freely and without some cost. Nam non tulit gratis, qui cum
rogasset accepit. There is nothing dearer, then that which is bought with the
price of many prayers, and the benefactour also loses some part of his thanks:
for a benefit pierces the heart like a dart, diversely, in respect of the
diverse manner of casting it: slighty if it be cast faintly, and deeply when as
it comes forcibly, and with a good will.

Besides, it brings fingular comfort to the party giving. It is said, Chron.
29. that the people rejoiced, when they offered willingly unto the Lord with a
perfect heart: And David the King also rejoiced with great joy: Verse 9.

But if this has been omitted, to prevent suites with our readiness* Yet at
least the cheerfulness of the heart must show it self in willing entertaining
the first motion: and if our benefit have not sought out him before he sued,
yet at least let him find it when he sueth. Atque etiam dum rogat crogemus:
and let us give whilst he asks: Or if necessary occasion causes any stay,
yet let us not by any means seem to doubt, and deliberate whether we shall give
or no. For, Proximus est neganti, qui dubitavit nullamque meretur gratiam: He
that doubts, deserves small thanks, because he is next neighbor to him that
denies. Nam qui tarde dedit, diu noluit: He that was slow in giving, was long
unwilling.

CHAP. XXI.
NOw this cheerfulness shows it self in our countenance, words, and actions.
For the first, benefits are to be done with a cheerful look, a smiling
countenance, and amiablenesse of face: which flows from the former, as the
stream from the fountain. For as a merry heart, so a willing mind makes a
cheerful countenance, Proverbs 15.13. And this adds much to the grace of a
good deed: when the eye of the giver, tells the receiver that the benefit
bestowed, is a token sent unto him from a loving heart. Whereas contrariwise a
sour look, much blemisheth it: as though the hand had stolen it from the heart
at unawares, and the eye were displeased when it discovers the theft. Yea,
experience teaches, that without this, the best entertainment finds no
acceptance from the guests. For to see Manum apertam and vultum clausum: An
open hand, with a close and cloudy look; is distastful to every man. We measure
and esteem our welcome, by the face and countenance; not by the feast, and cost
of our host. One may easily destroy the force of his good deeds, either with
his churlish words, or by his grim looks, as citero observes. And as Piety is
often wounded, so hospitality may be spoiled with loo^s. Vultus indicat viru^
hospitalem. One may read in the face of a man, whether he be given to
hospitality or no. For as a man's wisdom, so an entertainers alacrity and hearty
affection; makes his face to shine, and banishes all heavy looks. But a crabbed
look like a scar-crow, affrighteth the poor, so as they cannot with any
boldness or confidence; come to ask relief, nor feed securely upon those seeds
of beneficence, which are cast unto them. Which makes the son of Sirac say, In
all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, Eccles. 35.9. Contrary whereunto is
the practice of many: who either like evil Nurses, are so hard of milk; that it
cannot be drawn from them without pain and irksomness; the which they express
by their sour looks, and wreathed and wrinkled foreheads: or else cover the
poors nakedness, and relieve their wants, as Noah's sons (with a better mind)
did cover the nakedness of their Father, with their faces turned another way.
For as some brow-beat the poor with proud, sour and severe looks: so there are
others as bad as they, who turn away their eyes and faces from them; as though
they were such an eyesore, as might not be endured, nor be looked upon without
grief and vexation.

A man would wonder to see how some men, out of a desperate resolution to give
them nothing; will not so much as look upon their miseries: lest their
conscious eyes, should check their churlish hearts, and put them in mind of
their barbarous inhumanity. But let such be assured, that as they turn away
their eyes from the poor, in the day of their misery; so the Lord will turn
away his face from them, in the day of their calamity: and as they have stopped
their ears at the cry of the poor, so they themselves shall cry, and God will
not hear them: as it is, Prove. 21.13.

Secondly, the cheerfulness of the heart, appears in our affable and courteous
language, to the party unto whom we do good: for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. And surely then are these well suited
together; Quando adjicimus bona verba bonis rebus: when we join good words with
good deeds, which is to speak to his heart who receives the gift, and doubleth
the sweetness of any benefit. Where as to show ill looks, so to give ill words
to guests or strangers: is to feed them, as the Proverb is, with a bit and a
knock.

And what ingenuous heart, would not be better satisfied and contented, with a
respective denial of a benefit; then with a contumelious grant of it? I would
rather endure some extremity, then be beholding to the alms of a Churl. Where
is a good and courteous expression, like that of Laban, to the servant of
Abraham: Come in thou blessed of the Lord, wherefo^e stand thou without,
seeing I have prepared thee house and room for thy Camels, Genesis 24.31. more
then doubles a kindness. Other notable and eminent examples hereof, we have in
Lot, and Boaz, and Abraham especially: who behaved themselves toward their
guests, though strangers; rather as receiving then doing a kindness. And
likewise in the Macedonians, of whom the Apostle testifies, that in
communicating to the necessities of the Saints: they were to their power, yea,
and beyond their power willing of themselves; praying them with much entreaty,
that they would receive their gifts, 2 Cor. 8.2, 3, 4. It is not so now; yea,
let men be prayed with much entreaty, they will not give: Yea, so contrary to
this is the practice of many, that if they do give some small relief; they will
be sure to join with their alms, proud and insolent expostulations, harsh
words, bitter and upbraiding speeches: feeding the poor, as they feed their
untaught dogs; which they would have at command: for when they offer them meat,
they do withal so sneap and rebuke them; that they dare scarcely take it, but
are ready to let it fall out of their hands and mouths, for fear of beating.
Now this turns a benefit into an injury: so that he does not so much comfort
the poor men by his gifts, as he does vex and afflict his soul with his manner
of giving, causing him in his heart to prefer a courteous refusal before a
grant that is so sour and churlish. But you may usually observe, that this
insulting arrogancy is a weed that ever grows on a dunghill; and that they are
puffed minds and base spirits, that have thus to trample upon inferiors.
Whereas misery with good natures, is made a Loadstone of mercy: it is
contrarily made a footstool for pride to trample on: and nothing so midnights
the soul of him that is fallen; as scorn and contempt: whence the Spaniards
have their Proverb: In the house of one that was hanged, we ought not so much
as to name a rope. It is no hard, nor unheard of thing; With a gift to purchase
an enemy. Nam injuriae altius quam merita descendunt. Wrongs pierce deeper then
gifts; and the memory takes faster hold of them; when as it easily suffers
these to slip out. whence that Eccles. 18.15. My son, blemish not thy good
deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when thou give any thing, Verse 16.
Shall not the dew assuage the heat? so is a word better then a gift. Verse 17.
but both are with a gracious man, Verse 18. A fool will upbraid churlishly, and
a gift of the envious consumes the eyes: for as to show ill looks, so to give
ill words to guests or strangers, is to give them good meat, and put pins
therein.

Thirdly, this cheerfulness shows it self in the manner of the action: when it
is performed readily and speedily: but of this and that more fitly, in the
seventh Head or Division: where we shall treat of the time, when we are to give
our alms. Only let me mind you of this, that with these works of mercy; we
must be sure to join the affection with the action, and the action with the
affection; the one being as the fountain, the other as the stream; the one the
root, the other the fruit that flows and springs from it. And as we are to
take heed of bare alms without mercy: so much more of naked mercy without alms
(which is that false visard, and counterfeit of mercy: wherewith Hypocrites
disguise themselves.) For as the Apostle James, speaks Chap. 2. If a brother or
sister be naked and destitute of daily food; and one of you say unto him;
Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; notwithstanding you give them not
those things which are needful for the body, what does it profit? Verse 15, 16.

CHAP. XXII.
Sixthly, the next point to be considered, is the quantity of our alms, and how
much we are to give: the which is not particularly determined in the
Scriptures: because there are so many circumstances which alter the case, that
no certain rule could be given: but it is left in some kind to the discretion
of the prudent Christian; to give according to the occasion offered more or
less, as he shall be persuaded in his mind. And therefore the Apostle
exhorting the Corinthians, to abound in this grace adds; that he speaks not
this by commandment, but by the occasion of the forwardness of others, 2 Cor.
8.7, 8. and afterward, 2 Cor. 9.7. Every man according as he purposes in his
heart, so let him give, not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a
cheerful giver. And this the nature of the work requires: for giving is a free
and liberal action: and therefore is to be done freely, and willingly, and
consequently cannot be done by all in the like proportion: because their hearts
are not alike enlarged with love and bounty.

But yet this in the general is required, that we give our alms not with a
strait and niggardly hand; but bountifully and largly: the which is employed, by
the Metaphor that the Scripture uses of scattering and s^wing seed, fitted by
the Apostle to this action of giving alms, 2 Cor. 9.6. which is usually done
with a bountiful and full hand, as also by that phrase of opening the hand
wide, to the poor and needy, Dent. 15.11. and of stretching and reaching out to
the poor, which phrase Solomon uses to express the bounty of the virtuous
woman, Prove. 31.20. And in regard hereof, the act of giving alms is by the
Apostle termed by the name of bounty, and opposed to covetousness, as being
contrary unto it, 2 Cor. 9.5. And plainly expressed, where he persuades to
this bounty by annexing that gracious promise, 2 Cor. 9.6. He that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully, and makes it to be an especial grace of
the Spirit, to abound in these works of mercy, Verse 8. and an undoubted sign
of the sincerity of our love, 2 Cor. 8.8. Whence his advice to them is, As ye
abound in everything, in faith, in word, and knowledge, and in all diligence,
and in your love toward us: even so see that ye abound in this grace also, 2 Corinthians. 8.7.

Now he only is liberal and bountiful, who distributeth what he is able, and
according as God has enriched him, as the Apostle Peter enjoins, 1 Pet. 4.10.
As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another;
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. Yea, and that we may be the more
able, and so the more bountiful and plentiful in good works: we are commanded
to be careful and diligent in preserving and increasing of our estates, by all
lawful means in acquisition and getting by our honest and painful labor in our
callings: and by our frug al husbanding, and thrifty spending of our goods;
that so having greater plenty, we may be the richer in good works. Which being
so, let every man I say, as God has enabled him do good, and they more good
then others, who have received more goods then others.

CHAP. XXIII.
BUt because this rule also may seem yet too general: for, that the quantity
and proportion is not particularly set down; the best way will be to examine
what others have done in this case: for where the Law written does fail, we
ought to observe what has been the practice of the godly, that have gone
before us. To which end take these instances, Jacob thought he could not
discharge his duty, nor express his thankfulness to God this way; except he
gave a tenth-part of his substance: his vow is of all that thou shall give me,
I will surely give the tenth unto thee again, Genesis 28.22. and his hand, did
second his tongue. Zaccheus gave half he had to the poor, Luke 19.7, 8, 9. The
Primitive Christians exceeded him, Acts 2.44, 45. and 4.22. King Alfred the
first King of the Anglo-Saxons; bestowed the sixth part of his riches and rents
upon the poor strangers of the Country; and sent every year little less to
foreign Caurches without the Realm. John of Alexandria, surnamed the Almoner,
did use yearly to make even with his revenues, and when he had distributed all
to the poor, he thanked God, that he had now nothing left him but his Lord and
Master Jesus Christ; to whom he longed to fly with unlimed and unintangled
wings. The Lord Harrington gave the tenth of his allowance to the poor, and
other good uses; besides, what he gave as he walked and traveled abroad; which
was not seldom not little. Reverend Master Whateley Minister of Banbury, also
gave the tenth both of his spiritual and temporal means; and was earnest upon
all occasions (in private and public) in pressing this duty of liberality upon
others. Bishop Hooper at his house in Worcester, had every day a great table
full of poor people appointed by course; which he fed with wholesome meat: who
were first examined and instructed by himself, or others appointed by him in
the chief principles of Religion. He was said to be spare of diet, sparer of
words, sparest of time, and only liberal in relieving the poor. Queen Anne of
Bullen, ever carried about her a purse for the poor; as thinking no day well
spent, wherein some had not fared the better for her: yea, she kept her maids
and such as were about her, always employed in sewing and working garments for
the poor: that there was neither time for idleness, nor leisure to follow
foolish pastimes: so resembling Dorcas, and the good houswife in the Proverbs,
Chap. 31.19. Master Bradford Martyr, counted that hour lost; wherein he did
not some good with his tongue, pen, or purse. Yea, in a hard time, he thought
not much to sell his chains, rings, and jewels for others relief. M. George
wisebeart a Scotch Martyr, to the end he might do the more good, forbore one
meal in three, and one day in four, for the most part; except something to
comfort nature; and would lie upon straw, in course new canvas sheets; which
when ever he changed, he gave away. Giles of Brussels Martyr, gave all he could
possible spare, to refresh some with meat, some with clothes, some with
household stuff; and withal did minister wholesome exhortation and good
instruction, to those he relieved: and amongst the rest, one poor woman being
brought to bed, wanting a bed; he sent his own bed, lying himself in straw.
Yea, when he was in prison he ministered to the rest of his fellow prisoners the
best of his fare; and contented himself with the very coursest. Doctor Tailors
custom was once in a fourtnight, to call upon Sir Henry Doyle, and others of
his rich Parishioners, to go with him to poor folks houses, and there to see
what they wanted in meat, drink, clothing, lodging, and other necessaries: and
the like to others that had many children, or were sick, being himself no less
free in his spiritual alms, as wanting other. Master Fox that wrote the Book of
Ma^tyrs, durst never deny any that asked him ought for Jesus sake: insomuch,
that when he had bought himself shoes or the like; he would give them away
before he came home, when he wanted the same himself.

Many such instances I could give you, of some that are dead, and others yet
living; that give some a tenth part of what they are able to expend, others a
fifth part, others, that had they a thousand pounds a year, would let it all go
in good uses; others that refuse to keep Coach, horse or man, or to be atany
needless expense; but live privately and sparingly; that they may the better
discharge their duty, in giving all they can spare to pious and charitable
uses: and are so far from thinking they deserve by it, that they count
themselves most unprofitable servants. But it were unfit to name the living,
and I am loath to exceed in examples recorded by others: Neither would you
allow of it, if I should be over-prolix. I wish men would learn by these
examples, and be provoked to spare something from their superfluities, yea, if
need require (as in these times there be millions in need enough) even from
their necessaries; that the poor distressed members of Jesus Christ, might be
relieved and comforted more then they are with their six pence a week, which is
but enough to keep a dog. Nor can I think any thing more dishonorable to our
Nation and Religion; then our unmerciful, and unchristian like provision for
the poor. And the time will come, that men will curse themselves, that they
kept their Coaches, lived like Lords, got thousands ill enough, and kept it as
ill: in letting millions perish or pine for want of necessaries. I believe,
yea, I know (if the Word of God be true) that it had been better for them, to
have afforded God his tithes, his subsidiae pro pauperibus; which is, as I
suppose, a portion, that may well be spared of most men. And the Jews had the
poor man's tithes, as well as the Levits. But they will heap up wealth, and
purchase land, as if they intended to share the whole world amongst some few;
and the rest were to be their vassals. But I fear they do not more heap up
riches, then they heap up wrath to themselves against the day of wrath; and
that what St. James speaks will be verified upon them, who says, Go to now ye
rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you; your
riches are corrupted, and your garments moth-eaten; Your gold and silver is
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat
your flesh as it were fire. Ye have heaped up treasure together for the last
days; Behold, that which is of you kept back from the poor, either by fraud or
cruelty cries, and the cries of them are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; Ye have
nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter, etc. James 5.1, to 6.

And whatever men deem, our own abundance can ill stand with our engagement to
others that lack. It is great injustice for us to be full, when others pine.
And let rich men look to it: for great abundance cannot be both gathered and
kept without a great deal of sin, as Erasmus observes. The poor are owners of
our superfluities, nor is it so much ours as theirs: yea, what is it other then
a plausible stealth? to feed our riot with the wants of the owners. Whence
Laurentius is bold to affirm, That the rich offend more in not giving their
superfluities, then the poor do in stealing necessaries.

Wealth does not damn the rich, but when the getting or keeping of i^ does
damnifie our neighbor or the poor. The children of Israel might freely use
Manna; but what they hoarded up, either out of distrust, curiosity, or for
wantonness; would corrupt and turn to worms.

CHAP. XXIV.
BUt yet herein, respect must be had to our ability, as Saint Peter says; Let
him that ministers, do it as of the ability which God has given him, not
above his ability. It is not required that a man wrong himself, to relieve
another. A man is not bound to pluck a thorn out of another foot, and put it
into his own. No Law requires, that a man should lie in the streets; and let
another lie in his bed. Liberality gives with discretion, and is the mean
between prodigality and avarice. A good man, says the Psalmist, is merciful,
and lends, or gives, and will measure his affairs with judgment, Psalm.
112.5. He considers wisely of the poor, Psalm. 41.1.

Now wisdom must herein be seen: First, in respect of the giver* it must be
according to his ability as Acts 11.29. and secondly, of the receivers, it must
be according to their necessity, as Acts 4.35. Notwithstanding in cases of
urgent necessity and great extremity: men are to strain themselves, and to rack
their estates above the reach of their ability; to preserve their brethren,
from being tortured in their persons, upon the rack of necessity. For which the
Apostle magnifieth the Christian bounty of the Macedonians: who even above
their ability; contributed and communicated to the relief of the poor Saints.
And this our Savior requires, Luke 12.33. Sell that you have, and give alms.
If a man want money, yet if he have money-worth that he may spare, he must sell
and give; and in some eases all, even a man's possession, as they did in the
beginning of the Gospel, Acts 4.34. And John the Baptist, Luke 3.11. requires
that he who has two coats, should impart unto him that has none: and that he
who has meat, should do likewise. Whereby is meant, that he who has more then
is sufficient for the sustentation of life, must communicate it unto those who
are in extreme necessity, and in iminent danger of perishing, as we see it
practiced by the faithful in time of persecution, Acts 2.45. where in a common
calamity, They that had possessions and goods, sold them, and parted them to
all as every man had need. Otherwise, unless it be in these cases of
extremity, it is lawful to possess not only those things which are necessary
to nature, but also to a man's estate and person: For we read that Paul had a
spare cloak at Troas, 2 Timothy 4.13. And that our Savior himself had two coats
in his greatest persecution, John 19.23.

So that except it be in cases of the greatest necessity; we must observe a
golden Mean. For we have not a sea of sufficiency, which cannot be drawn dry.
No nor yet is our estate in it self, a springing fountain, which is no sooner
empty, but presently it fills again: but it is like a pool of standing water,
or as it were a small stream, which is fed and supplied by the spring of Gods
bounty, and therefore we must not let it flow out faster then it comes in,
but still preserve the main stock, (unless it be as has been shown in cases
of great necessity) and keep the pond in a convenient fullness; letting the
overplus continually run over to good uses: for otherwise there will be an
intermission in the stream of our bounty; till the emptiness be replenished;
and too much at one time, will cause necessarily too little at another.

Wherefore, that we may constantly hold out in well doing unto the end: there
is required that an equality and proportion be observed, in discreet fitting of
our works of mercy and beneficence, unto our estate and ability; that they may
match but not exceed it.

The wise Husbandman, does not cast all his seed into the ground: but reserveth
so much at least, as will be sufficient to maintain his family; and so we must
sow not all we have, but all which we can spare; that through out indiscretion
we want not food before the time of Harvest.

Now herein is respect had to our ability, when keeping (as the Wiseman
counsels us) our cisterns and wels full: that our selves may drink of them,
and letting the overplus run abroad to others in the streets, Prove. 5.16, 17.
And this the son of Syrach advises, According to thine ability, stretch out
thine hand, and give: Eccles. 14.13. and give unto the most High, according as
he has enriched thee: and as thou have gotten, give with a cheerful eye, Chap.
35.10. An example of which Christian discretion, we have in the faithful, Acts
11.29. Then the Disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to
send relief unto the brethren. And this the Apostle means, where he requires
such an equality, as that some should not be too much eased, and others too
much burdened: but that they should indifferently out of their abundance,
supply the wants of others, 2 Cor. 8.13, 14.

It is Gods express command, Deuteronomy. 16. None shall appear before the Lord
empty: every man shall give according to the gift of his hand, and according to
the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee, Verse 16, 17. Let
every man, says Saint Peter, as he has received the gift; minister the same
one to another, as good disposers of the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. It
is said, Acts 11. That the Disciples every man according to his ability, sent
succor unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea by the hands of Barnabas and
Saul, Verse 29, 30. The Disciples in the Primitive Church, every first day of
the week; put aside by himself, and laid up as God had prospered him, 1 Cor.
16.2. Let every one then give; If he be not able to bring a Lamb; let him bring
two turtle-Doves, or two young Pigeons, what he can well spare, Levit. 5.11. Or
if he cannot do so, let him at least contribute his prayers: To whom God has
given much, he requires they should give much: where he has given little, be
will accept of a little. According to his proportion of grace, he expects our
proportion of goodness, and he does the will of God; who does the best he can
to do it. They are written in the book of Life, says Bernard, that do what
they can to do it, though they cannot do what they should.

CHAP. XXV.
ONly we must take heed, that we do not straiten our selves in our own
conceits; and make our selves believe our ability is less, then it is: for
this is the way to make God lessen our ability of what it is. It is usual for
men to say, I have little enough for my self and mine: and therefore it is not
required, that I should give to others.

To which I answer, He that is all for himself, counts all (have he never so
much) little enough.

Or secondly, perhaps thou spendest so much upon thy lusts; that thou art not
able to supply the wants of others: which is the case of thousands: for the
lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life are chargeable;
they devour all and make poor: they are able to spend thousands a year, as one
said, I have twelve thousand a year, yet I want money as much as other men. One
sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 9.18. Romans 16.18. They have sought out many
inventions, Eccles. 7.29. and those consume their estates of which afterward.

But Thirdly, do thou think that if some others (that make conscience of this
duty) had the estate; thou have: that they could not, and would not do more
good with it then thou do?

Again, fourthly, He that has but two coats, may think he has little enough
for himself: Yet Christ's bids him part with one to those that have none: and
the like to him that has meat, Luke 3.11. And the rule which the Apostle sets
down is: that a man give according to that he has, be it more or less, little
or much, 2 Cor. 8.12. If then thou have not two coats, nor wherewithal to have
them: it will serve thee for a good excuse, otherwise not: But

Fifthly, How comes it that thou think so much, but little enough for thy
self? is not this self love only? For if thy great abundance be little enough
for thee: can thou think so short a pittance as thy brother has, much enough
for him? Thou have variety of food, diverse pounds or hundreds, he has scarce
any thing: and must you allege I have little enough? The measure we mete to
supply the wants of others, is not the same that we measure to our selves, they
are diverse, and diverse measures are abomination to the Lord, Proverbs 20.10.

Yet this is the sin of the whole Land: As it was the sin of Sodom, Ezekiel
16.49. so it is the sin of England: and let us look to it; for if we commit the
same sins; we may well expect to meet with the same pun^shment, fire and
brimstone. Or which is worse, hardness of heart, and everlasting punishment,
Matthew. 24.50, 51. I fear this Nation lies under a curse for this very sin
though they see or consider it not,

The poor able to work, are suffered to beg; the impotent, aged, and sick; are
not sufficiently provided for; but almost starved, with the allowance of their
six pence a week apiece; perhaps two pence, many have nothing at all. If we had
either charity or mercy, we would think if so much be but sufficient for us; o
how far is it too little from sufficing them!

But men are generally most devillishly partial: for otherwise why could not
this Nation as well as Holland set their poor on work, and provide necessaries
for those poor not able to work? that there might be no begging here, nor just
complaint by reason of want; it is so in the Low Countries, not a man of their
own Nation begs there. I hear the Town of Maidstone, and the City of
Dorchester, and a few other places set the poor to work; and provide for them
without begging: O that London and other places would do the like! That there
be no complaining in our streets, Psalm, 144.14. If men fearing God, and hating
covetousness, were appointed to receive that, which would be voluntar^^^ given
to effect this good work: there would be stock enough to do it, and to supply
all wants. Yea, the people of this Nation have been so bountiful, that a Law
was made to restrain them: fearing that all the whole Land would be given to
the Poor. The Papists will rise up in judgment against many of this
generation: and is it not a sad thing, that they should be more forward upon a
bad principle, then Protestants upon a good one?

This were a good and blessed work, very comfortable, of great necessity,
attainable and honorable to this Nation; very acceptable to God, and to those
in want, and to all good men. Surely God would greatly bless and preserve
those precious men; that having power, should also have hearts to further so
blessed a work, and do so great good for those, who cannot help themselves. God
would give them a full reward, 2 John 8. Nor do I utterly despair of seeing it
effected: some thing and to purpose has been done already; as I heart. And my
hope is, that ou^ no less pious and charitable, then valiant and Noble
Protector; will not let it stick there: nor is my hope groundless, for it is
known, he gives more money to the poor, then any I have heard of in our days,
thousands a year! I would the rich would follow his steps. It is expected the
Lord will use him, to do great things for the good of this Nation: especially
to ease the oppressed, and to help those that cannot help themselves. The
benefit and good whereof will (I presume) more and more appear; to the glory of
God, and the welfare of this Nation, maugre all the peoples rage.

But woe to those merciless men that do hinder! (as too many instead of helping
the poor, do rob the poor. One, even a Justice of the Peace gave in his account
of the poors money five hundred pounds short, as can be proved; it were a good
deed to name him, for example to others:) or that would not be ready to further
such a work. As, consider (I beseech you) what ought to be done in this case,
what is our duty, and what will be our doom if we do not prevent it, by a
timely breaking off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by showing
more mercy to the poor, Dan. 4.27. of which Christ has given us a fair warning
beforehand, Matthew. 25. from Verse 41. to the end of the Chapter, which is a
Book-case, plain, and easy for each of us to understand, that would not feel
those flames.

It is not sufficient to give the poor something, unless they have sufficient
for their need. Thou shall not harden thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy
poor brother: but thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely
lend him sufficient for his need in that which he wants, Deuteronomy. 15, 7, 8. So
they parted their goods to all men, as every one had need, Acts 2.44, 45.
Neither was there any among them that lacked, distribution was made, according
as he had need, Acts 4.34, 35, 37. If ye give not those things that are needful
to the body: what does it profit? James 2.16. 1 John 3.17. That their abundance
might be a supply of their want: that there might be an equality, 2 Cor. 8.13,
14. I say not such an equality, for every one to have, and wear, and fare
alike: but that the necessities of every one, may be supplied. Yet it may be
observed, that when God sed his people in the Wilderness; there were among them
Princes and Rulers: God could, but would not provide more, nor better for them
then others, one meat for all. Also God prescribed a like measure, an Homer for
each man, the poorest had no less, the richest had no more. What else does it
signify to us? besides his bounty; but this: that it is the will of God; that
there should not be such an extreme inequality of living among his people,
Exodus 16.16, 17, 18. Also that we should not think any thing too much, nor too
good; for the meanest of the Saints: for Manna is called Angels food, and meat
from Heaven.

But do we in any proportion what we ought? or what the former Scriptures
enjoin? As consider, Parishes allow their poor, perhaps four pence a week for
house-rent, a penny a week for apparel and houshould-stuff, a penny a week for
washing, a penny a week for firing, a penny a week for meat and drink: an
allowance able to make their skin cleave to their bones! or to make a man's hair
stand an end that shall hear of it! If our selves were confined to this
allowance, how soon should we be weary of it? and yet if they do cry to
Churchwardens, Collectors for the poor, etc. for what is allowed them, (if
they could always have it duly paid) they must so crouch, and creep, and be so
checked and controlled; that it would make them scorn to accept of it, did not
hunger so pinch them, that they are compelled whether they will or no, not
daring to anger their good masters, for fear of being cut short of that little.

CHAP. XXVI.
FIrst, But let men take heed what they do, and how they use these poor
despised ones: for Christ and his people are one, Heb. 2.11. 1 Cor. 12.12. He
is hungry and naked in his members, Matthew. 25.42, 43. If we neglect them, we
neglect him; if we give them, we give to him, Isai. 63.9. Matthew. 25.44. and
10.40.

Secondly, The precept runs thus, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self,
Levit. 19.18. Matthew. 19.19. ( a hard lesson for men in these days, wherein the
love of many waxes cold to God and man) yet as hard as it is, Christians must
learn it: If we see one in need that cannot help himself: we are to care for
him, and provide for him in some proportion, as we would do for our selves;
else how do we love him as our selves? We are willing to share in all that
Jesus Christ has; though we deserve it not: it is but equal that he in his,
should share in what we have, though they deserve it not. We ought to lay down
our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3.16, 17. Aquila and Priscilla who for my
life, laid down their own necks, Romans 16.3, 4. If so, then are we to lay down
our estates for them: for that is less. But

Thirdly, If on the contrary, we neglect them: we our selves shall be
neglected: you have lived without showing mercy, and you shall die without
receiving mercy. Thou in thy life time have received thy pleasure, (says
Abraham to Dives) and likewise poor Lazarus pains: now therefore is he
comforted, and thou art tormented, Luke 16.25. It is the poor man's comfort, (if
he be pious) that his condition is far better then the rich misers: for if he
have but a small share in this world, the other shall have less in the world to
come.

Fourthly, They are thine own flesh, Hide not thy self from thine own flesh,
Isai. 58.7, 11. and not to supply their wants to thy power, is to be without
natural affection, 2 Timothy 3.3. yea, hereby, thou make thy self guilty of all
the sorrows, and sufferings which thy not giving shall occasion them. So that
the poor will cry against thee; and God will hear their cry, and take their
part. Psalm. 72.12. and 12.5.

Fifthly, What thou give is not lost, but lent to the Lord upon usury: who
will not only repay it with an hundred fold increase here; but with ten
thousand fold increase hereafter, Mark 10.30. Proverbs 19.17. The merciful man
does good to his own soul, Prove. 11.17. So that it is not more for want of
grace, then wit; that worldly men are all for heaping up here: since those
things are worthy most esteem, which are of most use; and that is grace, and
peace, and a good conscience: for these will stand us in great stead at all
times; now, and hereafter; and in all cases, in health, sickness, death, day of
judgment, and to eternity. Whereas wealth without grace, has no such virtue.
Indeed many will trust men with thousands, but not God: because they do not
know him, nor believe his Word.

Sixthly, We should give, because we may come to want our selves. Give a portion
to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what evil shall come upon the
earth, Eccles. 11, 1, 2. Fire may come, thieves, oppressors, sword, famine,
overflowing of waters, etc. may come: therefore make frriends by giving to the
poor, Luke 16.9.

Seventhly, Give, because to give is the way to have, Luke 6.38. as part the
fourth plentifully proves. As we sow more or less, so we shall reap more or
less. Prove. 11.25. 2 Cor. 9.6. yea, not to give, is a cause of poverty. To
withold more then is meet, tends to poverty, Proverbs 11.24, 25. He
becomes poor, that deals with a slack hand, Proverbs 10.4.

Carnal reason will be apt to allege, I would give; but I fear I shall want my
self: But the Lord says, He that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove.
28.27. In the days of famine, they shall have enough, Job 5.20. Many in these
our days, have had great estates, now they have them not; yea, they have not
bread to put in their mouths: one cause is, they did not supply the wants of
others; therefore they are taken from them, and they are in great want
themselves.

Eighthly, By being unmerciful to the poor, we not only bring the judgments of
God upon our selves, James 2.13. even all manner of miseries, Psalm. 109.8, to
16. Job 20.19, to 25. and 31.16, to 23. Amos 6.1.7, 8: Jer. 5.28, 2^. But we
bring plagues upon our posterity also, Psalm. 109. Let his children be
continually Vagabonds, and beg. Let there be none to extend mercy unto him,
neither let there be any to favor his fatherless children. Let his posterity
be cut off etc. because he remembered not to show mercy, etc. Verse 9. to 17. So
that a man cannot more hurt himself, and wrong his posterity, then by not
helping the poor members of Jesus Christ, when they stand in need, nor is there
a sorer evil under the Sun, then to love money better then our selves, Eccles.
5.13. Matthew. 25.41, 45.

As knowing therefore the terror of the Lord: we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.11.
But to whom shall I speak, and give warning that they may hear? Behold their
ear is uncircumcised, they cannot hearken. Behold, the Word of the Lord is to
them a reproach; they have no delight in it, Jer. 6.10. But who so is wise,
will consider these things, Prove. 29.7.

And now to fall in where I left of Have thou ability for unnecessary expenses?
as drinking, feasting, recreations, etc. For he only is liberal according to
his ability, that bestows no less in works of mercy, then he does in
superfluous and needless expenses, and kindness to friends: He that resembles
the Th^ssalonians, was were forward according to their ability, and rather
beyond it. Or the Macedonians, of whom the Apostle says, that in great trial
of affl^ction, their extreme poverty abounded, unto their rich liberality: for
not only to their power but beyond their power they were willing: and prayed
the Apostles with great instance, that they would receive the grace, and
fellowship of the ministering, which was toward the Saints, 2 Cor. 8.2. to 6.
And so much touching the quantity, or proportion, of what we are to give.

Here ends the second Part, the other six follow.
In charity to the Poor, (and that to the blessings of this life, all felicity
in the next may be added) these two Mites are given to the Rich.

And that it may not be thought a begging business, the Messenger is only to
leave them with your Servant, and go his way. If you please to peruse these,
and the other six Parts: both you and the Poor may have great gain by it; and
God the glory, which is all the Author aims at.


