THE People's Impartial, And Compassionate Monitor; About hearing of Sermons:
OR, The Worlds Preachers and Proselites lively painted out, for a person of
Quality; upon occasion of hearing two famous Divines, whose transcendent Wit,
Oratorie, and Elegancie, made many at their wits end with admiration!

Being a rare discovery to Vndeceive the Deceived.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex.

We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, etc.

2 Cor. 4.5. My speech, and my preaching was not with entising words of man's
wisdom; but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power: That your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, etc.

1 Cor. 2.4, 5, to 9. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive,

Joh. 5.43. See 1 John 4.1. London, printed by J. B. for James Crumpe in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard, In the year, 1657.

TO THE TRULY NOBLE, AND DESERVEDLY HONORED Sr NATHANAEL BASILE: A WORTHY
PATRON AND PATTERN OF WISDOM, JUSTICE, FORTITUDE, PIETY, AND SINCERITY.
R. Y. Dedicates this mean piece of his Labors, and wishes long life; many
followers, with increase of all grace and happiness.

The Peoples impartial and compassionate Monitor, about hearing of Sermons. Or,
the Worlds Preachers, and Proselites lively painted out; for a Person of
Quality. Upon occasion of hearing two famous Divines, whose transcendent Wit,
Oratory, and Elegancy, made many at their wits end, with admiration.
Section 1.
Much honored Sir!
ACcording to your Order, I have heard another of your famous Preachers, and
will thereof give you an account, as I promised; And so, that hundreds I hope
shall be the better for it.

The truth is, I extremely admire them both, though I honor them not at all:
The one made as rare a something, of nothing, as ever I heard. The other for
his skill in Sophistry, is (I confess) a Non-such. Both may be rare Preachers
for ought I know; but as he said of one little learned, and less modest; who
usurped all discourse at the Table: I never heard learning make such a noise:
So I never heard a solid Preacher, deliver so many words, for so little matter;
so much Oratory, for so little Divinity.

Well may these plashes of water, be held by some deep Divines: but I presume
you may gage their Divinity with one of your fingers. As for their Sermons,
(for so men call them; though no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called
gods: Nor are they more like Sermons, than Michaels image of goats hair was
like David.) I may fitly liken them to a plume of feathers, for which some will
give any thing, others just nothing. Or, if I compare them to a Nightingale
tongue pie, (as being far more elaborate and costly, than profitable or
nourishing;) it is a great Hyperbole.

Indeed as a Reverend Divine speaks; if I had no other Mistress then Nature, I
would wish no other Master then such a Seneca, Cicero, or Demosthenes: but
being a Christian, I go not to hear the rarities of human Eloquence, but the
eternal Word of God; and more to profit my soul, than to please my senses. A
wise man should (yea, a good Christian will) propound to himself some end, some
good end of his going to hear: (for he that in his actions, proposes no mark,
or main end to himself; is like a Ship that aims at no Harbor; and no wind
makes for him, that has no intended Port to sail unto, neither can he expect
any Voyage of advantage.) And to what end should any of Christ's sheep go to the
Assemblies, but to hear his voice? which is spirit and life to quicken those
that are dead in sin; and to raise up those that are therewith cast down. Yea,
the Gospel is the strong arm of the Lord; and the mighty power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. And therefore they never go
to hear it, but in hope to be the better for it: Namely, that they may have
their faith strengthened by it, or their patience increased, or their judgment
rectified, or their wills reformed, or their life and practice bettered, or
their love and zeal inflamed. But certainly, if any shall go to hear such
Preachers as these, (bear with my boldness I beseech you) to any, or either of
these ends, he shall no less sail of his expectation, then did those guests
which Caligula invited to his golden banquet; which being set before them, did
indeed delight the eye, but neither pleased the palate, nor satisfied the
stomach. Nor do such Sermons, more please the ear, then they starve the soul.
Their simple hearers, being like that Calf in the Epigram; which went with no
small appetite to suck the teats of a painted Cow. Or, rather like one, that
whets his knife upon a chalk stone; which does not sharpen, but make it more
dull and blunt.

Yea, it were well, if it were no worse; for this is to be understood of the
best of their Sermons: whereas the other may be resembled to a poisoned
fountain in the way; which the innocent and thirsty passenger seeing, is glad
to drink of; but in drinking, is sure to dye for it. Yea, how many of these
rare Preachers could I name? that serve their hearers, (had they the wit to
perceive it) as Busirus (whom Herculus slew) served the poor: who killed such,
as came to him for hospitality. Or, Theodosius the Prince, who fraudulently
called together seven thousand innocent persons, as it were to see plays, and
then sent in soldiers to slay them: For under a color of feeding, and curing
their souls, they impoison and kill them. Or, in case they be less cruel, and
do answer the hunger and thirst of an empty soul; it shall be no otherwise then
the Jews did our Savior, who gave him gaul for his meat, and in his thirst
vinegar to drink, Psa. 69.21.

But this being a truth, that transcends both the understanding, and belief of
all that are unacquainted with Satan's wiles. (Nor can it be beaten into the
brains of unbeleevers, who want the light of Gods Spirit, and the eye of
faith.) I have taken some pains, in painting out these Preachers, and their
Proselites; affirming no more then I know by grounded experience; and shall
fully confirm from the Word of truth. Which commands us to try the spirits, and
their doctrine, whether they be of God or no. Nor will you I hope, think the
time ill spent, in your serious perusal thereof. If it make you a gainer, give
God the glory.

Sect. 2.
All sorts of Preachers, may be comprised under four heads: for either they
are, Preaching Or, Non-Preaching Or, Un-Preaching Ministers.

Or, Preachers that are no Ministers. Whereof I have to deal with Non-Preaching
and Un-Preaching Ministers.

Non-Preaching Ministers, I might martial into many Bands: but the cheef are
witty and Rhetorical Preachers: and to these, will I apply my self in the first
place.

Witty and Rhetorical Preachers are such, as Preach now and then, but it is to
very little, or rather to no purpose. For, as they neither aim at GODS glory,
nor the edification and conversion of their hearers, but their own credit,
profit, and preferment: So their people are neither instructed in the mysteries
of salvation, nor any whit reformed in their lives.

Now these as preferring Abana and Pharpar before the River of Jordan, choose
rather to feed their people with the Onions and Melons of humane speculations
than with the spiritual Manna of GODS Word. Which is the cause their hearers
have such lean and hunger-starved souls. There be a world of unhallowed
Divines, that being sent to sue for GOD, woo for themselves. For all their aim
and end is, To set out their Learning and Reading, and to breed admiration of
their wit and worth. With Gnatho, they are desirous to please every man's
humor: and therefore lest their Sermons, or rather Orations, should not be
thought Learned enough; you shall have them so richly compounded of Divinity,
Morality, and Policy; with so great aspersion of all other Arts, and Dapled so
full of Authorities from Poets, Orators, and Philosophers; and so stuffed with
rich, magnificent, pompous, and painted words, well-couched phrases, Oratory
Figures, and pathetical Metaphors: (For they run all upon Metaphors; and by
their good wills, speak not without a Figure.) Together with Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin Sentences; That no Room can be afforded for Scripture. Yea, they scorn
the grave Eloquence, the stately Plainness, the Rich Poverty, that Humble
Majesty, that shines in the Simplicity of the Scripture. The contemptible
Coursnesse of Scripture Phrase grates their Delicate Ears, and offends their
Queasie stomachs. For they are not able to Peise, (and so not to Praise) how in
Fewness of words, there is Fullness of Matter: That they are Thick and Short,
Pithy and Pathetical: Breef, and yet Full; Concise, and yet Clear; Careless,
and yet Accurate. Which men, if they cannot instruct GOD, how to deliver his
mind better: yet they are not so Well pleased with the SPIRITS way of
Expression, as with their Own; when delivering their Words by Weight, and
Drawing their Notions into Knots, and Borders; placing them like Checquer, or
Fret-work; driving their Clauses to so Even a Cadency, that they fall in a Just
measure and sound.

And to give them their Due; Their Discourses are so Curiously Couched, so
Neatly Starched and set; Their Words so Ranked, and meetly marshalled, as if
they were a Kin to Him, whose Name is, Six-Hundred Sixty-Six. And yet excel
they never so much in wit, learning, order, elegancy, and phrase: Admit they
deliver their words in Wax, with a Soaring-sublimity, of high Strains, and
Choice Composures; Though it move Great Delectation of affection; Suppose they
transport their hearers with the wind of words, and floods of eloquence,
wherein is more wit than art, and more art than use: yet they are but windy,
frothy, and vain Preachers: yea, they preach no more in reality, then
Harpocrates the Egyptian, who was always painted with his finger in his mouth.
For as every sound is not Music: so every Sermon is not Preaching. A main end
of Preaching, is Converting, as the end of Fishing, is Catching. But their
Sermons tend to no such end. Well may these Cobwebs of wit and learning be
curious and admirable for their fineness of thread and work; but they are of no
substance or profit to the soul.

For admit them dainty Moral Discourses, sufficient to satisfy the most
curious car, or refined Auditory: yet they are as improper to the end before
mentioned, as were a bone for a child: for wherein is the soul benefitted, or
comforted by a witty and Rhetorical Discourse? Or, in case some do dote
thereon, do they not resemble Ixion? who embraced a cloud instead of Juno.
Their Sermons being mere breath, which vanishes so soon as seen: For as he said
of the Delphick Oracle; Quoties legitur, negligitur; It is not sooner gotten,
then forgotten: so may I of their Learned Orations. For as one nail drives out
another, so one sentence, and one Sermon drives out another.

As for their Converting of a sinner, or building up of a Christian, they know
not what it means. Yea, He appeal to their own consciences, whether in all
their lives, they have so much as civilized, or philosophized one drunken,
deboist, and vicious liver, by this their manner of Preaching: or, can any one
of their applauders say, such a man has made me an hater of vice, and a lover
of virtue? hand credo. Yet this has been familiarly effected, by mere
Philosophers upon their Disciples.

Now if they are insufficient to effect the lesser work; what probability is
there, they should accomplish the greater? of true and effectual conversion,
which is no other then a miracle: For no less true, nor miraculous, though
spiritual, is our raising up from an estate of inward corruption, to the life
of grace, then was our Saviors restoring of sight to the blind, hearing to
the deaf, speech to the dumb, health to the sick, yea, life to the dead; and
whatever in this kind he did by himself, while he lived, the same he does
still by his Ministers, through the mighty and powerful working of his holy
Spirit, with his written Word.

Sect. 3.
Nothing proved him to be God, more then his casting out of Devils: For there
is no casting out of devils, but by the finger of God, Luke 11.20. Neither is
that strong armed man overcome and ejected, but by a stronger than he, verse
21, 22. And is any stronger than he, but God alone? no verily. As for man, he
is no way able to deal with him; witness Adam in his state of perfection,
(...). And yet as then himself cast out devils, by speaking the words of
eternal life: so now his Ministers cast them out, by applying the same Word;
for every reigning sin we have, is a devil: as Basil, Austin, and Saint Gregory
affirm, 2 Cor. 4.4. John 14.30. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26. and of him that by the
power of the Word, has pride, covetousness, drunkenness, whoredom, swearing,
envy, or ignorance cast out of him, or mortified in him; we may say as
properly, as it was of Mary Magdalen, he has so many devils cast out,

Now it were a strange folly to think, that these Preachers should cast them
out, and overcome them, with the carnal weapons of their warfare, which they
borrow from men, and not from God: What cares the devil, so long as they bring
wit instead of weapons? he fears them no more, hearing the words of their
Commission, and espying them to have no courage, no power, no zeal for the
glory of God, no aim at the edification of their hearers, than an Eagle fears a
Swallow, or a Laon a Lamb: but makes answer, as he once did to the sons of
Sevah, Jesus I acknowledge, and ^aul I know, but who are ye? It is a silly Hare
that will be caught with a Tabor; and their Preaching is as prevalent to the
casting out of devils, as is the hunting of an Hare with an Ox, or as oil is
to the quenching of fire, or as smoke for curing the eye-fight.

Now we esteem things good, according as they are proper for our use. The
goodness of an Horse, does not consist in his costly trappings, and a velvet
saddle; but in his strength and swiftness. What benefit is in a gilt armor, if
it will not defend? or, to what purpose is a golden key, if it will not open
the door? Hungry stomachs like not to be fed with flashy cates, but solid meat;
whereby they accrue both strength and growth; and such as meat is to the body,
such is reading, and hearing to the soul. It is the Word of God only, which
moves the conscience, and saves the soul. And what Aristippus said of other
Sciences, and Philosophy, is more true of all other Arts, and Divinity. They
that study the other, and neglect this, are like Penelopes wooers, that made
love to the waiting-women. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power, 1
Cor. 4.20

Again, every man seeks after those that are skilful in their Art: who says
Seneca, will not rather desire a skilful Physician, or Lawyer, than an eloquent
one; so a powerful, experimental Divine, is to be chosen, rather than a witty
one: Otherwise a Minstrel, or Musician, will serve to please the ear, and
starve the soul, as well as a Minister.

As for any spiritual nourishment, that redounds to the soul from their
Sermons, they may be compared to a Bristol stone, or a Saint Martirs Ring,
which seem to some of great value, but are scarce worth a groat. Or, to
Hercules Club in the Tragedy of Menander, which was of great bulk, but the
stuffing was only moss, and rubbish: Or, to variety of meats and drinks,
curiously painted; which look as though they would satisfy the appetite, and
quench the thirst; but do only cheat the speedy-approaching traveller, of his
hungry hopes: as Zeuxis did the silly birds, with his lively limbed grapes. So
dealing with their Auditors, as Heleogabalus did, by a great number of poor
people, whom he had invited to a feast; which when they came, he set before
them nothing but meats, and drinks in their similitudes. Or, to that which
rometheus, with a great show of religious devotion, made for Jupiter; wherein
he presented the bones of two Bulls, covered with Skin and sinews, but
defrauding them of the flesh and fat. Or, to painted fire, which at the first
blush, may make a man judge it to be fire indeed: but if a man hold his hand to
it, to feel for some heat, and to make trial by the effects, a child in
understanding, will be able easily to judge, that it is but a dead image,
because the effects are wanting. In a word, they cousen the world with copper
for gold, with glass for pearl, with seeming or shadow for substance, and sell
us breath, for the bread of life, to strengthen us, and froth instead of
cordial, and celestial water to comfort us; and so cheat us, whatsoever we
give; for its dear of a farthing, that is good for nothing. And we may say of
their Sermons, as the Apostle of Idols; They are nothing in the world, 1 Cor.
8.4.

Or, if the hungry soul finds any thing to feed upon, it is but like a meal of
Grafish, where is much picking, very little meat: or, a banquet of Kick-shawes,
which neither make good blood, nor beget spirits; neither strengthen the
sinews, nor increase the marrow; but only procure lust, make the belly
flatuous, and swell the body.

I need not stand to amplify it, you find in your own observation and
experience, a great difference between these speculative Preachers, and
experimental Divines. As hear the one, that speaks spiritual things in
spiritual words, with spiritual devotion, and zeal; and you will be ready to
say, with those Disciples going to Emmaus; Did not our hearts burn within us,
while he spoke? Luke 24.32. Or, with those, Mat. 7.29. He speaks with
authority, and not as the Scribes. Or, with him the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25. Who hearing the secrets of his heart made manifest, being convinced,
falls down, and worshippeth, saying; God is in him of a truth: Whereas hear one
of these speculative Divines preach, perhaps like a Discourse of Philosophy
read, the invention, the eloquence, and the pertinency does presently move you,
and tickle your spirit, but there is nothing moves or pricketh your
conscience; for it is not to her they speak. And indeed for the most part, when
speculative men preach of practical and experimental truths, it seems to
experimental Christians, as Phormio his argument of the wars, seemed to
Hannibal, no better then dreams and dotage.

Sect. 4.
Besides, holiness in a Preacher, gives addition to the matter; and is a great
means to heighten liking in the hearer. It is much moving in an Orator, when
the soul seems to speak, as well as the tongue. Saint Austin says, Tully was
admired more for his tongue, then his mind; Aristotle more for his mind, then
his tongue; but Plato for both. And both together is more persuasive, in
working on the soul it meets with; for he that hears, has only those
affections, that the speaker gives him; and devotion kindles devotion, where it
is not, as a live coal kindles a dead one. And it is very requisite, that
Ministers should be exemplary in all they urge and teach; for the eyes of the
whole Parish are upon the Pastor; and then is there life in their doctrine,
when there is doctrine in their life: Men in this case, as in other cases of
Manufacture, except they see, they will not believe. Their eyes must be taught,
as well as their ears, Phillip. 4.9. Those things which you have both learned,
and received, and heard, and seen in me, do.

He that will cast a stone at an offender, must be free himself: before Samuel
does charge Israel with their sin, he clears his own innocence, 1 Samuel 12.
Shall a profane liver, prescribe rules of sanctity, and piety? Shall an
Officer that reforms the Tap-house, be himself found in a Brothel-house? Were
it not strange, that the Witch should tell the Jugler, he has a bad
conscience? Or, that the Hypocrite should rail at the Player? Or, the Usurer,
challenge the Thief? Or, if so, will they not retort this answer? Physician
heal thy self, Luke 4.23.

Neither is it enough for them, being converted, to be common lines in
Christianity, or pious in ordinary: For so every private Christian is commanded
to be, blameless, and pure, and as the sons of God without rebuke, Philip.
2.15. But Ministers should be as set-copies of sanctification to others, and
shine as lights, among whom they live in the world. The Apostle exhorts
Titus, to soundness of speech, and incorrupt doctrine; but above all things,
says he, show thy self a pattern of good works, as preferring them: and gives
this for his reason; that he which withstandeth, may be ashamed, as having
nothing concerning you, to speak evil of Titus 2.7, 8. And the like in his
Epistle to Timothy, Be thou, says he, an example to them in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 4.12. his very
conversation must preach. If thou will turn unto me, thou shall convert, says
God to Jeremy, Jer. 15.19. implying, that if he did not the one, he should not
the other: or, if he did some, as it is possible a wicked Minister may, yet
nothing so many. And this is given as a reason of John the Baptists so great
success, in converting of souls, Luke 1.16. He shall convert many of the
children of Israel to their Lord God, (says the Angel) why so? for he shall go
before him in the spirit and power of Elias, ver. 17. who was a zealous, and
holy man.

I deny not, but a lewd and wicked Minister, may be a good Preacher, (as no
doubt but Judas was) and so prove the means of saving others, and bringing them
to Heaven, while in the mean time himself goes the other way. Our Savior tells
us, Matthew. 7.22. that many Reprobates will say unto him at the Resurrection;
Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out
deviis, etc? whose answer shall be, I never knew you, depart from me, etc.

We see in nature, that a deformed man may beget a comely child; a fool, a
wise man; an iron stamp may coin gold; the whetstone is blunt, yet it sharpens
other things; the wind is cold, yet it makes the fire burn; the skilful Rider
will reap some service of a resty and wind-broken Jade: and shall not God serve
himself, by the worst of men, when he pleases? But ordinarily, (for we speak
not of what God can do) where the Spirit speaks twice, by illumination, and
sanctification, he is more heard, then where he speaks but once.

And that this is so, appears most plainly, by the palpable difference that is
between those Parishes, which God has blessed with a zealous, holy, and
conscientious Ministry, and those other places, that have had
good-fellow-Pastors, or Corinthian-reachers: for even in this very case, the
wholesomenesse of the place is best known by the complexion of the inhabitants.
And we know what the holy Ghost tell us, Hosea 4.9. and Isa. 24.2. Like Priest,
like People.

It is both an happy, and pleasing harmony, when saying and doing go both
together; and he persuades to virtue most, who lives best. For a Christian
conversation, is of the Scriptures the best, truest, and plainest Comment, or
Exposition. Good works are unanswerable Syllogisms, invincible demonstrations;
and it is natural for men, to follow the law of fact, before the law of faith;
a visible pattern, rather then a mere audible doctrine. Religion has a truth,
and a power in it; people will never believe the truth of a doctrine in our
mouths, where they see not the power thereof in our lives.

Pastors are the glass, the school, the book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.
The learned Pastors words, though plain;
To plain men truth may preach:
But Pastors pious practice does,
A holy life them teach.
That doctrine is divine indeed,
That by good works, proves words:
More harm do ill examples breed,
Than good words, good affords.
Briefly, we read that more Insidels were won to the Christian faith, by the
virtuous and holy lives of the Primitive Preachers, then by the doctrine which
they taught. They made the world to read in their lives, that they did believe
in their hearts; and caused the Heathen to say, This is a good God! whose
servants are so good? Nor is this all; for with what zeal or devotion, can an
unhallowed, and unsanctified Minister, press his people to holiness, exhort
them to repent and believe? or, with what affections can he pray for, and
before them? As for instance; he whose hunger has tempted him to steal a Lamb,
says but a cold grace to his supper: As for oppressors, and defrauders, how
they give thanks to God for their wealth, I refer to your thoughts, and their
own consciences. For sin is worse than a thief in the candle: or, an
obstruction in the liver. Two or three reigning sins clapped on the heels of a
present devotion, is like a sudden cold, after a violent heat: So with what
affection can a laud Minister exhort his people to holiness? when his life,
yea, God and his conscience, are continually casting his doctrine in the teeth,
with that reproach, Romans 2.21.

Besides, as by shining here in their life, and doctrine, they turn many to
righteousness: so hereafter, they shall shine as stars for ever and ever, Dan.
12.3.

Again, happy are the people that have such a Minister; whose words answer his
thoughts, and his actions his words! who are Augustines in their studies,
Chrysostomes in their Pulpits, and Timothies in their houses; that adorn the
soundness of Learning, with holiness of life.

Sect. 5.
But to proceed, for this I salute only by the way. To go about to comfort an
afflicted soul, by a flourishing style, is as much as to present a nose-gay of
Violets, to one that is starving, for want of meat. When the thirsty traveller,
after much labor and grief, spies a fountain, he rejoices; but coming to it,
and finding it dry, his joy is turned into sorrow; and he is ready to curse it
for such a mockery, as our Savior did the fruitless Fig Tree, when he was
hungry. Suppose we are thirsty, and would drink; foul, and would wash; hot, and
would be cooled; our houses are on fire, and we would have them quenched; if we
come to the well with our buckets, and find it empty, we know not whether our
grief, or indignation be greater. To conclude, an holy soul will never frequent
the Church, that has such a Preacher; but if he light upon such a Preacher in
the Church that he frequents, he appears to him like an importunate Fiddler,
that without invitation, impudently thrusts himself into his chamber, draws,
and plays, and will not be denied; he may give it the hearing, and that is an
high favor; but he dares neither reward, nor commend it.

I know there is nothing more pleasing to the carnal ear, then variety, be it
but hogs-flesh a little varied with sauce: as Flaminius was served by his Host.
And that stomachs, which within one month, are weary of Manna, set more by
sallets and sawces, and Kick-shaws, sloshes of wit, then substantial food, the
Word of God. And let such a Corinthian Preacher, speak the abortive figments of
his own brain, yet their superstitious applause shall be vox Dei, the voice of
God, and not of man, Acts 12.22. Yea, it is strange to see, how such an
Orpheus, by his melodious harping, will draw these stones, birds and beasts
after him; and what applause he shall have, it being their manner to arrogate
to the instrument, and derogate from the agent.

Yea, admit they understand not the Minister, (as many of them preach for few,
because few understand them; as Jerome speaks of Plato's writings) yet all is
one, or rather they extol him the more; as a country fellow being asked, how
he liked such a Minister? Answered, I promise you neighbor, it was a good
Sermon, but me thinks a little Latin would have edified well.

Neither is it strange, they should gain such applause, from men as carnal, and
graceless as themselves: for how easily are wanton minds wrought upon? what
wind is so weak, as not to move the fan? what toy will not win a child? A
mind forestalled with levity, is like a vessel without ballast, soon over-set.

But what is the issue? These Ministers perceiving, how this bait takes, turn
all their peoples food into sauce; and like Lucians Jupiter, spend all their
time in painting of butter-flyes wings: so turning verity into vanity, or
rather the grace of God into wantonness, while they turn the word of grace into
curiousness.

Yea, that they may excel in this kind, they will turn all their stock into
four or six Sermons, which shall serve their whole life at the University, in
London, and as they travel abroad the country; resembling some needy flaunting
Goldsmith, who has nothing in the inner room, but all on the cupboard; and
these shall be of several kinds, that they may please all humors. One whereof
shall savor of piety, that so he may act the hypocrite, when it shall make for
his preferment; the second, serve to vex the Roundheads, because that most
generally pleases; the remainder being harmless, but unprofitable, shall
resemble the herb John; which being put into pottage, gives no taste at all
good or bad, but an excellent color.

Indeed he has such a mind to lash the Roundheads, that besides a special
supply from Satan, his learned Tutour, one of those Semons shall cost him more
labor and study, than all the rest. As it is no hard matter for them to
produce Elephanti partum, a years bird, or a child of two years breeding, one
whereof is spent in the conception, another in fashioning the members; and yet
a mere Embrion when it is born, and altogether unfit for most Auditories
perhaps before some great man, or to a refined auditory: the command of some
special friend, may deliver him of it with applause, answerable to his
expectation, which is all the recompense he looks for. For though
Narcissus-like, they dote upon their own shadows, and conceit of their
Embrion-works, as the Crow of her birds, and sing plaudits to their own brain,
not only falling in love with these their conceptions, as Pigmalion fell in
love with his Ivory Image; but expect that others should commend, and admire
them for rare and excellent, as though they were found in the Phoenix nest: Yet
so reasonable are they, that the peoples acclamation satisfies them to the
full. For like the Camelion, or the beast Ignarus, they can live by the ^ire of
men's praises.

And to speak rightly, the work and the wages are very proportionable. For
proof whereof, I will instance another case, of the same nature. Not to tell
you of him that dined with the smell of a cooks meat, and paid him upon demand,
with the sound of his money: when a Jugler, by his subtle slight, threw
millet-seed a great way, thorough the eye of a needle, and hoped to have some
great reward; Alexander making no reckoning thereof, commanded one to give him
a bushel of those seed, to practice his feats withal, and to keep his hand in
ure. And methinks when these Ministers thus offer, and intrude themselves; they
are sufficiently rewarded, when they are accepted: though oftentimes they fall
short of this: for as that Prentice of Apelles, in coveting to mend the nose,
marred the face: or as Seriphus the old drudge in Naples, by coveting to mend
his blear'd eye, put it out: or as the foolish Dyer never thinks his cloth
black enough, until it be burned: so these men many times, covet so much to
gild, and set more luster on their Sermons, that they make themselves
ridiculous by it. It faring with them, as it did with Neanthus, who having got
Orpheus his harp, so jangled and jarred with it: that whiles he looked for
listening beasts, and dancing trees, he brought the dogs about his ears. So that
sometimes, the less labored pieces are best accepted; yea, accepted of by the
best. For its possible, some one or two of their Pocket Sermons, may be both
honest and profitable; and then he has great thanks, and is answerably
accommodated: As it fared with Cherilus a foolish Poet, who of a great number
of Verses, made seven good; for which he had seven pieces of gold; but for
every other a buffet.

As for their other Sermons, be they never so accurately studied, never so much
gilt over with flourishes, and querks, when they are unprofitable, and want
matter of solid divinity; having more show than force, and more ornament than
fruit: However themselves think of them, and others are taken with them, (such
hearers resembling that young scholar in Athens, who went to hear Demosthenes
eloquence at Corinth, and was entangled with Layis's beauty: (As ever the
lightheaded, are light-heeled, such Dina's will not escape deflouring) Yet the
more solid and judicious know; that a Minister with a female wit, is the worst
Hermaphradite; and that these are no more like Sermons, than a Bristol stone is
like a Diamond. And certainly those have but sensual minds, that admire them,
and but poor hunger-starved souls, that are satisfied with them.

Sect. 6.
Objection. You seem to condemn all secular learning in Sermons, and to
restrain, or at least to limit the gifts of the holy Ghost which are sundry,
and various, 1 Cor. 12.11.

Answ. Far be it from finding room in my very thoughts: for certainly, as
Solomon in building the temple, made most excellent use of Hiram and the
Sidonians, 2 Chronicles. 2.14, 16. and as the Egyptians spoils served to adorn the
Tabernacle: so the wisdom and learning, all lawful arts, and the true sayings
of the very Heathen, may be of excellent use to him that would divide the word
of God aright, and justly improve them to the honor of the giver. Yea, it
grieves me not a little, when I see so excellent a thing as Divinity is, fall
into a sluttish handling. I see no reason, that so high a Princess, should be
presented to the people, in a sordid dress: Nor that he which speaks from the
Father of Languages, should deliver his embassage in an ill one.

And I cannot but marvel, that any should dare to usurp the Chair of Paul; that
were never brought up at the feet of Gamaliel. Or, presume to ascend the
Pulpet, without study; taking more pains there, than they have done in their
Library. And could heartily wish, they would either study more, or speak less.

I speak not for rusticity, I know a good garment may be spoiled in the making.
Nor do I think it a good spirit, that persuades men to preach extempore;
looking for divine supply, in the neglect of means. True, God is able to
inspire a man with transcendent abilities; but he will not do all that he can
do: he can give an Harvest without sowing, as he did the Israelites, in the
year of Jubilee; but he will not. He could give light without the Sun, as in
the Creation; but he will not: So he could give us wisdom, and learning,
without study, as to Solomon he once did; but he will not.

Indeed the Apostles in the Primitive Church, were rare Preachers; and yet but
raw scholars: but withal, we may take notice, that they had a supply for this
defect: they were immediately inspired by the holy Ghost; yea, they were first
Christ's scholars, before they became the worlds teachers, Mark 9.31. Luke 11.2.
And therefore we ought to have the more preparation, by how much we have the
less revelation.

Nor would I have all men tied to one form of Preaching; but rather that every
man would apply himself that way, wherein he is likeliest to excel, in edifying
the Church of God; as commonly each Minister excels another some way. One
excels for force of speech, another for sound and solid arguments; a third,
for shaming of vice; a fourth, for persuasions; a fifth, is excellent for
expounding the words; a sixth, surpasses in delivering the matter; a seventh,
is happy for eases of conscience; an eighth, exquisite in determining of
school-doubts. In a word, some are judicious to inform the understanding;
others powerful to work upon the will and affections, and speak home to the
conscience.

We admire profound Austin, for questions; learned Jerome, for expositions;
pathetical Chrysostom, for amplifications; holy Bernard, for meditations;
pithy Cyprian, for persuasions; sweet Ambrose, for allusions; eloquent
Nazianzen, for moving the affections, etc.

But what is all this to these Athenian Preachers? It is one thing to salute
Athens, in our way to Jerusalem, as Saint Paul did; and another to stay there,
and go no farther: one thing to use secular learning in Sermons sparingly; I
mean to sprinkle here and there a sentence, example, or history, for ornament,
and illustration; and another thing to crowd them so full of these, that no
room can be afforded for Scripture. One thing to use flowers as men do, only
for sight and sent; and another as Bees for honey and wax: not to gild their
wings as butter-flies, but to fill their combs, and feed their young. Borrow
these Jewels of the Heathen you may, but make not a Calf thereof, to worship
and adore: the which you do in rejecting to preach the words of eternal life,
that you may vent these, together with your own frothy conceits, and
fantastical flashes of wit. And may it not be said of your Sermons, as one
spoke of a poor Apothecaries shop? that he could find no drugs therein, for
pots and boxes: Are not your hearers served like Jacob, who when he looked for
Joseph, found nothing but his party-colored coat? Are ye not like the Papists?
who neglect the Bible, which is the Tree of Life, the Word of Life, the Bread
and Water of Life, to feed the peoples eyes with pictures and bawbles, and
their ears with legends and fables. Are not your Sermons rather taken out of
Platoes Academy, than out of Christ's school? Do you not cursedly prefer the
Ethics of Aristotle, the Odes of Pindar, the Morals of Plutarch, and other
books of humane Learning, before divine testimonies? As the Psalms of David,
the Gospel of Christ, and the Epistles of Saint Paul. Much like the Council of
Trent; who preferred unwritten Traditions of men, before the written Word of
God: which is all one in effect, as if a man should cast away his fleshy arm,
or leg, and set on another of wood. For what is all humane learning, compared
with Gods Word? but like a carcass without the soul; or a mere image which
seems fair, but being looked into, is found earth. Yea, is not this as great a
sleighting of the Scripture? as for the ^ope, in the first session of the last
council of Lateran, to lay them at his f^^t.

It were honor sufficient, to admit humane learning, and all lawful Arts, as
so many ma^^s of honor, to attend this Queen of Heaven-Divinity: it is
abominable, to make her subservient to them: he is an ill host, not worthy the
name Christian, who so suffers his Inn to be taken up by strangers, that there
is not place enough for Christ, and his Apostles.

Neither is it more profane, than it is ridiculous, in preaching to use a
flourishing, and meretricious eloquence, puffed up with unprofitable querks,
fictions, and flashes of wit: God affects not Aulicismes, and Courtly terms.
Wit I love well, but I loath and abhor to hear light, garish, gaudy, and
meretricious painting in Sermons; Flashes of wit, and playing upon a Text:
which was wont to be the guise and manner of our Court or Trencher-Chaplains:
And wherein the Rean of their honor, and pride lay: Because this would more
become, or befit a Tavern, than the Majesty of a Temple.

Nor do I think it any grace, for Ministers in their Preaching, to come with
the enticing words of man's wisdom; and the rarities of humane eloquence: but
in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2.1, to
14. and 1.17, 18. Christ taught the people with authority: gravity becomes the
Pulpet.

Sect. 7.
Obj. But thy Sermons are only stuffed with Authorities from the Ancient Fathers,
Philosophers, etc. and what more commendable, than sweet and sententious
sayings?

Answ. Suppose it be so, yet proverbs are for ornament, not for the whole
stuff; pearls grace a garment, but it were a strange garment made of nothing
but pearls; much like a body made all of bones, without nerves, sinews,
ligaments, flesh, and skin; most ugly to behold. We will make thee borders of
gold, with studs of silver, Cant. 1.11. studs, and borders, the vesture it self
is made of another piece. The words of the wise are as nails, Eccles. 12.11.
and nails finish the building, other materials went before.

Indeed when proverbs are used as ornaments, Sums, and corollaries, brief and
happy conclusions, they both leave a deeper impression in the heart, and take a
stronger hold on the head. And this is to turn the water of humane knowledge,
into wine; whereas they turn all our wine into water: and are so wedded to the
Muses, that they are enemies to the Graces. For they so deprive us of the food
of life, the Scripture; (without which never any soul was converted, 1 Pet.
1.23. Psalm 19.7.) that the sense may glut it self, on their curious-pencill'd
pieces, while the spectatour shall be even chap-fallen, for want of victuals.

Nor can they pretend the least reason for their so doing: save Satan's gain,
and their own glory: For,

First, as it is more painful, to cast forth ones empty hand, than if it be
poised with some stone, or other matter of weight: so it is more troublesome to
them, and they take greater pains, in contriving these fruitless and useless
Sermons, that have in them nothing of moment; than others do, who preach
serious and solid Divinity, which converts the soul, and makes a new creature.

Secondly, they have no need to seek farther; the Scriptures are so full and
complete: It is able to make a man wise to salvation, and perfect unto all good
works; it is given by inspiration from God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction, etc. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. Yea, the
holy Ghost to make it more amiable, has given it these titles, viz. a
lanthorn, to direct us; a medicine, to heal us; a guide, to conduct us; a bit,
to restrain us; a sword, to defend us; water, to wash us; fire, to inflame us;
salt, to season us; milk, to nourish us; wine, to rejoice us; rain, to refresh
us; a treasure, to enrich us, and the key to unlock heaven-gates unto us: so
naming the word all things, that we might only desire it, instead of all things.

Men talk much of the Philosophers stone, that it turns copper into panaces
the herb, that it is good for all diseases; of catholicon the drug, that it is
instead of all purges; of Vulcans armor, that it was an armor of proof
against all thrusts and blows, and other the like: but whatsoever they did
vainly attribute to these things, for bodily good, we may with full measure,
ascribe justly to the Scripture for spiritual. Augustine, Tanta facta sunt
quanta tunc fieri debuerunt, tanta scripta sunt quanta nunc legi debuerunt, His
salubriter and parva corriguntur, and parva nutriuntur, and magca oblectantur
ingenia. Nay, (says he) the Scriptures are so fit and full, Ut in eis quotidie
proficerem, sic eas solas ab ineunte pueritia usque ad decrepitam senectutem
maximo otio, summo studio, meliore ingenio conarer addiscere.

Thirdly, their flocks (if they be wise, and godly) as newborn babes desire
only to be fed with the sincere milk of the Word, contained in the Old, and New
Testament; which are the two Breasts of the Church, that they may grow thereby,
1 Pet. 2.2.

Fourthly, God abhors that his seeds-men the Ministers, (and so they pretend
themselves to be) should sow any thing, but the immortal seed of his Word,
Mat. 13.19. 1 Pet. 1.23. 1 John 3.9. which makes him so often complain against
those false prophets, who ran when he never sent them; and spoke out of their
own hearts, and not from the mouth of the Lord, Jer. 23. his words are, He that
has my word, let him speak my word faithfully; what is the chaff to the wheat?
is not my word like a a fire, says the Lord, and like an hammer? that breaks
the rook in pieces, ver. 16.28, 29. which words speak home to them, if they had
but the grace to apply it. But let them hear the Apostle, The weapons of our
warfare, says Paul, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

Sect. 8.
Gods word may be compared to a Cannon with bullets; whereas wit and humane
eloquence, is but like a Piece charged only with powder; which may make a great
noise, but throws not down sin. The word of God is quick, and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit, and of the joints and the marrow; and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and intentions of the heart, Heb. 4.12. whence it is, the Apostle so
frequently opposes his Preaching, to these Verbalists; who preach themselves,
and not Christ; that deliver not the word of God, but Poetry, Roman History,
the sayings of Orators, Philosophers, etc. I Will give you two or three instances
of many, I wish they would mind his words: We preach not our selves, says he,
but Christ Jesus the Lord; neither do we handle the Word of God deceitfully, 2
Cor. 4.2, 5. nor have we shunned to declare unto you the whole counsel of God,
Act. 20.27. and again, When I came unto you, brethren, my speech, and my
preaching, was not with enticing words of man's wisdom; but in demonstration of
the spirit, and of power, that your faith should not stand in the wisdom of
men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2.4. and again, In declaring unto you the
testimony of God; I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ and him crucified: which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual
things with spiritual, ver. 2, 13. and again, Christ sent me to preach the
Gospel; not with the wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made
of none effect, chap. 1.17. and lastly, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ; for it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes,
Romans 1.16.

But how contrary to the Apostle are these men in every thing? They preach
themselves, and not Christ; they deliver not the Word of God, but Poetry, Roman
History, the sayings of Orators, Philosophers, etc. not in the demonstration of
the Spirit, and of power, but with the enticing words of man's wisdom, and the
rarities of humane eloquence. Saint Paul was not ashamed of that preaching
which the world counted foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18, 21, 23. But these are, yea
they dare not make use of Moses, or the Prophets, or the Evangelists, or the
same Saint Paul overmuch: lest it should be thought, they have more grace than
wit, and less learning than religion. They strive so to be accounted great
Scholars, and curious Preachers, that they are ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
and scorn to deliver things so common, counting such plain preaching, no better
than foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. though God calls their witty Preaching
foolishness, and is pleased by that Preaching which they so slight, to save
them that are saved, verse 18, to 30.

But your fine wits, who prefer their sins before their souls, care not for
such course stuff, neither can these Amnons of the people, eat other cakes,
then such as are of Tamars baking. And therefore they swarm together, to hear
an eloquent Rhetorical Preacher, as those Idolaters did, to the house of Baal,
2 Kings 18. as where the dead carcass is, thither refort the Eagles.

It has been usual for such as come in their own names, to be received, and
entertained with general applause; while they that come in Christ's name, have
been slighted, if not persecuted. Mahomet and the Pope, possess three parts of
the world: whereas they that believe the Gospel, are few in number, Romans 10.16.
Michaia delivers the truth, Zedekiah speaks falsely: yet Zedekiah is credited,
and preferred to the Kings Table, while Michaia is laid by the heels, and sed
with the bread of affliction, and the water of affliction, 1 Kings 22.6, 12,
13, 14. Among the Jews, Baal had four hundred and fifty false prophets,
maintained sumptuously: God but one true Prophet, and he was forced to hide his
head, 1 Kings 18.22. Our Savior was entertained by some few, but his opposers
the Priests and Pharisees, were adored of all, Matthew. 27.22. though indeed
their refusal of him, more strongly approved him; neigold; of Cornucopia, that
it has all things necessary for food in it; of (...) there could he be proved
the Messiah, if they had not rejected him. Paul at Ephesus, could have no
audience: the truth must not be heard; but all of all sorts, cry out for Diana,
Acts. 19.34. Yea, aul complains, that all they which were in Asia, turned from
him, 2 Timothy 1.15. and the chief Jews at Rome tell him, that his Sest is every
where spoken against, Acts 28.22. Yea, Simon Magus had so bewitched the people,
that they all took him, for the great power of God: even a Sorcerer, shall have
more disciples, and applauders, than an Apostle; Acts 8.10. How then should not
these silver-tongued Preachers; that only study to please the ear, and speak
well, not be more applauded, than those that deliver the plain truth? which
makes men become their enemies, Gal. 4.16. Especially when their hearers
relish no Preaching, except it be full fraught with secular learning, and
flashes of wit. For such as the pastor is, such are the people: Like Shepherd,
like sheep, as the Prophet speaks, Hosea 4.9.

Neither go they to Church to any other end, but as some Heirs go to the
Universities, and Innes of Court: not to get learning, law, or money, but to
learn fashion, and complement; being like Saint Austin before his conversion,
who took great delight in hearing Saint Ambrose, but it was more for the
eloquence of the words, than for the substance of the matter: Yea, as himself
confessed after repentance, being a young man, he so affected eloquence, that
in vain things he heard Jupiter thundering, and therewithal committed adultery,
Confession 2.

As ignorant Lapidaries choose stones that delight the eye, and measure the
value not by the hidden virtue of them, but by the outward glistering: so these
prefer such Sermons, as please the sense, before others which work upon the
affections, and change the heart: they are like little children, who if they
see a Corn-field overgrown with poppies, (a fit resemblance of such a Sermon)
think it very glorious, and prefer it exceedingly before other Corn, that is
clear from weeds.

Sect. 9.
But to let pass the invalidity of their judgments, I would fain know what
they are the better, for these rare, Rhetorical Sermons? Does it not fare with
them, as it did with Ezekiels Auditors? who took such delight in his Preaching,
that he was unto them, as the pleasant voice of a Musician: and they commended
him highly, but yet their hearts ran after their covetousness; as did Herod's
after his incest, for all he delighted so much in John's Preaching, Ezekiel. 33.31,
32.

You shall hear them highly commend these Sermons: Oh it was a rare Sermon! He
is an excellent man! It was the best Sermon that ever I heard! He is an
admirable Preacher, etc. But ask them what they remember of such a Sermon, and
you shall find (admit the Sermon be Indifferently mixed with pleasant and
profitable things) that such an one; like a cracked vessel, pours out of his
thoughts all the good liquor, and keeps only the dregs: His memory is not
like the Sieve, or Cullender, which casts out the chaff and water, retaining
the good corn, and herbs; but like a Searce of Lawn, which keeps in the gross
things, and lets the purer pass: Or,

Secondly, ask them, what rare effects did it work within? What wonders wrought
it in thee? What excellency, or what goodness have thou received, or gained by
it? For that is to be accounted an excellent, a rare, and a good Sermon, which
produces rare effects in thee, makes thee better than thou wast before; and
then may thou wonder, when the Preacher works wonders in thy soul. A
faithful Preacher, cares not so much for thy verbal commendations, as thy real.
Thy good conversation, is his best commendation; his commending, stands in
thine amending; and thy godly practice, is his best praise. The sheep that
says nothing, commends her Shepherd, when her skin is whole, her fleece fair,
and her self in well-liking. Likewise he hears well, that does well; he learns
well, that lives well; and he only does prove himself a good hearer, which
hears the truth in humility, believes it in simplicity, and obeys it with
alacrity. A good institution, changes both judgment and manners; as it fared
with Polemon, a dissolute young Grecian, who going one day to hear a Lecture of
Xenocrates, not only marked the eloquence, and sufficiency of the Reader, but
brought home so apparent, and solid fruit thereof, that it caused a sudden
change, and amendment of his former life. Whereas these hearers, (mark what I
say, and see whether I am mistaken) like Pharaohs lean kine, feed much, but are
never the fatter: Perhaps they have somewhat enriched their tongues, but their
lives are not a whit changed: For what is their religion? to say the Creed is
all their says; to pay what they needs must, all their equity; to give fair
words, all their bounty; to take their own, all their mercy; to carry a formal
profession, all their piety; to cry God mercy, all their penitence; and to come
to Church, all their conscience. Yea, hear they never so many of these Sermons,
they can go as merrily away, with all kind of profaneness at their heels, as
horses with an empty Coach. And when the truth of obedience, and power of
godliness is wanting, I pray tell me what difference between an Israelite, and
an Ishmaelite? a circumcised Hebrew, and an uncircumcised Philistine? a
baptized English man, and an unwashen Turk?

Yea, they are so far from being Christians, that they have not made one step
toward Christianity. The first step to Religion, is to love Religion in
another: whereas these men generally hate, scoff at, and persecute the power of
Religion, wherever they perceive it. Yea, they hate that Preaching, whereby
alone men become Christians. For let them hear a Minister, that preaches
profitably, if they can find no fault with his Sermon, at least their verdit
shall be, Oh he is no Scholar: whereas if their opinion be asked, touching any
other, suppose him a dumb dog, that perhaps has been tongue-tyed from his
birth, (like Crasus his son) they will tell you he is a great scholar, a man of
deep learning, and great knowledge; though he want utterance, and cannot
express himself, nor vent his knowledge: when the plain truth is, he has no
knowledge to vent; only these men love to justify, what God in his Word
condemns; and to condemn what he justifies, Luc. 16.15. for if men Preach
fruitlesly, they are great scholars, though they show it not: or, if they do,
though these understand it not, as one spoke of Quintilians Orator, a learned
man I warrant him, for I understood him never a word. Whereas let men Preach
faithfully, and powerfully, though they show never so much learning, they are
no Scholars. I wish men would observe this deepness of Satan, to hinder the
means of conversion, and not be led like sots, to hear all godly Preachers with
prejudice, for you shall never hear them commend a wholesome and profitable
Sermon.

Yea, these Athenians (regarding delight, not profit) will scarce have their
ears open for any thing but novelties; but will go near to quarrel with the
Preacher, if he tells them any thing they have heard before, and censure him
for a dunce, of no reading, an empty Divine, without scholarship: adding
thereto, that his speech was rude, his voice low, his words stuck like burrs in
his throat, he railed upon the Parish, speaks daggers, and aimed at some body.

Yea, if you will believe them, as they believe their Prophets, such Sermons
are not to be heard, for they drive men to despair. It is one of the many false
doctrines they teach, resembling herein the Papists, who magnify their own,
and vilify the writings of God; saying, those will make men good Catholics,
these will make them Heretics.

And no marvel, that rational men, should believe such horrible untruths, since
the wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, Romans 8.7, 8. that is, more than
barely an enemy. Again, they will not receive the truth in love, therefore are
given up to believe lies, 2 These. 2.11.

Sect. 10.
Objection. You have shown how these Preachers are not more praised by some,
than they are condemned by others; but how shall the stander by, viz. the
indifferent Reader judge, whether of them is in the right.

Ans. By their Description of vices and graces. Resolving cases of conscience.
Visiting of the sick.


First, they make a description of our graces, and infirmities, even as a
Town-cryer of things that are lost, who makes inquiry after an horse, a dog, or
the like; describing his hair, his stature, his ears, with other marks and
tokens: but bring either unto him, he knows them not. For like as one that sits
in his chair, can paint Seas, Rocks, Shelves, and Havens upon a board, and make
the model of a tall Ship to sail in all safety; but put him to it in earnest,
he knows not what to do, nor where to begin. So fares it with these Divines;
they can speak of every thing by roat, know nothing cordially, and in
experience.

Secondly, in resolving cases of conscience; let a poor distressed soul come
unto these Verbalists, to be resolved of his doubts, they are as fit to resolve
them, as the Soothsayers were to interpret Nebuchadnezza s dream, which
himself could not so much as remember; and as able to give advice, as the wise
men of Egypt were to instruct Pharaoh, touching the famine to come, who could
say just nothing, Genesis 41.8. or if they do, it is nothing but conceit, and
melancholy: you must be cheerful, avoid solitariness, drink a cup of wine, and
the like. They can help to overthrow, and cast us down; but what help is there
in them, to raise us up? there they leave us in a forlorn condition, as the
Priests left Judas, after his treason; or as the old Prophet of Bethel, left
the Prophet of Judah, 1 Kings 13.22. wherein the case of their stock is much
more miserable, than was that of the Philistines, when they were in a quandary
about keeping the Ark: for they asking counsel of their idolatrous Priests and
Divines, were so far forth, and so well instructed, that thereby they were
freed from a temporal judgment, 1 Samuel 6. but these as S. Peter speaks, are
wels without water, 2 Pet. 2. they can afford no spiritual refreshment to the
thirsty soul.

Thirdly, let one of these witty Preachers be sent for, to visit a carnal man
upon his deathbed, and to fit him for his departure, (as some being sick, dare
adventure to take Physic of an Horse-leech) either he has nothing to say, or
nothing to the purpose: for as it is impossible to order the body aright,
either in sickness, or in health, without the certain knowledge of our
complexion, age, and strength, and unless we mark in what parts it is most
weak, or strong; that accordingly choice may be made both of meats in health,
and of remedies in sickness: So concerning the soul, whereas he can neither
judge of a man's spiritual estate, nor apply a fit remedy; but like a silly
Emperick, administers one and the same potion, to a burning Fever, and the cold
Palsy; one plaster to an old issue, and a green wound: for you shall hear him
tumble out the sweet Promises of the Gospel, without annexing the condition of
Faith and Repentance; or, if he name the condition, it shall be without
examining the parties estate, or declaring what Repentance or Faith means.
Though indeed if he should do all this, I would fain know, what comfort a
distressed conscience can receive from one, that although he talk of God,
Heaven, and Hell, yet he seems to believe neither? as appears by his
viciousness, or lukewarmness.

Now are not these simple Divines, who think themselves rare Preachers, because
they are good Orators? when the conversion of a soul is no other than a new
Creation, who think with earthly balms, to cure the strokes of Heaven; by the
strength of their own plots, to bind the hands of Omnipotency; and by the
fineness of their little wits, to supplant the counsels of an infinite wisdom.
Well may they (like the Popingay, that braved it in her borrowed feathers, like
the Ass, that jetted it in her Lions Skin, or like the Ape, that skipt up and
down in her Masters Jacket) be lifted up in their minds, and swollen with vast
thoughts of themselves: (for it is only an overflowing conceit of their own
abilities, which makes them to love whatsoever is theirs.) But others know them
unworthy to speak out of a Pulpet: for notwithstanding their great flourish,
yet their people perish for want of knowledge; as if darkness be on the hill,
what light is in the valley? Yea, they abound in swearing, and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, because there is no knowledge
of God in them, Hos. 4.1, 2. Well may they be great Scholars in humane
learning, (as oftentimes the most effectual means are applied to the ends
least to be desired, which is a misery) but they are dunces in divinity; at
least their understanding in experimental Divinity, is as little as their
presumption is great. Deprive them of secular learning in a Sermon, or
argument, and they are as weak as a Bull-rush. Yea, you put them to a nonplus,
as Muncastor a famous Schoolmaster, did a Scholar of his at Greenwich, where
he, and diverse of the Queens Chaplains were at breakfast; who being bid to
crave a blessing upon the creatures, answered after much pressing, that indeed
he had a grace for dinner, and another for supper, but he had none for
breakfast. He which speaks by roat, and not out of the abundance of his heart,
is soon drawn dry.

What comparison then (even in the judgment of malice, and testimony of envy
it self) between these, and a solid Divine, whose heart is a Comment upon the
whole Bible, and who has the holy Ghost to teach him, even the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.10. They may think themselves without compare, as those
shallow-headed Verbalists, Acts 17.18. to 22. under-valued Saint Paul; not
thinking him worthy to carry their books after them for learning, because he
did not in like pompous manner, and with such oftentation, set forth himself.
But it was only in conceit, wherein alone pride consists. So how did those
Epicurian and Stoic Philosophers scorn him, who in their learned and deep
judgments, was but a babbler, and his preaching mere foolishness? Yea, what
defenses was Saint Paul driven to make for himself, about his plainness in
unfolding the Gospel? In like manner also did Corah, and his company (not for
want of ignorance) compare themselves with Moses and Aaron. But a wiser than
they acquainteth us, that he who wins souls is wise, Prove. 11.30. And that
those who by their teaching, turn many to righteousness, shall shine as stars
for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3. So that however Goliath may make the greater
vaunts, yet David will prove the wiser, and the better man.

The Moon is glorious to a Candle, but pale to the Sun; the Lilly white to the
wool, but Short of the Snow; and the swarthy compared with the Blackamer thinks
himself fair: so these Preachers, these empty casks, these proud coxcombs, that
have more wit than learning, and more learning than honesty, or good intention,
in the discharge of their Ministry, when they compare themselves with such as
have neither wit, learning, honesty, nor good intention, may think themselves
somebody; but if they compare themselves with the meanest of Christ's faithful
Ministers, they are not worthy to carry his Books after him.

Sect. 11.
And the reason of it may well be, their too good opinion of themselves: being
like Drusus, grandfather to Cato, who was very eloquent, and learned; but
withal most ambitious and proud: For as in Luthers time, it was a Paradox,
justitia causa injustitiae, a conceited righteousness was the chief cause of
all unrighteousness: So may I say to these, prudentia causa stultitiae, an
opinion of wisdom, is in a manner the sole cause of all their ignorance, and
folly. Many a man had proved wise, if he had not so thought himself: and
commonly they are most proud, that have the least cause. The more each earth
advances it self, they are ever the more barren. The fuller, and heavier
scale, is ever lowest; and the emptier the ear is of corn, the higher it still
perks up: So he that knows himself best, esteems of himself least.

Or, admit a man be like Atlas King of Mauritania, who for his great skill in
the course of stars, is feigned to hold up the firmament with his shouldiers,
yet pride makes men decay in brain: for as when the Milt swells, all the rest
of the body wastes: so as the heart swells, the brain decays: and which is
the misery, few proud wits are ever reformed. There was never holiness, without
humbleness; for God resists the proud, James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. and as it is a
sign of the going down of the Sun, and of his departure, when our shadows grow
long: so it is a sign of the Spirits departure, when we entertain these high
thoughts of our selves.

Secondly, another reason of their strange mistake, in thinking so well of
themselves, so basely of their betters, is, the generality of the people are
extremely taken, yea, transported with their singular faculty in Preaching,
while those Preachers whom I seem to magnify, are as much neglected: Yea, not
one in many, but will choose rather to hear them, than the other. Yea, who will
not go from their own Pastors, and pass by many others, to hear one of their
elaborate, and accurate pieces?

As this is the case, if they have a godly and powerful Minister in their own
Parish, that will not let them sleep, and snort in their sins, but will rouse
and raise them out of their security, and cry aloud against their abominations;
as God commands Ezekiel to do, Ezekiel. 14 4. answer them according to their
idols, preach to their necessities, press them to holy duties, reprove them
for their unholy practices, make known to them what evil consciences they have,
and how fearful their doom will be, if they continue and go on in their
wickedness, and ignorance; not sparing to utter the whole counsel of God; to
the end they may soundly repent, and be saved. Then they will hate him ever
after, as Amos speaks, chap. 5.10. And that most deadly, as Ahab hated Eliah,
and Michala, Heredias John Baptist, the Jews our Savior, and the Galatians
Paul, saying, Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not meet that
be should live, Acts 22.22. And not only turn their backs upon him, but be
ready to kill him for his kindness; as appears by a world both of testimonies,
and examples: for I think I may say, there is not a man of God, either Prophet
or Apostle, mentioned in the Bible; no, not Christ himself, that has not been
some way persecuted, for delivering Gods errands to the people, and speaking
that truth, which if they had left one syllable unspoken, they had been
destroyed by God himself that gave them the charge: see Jer. 1.17. and 15.10.

The Pharisees you know, could not endure Jesus Christ, because he came to
break their customs, Luc. 6.2. The Masters of the Pythoness, Acts 16.21.
objected this against Paul and Silas, that they did teach customs not lawful
for them to receive. For this cause was that uproar at Ephesus, the copyhold
of Demetrius was touched, he and his fellows were hindered in their profits,
etc. Yea, the Jews in their blind zeal, were so furious and merciless, that
they put Stephen to death, who sought to bring them to eternal life; stoning
him for a blasphemer against God and his Law; who was a man full of faith, and
power, and of the holy Ghost, Acts 7.

Gods truth, if you mark it, would cry down men's sins, as Preaching would have
done Demetrius's trade; and therefore no marvel if the tradesmen of iniquity,
are up in arms against the Gospel, as Demetrius was against Paul. And did not
the Gospel cross their sins, they would not cross the Gospel: But the waves do
not beat or roar, any where so much, as at the bank that restrains them.

While the Preacher walks in Generals, every man can be master of his own
patience: but descending to particular application, as Nathan served David, and
John Herod, then let him look to himself. Or, admit he preaches unprofitably,
as caring only to please, not to inform: or stands more upon his own credit,
than the peoples benefit: so long they will hear the Word very orderly, and
delight in it; (For none so bad, but he loves the light as it shines, but as it
discovers, and directs they hate it) Whiles we search no farther than their
dead flesh, they can be quiet; but if we once touch them to the quick, we shall
quickly hear of it.

Sect. 12.
And the reasons of their so doing, (among many others) are these three: First,
these Serpents will hiss, if we trouble their nests never so little, because
they know themselves guilty. It is a sure sign the horse is galled, that stirs
too much when he is touched, Number. 5.27. In the Law of Jelousies, if the
suspected wife were guilty, that drank of the bitter waters of trial, she would
presently swell: if otherwise, she was well enough. Unsound flesh loves to be
stroaked; the least roughness puts them into a rage. Sore eyes cannot abide the
light of the Sun. The naked truth, makes so little for, and so much against
resolute sinners, that they will carp, and storm, and fret, and chafe, and
fume, and swell, and rage, and be ready to burst again when they hear it.
Instead of penitence, they break out into choler; fury sparkles in those eyes,
which should gush out with water: Like Gain, Ahab, and Herod, they are never
troubled for their sins, only they are vexed to hear of them. They are like the
mad man, that wounded his Physician, even while he was administering Physic to
him for his recovery.

Secondly, the Word of God, is like some fructifying dew or rain, which falls
not upon any ground in vain; but will either produce the herbs of good works,
or the weeds of impiety: Every line of Gods Word, adds sinew to the virtuous
mind, and withal heals that vice which would be springing in it. But as all
bodies are not equally apt to be wrought upon by the same medicine: so are not
all souls by the same means of grace. The same report wherewith the spirit of
Rahab melts, hardens the King of Jericho, Joshua 2. Sergius Paulus was
converted, Elymas obdurated by the same Sermon, Acts 12. Therefore no wonder,
if these spiders, those bees, the wicked and the godly, suck the one honey, the
other poison from the self-same flower of holy Writ.

Thirdly, the Word of God is the rule of justice, which shows the crookedness
of their ways. It is the Law, by which they shall be condemned, therefore they
cannot endure it. They love not to have their consciences awakened, but would
sleep quietly in their sins; and he that desires to sleep, will have the
curtains drawn, the light shut out, and no noise made. Besides, they cannot
hear the downright truth, but they must also hear the sentence of their own
condemnation. It is the very word, by which they are judged and condemned:
therefore they loath as much to hear it, as a prisoner does abhor to hear his
sentence, from the just Judge. And indeed, if many love not to hear the worst
of their temporal causes, and cases; nor yet of their bodily distempers, with
which their lives, or estates be endangered; how much more will wicked men
decline, from seeing their heinous abominations, and themselves guilty of bell,
and eternal damnation. Though thereof there be an absolute necessity, if ever
they be saved.

This is their main cause, or quarrel, against a zealous, and powerful
Preacher; this above all makes them fret and storm: But let envy sweat, swell,
and burst, truth must be spoken: And indeed, why should not Gods servants, take
as free liberty in reproving, as the Devils servants take liberty in offending:
Shall not the one be as bold for God, as the others are for Baal, and
Beelzebub: These are the reasons, why they threat, when they should (and others
do) tremble; and jeer, when they should fear; and mock when they should mourn:
like those shameless, and graceless Israelites, 2 Chronicles. 30.10.

Sect. 13.
Nor can the cause of wicked men's raging, be imputed to any miscarriage in the
messenger; for he may vindicate himself as Paul did, 2. Cor. 7. ver. 10. I have
not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Act 9.4.
that he persecuted him: so they which resist any truth delivered out of the
Word, do resist God himself and not his messenger. And this for certain, if
Christ himself were their Minister; and should reprove them for their sins, and
denounce the judgments of God against them for the same, as when he was upon
the earth: not only the wit-founder'd drunkard, and profane beast; but even
civil honest men, and formal Christians; would persecute him to the death, as
the Jews formerly did. Which is some comfort to a conscientious Minister: Nor
is it their shame to suffer, what Christ suffered; nor the others honor, to do
as Judas and the rest did, as Cyprian speaks. Neither can there be a greater
honor, done to a poor Minister than this: for as one of the Fathers has it,
it may well be doubted, Ministers open not the Word aright; when wicked men
kick not against it. Yea, says Luther, to preach the Gospel as we ought, is
to stir up all the furies of Hell against us: and our Savior's Words Joh. 7.7.
import no less, Matthew. 10.16.

Now if this be the case, no wonder they should be for that preaching, which
brings none of all this vexation: yea, they may hear one of their witty
Rhetorical preachers till doomsday, and never be disturbed in their sins, or
disquieted or molested in their consciences, for it is not to her they speak.
Yea, such preaching is rather an Antidote against what the Legal preachers
have averred, and does again cheer up their spirits, against all qualms of
conscience. As David's harp cheered up Saul, when vexations and melancholy fits
came upon him. Yea, the preaching of these brave Orators, and quaint wits; is
to them as sweet and melodious, as music: for which see Ezekiel. 33.32. Micha
2.11. And this is the reason why most men walk in the broad way, and yet every
man thinks to enter the straight gate: The Devils Chaplains are chiefly heard,
Christ's Messengers are mostly neglected.

A good and faithful Minister, who is of Gods sending, and studies more to
profit, then to please his people: that he may the better undeceive the
deceived, and (with blessing from above) pluck sinners out of Satan's snares:
he deals with his hearers, as the Prophet did by Hazaell; when he plainly
told him the abominable wickedness of his heart, even beyond belief: Or as
Nathan did by David, when he so cunningly made him to pronounce sentence
against himself. Or as Jonah did by the Ninevites, when with his short
thundering sermon, he converted that great City. Or as Peter with his
converts, when he told them they were the men, that had crucified the Son of
God, the Lord of glory. Or as John Baptist did by Herod, and all that came unto
him. Or as our Savior by the woman of Samaria, when he so represented the
very thoughts of her heart to her conscience; that she was forced to confess,
He has told me all things that ever I did; which kind of preaching, they will
never endure: because they are resolved to continue their sins, and withal
would preserve the peace of their consciences: which can never be, so long as
they hear the Word purely taught.

Which yet they must do, if ever they be saved: for there is no being saved
without Christ, and Christ's Blood will never be sweet unto us, until we
feel the smart of our sins; and the necessity we have of it. Before men are
convinced of their wickedness, they can no way be capable of forgiveness: All
men will grant, that without repentance there is no being saved: but what hope
of their serious, and unfeigned repentance for sin? who scarce know wherein they
have offended. Sin must be seen, before it can be sorrowed for: A man must
be sick before he will seek to the Phisician, yea where is no discovery of
the disease, the recovery of the health is in vain hoped for. Which makes
Cyprian say, that it is as mere lost labor, to preach unto a man the things of
God, before he be humbled with the sight of his wants: as to offer light to a
blind man, to speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a brute beast wise. But
when our consciences are troubled, the Law having laid open our guiltiness, and
denounced the deserved punishment: this (and nothing but this) makes us run to
Christ for remedy. Christ came to seek, and to save only that which was lost:
the lost sheep of the house of Israel; even such as utterly despair, in regard
of all other helps, Matthew. 18.11. Luke 19.10. 1 Timothy 1.15. God does not pour
the oil of grace, but into a broken and contrite heart: and still the deeper
the sense of misery is, the sweeter the sense of mercy is. Nor can there be a
stronger argument, that a Minister studies more to profit, then please men with
his wholesome counsel: as when he will not let them sleep and snort in their
sins; but cry aloud against their abominations. As well knowing, that it is
better to loose men's favors, then their souls: therefore he will be sure to
discharge his conscience from the burden of any ones blood.

Section. 14.
And so much to show, how these witty preachers slight and scorn our solid
divines, in regard of their excelling them (as they think) in learning, and
parts; and how they are preferred by their hearers, with the reasons of it? But
will you know withal, how they envy and malign them, in respect of their
success and acceptance both with God, and good men. As if you observe it, Godly
and conscientious Ministers, no less suffer from others of their own coat, then
from their hearers. I mean from these men-pleasers, as thus stands the case.

A Godly Minister, that coms in Christ's name; by his faithful, and powerful
preaching, and Gods blessing upon it: makes his hearers, of natural men to
become Christians, Act, 2.37. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Who may answer any that slight,
and revile him, as that young man did the Pharisees, touching Jesus, Joh. 9.
Doubtless this is a marvelous thing, that ye do not know whence he is, seeing
he has opened mine eyes, who was blind from my birth; inclined my will to
obedience, which before was rebellions: softened my heart, sanctified, and quite
changed my affections? so that I now love that good, which before I hated; and
hate that evil which before I loved; and am delighted with those holy
exercises, which heretofore did most displease me, and am displeased with
those vain pleasures and filthy sins, which in times past did most delight me;
and therefore, if he were not of God, and of his sending, he could have done
no such thing: if he were not inspired, and assisted by his holy Spirit; and
his preaching made effectual, by the virtue and power thereof; he could never
have wrought in me such a change, and strange alteration.

And as he converteth the good, so he convinces the bad: and not seldom are
such so convinced, and the secrets of their hearts made so manifest, that their
hearts even burn in their bosoms, and are so pricked, that they are ready to
sall down, and worship God, and report to their consciences in private, that
God is in such a Minister, of a truth; as it fared with that unbelieving
Iddiot, spoken of 1 Cor. 14.24.25. Thus does God give his faithful Ambassadors
power to work miracles, as a seal to their Ministry; for conversion of sinners
is the only miracle that the Gospel now has. But is such, that Cesars and
Alexanders victories were nothing comparable to this glorious conquest, which
the Ministers get in the hearts of men when they convert them. And this is it
that so mads them, when they behold and consider, how the people of God flock
after their sermons, affect and applaud their preaching, and how many of
natural men, become Christians by hearing them: as we may clearly see, by
what Saint John relates of their fellows, John 11.48. As mark well what is
there set down! Then gathered the chief Priests and Pharisees a counsel, and
said; what do we? for this man (meaning Christ) does many miracles; if we let
him thus alone, all men will believe in him [observ the cause of their spite].
And from that day forth, they took counsel together for to put him to death,
Joh. 11.47.48. And again, Joh. 12. The chief Priests consulted that they might
put Lazarus to death also, because that for his sake, or by reason of him, many
of the Jews believed in Jesus, verse 10.11. Now as it fared with them, so fares
it with these, they are vexed to see how God honors such an ones Ministry,
with the conversion of souls; and that his words are with such power, that the
people flock after him, as they were wont after Christ, while in the mean time,
themselves are neglected and disesteemed: being as they suppose far greater
scholars, and their sermons more elaborate. For they will be as long in the
conception and breeding of them, as an Elephant is of her young; which being
born, only amazeth the hearers, and makes them at their wits end with
admiration. Pride was ever envious, and contumelious: thinking she adds so
much to her own reputation, as she detracts from others. And indeed the
twinkling stars, at the approach of the Sun, lose their light: and regain it
nor, until darkness be upon the deep. Yea, the whiter the Swan is, the more
black is the crow that is by her: They are not more propitious to vice, then
they are malicious to virtue: for goodness alone, is the whetstone of their
malice, and makes them sick of the splem, Prove. 29.27. Aman that has no virtue
himself, ever envies it in others. What is recorded of the Rulers and
Governors of Babylon touching Daniel, is verified in these preachers, touching
their fellow Ministers: they therefore envy them, because the Spirit is more
excellent in them, and they can find no accusation against them; unless it be
concerning the Law of their God, Dan. 6.3, 4, 5. I might produce a cloud of
examples of this nature; as Cains envying Abel, Esau Jacob, the Patriarchs
Joseph, Saul David etc. who were envied and hated, merely for their goodness
and virtue: but to what purpose? when every man's own heart can witness that of
Solomon, Prove. 29.27. to be true, A wicked man is abomination to the just, and
he that is upright in his way, is abomination to the wicked.

Section. 15.
And so according to my promise, and as well as I can: I have given you the
Character of a non-preaching Minister, of a witty and Rhetorical Preacher; And
to the end you may be instructed, as well by similitude as contrariety, I have
declared the difference between these speculative Preachers, and experimental
Divines: whereby you may clearly see, that the former in comparison of the
latter, is but a hollow Reed without pith: that though his memory be
sufficiently sull fraught, yet his judgment is hollow and empty: that he is a
barren divine, whose roots knowledge, bear no fruit but flowers: that for any
solid divinity that is in him, he may do as Pope Celestine the fifth did, who
deposed himself by reason of his ignorance. In a word, that such a preacher is
a bladder full of wind, a skin full of words, a fools-wonder, and a wise-mans
fool.

But the better to undeceive the deceived, and to the end that we may be
gainers by this discovery: because evil were as good not known, as not
avoided. I will show you how God's people are gulled, and Satan advantaged by
these non-preaching Ministers. Who deal with the Church, as Vespatian did with
Rome: who intending to invade the Empire, first made sack of Alexandria, where
were all the Granaries, that so he might make them yield for want of
victuals, and become his vassalls. As to way-lay an enemies provision, has
ever been held and sound a principal stratagem in war.

How God's people are gulled, and Satan advantaged by this deep, and devilish
stratagem; I sear few consider as they ought: for if they did, they would as
much detest these preachers, as now they applaud them. For what do they, but in
a great measure (and as much as in them lies), bring the heaviest judgment upon
the land that can befall any nation. Namely, a famine of the Word, and Gospel:
Yea, they do not only bring this judgment upon those parishes which they are
placed in; but they draw thousands from other parishes, (so hindering, and
depriving their souls of their spiritual food): and make the wholesome, and
faithful preaching of all good (...), and disregarded by their people.
Insomuch, that they do the Devil service, under a color of serving Christ:
and destroy souls, under a pretense of saving them. Nor is this their sin of a
narrow extent. For hereby the people me brought into such a loathing of the
true Mannah of Gods Word: that we have just cause to fear our being deprived
of it. As what cause have we to fear, the removal of our Candlestick? and
that God should leave us in the dark, since most men (I fear ninety nine of an
hundred) love darkness, rather then light; and had rather hear wit and froth,
then the pure and solid Word of God. And to take away our faithful Ministers
from us, when we so little regard, and so ill and unworthily entreat and
reward them, preferring the worlds preachers before those who are of Christ's
sending. Behold the days come says the Lord God; that I will send a famine in
the Land: Not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water; but of hearing the Word
of the Lord, Amos 8.11.

And this, (what ever carnal hearts conceive of it) were a greater judgment,
then were the loss of the Sun out of the firmament. Yea is it not just with God
to take away the Lamp from that Nation? which has (besides all this) taken
away the holy oil that should maintain it; and to send upon us a famine of
preaching, who have brought a famine upon the Preachers: For do not most men
deny them maintenance, unless by Law they are compelled: and then if they give
it, they as good as give their curse with it. At least they will smite him with
the tongue, giving no heed to his words, as the Prophet Jeremiah complains,
Jer. 18.18. Lament. 3.45.46. And every penny they are forced to part with, is
drawn from them, as so many drops of blood from the heart. Nor will they give
it, but after such a base manner; that one would scorn to accept of it: for
then nothing but find faults or mock them: As, I like not his preaching, or he
is a roundhead, or I cannot edify by his sermons, or he preaches the Law,
and therefore is a railer: with an hundred the like, which apparently proves
them God-haters, and Gospell-haters; as the root of this their enmity to the
Ministry, is their enmity against God and his Word, and holiness: which they
cannot endure, as appears by these places of Scripture, Romans 1.30. Joh. 15.23,
24, 25. Rev. 16.9, 10, 11. Luke 10.16. Matthew. 11. ver. 6. 1 Samuel 8.7. Number.
16.11. John 7.7. Act. 9.4.5.

Wherefore look to it my brethren, lest you rob your selves, and your posterity
to the worlds end, of enjoying this matchless mercy, this unparalled pearl.
And Lord I fear, that England shall want the Gospel! when the Barbarians
receive it: because England had the Gospel, and did so little esteem of it.
You indeed set a low price upon it, and thereafter deal with the publishers of
it; But O what large bribes would Satan give! (whose Chaplains only you desire
to hear) to have such men hold their peace; In the mean time I am sure, he
has effected his will upon us, in a great measure another way, by sending
these his Chaplains amongst us. Insomuch, that many men in England may be said
to wander, as Amos speaks Chap. 8. not from Sea to Sea, nor from the north to
the west; but from parish to parish to seek the Word of God, and cannot find it
ver. 11.12.

As let any knowing, and experimental Christian go to hundreds of parishes in
England, and hear but what preachers they have; yea, have chosen for themselves
(for by their good wills they will admit of no other then these or worse.) Or
rather let there be a survey made, throughout the three Nations; and the
number taken: first of such as preach so unprofitably, that the people are
never the better for their preaching; secondly of scandalous Ministers, that
pull down either with one or both hands; that is to say with their lewd lives,
or by their devilish doctrine; thirdly of serpentine preachers, who instead of
edifying to salvation, do edify to damnation; being very Rhetorical to
discourage the godly, and encourage the wicked; rarely eloquent to flatter sin,
and flout holiness. And you will say, that God is as much beholding to hundreds
of the best of them for their pains in preaching, and receivs as much good by
their labor in the Church, as does a Farmer by those quick cattle which
continually live in his barn, feed upon his corn, and though they do him no
great hurt, yet he has no service from them at all. Yea, I doubt not, but
themselves, I mean these non-preachers, these witty preachers will one day (If
ever God be pleased to open their eyes) acknowledge as much; and as much
disdain to preach so, as now they do the contrary. For as the Jews, when they
heard the Apostles preach, burnt their curious books, and had no more delight
to study such toies: so as these Ministers come to the knowledge, and
experience of the truth; and to have their eyes opened: they will be content
to leave these fancies, and say with Saint Paul, I desire to know, or preach
nothing but Christ and him crucified. And indeed, there is but one right way of
preaching; that is, when sound doctrine, and home-application goes together;
many indirect ways: God charge his Ministers to refuse all ways but one,
Satan bids them refuse that one, and take which way they please. Now whether
God, or Satan is most heard, and obeyed, I leave for the indifferent Reader to
judge. In the mean time, these barren Trees, that occupy the room where better
trees might grow; are not only liable to a fearful curse, Luke 13.7. Ezekiel
3.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 9.16. Zach. 11.17. Jer. 23.12.19. but have made themselves
guilty of the blood of the Lords people; in taking upon them to be their
Captains, and conductors; and yet have no skill at all, in managing of martial
affairs: being like that Soldier, who was very diligent in scowring of his
Musket, preparing his match, practicing his postures, etc. but when he came
into the field, had forgot his powder; or some careless Carpenter, that should
square all by his rule, but sticks it at his back, and works by aim. For this I
may boldly affirm, that all such as come to this spiritual warfare with carnal
weapons; and strive to encounter that spiritual Goliath, with Saul's harness,
and not with David's sling: with the blunt sword of mere humane eloquence, the
words of men, Philosophers, and Fathers only; and not with the sharp two-edged
sword of the Spirit, the Word of God: show themselves more like the Devils
deputies, then Christ's Vicars. For instead of preaching the Word, they bring a
famine of it.

Section 16.
And great pity it is, they are not cast out of Churches; and for ever
silenced, as many of them have been for some years, (did they not daily creep
in again, by means of such, whose souls they have formerly poisoned, and
bewitched with their Philosophy, and vain deceit, Colos. 2.8.) Because so long
as he supplies the Room of a Minister, he keeps out another that would Preach
better: and perhaps save those poor souls, whom he destroys.

An ill man in the Church is but like some Shrubby Tree in a Garden, whose
shade not only keeps better plants from growing; but draws away the
nourishment from the rest that would bear us fruit. Or as a great Oak in a
Grove, which not only pines all the under-woods near it, but spoils the Grass
that should feed the Cattle. So that it were better for the Parish to have no
Minister at all, then such an one. For though it be miserable to want food for
the soul; yet a blank does far better in a room, then an ill-filling. But how
much better would a godly, faithful, and zealous preacher placed in his room
be? who by Gods blessing would feed those souls, whom he starves; and save
those, whom he lets perish.

A conscionable Minister, resembles David, who would venture on a Bear, rather
then lose a Lamb; and Jacob, who would endure heat by day, and frost by night,
rather then neglect his flocks; and Moses, who would fight with odds, rather
then the cattle should perish with thirst. Only such a Balaam as these, wants
this mercy. But what is the reason? The hireling cares not for the sheep, Joh.
10.13. they are not his own, and what minds he, whether they be fat or lean.
A mercenary advocate looks only to his fee, let his clients cause stand or
sall, it is all one to him, so long as he has his money. A Capon that has
moulted away all his feathers, and is cold and naked, in the absence of the Hen
will run to her nest; not for any love to the Chickens, but to warm his own
sides.

But let such look to it; for they have a fearful reckoning to make, and
destruction is threatened to every Prophet that thus conceals the truth, or
forbears to reprove sin sharply, Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 9.16. For if they
had stood in my counsel, says God; and had caused my people to hear my words:
then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of
their doings, Jer. 23.21, 22. Whereas now, whenever thou shall hear the bell
toul for a wicked man, thou may cry out, There is a soul going to hell, whose
blood will be required at my hands, because I was not faithful, and did not give
him warning, Ezekiel. 3.18, 19.

Indeed these men-pleasers may seem to be neuters, (as doing neither good nor
harm) or at least more excusable, and less principal in blood-guiltinesse,
then those unpreaching Ministers I am yet to speak of; who flatter sin, and
flout holiness; discourage the godly, and encourage the wicked, by
false-wresting, or mis-applying the Word; (in that starving the people, seems
not altogether so bad as poisoning them) and to be more excusable, but the
truth is, they are no less guilty of the peoples blood; for they are traitors
to God and his kingdom, and guilty of the peoples blood, whom Christ the chief
Shepherd has committed to their charge. For if a man will take upon him the
office of a Pastor, and yet not feed his people that depend upon him: to be an
Ambassador, and yet not declare God's message to the people: to be their
Physician, and yet not see to the peoples health; does he not make himself
guilty of their miscarriage, and betray the trust which was committed unto him?
it cannot be denied. The Advocate that is retained to plead, betraies the cause
by his voluntary silence: the Watchman that does not ring the alarum-bell at
the approach of danger, betraies the city to the enemy: he that will take upon
him to be a leader, when he cannot instruct God's people in the spiritual
warfare, betraies the trust which was committed unto him, and gives great
advantage to Satan and his ministers, who are far more industrious in their
generation, Mat. 13.25. Rev. 14.11.

Neither is there any difference between the shepherds destroying the sheep
with his own hands, or leaving them to the mercy of the Wolf; or of a Captains
giving up a Castle, or not defending it against the enemy, when it is besieged.
What difference between not-saving, and destroying? Not to water a plant when
it is dry, is to kill it: And the fire is as well put out by the subtraction of
fuel, as by pouring water upon it.

Section 17.
Nor are these Non-preachers more guilty of the people blood, then the people
are of their own; for all that forsake their faithful Pastors, whom Christ has
placed over them, to follow these mountebanks, are in the sight of God wilful
murderers of their own souls. For as when God had given the children of Israel
Sampson; to deliver them out of the hands of the Philistims, that so much
oppressed them, they spared not to betray him themselves, and to deliver him
bound into their oppressers hands, Judge. 15. when yet he was the only
deliverer that God had appointed them: or as Jephtha was rejected of his
brethren, and yet the Lord appointed and intended no other to save and deliver
them but him: (...) as Christ, albeit he came to his own, yet they received him
not, but disdainfully refused him; and yet the Lord decreed him to be the
only Savior of his people; and that by no other means or name under heaven we
should look for salvation, but by the Name of JESUS, Acts 4.12. So they reject
and persecute their faithful Pastor whom God has set over them, and sent to be
their deliverer from the thraldom of sin and Satan: and probably resolved to
save them by him, and none else. Yea, they will hear, honor, applaud and
reward these men-pleasers, these soul-murtherers; while in the mean time
Christ's faithful messengers shall meet with nothing from them but contempt,
hatred, base language, and blows.

But fools as they are, the case will be strangely altered: for come they once
to a sense and sight of their sad condition, as when they lie gasping at their
last hour, they will wish, O that I had now but the opportunity to converse
with such a Minister! As Saul slighted Samuel while he lived, but would sain
have heard, and advised with him when he was dead. He (says Solomon) that
rebukes a man, shall find more favor at the length, then he which flattereth
with his tongue, Prove. 28.23. a point well worth these men's minding.

And the same touching the cause of their dislike, as observe I pray you; Manna
we know had no fault, but that it was too good, and too frequent; only the
Israelites liked it not; and indeed the pulse of Egypt had been fitter for
their course stomachs: and so is poetry, Roman history, etc. sweeter unto these
men's ears, which are so gross of hearing: But where lies the fault? Look into
thy self, that heavenly bread was unspeakably delicious, it tasted like wafers
of honey; and yet even this Angels food is contemned. He that is full despises
the honey comb: and no less sweet is the Gospel, not only the Fathers of the
Old Testament, but the Angels desired to look into the glorious mysteries of
it; and yet thou art cloied, this supernatural food is too light, the
bread-corn of humane reason and profound discourse will better content thee.

But little do thou think what a damnable sin this is, and what it will cost
thee another day, if thou continuest in the same mind. For this is the
condemnation, [none like this] that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then light, because their deeds were evil, Joh. 3.19. And so
on the contrary, This is life eternal; to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

Section 18.
But the misery is! there is no persuading these men that they are ignorant of
God, or of Christ: What they ignorant persons? when they are the only lovers
of wit and knowledge, which makes them frequent these witty preachers; nor can
they endure your dull drones.

To which I answer, This wit in Scripture language, and in Gods account, is
foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.14. and enmity against the wisdom of God. Romans 8.7. So
that as wise Solomon speaks, there is more hope of a fools becoming wise, then
of these men's, that are wise in their own conceit, Prove. 26.12. And as love and
lust are not all one; so a witty, and a wiseman is not all one. The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding,
Job 28.28. And hereby, says Saint John, is it known that we know God, if we
keep his commandments, 1 John 2.3. But he that says I know him, and yet
keeps not his commandments, is a lier and there is no truth in him, ver. 4.
He only is wise, that is wise for his own soul. If they were wise says Saint
Bernard, they would foresee the torments of hell, and prevent them. Alas! one
spark of spiritual experimental and saving knowledge, guided by the fear of God,
is more worth then all secular wisdom and learning, Mat. 16.16, 17. Romans 8.15,
16. Psalm. 111.10. Luke 24.45. Joh. 15.15.

But this wisdom descends from above, and keeps a man from every evil way,
Prove. 2.12. and God only is the giver of it, and he gives it to none but his
children the godly, Psalm. 25.14. Luke 24.45. Mark 4.34. Genesis 18.17. Prove. 1, 7.
It is not so much scientia capitis, as conscientia cordis that knows Christ,
and our selves: Whence Solomon says, Give thine heart to wisdom, Prove. 2.10.
and, Let wisdom enter into thine heart, Prove. 4.4. The natural man perceives
not the things of the Spirit of God; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. and indeed if they are spiritually
discerned, how should they discern them that have not the spirit.

Obj. You seem to condemn all that frequent these witty Preachers; do you think
none of their hearers good, nor wise?

Answ. To this I will make a threefold answer; the first shall be in the words
of our Savior Christ, and of Saint John: They are of the world (says Saint
John) therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. We are of
God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of God, hears us not.
Hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, 1 John 4.5, 6.
And again, He that is of God, hears Gods words: Ye therefore hear them not,
because ye are not of God, Joh. 8.47. Every one that is of the truth (says
our Savior) hears my voice, Job. 18.37. Christ's sheep know not the voice of
a stranger; neither will they hear or follow strangers, or hirelings; because
they care not for the sheep. But as they know Christ's voice, so him only will
they follow, and fly from a stranger, as you have it Joh. 10.3, 4, 5, 13, 14,
27. Now if we would know, whether a Minister comes in Christ's name, or in his
own; whether he be of God, or of the world: we need no better note, then to
observe what his hearers are. For usually if the Church of such a preacher
should be searched, as Jehu and Jehonadab did the house of Ball, there is
scarce a servant of the Lord amongst them. Their judgments being so
diametrially opposite, that what preaching the one loves, the other loathes.
Neither would their hearers so applaud or approve of them, if they were of Gods
sending. I am come in my Fathers name, says our Savior, and ye receive me
not: if another shall come in his own name, him you will receive, Joh. 5.43.

Men of the world will not hear such preachers as are of God: because then they
must have their consciences terrefied about their sins, (or else part with
them) and be told of the fearful condition they are in: yea the greatest of
sinners affect more the flattery of false Prophets, then the sincerity of
Christ's faithful messengers, Isa. 30.10. Mica. 2.11. But it is easy to discern
where the fault lies, and who is to be blamed. For it is only the weak-sighted
that cannot abide the light: and none can dislike the word of truth, but such
as have an overflowing of their gall, or an overweening of their wit: such as
are both shameless and graceless. As do you see an Apple fall untimely from
the tree, view it well, and you will find it worm-eaten, else it had held. But
such as have a blemish in their eye, think the element to be over cloudy. Our
Savior himself could neither speak, or do ought, but such would be offended at
it. In which case who is to be blamed? Is the Physician to be blamed for the
pain of his Patient, or the disease? the Surgeon, or the wound which he
endeavors by all means to cure? Yea, tell me what is the cause? why the worst
men, and members in a parish, evermore regard a good Minister least; complain
of his bitterness, and seek by all means to remove him? Is it not because they
are feet, and legs, and thighs, and arms out of joint, and so cannot endure the
touch of the Chirurgions hand, and the acrimony of his medicines.

Section 19.
Secondly, my next Answer to the former question is, Their practice proves it.
For this you may take for a general rule, that if these brave Orators, these
unhallowed Divines, have ap plaus, and be cried up for rare Preachers, it is
from men as carnal and graceless as themselves. As look but upon their lives,
and see if they be not like people that have a disease called the Wolf; which
is always eating, yet keeps the body lean. They have long heard, and still
desire to hear their sermons: yet they grow not by their hearing; for like
those seven ill-favored and lean-fleshed Kine, Genesis 41.20, 21. it cannot be
known that they have heard them: for they are not only as lean and ill-favored
Christians still as they were before they heard them, but much worse. For as
touching that is good, that they let pass; it faring with their memories as
with an hourglass, or Conduit; that which in one hour runs in, the same in
another hour runs out again: Only the evil will they keep to increase their
prejudice, and to fore-stall them against goodness.

Quest. Whereby may we know and judge of a wicked man? for we must not pronounce
any man a leper, till we see the scab.

Answ. by his works, and by his words; every tree is known by the fruits: It is
Christ's everlasting rule, however the tree lives by the sap, and not by the
fruit; yet it is known to live by the fruit, and not by the sap, for this is
hid. When the Conduit is walled in, how shall we judge of the spring? but by
the water that runs out of the pipes. The outward actions, declare the inward
intentions. Men do sometimes bewray that by their deeds, which to confess they
are hardly drawn.

As in a clock when the hammer strikes well, and the hand of the dial points
well; it is a sign that the wheels are right set. Yea by the pointing of the
hand alone, we may know how the clock goes within: And so by the striking of
the hammer, which is the second rule.

Speech is the index of the mind, for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Matthew. 12.34. Whence observe, that a good man out of the good
treasury of his heart, brings forth good things: and an evil man out of the
evil treasury of his heart, brings forth evil things, Matthew. 12.35. As the
bell is known by his sound; so a man is by nothing better known, then by his
communication, says Seneca: evil speaking discovers an evil heart: as the
striking of the clapper does a broken bell.

Yea, men may be known by their want of fruit: we may suspect want of sap in
the root of a tree; if we find barrenness in the branches: if either it have
bad fruit, or no fruit, it is but a dead faith. And the true method of grace
is, Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isa. 1.16, 17. For as grace enters
into the heart, so sin goes out: like air out of a vessel, when wine is poured
in; or as it fares with women, that having once conceived, cannot admit of
another conception, until they be delivered of the first, see Gal. 5.24.

I grant there be multitudes of them that appear not wicked no every man's
capacity; for some of them and not a few, are civil and fair in their
carriages, smooth in their communication; and for the most part, unreprovable:
yet this you shall be sure to find, that they are bitter malignants to the
power of religion, and scoffers at holiness: and there needs no more to prove
them wicked.

I grant they may be morally honest, temperate, chaste, charitable, go duly to
Church, pray in their families, abstain in some measure from swearing, lying,
and the like: But does this flow from a pious and good heart, sanctified by the
holy Ghost, 1 Timothy 1.5. Act. 15.9. Is it done in faith, and out of right ends:
as out of love, and obedience; because God commands the same, that he may be
glorified, and others edified thereby; for otherwise all their performances are
no better in Gods account, then blessing of an Idol, or cutting off a dogs
neck, as the Prophet shows Isa. 58. Chap. and 66.3. Matthew. 7.22.13.

Again, do you pay God his dues also? do you repent and beleev the Gospel
precepts and menaces, as well as promises? do you declare your faith by your
works? do you pray by the power of the Spirit, and with the understanding also?
1 Cor. 14.15. do you receive the word with good and honest hearts? and also
bring forth the fruits of it, in your life and conversation? do you sanctify
his sabbaths, and see that all under you do the same: love his children,
promote his glory, and strive to gain others to embrace the Gospel? instruct
your children and servants? and teach them to fear the Lord? do you fear an
oath, hate a lie, etc. Love zeal, and devotion in others? make conscience of
evil thoughts? vain and unprofitable words? grieve for your unprofitableness
under the means of grace? for the evil which cleavs to your very best actions?
for sins of omission etc. No, you may be good moral honest hypocrites; but
none of these graces grow in the gardens of your hearts; you have a form of
godliness, but you deny the power of it, and are reprobate to every good work,
2 Timothy 3.5. Titus 1.16. Yea, have you not strange conceits, and base thoughts
of the best men? do you not deeply censure and condemn the generation of the
just? and think the worse of a man for having a tender conscience? do you not
envy, hate, scoff at, nickname, rail on, and slander the people of God; and
misconstrue their actions and intentions? watch for their haulting, etc. Do you
not with Festus, account zeal madness; and religion foolishness, with Micholl?
Yea, you hate zeal and devotion so invetterately; that you can in no wise bear
with it in others. And does not all this prove thee wicked? though righteous
enough in thine own eyes. But

Section 20.
Thirdly, and lastly; there needs no more to prove them ignorant, then their
rejecting to hear the Word plainly preached; choosing rather to hear a lecture
of Philosophy read: As it is strange to consider, how grossly men err in judging
of things, that take not the Word for their rule; whereof some instances. Such
shall think they do God service in murdering his Children and Prophets, John
16.2. And so did the Powder Traitors, intending to blow up the whole State.
They think to be saved by Christ, though they do nothing but blaspheme him,
and take up arms against him. They will say, they love God and Christ, and yet
hate all that any way resemble him. They will boast of a strong faith, and yet
fall short of the devils in believing, Jam. 2.19. The Jews accused Christ for
keeping company with sinners, when they should have blamed themselves for not
keeping company with Christ. God has given me my reward, says Leah; because I
gave my maid unto my husband: she rejoiced, when she should have repented,
Genesis 30.18. And the like of Saul, Blessed are ye of the Lord says he, when
the Ziphims told him where David had hid himself: his intent being to murder
him, 1 Samuel 23.21. And like to this, is that of Micha, who thought the Lord
could not choose but be good unto him; seeing he had got a Levite into his
house, Judge. 17.13. In like manner, what is the cause of these men's preferring
these preachers? but their ignorance of Gods Word: they do not in the least
perceive the things of the Spirit; they are spiritually blind, and so not able
to judge of preaching, or Preachers. Being like shellfish that cannot smell;
or the Camelion which has no taste: and withal so improvident touching their
souls, that they will rather take dross for gold, then try it in the furnace;
whence it is they resemble Alchidas, who was enamored on the Picture of Cupid;
or Zerxes, who fell so far in love with a Plane-tree which happened in his way,
that he tarried by it a whole day; causing the boughs to be adorned with
chains of gold, bracelets, and spangles, yielding thereto great reverence. But
did they tread in the steps of all wise and good Christians, who have the mind
of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. or acquainted with Gods Word, and judge of things and
persons as they are, and not as they seem, (whose testimony only is of
credit); they would be so far from applauding the men, that they would not
vouchsafe to hear their sermons.

Now if any shall yet make question of their ignorance, do but ask them a
reason of the hope that is in them; (as every one that professes himself a
Christian, should be able and ready to yield, 1 Pet. 3.15.) they can no more
tell you, then the wind can tell which last blew off my hat. All experimental
divinity, is greek to them, be they never so great lovers of wit. Indeed to
speak against the truth, their tongues will run like the wheels of a clock,
when the spring is broken: but they are neither able, nor willing to speak a
word for it.

Now if these things be so, then they whom they hear and honor, have small
cause to rejoice therein: Nor have the other whom they shun and hate, any cause
to be discouraged thereby, because to carnal and fleshly men, that preaching
which saves souls, is foolishness; devotion, idleness; the Prophets, madmen;
Paul, a babbler. And until they be cured of their prejudice, (which God only
by his prerogative can do) nothing that can be said will serve. Wisdom, says
our Savior, is justified of her children; that is the faithful, Mat. 11.19.
intimating, that such wisdom as is justified by wicked men, is not wisdom
indeed. Take we then our Saviors counsel, and seek to justify our judgments
to the children of wisdom, of whom wisdom is justified; and not to fools, by
whom she is daily crucified. And tread in his steps who rejected the
commendations and approbation of such, Luke 4.35, 41. and Saint Paul, Act.
16.17, 18.

True, as the Church of Laodicea could flatter her self with an opinion, that
she was rich, and had need of nothing: when yet she was wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. Or as the young man in
the Gospel, could brag that he had kept all the commandments from his youth,
Mat. 19.20. And that cackling Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. could tell Christ, that
he was not like other men: so there is no persuading these men, but they are
wise and good enough; and no wonder, for they slumber, and suppose themselves
good Christians: their faith is but a dream, their hope but a dream, their
charity but a dream, their obedience but a dream, their whole religion but a
dream, and so their assurance of salvation is but a dream. They have
Regeneration in conceit, repentance and righteousness in conceit; they serve
God well in conceit, do the works of piety and charity in cenceit; and they
shall go to heaven only in conceit, or in a dream, and never awake, until they
feel themselves really in the burning lake. And indeed, do but take away from
men's minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, false valuations, imaginations, and
the like, you will leave the minds of most men and women but poor shrunken
things, full of melancholy, indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves.

Which could never be, if Satan the Prince of darkness, and of this world, did
not so blind their minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel shines not unto
them, as it is, 2 Cor. 4.4. And would they but lend the Gospel an ear, where it
is powerfully preached; they would at least be so wise, as to get better
assurance, then only to think themselves good enough; since pure and naked
supposals never brought any one to eternal life. Neither is there any other
means to be used, whereby it is to be had. Only the skill is, to persuade the
simple (as to be wise and solid is the portion but of a few) to beware of
hearing these fruitless Preachers; or indeed any others that preach not
point blank against sin and ignorance; that discover not Satan's wiles, and the
hearts deceitfulness; that preach not faith and free grace; that press not to
Repentance, Regeneration, and the like; that make not the glory of God, and the
good of souls, the main end of their preaching. As why do, or why should men go
to hear, if not for profit and comfort to their souls? ( Good stomachs make
better account of wholesome fare, then of dainty cates.) Why, but to hear the
good Word of GOD? that they may grow thereby, and to be nourished. Now
nourishment is the making of food received, like to the body nourished:
Therefore a wise Christian affects to hear powerful preaching, searching
Sermons, rather then run after Rhetoricians; because the rarities of humane
eloquence works no such effect, nor tends to any such end. For Philosophy and
such like may civilize, but not sanctify; hide some sins, but not heal them;
cover, not cure them; harb, and curb them; not abate, and abolish them. Yea, we
may say of their problemes, as the Philosopher did of the Athenian-shops, How
many things are here that we have no need of.

Wherefore I shall conclude with an Exhortation, or Advertisement to these men,
to use this means, and to affect that food which is wholesome, and would nourish.
O! that I might prevail with them, to hear either Scripture, or reason, though
my betters cannot; for then would they find it the happiest counsel that ever
they met with. Nor am I altogether out of hope; for though all the water in the
sea will not wash a Blackmore white; yet others with Naaman, may wash and be
clean. Nor can it be denied, but an Emperick now and then has had the hap to
cure a patient, which a learned Artist could not do.

Section 21. An Advertisement to all uncircumcised hearts and ears, exhorting
them to hear the Word of GOD purely and powerfully preached; and not to listen
after such, as seek only to please the ear with rarities of humane eloquence,
and the enticing words of man's wisdom.
IF there be any (if but one, even thy self,) that shall by what I have said,
be induced to judge of things according to clear truth, not blinded opinion; and
be willing to depart from this discourse better then they came to it, let him
in the first place know, that the only ordinary means of grace and conversion,
is by hearing the word of God impartially and powerfully preached, and by
entertaining it with a good and honest heart: for this Word, and this only is
able to make a man wise to salvation. As thus we may argue; Without knowledge
the heart cannot be good, Prove. 19.2. A man may know the will of God, and yet
not do it: but he can never do it, except first he know it. Whence, as in the
Creation of the World, the first thing that God made, was light, Genesis 1.3. So
when he makes us new creatures, he first creates light in the understanding,
whereby the poor soul may see his spiritual misery and wretchedness, which
before (by reason of that vail, or curtain which is drawn over every natural
man's heart, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16.) he is so far from discerning, that with
Laodicea, he thinks himself rich, and to want nothing; when yet he is wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked of all spiritual indowments,
Revel. 3.17. 1 Timothy 6. ver. 4.

Therefore let your principal care and ambition be; to know those things, the
knowledge whereof is eternal life, John 17.3. And the neglect whereof is of
all most the damnable, John 3.19. Therefore it is said of Christ (whose first
coming was to save the world) that he will come the second time, in flaming
fire, to render vengeance unto all those that know not God, 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8,
9. A terrible text to all that are ignorant in the midst of so much means as
we enjoy. Which being so, be diligent above all, to hear Christ's faithful
messengers; And not these, who if they preach not wickedly in flattering, or
furthering of sin: yet they preach unprofitably: as if they were resolved to
connive at sin, as feeding their flocks rather with words, then matter: as
caring only to please, not to inform; forming their voice to the liking of
their hearers, not their hearers judgment to the voice of Christ in the
Gospel; and striving more to make them in love with the teacher, then with the
lesson. Because they stand more upon their own credit, then their peoples
benefit.

3. Or if they labor to fill the head with knowledge, they leave the heart
empty of grace; spending their time either in curious Questions, and vain
speculations; which kind of preaching tends rather to mirth, then godly
edification; as it is observable, that that age of the Church, which was most
fertile in Nice Questions, was most barren in Religion. The reason is, it makes
people think Religion to be only a matter of wit; as tying of knots, and
untying them. Wherein the brains of men given this way, are usually hotter then
their hearts*

4. Or if their preaching be more solid, they rove altogether in generalities:
which are no more aiding to practice, then an Ortelius Universal Map is to
direct the way between London and York.

5. Or if they descend to particulars, they pass over the grounds of Religion,
the most useful part of all Divinity. For this lays the Foundation, the other
raises the Walls and Roof. This informs the Judgment, that stirs up the
Affections. And what good use is there of those Affections which run before the
Judgment?

6. Or lastly, If they give you the grounds of Religion, and preach wholesome
truths, yet they bring forth their Doctrines as some women do their children,
still-born, for want of application: without which the former seems to be no
better then a fair Image, or Statue, which is beautiful to Contemplate, but is
without life and motion: It being the soul of preaching, when the Word is
brought home to men's consciences, and applied close. For whereas those other
Divine discourses, enrich the brain and tongue; This settles the heart, changes
the will, and works upon the affections.

The only way to become such indeed, as men dream themselves to be, is to
trust Satan and their deceitful hearts less, and Gods Word and Mininisters
more. This is to become fools, that they may be wise, as the Apostle advises,
1 Cor. 3.18. Wherefore receive with meekness the ingrafted word which is able
to save your soul, as Saint James advises, James 1. verse 21.

And that you may not want encouragement, mind but what our Savior Christ
says, Joh. 13. Verily, verily, (he confirms it with a double asseveration) I
say unto you; If I send any, he that receives him receives me; and he that
receives me, receives him that sent me, ver. 20. Lo, in entertaining the
Word with an honest and good heart, we entertain both God and Christ with it.
Another famous place to encourage us in this case, is that, 2 Chronicles. 34.27.28.
too long to repeat, I pray turn to it.

Again take notice, that as hunger is a sign of good health; so to hunger and
thirst after Gods Word, is a notable sign of our spiritual health and safety,
Matthew. 5.6. Yea, the sense of our wretchedness, and the valuation of our
spiritual helps, is the best trial of our Regeneration. In the next place,
delay not the opportunity of hearing: but as the Holy Ghost says, Even to day
hear his voice, and harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, etc. Heb.
3.7.8. The time present, is the only time to seek the Lord. To make short,
heat the Word indifferently, and impartially: have no prejudice against him
thou have heretofore most hated, and slighted; but hear him the rather for his
bitterness. Perhaps God will convert and save thee by no other means, or
Minister, then such as he has placed thee under. Despise not the meanest of
Christ's Messengers, that delivers the Word purely, aims at his glory, and the
good of souls. And the better to induce you to esteem such, consider with me a
few particulars.

Section 22.
Such Ministers, as are of Christ's sending; are not only appointed of God as
watchmen, to give us warning of ensuing danger, Ezekiel. 3.17. and Pastors, to
feed our souls with the spiritual Manna of God's Word, Ephesians. 4.11.12. and
Captains, to fight God's battles for us against our spiritual enemies; and our
Leaders, to instruct us in the spiritual warfare, Ephesians. 6.12, 13. 2 Cor. 10.3,
4, 5. and God's Ambassadors to declare his will, and message unto us, Ephesians.
6.20. and lie Leigers, for the great King of heaven and earth, (So that
whatsoever is done to them, God takes and accounts as done to him, Psalm.
44.22.) But they are co-workers together with God, in converting and saving our
souls, 1 Cor. 3.9. He shall speak words unto thee, (says the Angel to
Cornelius) whereby both thou and all thine house shall be saved, Act. 11.14.
We are all born dead in sins and trespasses: But what says the Apostle Peter?
Unto this purpose was the Gospel preached also unto the dead: that they might
be condemned according to men in the flesh, but might live according to God in
the spirit, 1 Pet. 4. ver. 6.

For conclusion of all, hear the Word in season, and out of season; and so
mind the same; that if any virtue be commended, practice it; if any vice
condemned, avoid it; if any consolation be insinuated, approoriate it; if any
good example be propounded, follow it; yea so mind what thou hear, as if it
were spoken only to thy self; and be not like a child, who looking in a
glass, thinks he sees another child's face, and not his own. For want of
application is the sole cause, that in the midst of so much means, so few are
converted. Yea there be very few men, that make not the whole Bible, and all
the Sermons they hear; yea the checks of their own consciences, and the motions
of Gods Spirit utterly ineffectual, for want of wit and grace to apply the same
to themselves: Whereas if they would rightly and ingenuously apply but one text
or two, as Mat. 7.12. and 16.26. or the like unto their own souls, as they can
unto others (being better able to discern others motes, then their own beams)
they might be everlastingly happy.

And so much of Non-preaching, now of Unpreaching Ministers; who as much excel
these, as the Spider excells the Butterfly. The ones Sermons being like that
unblest food, Hag. 1.6. the other like those bitter and venomous waters, 2
King. 2.19, 20, 21. Or that Pottage, 2 King. 4.39, 40, 41. wherein was put
colloquintida: as you will acknowledge when you have seen them in like manner
cut up and anatomized: which will be the sum of the second part of this
discovery; which had been joined with it, only I prorogue the printing of
that, until I see the acceptance of this: because I much question, whether
those it concerns will be capable of its usefulness: for having imparted both
parts to some of those Non-preaching and Unpreaching Ministers, for whose sakes
they were both composed; though they commend the pieces, yet (so unacqainted
are they with their own hearts) they conceive not that there are any such
Preachers.

Now in case it shall not be printed, and yet of some shall be desired; they
may please to read in lieu of it, my Characters of the kinds of Preaching;
published fourteen years since, and sold by James Crumpe, in Little
Bartholomews Well-yard.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

JOSEPH CARYL.

ERRATA.
Not to mention any of the literal mistakes, or mis-poyntings in each sheet
which are usual: At the top of Page 15. there was (by what means I know not) a
whole line taken out, after the proof was returned: and put at the bottom of
Page 16. whereby the one place is left defective, and the other marred in the
sense. The words are these. Gold; of Cornucopia, that it has all things
necessary for food in it; of Panaces. And in Page 39. line 33: there is, most
the, instead of the most, Neither of which faults though very gross, were
espied, until most of the sheet was printed off: But the ingenuous Reader will
either mend them with his pen, or be so charitable as to bear with the
Compositor: However the Author must, or else turn the buckle of his Girdle.


