A BRIEF VIEW OF The late troubles and confusions in England, begun and
occasioned by a prevailing Faction in the Long PARLIAMENT: Deduced to the
auspicious coming in of GENERAL MONCK, And the most glorious and happy
Restitution of KING CHARLES the SECOND.

By WILLIAM YOUNGER.

Psalm. 118.22. The same stone which the builders refused, is become the head
stone of the Corner: This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.
London, Printed for Robert Gibbs, at the golden Ball in Chancery Lane. 1660.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE Reader.
THis brief Relation was composed Chiefly out of the Authors own observation of
the transactions in these late sad times. Many things are purposely omitted
(especially in the former part) for brevity sake, which otherwise might have
been inserted. For his intentions at first, were to leave it in the Register
book of his Parish (in which he first began it) for the use of his successors;
but it growing too big for that design, he drew the rest down in papers to the
coming in of General Monck, and the happy Restitution of King Charles the
Second to his Throne. He has endeavored herein to set down nothing but truth;
and hops he has not much failed therein: However, if any errors or mistakes
be, they are not wilful, and (possibly) not much material. His purpose only is
to set forth the stupendous mercy of God in raising up a temporary Savior
(such a one he accounts General Monck to be) for the deliverance of this sinful
Nation, from an oppression or slavery as bad as Egyptian; and from a confusion
no less than Babylonish. If God may have the glory, by an humble ackowledgement
and real thanks to be given him by the people of these Kingdoms, it is all the
Author expects or desires.

A Brief View of the late troubles and confusions in England, begun and
occasioned by a prevailing faction in the Long Parliament.
ANNO 1640. Novem. 3. began the Parliament, called the Long Parliament, the
King, the Parliament it self, and thee Kindoms.

The King in the beginning of this Parliament, had for the security of the
Subjects in their Persons, Liberties, and Estates, passed many and several Acts
of grace, (to the no small diminution of his Royal Prerogative) more than all
his Predecessors Kings of England, from the Conquest downward, had ever done;
and all this to remove from them all jealousies and fears.

After this in May, 1641. he gives way at the great and pressing importunity of
the House of Commons, ^^^1.
to the Condemnation and Execution of the Earl of Strafford, a loyal Subject,
and a most able and accomplished counselor, as any Prince in Christendom
ever had. The King was very hardly moved to yield either to his attaindor or
execution, as not being satisfied in conscience, of any guilt or crime in him,
deserving such punishment, but yield at length he did (though with much
reluctance) to satisfy the importunity of the people, and indeed at the
request of the Earl himself; who desired Jonah-like, to be cast overboard,
thereby to appease the violent rage of a tempestuous people. The truth is, this
Nobleman, as also the Archbishop of Canterbury (afterward Anno 1644.) were
merely sacrificed to the malice and revenge of the Scots.

In August following, the King goes into Scotland, to compose differences
there, between himself and his Subjects of that Kingdom: which done, he returns
again to London, and is there received with exceeding joy and triumph of the
people, in or about the beginning of December.

The House of Commons to welcome his Majesty home, instead of giving him thanks
for the many gracious Acts he had lately passed, they present him with a
Remonstrance, Dec. 15. laying open all the miscarriages and misfortunes of his
whole Government, from the beginning of his Reign, even to that present; and
this they publish, contrary to his express desire, to the whole Kingdom;
whereby they gave occasion to the people, to conceive jealousies and suspicions
of a malignant party about the King, still carrying on their own designs, both
against Religion, and the Laws of the Land.

After the publishing of this Remonstrance, fears and jealousies increase among
the people; the vulgar rabble in and about London, frequently flock down to
Westminster, with Petitions and clamours, against the Bishops and Popish Lords,
and disaffected Members (as they termed them) in the House of Commons, and no
redress could be had again them, though the House of Lords and the King himself
had moved the House of Commons to declare against them. The truth is, they were
favored and countenanced under hand, by some Members of that House.

The King to avoid the danger of these tumults, withdraws from White Hall to
Windsor; from thence afterward to Newmarket, and so by Cambridge into the
Northern parts; and thence to York.

The Parliament soon after his removal from Whitehall, petition Him, at
Newmarket, and elsewhere, for the Militia, to have it put into such hands as
the two Houses shall think fit; but he denies them: telling them that the Law
has settled it in Him; that to divest Himself of the power of the Sword, is to
bereave Himself of power to protect his people, and support the Laws. This
Petition was much insisted on by the Parliament under pretense of fears and
jealousies; but the King absolutely and peremptorily denies it.

The King by several journeys comes to York, in the beginning of the year 1642,
and there he settles His Court. Soon after his coming into those parts, he was
denied entrance into Hull by Sir John Hotham, when he offered to go into the
Town but with twenty persons attending Him; The King thereupon fearing, lest
the same armed force that kept Him out of Hull, might surprise His Person at
York, he entertaines a guard of the Gentry of that County. This by the house of
Commons is Voted a levying of War against the Parliament, though they
themselves had long before, three times as many of the Trainedbands of the
City, to guard the houses daily.

Many Petitions, Answers, and Declarations, passed between the King and
Parliament, during his Majesty's being at York, wherein it is evident to all
understanding men, that the King had the better cause, and was more able to
maintain it by the pen, and by reasons and arguments, than the Parliament was;
for the truth is, his Declarations, and Answers to their Messages, Petitions,
and Propositions were unanswerable.

But words and writings not being sufficient to compose these differences, they
proceed from words to blows: About July, they Vote that the King is seduced by
evil and Malignant Counselors, and thereupon they Vote an Army to be raised
under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex; the pretense is for King and
Parliament, against these Malignant Counselors; but they accuse or name none
in particular.

The same year, Aug. 24. the King sets up his Standard at Nottingham,
commanding all men who were bound to assist him by virtue of their Tenures, to
repair unto him. But at Nottingham there being no great appearance (though
Essex his Army was at that time listed, and formed ready to march) his Majesty
marches with those few Forces he had to Leicester, Worcester, Shrewsbury, and
so upon the borders of Wales, gathering an Army; Essex all this time marching
after him, and pursuing him.

After some little conflict at Worcester, wherein the Kings Forces under the
conduct of Prince Rupert, and Maurice had the better, the two Armies meet at
Edgehill near Keynton in Warwickshire, where the first Signal Battle was
fought between them, with great loss and slaughter on either side: The Kings
standard being taken, yet recovered again; his General the Earl of Lindsey
slain; but the King had the better, keeping the field all night; and Essex
Retreating with his broken Forces to Warwick-Castle, and from thence soon after
with a few horses to London: This Battle was fought on Sunday October. 23. and
the Guns were heard all that afternoon to Thetford in Norfolk.

The King presently after enters Oxford, and fortifies it, and matches to
Reading and Windsor, and so toward London; The Citizens arming and sending
forth all the power they could make against him. At Branford he encountered them
about Novem. 12. and beat the party that opposed; but fearing least he should
be surrounded with their numerous Army of Citizens, he Retreated back to
Windsor, and Fortifying Reading, he marches back to Oxford; but about the
latter end of the year Reading is besieged by the Parliaments Forces, and the
Governor Sir Arthur Ashton being unhappily wounded with a brick falling from a
Chimney beaten down by a Canon-shot, the Garrison is yielded upon composition by
Colonel Fielding.

Anno 1643. West, under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Richard Grenvile
and others, beating out the Earl of Stamford who commanded there for the
Parliament. The Earl of Newcastle for the King grows very strong in the North,
beats the Lord Fairfax in several Encounters, and takes in all places of
strength, except Hull, into which the Lord Fairfax had fled. The Queen lands at
Bridlington with arms and ammunition out of Holland; she marches by Nottingham,
and so to Oxford: The King the mean time takes Bristol; thence he removes and
summons Gloucester, which refusing to yield, he sets down before it. The terror
of Newcastles Army affrights Norfolk, and the Associated Counties, in so much
as many of the Parliament side are preparing to fly beyond sea for their
security. But the King setting down before Gloucester, and Newcastle before
Hull, wasted their Armies, and trifled away their time; whereas had they joined
and marched directly up to London, all had lain prostrate at their feet. The
King lay so long before Gloucester, that Essex had raised a great Army for the
relief thereof, which Army appoaching, the King arose and marched off; Essex
relieves the City, and pursues him; they encounter at Newbury, where the King
was worsted, and lost many gallant men. Newcastle in the mean time lay before
Hull, till the Earl of Manchester, besieges and takes Lyn in Norfolk, until
Lincoln and many other places were reduced to the Parliament, with much loss to
the Kings party.

The same year the Parliament treats with the Scots for their assistance
against the King, and the better to engage them, they impose the Covenant
(fr^med in Scotland) upon the whole Nation, for putting down of Bishops,
changing the whole Frame of Church Government in England, and Ireland with
Doctrine, Discipline, and worship to that of Scotland; the Scots accordingly
come in with an Army of 20000. or thereabout, in winter they besiege Newcastle
upon Tyne, and at length take it. Mean time the Forces of the Association
besiege Newark upon Trent a Garrison of the Kings, and much straiten it; Sir
John Meldrum, Sir Miles Hobart, and Sir John Palgrave commanding the forces
against it. But in their march, toward the latter end of the year, when they
every day expected the surrendering of the Town, Prince Rupert comes suddenly
upon them with a party of Horse (his body of foot being three or four miles
behind) assaults and surprises the Besiegers, disarms them all, and so relieves
the Town. Many of the Soldiers, and some Commanders were plundered and stripped,
contrary to Articles, for which the Kings party were afterward served in the
like kind.

Anno 1644. Earl of Essex, and Sir William Waller were sent forth with two
Armies, to pursue and take the King. The King fortifies Oxford, and lodging the
rest of his Artillery in Dennington Castle, with a light Army he takes the
field; Essex goes toward the West then mostly ^n the Kings possession; Waller
understanding which way the King was marched, pursued him. At Cropdie Bridge in
Oxfordshire, a place of advantage, he sets upon the Kings Forces, but is
himself beaten and routed; this was about the latter end of June.

Waller being thus defeated, the King follows Essex into the West, drives him
by degrees as far as Lestithrell in Cornwell, and there coops him up. Essex
takes the Sea in a Boat, and leaves this Army to capitulate for themselves.
The Horse under the Command of Sir William Balfore, break through the Kings
Quarters, and get away; the Foot commanded by Skippon capitulate for their
lives, leaving their Arms, Ordnance, and Ammunition upon the place, September. 4.
and t^king an Oath not to serve any more against the King, which nevertheless
many of them presently after broke. The King after this hard service, marches
back with his Army leasurely, and at Newbury, is assaulted by the broken Troops
of Essex his Army, assisted by Manchester and Cromwell, commanding the Forces
of the Association. A sore fight there was in the night, with much loss to both
parties: The King gains the Town, and the next day, or the day after, takes his
Ordnance, and Ammunition from Dennington Castle in the sight of the Enemy,
without opposition, and so marches with them to Oxford. This Summers service
lost the credit of Essex, Manchester, and Waller, they were never employed
after.

But in the mean time, while Essex and Waller were thus employed against the
King, the Scots with the assistance of the Associated Counties, and other of
the Parliaments Forces, had so far prevailed against the Earl of Newcastle and
his Army, as they had besieged him in York for many months: Prince Rupert with
a great Army out of Lancashire and the parts adjacent, to his relief: Upon the
Prince his approach, the Besiegers rise in disorder, and are ready to break and
run. The Prince thought it not enough to relieve the City, but would also beat
the besiegers, and setting upon them, July 14. they Rally and beat him; a great
slaughter there was, not less than seven thousand slain of both parts, but
most (they say) of the Princes party. The Earl of Newcastle, in discontent at
the Prince his rashness, quits the place and all his Command, and with some
others of note, leaves the Kingdom. York soon after is again besieged, and Sir
Thomas Glenham undertakes the defense of the place, but at length was forced to
yield upon honorable terms.

Anno 1645. year the Parliament new moulds their Army. By a self-denying
Ordinance (as they termed it) they cast out Essex, Manchester, and Waller, and
all others that were Parliament Members, both Lords and Commons, only Oliver
Cromwell one of the Burgesses for Cambridge is dispensed with. Sir Thomas
Fairfax is made Captain General, Cromwell his Lieutenant General; Skippon also
has a great command amongst them, and many of Cromwels kindred and Relations
have great employment and commands in this new modelled Army, most of Essex his
Officers being laid aside.

In May the King marches out of Oxford with a very good Army, and takes
Leicester by assault, about the latter end of the month, having then also a
very considerable Army in the West, about 15000. (as was reported) under the
command of Goring, who at that time besieged Taunton.

After the taking of Leicester, the King was requested by Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and the Northern Gentlemen to march Northward for the Relief of
Pomsret Castle then straightened by the enemy: But receiving intelligence that
Fairfax intended to besiege Oxford, he marches against him, hoping if he could
deseat their new modeled Army, all other places and forces would easily be
reduced. At Naseby in Northamptonshire the two Armies meet on Saturday, June
14. where at the first encounter the King had much the better, his Right Wing
of horsemen Defeating and Routing the Left Wing of the Parliaments Army,
wounding Skippon, and taking Ireton ( Cromwels son in law) prisoner. But the
Left Wing of the Kings Army, consisting most of Northern Horsemen (and they
discontented) at the first Encounter were broken, turned head and ran; the King
did what possibly could be, riding up and down the field to stay their flight,
and Rally them, but all would not do; and the Right Wing of Horse were so far
engaged in the pursuit, as they could not timely and orderly Retreat to succor
the Foot. The Horse being thus routed and defeated, the Foot were not able to
stand; but after some little resistance and slaughter, yielded themselves
prisoners, four or five thousand of them. The Kings Coach, and in it his
Cabinet, with Letters and Papers taken; all Arms, Artillery, Bag and Baggage
lost; the King himself hardly escaping to Leicester, and from thence that night
to Ashby de la Zouch.

This was the fatal battle of Naseby: for after this, the Kings affairs never
prospered, but Town after Town was taken, and in all encounters the Kings party
was worsted, all the West parts by degrees taken in that Summer, and the Queen
and Prince forced to fly beyond sea.

anno 1646. Oxford the Kings chiefest Garrison was besieged, and much
straightened. About Ascension time, the King in a disguise got out of the City,
came as far a Downham in Norfolk, and from thence went to the Scots Camp, lying
in siege before Newark, and to them his native Subjects he yields himself,
hoping by their means to make some better terms with the Parliament. They used
him civilly and respectively, gave notice to the Parliament of his yielding
himself to them (having made use of his Authority for the pr^sent surrendering
of of Newark) and from thence carried him to Newcastle, a Garrison then in
their possession, where he remained all that year, and from thence gave Order
to several other Garrisons, as yet holding out for him, to surrender to the
Parliaments Forces upon honorable terms.

At Newcastle he remained all that summer, and afterward upon Treaty between
the Parliament and Scots Commissioners, the Parliament paying them 200000. l.
in hand, and securing as much more to be paid. And promising (as the Scots
affirm) to treat the King honorably, and not to do any violence to his Person;
they deliver the King up to the Parliament, and quitting Newcastle, and the
rest of the Garrisons they held in England, they departed with their Army into
Scotland.

The King from Newcastle was removed to Holdenby, Northamptonshire; there he is
kept an honorable Prisoner, attended by some Commissioners of Parliament, and
a slender Guard of soldiers; none of his own servants are permitted to wait
upon him, nor any of his Chaplains or Ministers of his Opinion, though he
earnestly desired it in a Message to the Parliament; but they force upon him
Presbyterian Ministers, of the Parliaments Opinion and appointment: These would
not suffer him to celebrate the Feast of Easter, as being against their
Directory of late established.

This summer the Wars being finished, all Garrisons surrendered, and the Kings
Forces utterly subdued, and forced to compound for their estates, taking an
Oath never to bear Arms against the Parliament, they take a resolution to
disband the Army, sending some part of it into Ireland, against the Papists
still in Arms there, and only to keep 5000 Horse and Foot in England, to
preserve the peace of the Kingdom, against any risings that might happen.

The soldiers fearing the Wars would cease, and their trade decay, began to
Mutiny; first they pick quarrels against the Parliament, and at once impeach
eleven of the Members of the House of Commons, all rigid Presbyterians, as
enemies to the Army, and desire they may be secluded the House: They Act now,
not as Soldiers, but as Commonors and Freemen of the Nation, pretending to
stand for the Native Rights and Liberties of the people. And to carry on their
designs the better, the common Soldiers, who began the work, choose their
Agitators, (as they termed them) two or more out of every Regiment, to
represent their grievances to the General and chief Officers of the Army: And
in conclusion they peremptorily refuse to disband, or to send or go any of them
into Ireland, till all their grievances were redressed, and their desires
satisfied: But all this (ye must know) was underhand countenanced (if not
contrived) by Cromwell and some principal Officers of his Faction.

And because the Parliament had made themselves sufficiently odious, by keeping
the King under so strict guards, denying him the attendance of his Chaplains,
and the use of the Common Prayer Book, and tendering such harsh Propositions to
him, both in relation to himself and his party, that had already suffered so
much for his sake; The Soldiers to ingratiate themselves to the people,
pretended much for the King, and for his restitution of his Throne and
Government, upon fairer terms by much, than the Parliament would afford him.
And suddenly by a Party Commanded by one Cornet Joyce, they seize upon the King
at Holdenby, June 4. in the night, and bring him into the Armies quarte^s, then
about Newmarket or Cambridge. The General would not suffer him to pass through
Cambridge, lest the Scholars, more than ordinarily addicted to him, should
make any disturbance, but brought him a more private way to his own house at
Newmarket. There he rested some while, and the Gentry and people of all sorts
from severtl parts; had access to him, and many came and were cured of the
Kings Evil by him. The Soldiers were highly magnified by the people, for their
civilitie and specious pretenses to the King.

From Newmarket the Army removed to Saint Albones, and the King with them, his
Majesty being lodged at Hatfield house, there they pretended great matters for
him, and Cromwell (especially) in private gave him great hope of his
Restitution. From thence June 23. the publish a Remonstrance of their good
intentions toward the Kingdom, and to the King especially: Amongst other
passages in that Declaration, this is one, They profess they do not see how
there can be any peace to the Kingdom firm and lasting, without a due
consideration of, and provision for the rights, quiet, and immunity of his
Majesty's Royal Family, and his late partakers: And herein (say they) me think,
that tender and equitable dealing (as supposing their cases had been ours) and
a spirit of common love and justice, diffusing it self to the good and
preservation of all, will make up the most glorious conquest over their hearts
(if God in mercy see it good) to make them and the whole people of the Land
lasting friends. These are the very words in that Declaration; and I have
noted them the rather, to see how quite contrary to these specious professions,
their after-Actings within a short while, were.

The Army removes to several quarters, and the King along with them. They
treat him honorably, in respect of what the Parliament had done: they allow
him the attendance of his Chaplains, and the use of the Common Prayer, denied
him by the Parliament; some Noblemen and Gentlemen of his party, are permitted
to come to him. The General obtains of the Parliament, that he may see his
children, t^en under the custody of the Earl of Northumberland, upon promise of
the General, that they shall return again. Proposals are made to him by the
Army, far more moderate than the Propositions lately tendered to him at
Newcastle. All things are carried by the Army, as if they really meant his
Restitution, upon very reasonable terms. And most certain it is, that Cromwell
gave his Majesty very faithful promises of restoring him upon more moderate
terms than either the Parliament or Army proposed.

But ye must know, while these things were in agitation, about the later end
of July, there fell a great difference between the Parliament and Army,
insomuch as the Army were jealous that the Parliament and City would have
brought the King to London, upon his own terms. The occasion was thus:

The Militia of the City of London, had been settled by an Ordinance of May 4.
1647. in the hands of such of the City, as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council, had nominated and approved: The Army about the 20 of July, require of
the Parliament, that Ordinance may be repealed, and the Militia of the City
settled in other hands, such as the Army might confide in; and accordingly in a
thin house, the Militia was changed, without any Objections against the persons
formerly entrusted, or acquainting the Mayor or Common Council with it, to hear
what they could allege in their own behalf. The City startled at this sudden
and unexpect change of their Militia, calling a Common Council, they resolve to
petition the Parliament for restoring their Militia, as formerly settled, in a
full house, and accordingly July 26. the Sheriffs, and some Common Council men,
present their Petition; which Petition the same day within a few hours after,
was seconded by another other of the Apprentices, to the same effect, and
wherein they claimed that the ordering of the Cities Militia, was the
Birthright of the City, belonging to them by several Charters confirmed by
Parliament, and about one thousand Apprentices, (yet without any arms) came
down with this Petition.

The House of Lords upon presenting these Petitions, were pleased to grant
their desires, revoking the Ordinance of the 23 of July, and reviving that of
the fourth of May. The debate stuck longer in the House of Commons, but about
three of the clock in the Afternoon, they passed it; The Apprentices staying in
and about Westminster Hall and the Parliament door, till the Vote was passed;
and then all or the most part withdrew and went to their homes.

The Apprentices being departed, some disorderly persons instigated thereunto
(as was probably thought) by diverse Sectaries and Adherents to the Army, to
make the business more odious, and to give the Army occasion to quarrel with
the City, flocked again to the Parliament door; and the Speaker having
adjourned the House, they compelled him again to return to the chair, and
there kept both him and the Members in the House, till they had passed a Vote,
that the King should come to London to treat.

The Mayor and Common Council still assembled, hearing of this disorder, sent
down the Sheriffs immediately with such strength as they could for the present
get, and pacified the tumult, sending the Speaker safe to his house; and
published Edicts to prevent the like. This tumult happened July 26. being
Monday.

The House met again next day, being Tuesday, sat again, and Acted quietly;
and because the Fast was the next day after, they adjourned the House till the
Friday following, the Lords having formerly adjourned to that day.

On the Thursday following, the day before they were to meet upon the
adjournment, the Speaker with about forty of the Members, secretly withdrew to
the Army then at Windsor, complaining of an horrid force put upon the House.
The rest of the Members at least 140, meeting on the Friday morning according
to adjournment, finding neither Speaker, nor Mace, and understanding upon
inquiry, whither he was gone, they chose a New Speaker, and get another Mace,
and set again; and the like did the Lords, whose Speaker also was fled upon
the same account: both (as it was conceived) either inveigled, or threatened by
the Army, that they might have the better pretense of quarrel against the City
and Parliament. I have related this passage the more particularly, that it may
be compared with the force afterward put upon the Parliament, by the Army
themselves, upon the King Trial.

These things thus passed as London between the Parliament and City, highly
incensed the Army, who now take upon them, to be Supreme Umpires over the
Nation; they entertain and countenance the fugitive Speakers and Members, and
they and the Council of the Army, set together in consultation, engaging to
support one another in this quarrel against the members (as they termed them)
at Westminister, and the City.

Mean time the Parliament call in the eleven impeached Members, secluded
hitherto upon the Armies accusation; they revive the Committee of Safety, they
give power to the City by several Orders and Ordinances, to list and raise
Forces, to appoint Officers and Commanders, to issue out Arms and Ammunition,
for the defense of the Parliament and City, against all that should invade
them. Massey, Pointze, Birch, and other reformadoes that had formerly done
great service for the Parliament when Essex was General, are now employed as
chief Commanders for the City. The Army on the contrary drawing together all
their Forces, and endeavoring to raise the Trained bands in the adjacent
Counties, prepare and intend to invade and subdue that Rebellious City.

The City thus prepared for defense, were nevertheless, for preventing the
effusion of blood, willing to have accorded with the Army upon any reasonable
terms; and to that purpose sent several messages to the Army; but all would not
do, no terms of reconciliation or peace would be granted, unless they would
submit themselves, and the Parliament, wholly to the power of the Army; which
upon the point they did; for in conclusion they agree and yield, To desert both
Houses of Parliament and the impeached Members: To recall their Declaration
lately published, Relinquish their Militia, deliver up all their Forts and line
of Communication to the Army, as also the Tower of London, with all Arms and
Ammunition therein; to disband all their Forces, and turn all their new-made
Commanders and Reformadoes out of the line, to demolish all their works, and to
suffer the Army to march without opposition through the City.

These imperious conditions of the Army, were calmly submitted to by the
tame-spirited Citizens: And thereupon, the Army brings in the fugitive Speakers
and Members, and seat them again in their authority; Fairfax receives the
solemn thanks of the House, the common soldiers two months pay for their good
service and valor, and a day of Thanksgiving is appointed, to be solemnly kept
for this great deliverance: and Fairfax made General of all Forces, both in
England and Wales, and Constable of the Tower of London: All this was done,
Aug. 6. 1647.

Soon after the General, Lieutenant General, and the whole Army, with their
train of Artillery, march in triumph through the City of London; And from that
day forward, both City, Parliament, and whole Kingdom, are subject to the Army.

Not long after the restitution of these fugitive Members, all Votes, Orders,
and Ordinances of Parliament, made in their absence, are declared null and
void: The eleven impeached Members of the House of Commons, have leave granted
them to go beyond Sea, and they must think they are favorably dealt with:
Seven Lords that sat in the upper House, in the absence of the fugitive
Members, viz. The Earls of Suffolk, Lincoln, and Midlesex; the Lords Berkly,
Willoughby, Hunsdon, and Maynard, are impeached of high Treason, and committed
to the black Rod, for levying of War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom.
The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and diverse Citizens, are likewise impeached of the
same crime, and committed to the Tower; diverse members also of the Commons
House, are under accusation and examination, as countenancers and abettors of
the late tumult. But all these impeachments and accusations, in time vanished,
and came to nothing; only the Army Faction was by this means strengthened and
encouraged, and the other party as much quelled and discouraged; so that
thenceforward all Votes propounded, were passed or not, according to the temper
and disposition of the Army. The Parliament became wholly subservient to the
Armies designs, as will plainly appear in the ensuing Story.

Meantime the King continues still under the power of the Army, removes and
passes from place to place as they remove their Quarters: But now having made
the Parliament wholly for their turn, he is removed nearer London, to Hampton
Court; there he had much freedom, and abundance of people continually resorted
to him. At Hampton Court he receives Propositions from the Parliament, Septem.
7. the same in effect that were tendered to him at Newcastle, in July the year
before. The King in answer, desires that the Parliament would take into
consideration the Proposals of the Army, of August 1. 1647. as more moderate,
and more conducing to satisfy all interests in the Nation.

Things thus standing, and the King remaining still at Hampton Court, a Faction
of Seditious people called Levellers, sprung up in the City and Army; some of
the chiefest whereof were Lilburn, Overton, VVyldman, and others, people of a
turbulent and heady temper. These frame a writing, called the Agreement of the
people, tending to the alteration of the whole frame of Government of the
Nation. They style the House of Commons in their Petitions, the supreme power
of the Nation; they bitterly declaim and rail against the House of Lords in
several Pamphlets. These at first receive some check from the House of Commons;
and one of them (a soldier) is by the Council of War, condemned and shot to
death at VVare: but yet they increase more and more, and grow more insolent
every day, being (as is was probably thought) countenanced underhand by some in
the Parliament, and by some great Officers in the Army, to promote their own
ambitious designs. At length about November. 9. or 10. Cromwell sends word to the
King by Colonel Whaley who had the Guard of him, that those kind of people
were grown very numerous in the Army, that he feared they had some malicious
design against his Majesty's person, and he doubted it would not be in the
power of the Officers of the Army to protect him, and therefore advised him, by
timely withdrawing himself in private, to provide for his own security; A
Letter of Advertisement also from an unknown person in London to the same
purpose, was sent and delivered to his Majesty, intimating his danger, and
wishing his Majesty were at his or any Loyal Subjects House in London:
Whereupon the next day in the Evening, November. 11. his Majesty with a Servant
or two only, conveyed himself secretly from Hampton Court, into the Isle of
Wight.

In that Island commanded one Colonel Hamond, as Governor there for the
Parliament; a kinsman he was of Dr. Hamonds, that famous Divine, and (I think)
the Kings Chaplain; insomuch as the King might expect some more then ordinary
civility from him. Hamond presently gives notice to the Parliament of his
Majesty's coming thither, and upon order from the Parliament, takes him into
custody at Curesbrook Castle.

The King also upon his departure from Hampton Court, had left upon the Table a
Letter or Message to the two Houses of Parliament, signifying the cause of his
withdrawing himself, and also his readiness to concur with them in all things
just and reasonable, for the settling of a safe and wellgrounded Peace. And had
further soon after his arrival in the Isle of Wight sent another Message or
Declaration to them, wherein he offers, First, Concerning Religion to establish
the Presbyterian Government for three years, and then afterward to establish
Church Government in such a manner as shall be concluded upon by the Assembly
of Divines, with the addition of twenty Divines to be nominated by his Majesty.
Secondly, For the Militia he offers it them wholly by Land and Sea, during his
whole Reign, so as after that, it may return entirely to the Crown. Thirdly,
For the arrears of the Army, he will undertake, if he may have the benefit of
Sequestrations from March last, and compositions to be made before the
conclusion of the Peace, and the Assistance of the Clergy, and the arreares of
the Rents of his own revenew, that were yet behind; to pay 400 thousand pound
within eighteen months; and if that will not do, then to make sale of forest
Lands for raising the rest. Fourthly, He gives them power to dispose of the
great Offices of State, as also to nominate and appoint his Privy Counselors
during his reign. Fifthly, For the Court of Wards, if it cannot be regulated
without being a grievance to his Subjects, he is willing to abolish it, for a
valuable compensation. Sixthly, He offers to recall and null all Proclamations
and Declarations against the Parliament, and all Indictments against any person
for adhering to them, or acting by their authority; and to pass an Act of
general pardon and Oblivion to all his Subjects whatsoever.

Those and some other things he offers by that Massage of November. 17. and for
all other things, he desires they may be debated and composed in a personal
Treaty, between himself and the two Houses of Parliament at London: Which
personal Treaty the Scots Commissioners soon after desired to be assented to,
and held forth his Majesty's offers to be very just and reasonable.

But to this Massage of his Majesty the two Houses return answer, by sending
him four Bills to sign and confirm under the great Seal of England. 1. To
settle the Militia by sea and land, both in England and Ireland, in the two
Houses of Parliament for ever; with power to raise what Forces they please; as
also what moneys they thought good, upon the Subjects, for support thereof,
thereby divesting the Court wholly of the power of the Militia. 2. To justify
the proceedings of the Parliament in the late War, and to make void all Oaths,
Declarations, Proclamations, and other proceedings against the Parliament. 3.
Against all Peers lately made or to be made without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. 4. For the adjournment of the Parliament from place to place, as
the two houses should think fit. These Bills being assented to, and confirmed
by his Majesty, they will yield to treat with him concerning the rest of the
propositions in the Isle of Wight. Which propositions I must further tell you,
were such as the Scotch Commissioners declared their dissent upon them, before
they were sent.

The King apprehending these four Bills especially in the way they were penned,
not only destructive to Monarchy, but to the peoples liberty, refuses to
confirm them; yet in a message or writing to the Houses, gave his reasons
against them.

Whereupon the House of Commons presently Vote to make no more addresses to
him, but to settle the Kingdom without him: and further by the same Vote, they
make it high Treason, for any person whatfoever, to send any Message or Letter
to him, or to receive any from him, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. This was about the beginning of January.

The House of Lords would not be drawn suddenly to pass these Votes; diverse
argued strongly against them; and the House was equally divided about the
question; but within three or four days after, the Army sending solemn thanks
to the House of Commons for their passing these Votes, and drawing down some of
their Forces to garrison Whitehall and the Mewes, it turned the Scale in the
House of Lords, and they also passed those Votes.

Soon after the passing of these votes of Non-address, discontents grew high in
all parts of the Kingdom; And the common people especially in the parts about
London, were wonderfully oppressed, and even eaten up with Freequarter. The
Commissioners of Scotland withdrew and went home, and with the assistance of
Duke Hamilton, formerly imprisoned by the King, and lately set free by the
Parliament, called a Parliament in Scotland, wherein they resolve ( Maugre the
Kirk) to raise an Army for the delivery of the King.

The beginning of this year 1648, was full of discontents. Poyer, Ponel, and
Laugherne, formerly for the Parliament, holding out Pembrook Castle a^ against
the Parliament, and defeating a party of 2500 that were sent against them. The
Lord Inchequen, that was President of Munster in Ireland, declares against the
Parliament, and joins with the Marquess of Ormond for the Kings interest; for
which the Parliament imprison his son, a child of eight or nine years of age,
that was Borded and went to School at Thistleworth near London. Petitions came
from many Counties of England, and from the City of London, requiring a
Revocation of those Votes for Non-address, and desiring a Personal Treaty with
the King, and his future settlement.

These Petitions being slighted, and many Surrey Gentlemen wounded by the
Soldiers, at the Parliament door, and in Westminster Hall, and some slain
outright for presenting their Petition* the Kingdom grew into a general flame.
Tumults arose in many places, as at Norwich, April 24. where the
Committee-House was by accident blown up, that part of the City exceedingly
shattered, and above 100. people slain. At Bury in Suffolk ^here the Town was
held out some days by the meaner sort of people, against the Troopers. In
Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire, and other places, so that the Troopers were
posted from place to place to subdue tumults; and as fast as they subdued them
in one place, they brake out in another.

The Kentishmen rise up in arms, to the number of ten thousand, and possess
themselves of some strong Castles; They in Essex also, under the command of Sir
Charles Lucas and others, second them, and seize upon the Committee for the
County at Chelmesford. Pomfret Castle is taken by stratagem, and a great party
of the Kings possess it, and command the whole Country round about. Many (if
not most part) of the Navy revolt, and setting Raynsborough their late made
Admiral on shore in a Cockboat, they go to the Prince; with whom also joined
the Lord Willoughby of Parham and others, so as the Prince had a matter of
thirty or forty ships, one and other under his command at Sea. The Scots under
D. Hamilton, invade the North, by the way of Carlisle, with an Army of fifteen
thousand, besides a party of English (about 3000) under the command of Sir
Marmaduke Langdale.

All this time the Parliament are consulting about Propositions to be sent to
the King, as also of the place and manner of a personal treaty with him, which
was desired by the Londoners and most of the Kingdom to be had at London. Thus
the time was spun on, and the Summer well-nigh spent, before they could agree
upon terms for a personal treaty; and at length it was resolved to be in the
Isle of Wight.

In the mean time, while the Parliament thus defer the Treaty, Cromwell is
first sent into Wales, to subdue them; where he found work enough for most part
of the Summer: Fairfax is sent against the Kentishmen, where though he were
worsted at Rochester Bridge, and lost many men, yet at Maidston he had the
better, got the Town, and dispersed them. Presently after five thousand of the
Kentishmen, under the command of the Lord Goring Earl of Norwich, being denied
passage through London, transport themselves over the Thames, and so into
Essex, where after some skirmish about Bowbridge, with some of the Parliament
Forces, they march to Rumford, and so to Chelmesford, and join with the
Essexmen at that time there Rendezvouz'd. Fairfax pursues them with all
expedition; they march to Colchester, but were scarce set down in the Town,
before Fairfax with his Army was at their heels. A sore fight there was in the
Suburbs, June 13. the next day after their coming into the Town, a thousand men
and more slain upon the place, most of them of Fairfax his party. Had they of
Colchester pursued that days victory, it is probably thought, they might
easily have destroyed Fairfax his Army. The Kings Party fortify the Town,
hoping the Gentry of Suffolk and Norfolk will come in to their assistance:
Fairfax on the contrary, by degrees begirts the Town, forcing all the Country
thereabout both Essex and Suffolk to assist him against it.

During the siege of Colchester, the Duke of Buckingham with Lord Francis his
brother, the Earl of Holland, and the Earl of Peterborough, appear in Arms
with five or six hundred Horse at Bamsted Down in Surrey or thereabouts; where
they would soon have increased, had they not been suddenly surprised by a party
of the Army out of London; the Lord Francis was slain, and the rest scattered;
Buckingham escaped, but Holland was soon after taken at St. Neots in
Huntingtonshire, cowardly yielding himself without resistance.

The Scots mean time lingered and came on slowly, insomuch as Cromwell having
subdued them in Wales, he marches immediately from thence into Lancashire, and
at Wiggon and Preston defeats them, taking Duke Hamilton prisoner, basely
yielding himself in his Chamber, Aug. 18, 19. From thence he pursues his
victory into Scotland, even to the City of Edinburgh, where he is highly
applauded and magnified by Argile and the Churchmen, who were always against
this engagement of Hamilton.

Colchester after this, pressed with a long siege, and pinched with hunger, at
last yields to Fairfax upon very hard terms, Aug. 28. where the very same day
that they entered the Town, they caused Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle
(too gallant men as ever England bred) to be shot to death in the Castle Yard:
All the rest of the Nobility and Gentlemen of quality, were carried away
Prisoners.

The Treaty with the King is at length begun: a fixed number of days are at
first appointed; that expired, a fortnight more is added, so that upon the
finishing of the treaty, a little before all was concluded, Cromwell returns
with his victorious Army out of Scotland. The Army fearing the Parliament would
agree with the King, and re-establish him in his Throne (though the conditions
were extreme hard on his side) they first publish that shameless vile
Remonstrance at Saint Albans, November. 16. 1648. wherein they declare their
resolutions to question the King for his life, as the Capital Enemy, or grand
Delinquent, to bring him to trial. They prefix a time for the appearing of the
Prince now beyond Sea, to answer for his crimes; and in case he refuse to come
in and submit to a trial, to banish his person as a Rebel and Traitor, and
confiscate his estate.

This Remonstrance was sent to the House of Commons, with a Letter signed by
Fairfax the General, whom Cromwell abused and made his Stale in all this action)
to take it speedily into consideration, as a matter admitting no delay: But the
Commons laying it aside, and making the more speed to conclude with the King
upon the Treaty, voting his concessions satisfactory, so far as to be ground of
peace; Suddenly on Tuesday, December. 5. A Party of the Army seize upon the
Members of the House, whom they conceive to be opposite to their design; They
imprison many, and seclude and deter more, in all to the number of above two
hundred, leaving about sixty or seventy (if that) in the House, and those
either Army men, or devoted vassals to Cromwell and his faction; these vote the
Kings concessions not satisfactory, and thereupon break off the Treaty.

The Army then presently seize upon the King in the Isle of Weight, they remove
him in the night from Caresbrow Castle to Hurst Castle in Hampshire, an
unwholesom place, standing two or three mile into the sea, upon a very narrow
neck of Land: there they closely imprison him, and soon after obtain a Vote in
their new modeled House of Commons, to bring him to trial. The Lords refusing
to consent, they proceed without them, and draw up an impeachment against his
Majesty, by the advice of one Dorisley, an outlandish Doctor of Law, and that
many years before, had been History-Reader in Cambridge, preferred thither by
the Lord Brooks, to read that Lecture by him first founded, but soon after
silenced and put out by the Vice Chancellor and Head of the University, for
seditious Doctrine by him there delivered, against Monarchy.

For the Kings Trial, they appoint seventy or eighty Persons, the most of them
Army-men (all of them his mortal enemies) to be his Judges: the Judges of the
Land and most eminent Lawyers refusing to join with them, or assist them, they
appoint one Bradshaw a poor petty-fogging Lawyer, but of an audacious, impudent
forehead, to be President of their high Court of Justice, so they call it,
(more properly their Court of high injustice.) The King is brought from Hurst
Castle to Windsor, about Christmas, where they would not allow him a Minister
to keep the Festival with him. From thence they bring him to White Hall and
Saint James about the tenth of January by water. And there afterward, being
brought four several times before their pretended Court of Justice, where he
every time refusing to answer, and disclaiming their authority, offering to
give his reasons, but they refusing to hear him, at last Saturday January 27.
he is condemned to the block, and his head cut off on a Scaffold erected before
his Palace gate at White Hall, on Tuesday following, January 30. to the
unexpressable grief and sorrow of all true English People. And thus perished
the best, the wisest and the most Religious King that ever England had.

The House of Lords that had basely complied with the Commons, and supported
them from the beginning hitherto against their King, because they would not go
along with them in this last most wicked act, are kicked off by a Vote. The very
same day that they voted the abolition of Regal Government, February 7. 1648.
they voted down the House of Peers, as useless, inconvenient, and an hinderance
to the proceedings of Parliament, a just reward for so ignoble, degenerous
spirits.

And because great Personages, like great Trees in a Forest, seldom fall
alone, to complete the Tragedy, within a few weeks after, they impeach Duke
Hamilton General of the Scottish Army, and the Earl of Holland, as also the
Lord Capel, and Lord Goring taken in Colchester, and some others. None of these
seared to be questioned for their lives till now, for they yielding, had
quarter given them. But an high Court of Justice must not be set up for the
King alone; They mean to go the same way to work with others: the Law taking no
hold of them, they will make a Law that shall; and therefore the like Court is
erected again, for the trial of these Lords and others; though the same
President sat not, yet others did, that had the same power.

All that were accused, were condemned, but Goring being a Gentleman of no
great fortune, and never before engaged against them, found mercy at their
hands; Capels great estate drove on his ruin. Hamilton and Holland are
observed to have suffered deservedly, because they had played on both parts,
sometimes for the King, and otherwhiles against him, as affairs changed: The
poor spiritness of the rest is observed, in cowardly submitting to their
pretended authority; only the stout Lord Capel (so Lilburn calls him) would not
in the least buckle to acknowledge them a lawful judicatory, but after the
example of his Royal Master, denied their Anthority, and when he came to suffer
(which he and the other did, March 9.) he took his death with a most resolute
and undaunted courage, not only to the admiration of all men, but even to the
very terror of his enemies; they that neither loved him nor his cause, yet
highly commended him for his courage and magnanirnity, and as much despised
Hamilton for his timorous baseness, using all means possible to save his life;
but all would not do; much confidence he reposed in Hugh Peter's, that Clergy
Mountebank, who at last betrayed him, as himself had formerly betrayed the King.

After the King was thus put to death, and the Government changed into a
Commonwealth, a new Seal and new Coin being made, this Piece of the Parliament
that put the King to death, governed the Nation till April 20. 1653. what time
they were thrown out forcibly by Cromwell, (being then their General) and his
Army Officers, to the great content and rejoicing of the People.

But in the mean time presently after the death of the King, the Scots
proclaimed the Prince, King of Scotland, by the Name of Charles the second.

Ireland was almost all revolted soon after the death of the King; City of
Dublin held out for the Parliament: But Cromwell going over thither about
September 1649. in less then a years time reduces that whole Kingdom to the
obedience of the Parliament, driving the Natives for the most part out, and
cooping up the rest in the Western parts of the Kingdom.

Scotland having (as is said before) proclaimed the Prince King; they received
him into that Kingdom and crowned him at Scone the first of January 1649. 1650.
whereupon the Parliament having reduced Ireland, they resolve to send an Army
into Scotland about June 1650. Fairfax upon this lays down his Commission, and
Cromw ll is made Captain General in his stead; He marches into Scotland with a
great Army, where he lay a long time before he could engage the Scots to fight;
insomuch as the English were in great distress for provisions, and had been
famished or forced to return long before, had they not encamped near the sea,
and had the sea free and open to them. At length the Scots set upon them at
Dunbar, but were defeated and routed; at least 10000. of them slain and taken
upon the place; all of the Presbyterian party, and such as had formerly engaged
in England for the Parliament against the King: An hundred Ensigns at least are
taken, brought up to London, and hung up in triumph in Westminister Hall: and
which is remarkable, great numbers of those Soldiers, that at their coming
into England in 1643. had heathenishly profaned the Cathedral Church of
Durham, were now brought prisoners, and lodged in the very same Church, shut'
up together, and fed like swine, with roots and other trash, so that with
hunger, and cold, and stench, lying there a long time, most of them perished;
some of them acknowledging the just hand of God for their sacrilegious
profaneness committed in that place: this is a certain truth, reported by
credible persons living near and in that City: And thus our Brethren the Scots
were in part paid for their brotherly assistance.

But Cromwell has not yet done with them; he stays still after the battle of
Dunbar, and pursues his victory: he presently takes Leith and Edinburgh, and
afterward that strong and impregnable Castle, called by the Scots the Maiden
Castle, because never before conquered: Nor can I say it was now conquered by
Cromwell: He took it not by assault, nor yet by hunger, but as is credibly
reported, surrendered by the treachery or cowardice of the Lord (...) that
commanded there in chief.

This Cast e being taken, Cromwell enlarges his conquest all over the South of
Scotland, from Leith and Dunbar on the East, to Glasco and Air in the West,
without any great resistance. But the City and Castle of Sterling held out for
the King, together with the Fife, (the fertilest part of the Kingdom) and all
the North of Scotland, from Endinburgh Frith Northward: the Scots being now
grown so wise, after their beating at Dunbar, as to take and call in to their
assistance all the Kings party, both Scots and English, whom formerly they
rejected under the notion of Malignants and Cavaleers, putting the Earl of
Montross most barbarously to death, who landed in Scotland a little before the
Kings coming thither, and whom if they had entertained, might possibly by the
blessing of God, have prevented their being beaten at Dunbar, being a man of
extraordinary experience, conduct and courage in war, exceedingly beloved of
all the Royallists in Scotland, and one that had formerly with an handful of
men, done incomparable service for the King. But the Presbyterian Scots were as
bitter against the Kings party, as they were against Cromwell and his army, and
would have the glory wholly to themselves and their Covenant, in restoring the
King: that thereby they might the better advance their Covenant, and carry on
their pretended work of reformation both in Scotland and England.

Cromwell and his Army lay long in Scotland, Dunbar fight, and did little, not
able to advance any further. At length toward the latter end of July, he gets
over Edenburg Frith, and lands his Army or a considerable part of them in the
Fife, with a great loss and defeat to the Scots, who resisted: The King soon
after quits Sterling, and suddenly marches away in the beginning o^ August,
with an Army of about eleven thousand horse and foot into England, by the way
of Lancashire; and forcing his way at Warrington bridge, against a party that
opposed, he comes by easy marches without resistance to Worcester ( Massey
being with him) hoping the Presbyterians in those parts, and about Gloucester,
would generally have risen, and joined with the Scots.

The Parliament upon the first intelligence of his entrance into England, arm
all that possibly they can against him, publishing a Proclamation against him
and all his adherents as Rebels and Traitors, and forbidding all men upon pain
of high Treason to join with him, or to aid or assist him in the least. Cromwell
also pursues him out of Scotland, with as great a part of his Army as he could
well spare; at Worcester all forces assembled against him, meet; there they
fought, and the Kings party in conclusion is beaten; the Scots (they say) many
of them, refusing to fight at all. The King in a disguize very hardly escapes;
yet it pleased God, that at last he got safely out of England, many of the
Scottish Nobility, and some of the English, being taken prisoners, and kept
long after in the Tower of London. This fight at Worcester happened September. 3.
1651. a remarkable day for Cromwels Victories.

Scotland after this, is with little difficulty, wholly reduced to the
obedience of the Parliament; and Garrisons maintained in several places, even to
the utmost Northern Coasts; and they who formerly would not be subject to their
King, are now enforced to submit to Cromwell and his Faction.

Afterward in Anno 1652. Hollanders, many fierce and bloody battles were
fought at Sea, with great loss of both sides; in one of which, Admiral Dean for
the English, and in another, Van-Trump, for the Dutch, were slain. The
Hollanders have the worst in conclusion, so that at last they sue for peace and
obtain it.

But some while before this peace was concluded, Cromwell being now grown great
with his Victories in Ireland and Scotland, having subdued both these Kingdoms,
upon the twentieth of April 1653. he suddenly and forcibly turns out the
Parliament, who had for four years, and as much as from January to April, since
they put the King to death, with bloody cruelty and heavy oppression, governed
the Nation.

The Parliament being thus turned out, Cromwell and his Army Officers take upon
them the government of the Nation: They presently impose six Months Tax, and
erect a new Council of State, ( Bradshaw who formerly for his good service was
President, is now not so much as a Member of the Council.) Cromwell soon after
calls a Convention, of about an hundred and twenty persons, picked out by
himself, out of the several Counties of the Nation, most of them inferior
persons, and of the Independent and Anabaptistical faction. These were summoned
by particular Warrants or Tickets in paper, under his own hand only to meet at
Westminster, and consult fort settling the Nation.

Being met according to their summons, July 4. 1653. in the Commons House of
Parliament, and having chosen them a Chairman or Speaker, Cromwell comes in
amongst them, and pulls a writing out of his pocket, thereby giving them the
supreme authority of the Nation: upon this they presently vote themselves to be
a Parliament, and to requite his courtesy, they vote him to be a Member of
their Parliament.

Thus being seated in Authority, they make an Act for six Months Tax, at the
old rate of 120000 li. a Month; and another Act concerning marriages,
appointing Justices of Peace to marry, and none other marriages to be valid or
lawful: In the same Act, they ordain a Register to be kept in every Parish, in
which is to be set down all births and burials, not so much as mentioning
Baptism, as a thing in their opinion at least not necessary: thus they lessen
and diminish the use and authority of Ministers, whom they intended by degrees,
to take wholly away.

In order whereunto, they had a design to take a way Tithes; but the Ministers
of London, being called to allege what might be said in defense of them, by
their Counsel learned in the Law, and by Arguments out of Scipture, they
opposed so strongly, as that debate was laid aside for the present. But that
failing, they had another device, namely by an Act, in one day, to have
unbottomed all Ministers in England, and to have locked up the Church doors, (as
some affirmed) and then afterward, to have taken in whom they had thought good,
which may probably be conceived, should have been only such as would have
renounced their orders, if not their baptism.

Things being carried so high and in such a frantic manner, the more moderate
among them weary of the work, and fearing they should rather bring things into
further confusion, then settle any thing, they repair to Cromwell the General,
desiring him to take again into his hands his Writing or conveyance of the
supreme power; whereupon he presently dissolves them: but some of the
Anabaptists refusing to obey, and continuing still in the house at their
prayers, he sent Soldiers who pulled them out, and locked up the doors against
them December. 12. 1653.

This Schismatical Convention, called by some the little horn, being thus
timely and happily outed; Cromwell upon the sixteenth day of the same month,
having by advice of his Army Officers and Council of State, framed an
Instrument of Government, presently after printed and published, consisting of
forty two Articles (and therefore by some called his forty two string'd sidle,
by others the Magna Charta) takes upon him the Government of the three Nations,
as Supreme Magistrate, under the Title of Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland. And sending for the Commissioners of the great
Seal, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, with the Judges of Law, and the
chief Officers of his Army, (Proclamation thereof being made in London) he is
solemnly installed in Westminster Hall, taking an oath to govern according to
that Instrument and the Laws of the Land, though nothing could be more
repugnant to the Laws then that Instrument was.

According to that Instrument, September. 3. 1654. though it fell out that year
to be Sunday, accounting the day auspicious, by reason of his two great
victories upon that day, at Dunbar and Worcester. This Parliament was not to be
chosen according to the ancient manner, two in a County and two in a
Corporation, but ten, eight, six, more or less in a County, according to the
proportion of it, and the small decayed Corporations (as Thelford and Rising in
Norfolk, and the like elsewhere) were wholly left out. There were also added to
the Parliament, Thirty Members for Scotland, and as many for Ireland, chosen or
nominated from thence; so as it was a Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland and Ireland; whereof as before, he had made himself Protector.

It is probable the Protector foresaw that little or nothing would be done by
this Parliament; and therefore to make sure work, he and his Council, (besides
this Ordinance for his style and Title, for the issuing out Writs, and for
Law-proceedings, to go according to that Style and Title, and some others of
the like nature, made in the beginning of his government immediately upon the
Change) I say besides these, before the Convening of this Parliament a very few
days, he publishes by Authority of himself and his Council above twenty
Ordinances (as some reckoned them,) which were observed as valid Laws; and
amongst them, one remarkable one, for the Ejecting of Ignorant, scandalous and
insufficient Ministers, by any five, or more of the Commissioners therein
named: and by which in a quarter of a years time, they ejected many Ministers
(especially in Norfolk) out of their livings; scarce one of twenty that were
accused or complained of, but were ejected; And this was done (I suppose) to
gratify the Anabaptistical and Independent party, who hitherto beheld Oliver
with an evil eye, since he was Protector, looking (as they thought) too like a
King.

The Parliament convened according to appointment at Westminster, September. 3.
they presently question the Protectors Authority, though he had at their first
meeting, in a very large speech, presently after printed and published,
magnified the same, as if he had been called to the Place, by the concurrent
and universal consent of the whole Nation. It is true they consented, because
they could do no otherwise, being forced thereunto by his armed power.

to silence and suppress this question, within a few days after their sitting,
he enjoins a Recognition or acknowledgement of his power, by a particular
subscription of every one of the Members, before they were admitted to enter
the House any more* and such as would not subscribe, were forcibly secluded by
a guard of Soldiers; but at last all or most of them subscribed.

No sooner were they set again, but they fall in hand with the Instrument of
Government, examining it in every particular; and the Protector suffered them
to go on without interruption. They would have been content to have made him
Protector, but they would not allow of the Instrument of Government in all
things.

Ye must know by the way, that one Article of the Government was, that the
Parliament called and convened, must sit five months (if themselves think good)
and during that time, the Protector had not power to dissolve them; but
afterward at any time he might: It was further ordained, that whatsoever Acts
they made and tendered to him, if he did not consent within thirty days, or
satisfy them to the contrary, they were to be Laws valid and binding, without
him. To conclude, they spent so long time in tuning the instrument, that just
at the five months end (counting precisely twenty eight days to a month) the
Protector calls them together, tells them he thought they had been asleep,
having not of a long time heard from them; That they had sat long and done
nothing, and therefore tells them they may repair every one to his several
home. Thus they are dissolved with a kind of jeer, January 22.1654.

But I must tell you, the Parliament, would not tender him any Bill to pass,
nor receive any Laws from him, till such time as they had regulated the
Government of the Nation, and confirmed his authority upon him. The truth is,
they thought him not to have power to enact Laws, till themselves had given it
him: And therefore they would have nothing pass, till altogether were done and
finished.

After the breaking up of this Parliament, it was generally thought, we should
never have had any more in his time. For the Protector betakes himself to other
Methods of government.

That year 1655. will not suffer any ejected Minister to teach a School either
publicly or privately; to pray, or preach, or to perform any Ministerial duty
in any Church or private Family; in a word, they would have starved them, if
they could, denying all means of livelihood to them and theirs.

And because diverse ejected Ministers, had during the sitting of this last
Parliament, and soon after, commenced suits in Law for the recovery of their
Livings, and had gotten (some of them) damages against their Intruders and had
hopes of recovering the possession of their Livings: and some of them had
already got into possession by Law: The Protector publishes a Proclamation,
thereby strictly commanding them to quit their possessions, and to release all
judgments obtained, and further inhibiting all Attournies, Lawyers and
Advocates, to commence or prosecute any Suits for, or to plead in the behalf of
such Clients; And all Judges are likewise inhibited, to admit of any such
Actions or Pleas in any of their Courts. All which, was apparently to deny them
the benefit of the Law, (which is the highest Act of Arbitrary and
Tyranni-power that can be) and consequently to condemn that Authority as
illegal, by which they were first ejected.

Furthermore upon occasion of a rising in the Spring, by some of the Kings
party in the West, he not only proceeds against Col. John Penruddock, and
diverse other Gentlemen, by Capital punishment; but he decimates all the
Cavaleers or Gentlemen of the late Kings party, that had been in arms for him,
all over England; that is, he enjoins them to pay yearly the tenth part of
their whole Revenue, notwithstanding their former Compositions made for their
Estates, and their Pardons sued out as the Parliament had enjoined, and also
the late Act of Oblivion, anno 1651. And this Decimation was put in execution
by these Major Generals.

And in this Government, he much resembled the Turk: Himself like the Grand
Signior, ruling by sole command, had his standing Army (as a guard for his
Person) answerable to the Janissaries and his Major Generals representing the
Bashaws in their several Provinces; And besides these, he had his Auxiliaries
lately set up in every County; viz. certain Troops of horse, and Companies of
foot, armed and ready upon all occasions, maintaining, and finding their own
horses and arms; for a constant yearly salary, the horsemen had 8 li. per
annum, and the foot 3 li. and these were upon any occasion to be drawn forth,
and march in a few hours warning.

Anno 1656. The Protector calls another Parliament, etc. These convene at
Westminster, Sept. 17. Upon their first meeting, many of the Members of several
Counties were excluded, because they had been somewhat busy and active in the
Parliament before. This exclusion of Members being noised abroad, many that
were not yet gone up, went not at all, lest when they came there, they should
be excluded and sent home again. There were in all about sevenscore or more
that absented themselves, or were secluded the House by order from the Council
of State; and yet not any reason alleged against them. They represent the
injury to the House, but find no redress; the House dare not offend the
Protector, by admitting their Fellow Members.

This Parliament thus purged and garbled, was for the Protectors turn; he gave
them leave to sit almost two five months without dissolving or adjourning.

About the beginning of the next spring, London to the Speaker, sealed up in a
box. Afterward a Bill is prefered for it: the House are very forward in the
business; only the Protectors pleasure is not known. They very humbly and
solemnly petition his Highness to accept of it; as an honor not only merited by
himself, but much inducing to the settlement of the Nation. But he makes
strange at it, gives them thanks for their good affection toward him and the
public; yet desires time to consider of it, before they press him to a
resolution.

Mean time the Independents and Factious people fast and pray, to avert the
judgment that is like to fall upon them, in having a King. Some great
Commanders in the Army, and many of the common-souldiers express their dislike
of it; amongst whom Lambert, the Leiutenant-General, is the chief, conceiving
it a bar to his ambitious hopes. It is more then probable, the Protector
himself thirsted after it, and that the design was first hammered in his own
forge; for Thurloe his Secretary openly promoted it, and (as it was said)
brought in the Bill. But when the Parliament made their second address to him,
he modestly denied it, yet he gave them thanks for their good affections to him.

This Parliament sat from the 17. of September, to the 26. of June. And then by
an Act entitled The humble Petition and advice, they constitute him Protector,
and give him power to nominate his Successor, which was all one as to establish
the Government in his Family: They erect another House of Parliament, in place
of the Lords, for which they could invent no other name, but The Other House.
It was to consist of a number of persons not exceeding seventy, nor less then
forty, all chosen or nominated by the Protector, and to be called particularly
by Writs, as the House of Peers were wont to be: They also ordain some other
qualifications for future elections of Parliament men; and appoint an Oath to
be taken by the Protector, and by all successive Protectors: and also another
Oath by all the Members, both of the one and Other House upon their entrance
to sit in Parliament. Some other things they ordain in that Petition and
advice, for settling the future Government. All which the Protector ratifies and
confirms, by giving his solemn assent in those words, the Lord Protector does
consent.

Further in that Act, they limit him so far, as not to impose any Tax or
payment upon the People, without their consent in Parliament; and in lieu
thereof, they give him 35000 li. a month by way of Tax for three years to come,
from June 24. 1657. besides the Excise, Tunage and Poundage, the Customs, all
the Crown lands that were unfold, and all Forfeitures, Penalties, and other
accidental Emoluments that the Kings of England were wont to have; amounting in
the whole to Thirteen Hundred Thousand Pounds per annum; for so much they
promised to settle upon him forthwith, as a certain standing Revenue, besides
land Taxes. This done, he does not dissove, but only adjourn the Parliament, to
the 20. of January following.

But in the mean time soon after their adjournment, the Protector Cashiers
Lambert his Lieutenant General, and Hacker Colonel of his lifeguard, and some
other Officers of his Army, who were conceived to be averse to the business of
his Kingship; which gave men cause to conclude, that he still thirsted after
the Kingly dignity, as indeed it is more then probable he did.

And here let me tell you, there goes a story very credibly and confidently
reported by some persons knowing and well-affected to the late Protector, That
he, when he was a boy, and going to school at Huntington, where his father
dwelt, dreamed one night thar he should be King, and Ruler over all the Kingdom
of England, but afterward he should be hanged. This dream he tells to his
fellow schoolboyes, and by that means it came to his Masters ear, who lashed
him soundly for it. How near the former part of his dream was fulfilled,
appears by this story; and how justly he deserved the latter part, I leave it
to others to judge?

Against the meeting of the Parliament by adjournment, he sends out his Writ,
for summoning the Members of his other House. Some ancient Peers of the Land he
summoned, as the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Manchester, the Lord Say; I
cannot say, whether or no the Earl of Salisbury was one, because he seldom
wanted a place in the House of Commons. Others, some of them, were Gentlemen of
quality in several Counties, and of good repute, but the most of them were of
his Army-men, or of his alliance, that had married into his Family. Amongst his
Army-men, there were Pride the Dray-man, Hewson the Shoemaker, Barksted the
broken Thimble-maker, and others the like, all Colonels of his Army; and
Lambert also to gratify him, is made one of his Peers; and Haselrig, that was
a great stickler against him in all Parliaments, is another. There is a
Catalogue extant of them all, and therefore it is needless to repeat them.

When the time came according to the Adjournment, January 20. the Nobility
though called, disdained to appear: Many of the Gentry absented themselves, yet
some of all sorts (except only the Nobility) enough to make a competent number,
appeared. Some that were called to his other House, were elected for the House
of Commons, and chose that place, rather then the other House; Sir Arthur
Haselrig (always an enemy to the King, and no friend to the Protector) was one
of the number: The House of Commons would by no means digest that other House,
nor own them; though some messages were sent to them, yet would they not
vouchsafe them any answer.

Besides this, there was another business set on foot in the House of Commons,
that touched the Protector very nearly; and that was their tampering with the
power of the Militia: The People were to pay the Army, and it was thought just
by many, that the Parliament should have command of them. And it was suspected,
had they sat but a little longer, that the Army, or a considerable part of it,
would have adhered to the Parliament. To prevent this mischief, that was a
working, the Protector suddenly and unexpectedly dissolves them, Febr. 4. with
this word of comfort (nevertheless) to his other House, My Lords, ye are Lords,
and shall be Lords.

The Parliament thus again dissolved in discontent, things rested as formerly,
though not without much murmuring and secret discontent, both in the Protector
and People.

About the latter end of August, September, the Protector dyed; having lain
somewhile in a very sad condition, with extreme pain and torment in his bowels.
Some strongly fancy, that he died on Tuesday, Aug. 30. what time was the most
furious, violent wind, that ever happened in the memory of man. And its very
probable that he died that day or soon after: but it was given out, and
commonly reported, that he dyed on Friday, Sept. 3.

His Funeral was a great while deferred, his body embalmed and kept above
ground many months together, with mourners continually attending his corpse,
and meat carried up and served on his Table, as if he had been the greatest
Prince in Christendom, and afterward he was interred with as great funeral
solemnity, as ever any King of England was interred, and his Hearse or Statue
set up after the manner of Kings, and a most most magnificent Monument erected
for him.

It is worth the remembering, that about a year or two before his death, he made
a new broad Seal, with the Arms of England, viz. a Saint Georges Cross,
quartered with Saint Andrews Cross for Scotland, and the Harp for Ireland, and
his own Coat in a little Escutcheon in the midst; his Helmet and Mantle, with a
Crown imperial, and a Lion puissant for his Crest, and and the supporters a
Lion and a Dragon: the Motto underneath his Arms, Pax quaeritur Bello. And this
inscription about, Sigillum magnum Reipublicae Anglioe, Scotiae and Hiberniae:
On the other side, himself on Horseback, richly trappered, as the King Seal was
wont to be; and the Inscription about it, Oliverus Dei gratia, Reipublicae
Angliae, Scotiae and Hiberniae Protector.

And though he usually coined no money, yet I have seen some pieces of Silver,
of an half crown bigness, with his Arms (as before) on the one side, and his
Picture crowned with bays on the other side, and the former Inscription. In
these respects so near he approached to the Royal dignity; sure I am, he
assumed more power and authority, then ever any King of England did.

The Protector before his death, had according to the forementioned Humble
Petition and Advice, appointed his eldest Son Richard Cromwell, to succeed him
in his place; and accordingly immediately after his Fathers death, he was
proclaimed in London, and soon after all over England.

The Independents, Anabaptists and other Sectaries, were not well pleased at
it; they had rather have had Fleetwood in the place, who had married the late
Protectors Daughter, Iretons Widow; for Richard had formerly been reputed a
kind of a good fellow and a Royallist, and never was in Arms against the King,
as all the rest of his Fathers Family and Allies had been.

Richard soon after calls a Parliament to begin at Westminster, Jan. 27. not
according to the Instrument of Government, but after the old way, two in a
County, etc. Before the calling of the Parliament, and after, congratulatory
Addresses are made to Richard, from most Counties, Cities and Corporations of
Note in England, extolling the merits of his heroic Father, expressing their
joy for the succession of such a Son, and promising to adhere to him withal
faithfulness and loyalty. In some of their Addresses, they compare the Father
to Moses, and the Son to Joshua, the Guiders and Conductors of Gods People out
of Egyptian thraldom, with other the like blasphemous expressions. Richard
receives these Addresses with as much gravity, as they were tendered with
humility; so that no man could imagine, but that he was most firmly fixed in
his Throne; And Lilly the States mercenary Prognosticator, assures it, from his
Astrological Predictions of that year.

AT the opening of the Parliament, Jan. 27. he makes a Speech to both his
Houses, wherein he minds them of his just and lawful Title to the Government,
not only by the wonderful Provindence of God, but by the disposition of the
Laws: he tells them, he had convened them together for important affairs of
State, for the honor and safety of the Nation; willed them to take into
consideration, the necessity of the Navy and Army, whom he commends for their
patience and obedience, to the best Army in the world: some other things to
this purpose he commended to them, and told them in conclusion, that they
should find him ready and willing to concur with them in any thing for the good
of the public; and to deny them nothing that was just and fit; And that if
this were not an happy Parliament, it should not be his fault. And all this
(says the Book) was spoken with so gracious and Princely a deportment, as has
gained this opinion amongst the wisest Hearers, that he deservedly holds the
place of Supreme Magistrate in these Nations.

Thus the Parliament began, and great hopes there were of good agreement
between the Protector and the People: and doubtless he for his part, would have
given them leave to have settled the Nation as they thought good, both for
Religion and Civil Government. But still the other House, though called as
formerly, and many of them convened, would not down with the Commons; they
would not in the least own this new made House of Lords; sit they might, if
they pleased, but little or nothing they had to do: for the Commons would never
impart any thing to them, nor indeed have any intercourse with them. A pitiful
company of Peers they were, and accordingly regarded.

But Richard and the House of Commons agreed very well; he was willing to leave
all to them; And there being a very great number of young Lawyers in the House,
that gaped for preferment, they were willing to give him power enough: too much
as many suspected.

Ye must know, that in all Parliaments since Olivers time, there was a faction
of men in the House, called Commonwealths men, that were for a free State (as
they called it) and against a single Person. These were such as had purchased
the Lands of Bishops, Deans and Chapters, and those belonging to the late King,
Queen, and Prince; And they feared, that these Lands might be at one time or
other restored, unless the Government were again settled in the way of a
Commonwealth: for a single Person they thought might possibly come to be a
King. With these also concurred all such, both Parliament Men and Armymen, as
were highly guilty of the Kings Trial and death. And all these together, had a
great influence upon the Army. These generally were disaffected to the
Protector.

The Army also ( Richard having never been a Soldier) were very desirous to
have a General of their own choice with power to place and displace what
Army Officers he thought fit. Fleetwood the Protectors Brother in-law, or
Lambert aims at the place; To effect their design, they with the Commonwealths
men in Parliament, as Haselrig, and Vane, Scot and Weaver, and others the like,
make a Faction in the Army against the Protector. The Commanders of the Army
that were of this Faction, had frequent meetings at Fleetwoods Lodging at
Wallingford House; whereof Richard had notice, and might have suppressed them in
time, by some chief Officers that were of his part, who offered their
assistance thereunto; but being loath to hazard the effusion of blood, he let
things rest, hoping (perhaps) they would not have proceeded as afterward they
did.

Fleetwood soon after advises him to adjourn the Parliament, was about the
latter end of April, 1659.

The Parliament thus suddenly dissolved, the Soldiers were at a loss what to
do; at last they resolve, after a solemn Fast had among themselves (as their
manner was) to call in that piece or tail of the long Parliament, (that
Cromwell and themselves had broke up and cast out six years before, April 20.
1653.) to return again to the exercise of their trust, as they termed it;
expressing their Repentance for that action, and desiring to return again into
the good old way. Lenthal the Speaker, and some others of that company, being
then in and about the City, very gladly accept the motion; they thought long to
be again in authority. They call together all their Fellow Members that they
could get, and had much ado to make forty, thought they took two of them out
of the Gaol, viz. the Lord Munson and Henry Martin, who were Prisoners there
upon execution: Being thus got together upon Saturday afternoon, May 7. the
Speaker with the rest, enter the House, and set again as a Parliament;
publishing a Proclamation or Declaration, to let the People understand, how by
the wonderful providence and mercy of God, they were again restored to the
exercise of their trust, being (as they call themselves) Asserters of the Good
old Cause, etc.

The Monday following, Mr. William Prin a Bencher of Lincolns Inn, and many
more Members of the Long Parliament, that were secluded upon the Kings Trial,
December 1648. met together at Westminster, and went to the House-door,
demanding admission to sit with the rest, but were den^ed entrance, and kept
out with armed guards. Whereupon he writes a Book called his Narrative, wherein
he declraes at large their manner of demanding admission, and in what manner
they were forcibly kept out, and very solidly pleads the Kings cause against
their Commonwealth. And another Book he writes and publishes at the same time,
entitled, The good old Cause, wherein he manifestly proves, by twelve
undeniable Arguments, that that which they termed the good old Cause, was far
worse, more destructive both to Church and State, to Religion and the
Commonwealth, then the Gunpowder Treason. And though he openly owned and avowed
these Books, setting his name to them, yet they never returned the least answer
to them, nor questioned the Author: But these Books thus seasonably published,
gave a deadly blow to their good old Cause, though the operation of it was not
so presently discerned.

The Parliament (those few that were) being thus got in again, they presently
depose the Protector, and alter the Government from a single person to a
Commonwealth. They null all honouts conferred by the late Protector, so that
many are in an instant unknighted, whom Oliver before had honored with that
dignity. Richard himself but the other day Lord Protector of England, Scotland
and Ireland, and his Highness at every word, is now in the language of the
Parliament but Richard Cromwell Esquire; for by that Title they wrote to him, to
quit his Lodgings, and remove from White Hall: and his Excellency Lord Henry
Cromwell, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, is now no more then Mr. Henry Cromwell;
All Olivers venerable House of Peers, have now in an instant lost their
Lordships, and are the same that formerly they were; so great a change is
effected in an instant. Only Fleetwood and Lambert are still termed Lords in
the Parliaments first Declaration, May 7. and there was cause for it; for the
Parliament were what they were by their means.

And now all mouths are open in an instant, against the late Protector Oliver,
reproaching him as the worst of Tyrants and Usurpers, tearing his Hearse or
Statue in pieces, defacing and pulling down his sumptuous Monument, that was
but a few weeks before at a most vast charge, set up in Westminster.

The Parliament were more obliged to the Army, then they were to the people,
for putting them again into Authority; for the people had had more then enough
of them, for almost two seven years before. Oliver never did so much good for
the Nation, nor had more thanks from the people, then when he and his Army had
turned these men out, as before is said, April 20. 1653. And therefore they
thought it concerned them, rather to gratify the Army, then to please the
people. To this end, not long after their re-installment, they impose a Tax of
twelve months, to be paid in a manner altogether. That 35000 li. a month which
was not to be paid by the Act that imposed it, till Midsummer, 1660. and that
quarterly, they command to be paid in presently between Lammas and Michaelmas,
1659. intending (as its probable) as soon as that was paid in, to impose
another the like payment upon the people.

After this, about July, they pass an Act for settling the Militia, and it was
sent down into the several Counties, to be presently put in execution; but the
Army (as it was thought) not relishing this design, it was soon after laid
aside.

This year about the beginning of August, there was a rising in Cheshire,
Lancashire, and the parts adjoining, under the command of Sir George Booth, Sir
Thomas Midleton, and other Gentlemen in those parts; they declare for a free
and full Parliament to be elected by the People. It was commonly reported, the
design was general, laid all over all England, and t^^ (...) was carried on
ch^^^ly by the P^^^^^terian Party. But Cheshire and the parts adjacent, were
the first that arose; in other places attempts were made, but they were
suppressed.

Sir George Booth had taken Westchester both Town and Castle, and was reported
to be very numerous. And therefore upon the first intelligence thereof, Lambert
is sent out against him, with an Army of six or seven thousand men, and a train
of Artillery; and forces from all quarters are appointed to draw to him, so
that all meeting, he had a very great Army. Sir George Booth's party, seeing
other Counties so slack, begin to faint and forsake him; Lambert marching
toward them, is opposed by some forces at a narrow pass, but presently all are
routed, and Sir George himself, and some others are taken and brought prisoners
to London: this happened about Aug. 20.

This design so strongly and universally (as was reported) laid, and so soon
defeated and disappointed, the Parliament themselves, and all men thought them
cock-sure. They begun to resolve to submit themselves to the yoke of their old
Taskmasters, seeing no other remedy; And the Parliament went on with their
work, in settling the Nation in a Commonwealth way; intending after that was
established, to proceed severely against Sir George Booth and his party. They
began already to sequester his and other men's estates; for many they say were
engaged in the plot, all over England: and the City of Westchester they quite
dis-franchised.

But observe what followed. Lambert and the Army were so heightened at this
success, and the Parliament (as they thought) so much obliged to them, for
restoring them into their power, and preserving them in it, as they thought
whatsoever they demanded, would not have been denied them. Thereupon in their
return to London, they take a resolution by unanimous consent of the Officers
and common Soldiers to require to have a General of their own Election, either
Fleetwood or Lambert.

The Parliament having intelligence hereof, resolve the contrary; calling to
mind, how six years before they had been served by Oliver, who then was their
General: and therefore they thought it not fit any more to entrust so great a
power in any one man's hand, least he should do as Oliver had done. And
therefore they resolve and vote, to put the power of the Army into the hands of
seven Commissioners, whereof about two or three (at most) were Army-men, and
the rest Members of the Parliament.

This Vote of theirs highly discontented the Army, and Lambert especially; the
business came to than height, as about the tenth or eleventh of October, their
forces were drawn out on either side at Westminster. Some Regiments for the
Parliament under the command of Haselrig, Morly and others; and other Regiments
for the Army, under command of Lambert, Desborough, Berry and other Colonels,
and ready they were to charge one another. The Council of State interposing,
prevented bloodshed, but could not appease or satisfy the Army. At length the
Army became Masters, and turned out the Parliament, October 13. whom but a few
months before, they had placed in authority.

But the Parliament did prudently and stoutly in one thing; when they saw
whereto they must, that the Army would turn them out, a day or two before (
October. 11.) they made an Act presently after printed and published, That it
should be high Treason in any, to impose, assess, collect, levy, or pay any
Excise, Customs, Tunnage and Poundage, or any Tax or Tallage whatsoever, from
that 11th day of October, but what should be imposed by the consent of the
People themselves in Parliament.

This was a stumbling block to the Army-men; it hindered them somewhat from the
raising of money for the present; but had things succeeded according to their
mind, they would soon have leapt over it, and raised what moneys they pleased.

The Parliament thus casheerd by the Army, the next thing they do is to provide
places for themselves. Fleetwood is made General, Lambert Lieutenant General,
Desborough is made General of the horse. And they provide a place for Monck
also, who at present is Governor of Scotland; him they will make Major General
of the foot. This for the Army.

For the government of the State they must take time to consider of that. But
some things they lay for grounds and principles. 1: They Will free the people of
the burden of Tithes (and in time perhaps of Ministers too) that has been a
design all along since the Army gave Law to the Nation. 2. They will perhaps
have a kind of Parliament, but not of the choice of the people; for the people
(say they) are grown generally so corrupt, as they are not fit to choose their
own representatives; but must be left to the godly. In stead of an House of
Lords, thev'l have a standing Senate of Army Officers and such like godly men,
which shall have a Negative voice in all Parliamentary consultations. These and
some others, as I concluded out of some of their books, were their design.

But the truth is, though much consultation they had, and some progress they
made in framing a Government, yet could they make no work of it, they could not
agree of any. Only thus, for the present exigence of affairs, they establish a
Committee of Safety, consisting mostly of Army Officers, and some Members of
the late Parliament, that since the dissolution thereof, had sided with the
Army, whereof Sir Henry Vane was one.

But that which spoiled the sport, and gave check-mate to their new intended
Government, was a business in Scotland. Monck (as I touched before) was
governor of that Nation, and had been so in all these changes, almost ever
since Oliver took upon him the Protectors place. They had provided Monck a
place among them, (so courteous they were) but they were not so prudent as to
consult with him about breaking up the Parliament.

And therefore upon the first intelligence of these things, Monck in Scotland
declares against their proceedings. The soldiers here (without expostulating)
presently arm against him; insomuch as their forces are upon their march
toward Scotland, from Norwich and the parts thereabout, upon the 29th of
October the Parliament having been broken up but bare sixteen days before;
Monck seeing them thus on the forehand with him, entertains them with a Treaty;
Commissioners are appointed on both sides, and furnished with instructions;
mean time Monck takes and fortifies Barwick upon Tweed. The news comes that
they are agreed, and that both parties have unanimously declared against the
interest of Charles Stuart, (so they commonly call the King) which caused much
rejoicing amongst the Armies adherents; but this soon after proved to be
false: Monck at the return of his Commissioners, is not satisfied in some
particulars; Nevertheless soon after, he desires another Treaty, which was
held at Newcastle; during which time he calls a Covention of the Estates of
Scotland, who (as it was reported) not only approved this his undertaking, but
assisted him in it.

The Treaty at Newcastle, after some time spent therein, had no better success
than the former; They could not, or at leastwise Monck would not agree. But
Fleetwood notwithstanding gives intelligence to his adherents in Norfolk, that
they were so far agreed, that if they should grant what Monck insisted upon,
it would be no whit prejudicial to them.

While these things were thus acting, it pleased God there happened a great
frost, and after that so deep a snow, as the like has not been known of many
years, both for the greatness and continuance of it. Monck was all that time
with his Army at Barwick and thereabouts, never advancing farther into England
than Alnwick. Lambert and his Army having much impoverished Yorkshire and those
parts, what with Texas and Free Quarter, were now about Newcastle, quarterred
in a barren cold Country, and not able to march by reason of the hardness of
the waether.

In the mean time I must tell you, from Lambers first advancing against Monck,
the Londoners had been solicited by Fleetwood and the rest, to join with the
Army; but they utterly refuse it, though they liked well enough the turning out
of the Parliament. About the beginning of December, the Apprentices and some
others Petition the Lord Major and Court of Aldermen; the soldiers interpose;
whereupon there is a great hurliburly in the City, and some blood is shed, a
Captain (they say) being slain; but by the means fo the Major, the tumult is
appeased. Fleetwood upon this occasion, to curb the City, and prevent any
risings hereafter, sends in a considerable part of his Army; they take and
fortify four houses in several parts of the City, whereof Gresham College was
one; these they strengthen with soldiers and Grenades, and threaten to fire
the City in case the Citizens should stir.

While these things were thus carried at London, Haselrig and some Army
Officers, that from the first had adhered to the Parliament, got into
Portsmouth about December the third; and there joining with some chief Officers
of the Navy, declare openly for the Parliament against the Army; And because
the City of London would not join with them, (for they liked the Parliament as
thus constituted, as ill as they did the Army) they will a considerable part of
the Navy under the command of Lawson then Admiral, (who had a little before
deserted the Army) block up the Thames; this was about a week before Christimas.

The City thus blockt up by Sea, and Garrisoned with Fleetwoods soldiers by
Land, were in a sad condition: but for all this they would neither declare for
the Army nor Parliament, but still desired to have a free Parliament of the
election of the People; to which the soldiers forced by necessity and want of
money, at last consented; but with such qualifications, as had they been
observed, would have rendered the Parliament wholly subservient to the Armies
interest; And the Committee of Safety had by a Proclamation summoned the same
to begin at Westminster, January 24.

But the Parliament now commonly called the Rump, (and so I shall hereafter
term them) taking the opportunity of this difference between the City and
Army, made a shift to meet together, (a competeur number of them (about 40.)
and to crowde again into the House, December 26. late in the Evening by
Torch-light. But lest the Londoners should join with the Army, and oppose,
they promise upon their first fitting, either to call in the Secluded Members
by the 6th. of Jannuary; or else to issue out Writs for filling up the House by
new Elections. To pacify the Army, they pass a Vote of Indemnity to
Fleetwood, Lambert, and all rest of the Army, both Officers and Soldiers, for
what was past, in case hereafter they demean themselves quietly; which Vote
they are glad to accept of, not being able farther to oppose.

But I must tell you, that before this, they had endeavored what they might,
in all the Counties, to raise money for the supply of the Army, but could not
get any confiderable sums. The Gentlemen in the Country, that had been laid
horses by virtue of the late Act for the Militia (which was first set on foot
by the Parliament of July last, but laid aside soon after for fear of
offending the Army) these they now rate at 10 l. for every horse; yet rather
than fail they would have taken fifty shillings. Some that were faint-hearted
compounded at so low a rate, and paid; but many refused. And of them that
compounded, the most part would never pay a penny. This was about the beginning
of December; and some money by this tric^ they got, but not much. About the
same time also, they sent forth warrants for one months Tax, assessed for
Drums and Colors, etc. by virtue of the said Act, but this in many places was
never paid, and in most places though rated, yet not paid. So that the want of
money, was the maine thing that broke their design; the soldiers about
London, mutining and growing insolent against their Commanders for want of pay:
some of them falling to that party that adhered to the Parliament, and others
offering their service and assistance to the City, whom they thought best able
to entertain them; so that it came to that pass before the Rump got in, that
Fleetwood had little or no command of his soldiers in and about the City. And
this gave another advantage to the Rump to crowd in.

Being got in as before is noted, The Citizens of London are yet jealous, that
they would not according to their promise, call in the secluded Members, nor
fill up their House by new Elections. And therefore they fortify the City in
several streets and places of access with chains and posts to prevent the
sudden incursion of horses; For now they feared the Rump Parliament, as much or
more than formerly they did the Army: this was about the beginning of January.

And indeed within a few days after they discovered their intentions; the Rump
was so far from calling in the secluded Members, as they passed a Vote that
never any of them should sit again: and in stead of filling up their House by a
new election, they are about contriving an Oath of abjuration, whereby to force
men under a penalty to abjure the King and all the Royal Line or Family; but
this Oath stuck long in debate, and at last would not pass amongst themselves.

But notwithstanding the Rump was thus got into possession, and likely enough
to hold it, Lamberts Army being at the news of it quite broken and dispersed,
himself secretly departing from them at Rippon, and posting to London to accept
his Vote of Indemnity. Monck advances with his Army, marching on slowly, and
was come to Newcastle about the sixth of January without the least opposition.

The Rump likes well of it, hoping by his assistance to quell the City, who as
yet stood at distance with them, and had in a sort fortified themselves against
them. The Londoners on the contrary, entertain hopes, that by Moncks coming,
the Parliament might be enforced, notwithstanding their former Vote, either to
call in the Secluded Members, or else to sill up the House with new elections,
either of which would have satisfied them, and one of which they resolved to
insist upon. All expectations on either side, are upon Monck, but no man knew
certainly what his intentions were.

The Rump had from the first intelligence of Moncks advancing, after Lamberts
Army was disbanded and broken, sent two of their Members ( Robinson and Scot)
to wait upon him, or rather indeed as Spies to watch and observe him. The City
of London had also sent their Sword Bearer as far as Newcastle, to congratulate
his coming, and to tender the respects and affections of the City to him. He
receives him courteously, returns hearty thanks to the City, but nothing
satisfactory of what they expected: so that hitherto, and long after he marched
hooded in allusion to his name; no man could tell what to make of him, nor what
his design, or the end of his coming was, but men guessed and hoped, according
as their opinions and desires were: but the Rump both now, and long after, were
as confidently assured of him, as of any man within their own walls.

Passing through Yorkshire he is honorably received by the Lord Fairfax, and
the Northern Gentlemen, who had not many days before contributed much to the
reducing of a party of Lamberts Officers and Soldiers, that had possessed
themselves of York.

While Monck was there, diverse of the Yorkshire Gentlemen were very desirous to
understand his intentions, and to that purpose, requested Sir Henry Cholmely
one of their number, to go to him and talk privately with him; which he did,
and had conveniencie of discourse with him. At his return they were big with
expectation, and demanded of him what he thought of the General; He told them
he thought he was like the Peace of God; they asking why? He answers, because
he passes all understanding. This I was credibly in formed of by a Yorkshire
Minister, living in those parts.

Coming along all the way to Saint Albones, he receives several Addresses from
all or most of the Counties of England, all importing their humble desires,
that either the Secluded Members might be called in, or that the House may be
filled up by new elections, that so one way or other, they might have again a
full and free Parliament; the want of which they apprehend to be the cause of
all their late sufferings, and frequent changes of Government, to the
oppression of the people, and high dishonor of the English Nation. He receives
them all courteously, treats them civilly, but for answer tells them, That he
was but a servant to the Parliament, and that only in a Military capacity; that
it became not him to interpose in Civil affairs; that the Parliament he doubted
not, would do them right, and satisfy their just desires: That for the calling
in of the Secluded Members, the Parliament had already given judgment in that
point, and they ought to acquiesce therein; But for the filing up the House, he
told them it was now under debate, and doubted not but they should receive full
satisfaction therein; and therefore he exhorts them to attend with patience the
determinations of the House, and not by any unseasonable importunity to
disturb their Counsels, which might be a means to delay their satisfaction,
and the settlement of the Nation, which (said he) was now intended, and ready
to be effected.

From Devonshire also (though far remote out of his way) he receives the like
Address (one of the first that were tendered to him) wherein after complaint
made of their greivances, they earnestly desire the calling in of the secluded
Members. But to them (being his Countrymen, and some of them near allied to
him) he returns by way of answer, a courteous Letter; wherein amongh other
things, he tells them, that the calling in of the secluded Members could not
safely be yielded to, most of them being known to be Assertors of Monarchy; He
gives them several Reasons, showing, that as the case of affairs now stood,
Monarchy was utterly inconsistent with this Nation: That a Republic or Free
State was the only Government, wherein the several interests of the Nation,
both Ecclesiastical and Civil might be best preserved: And therefore in the
conclusion, he desires them that by their impatiencies they would not obstruct
the Parliaments consultations, otherwise (says he) our peace will be so much
the longer a stranger to us, and we thereby made a prey to our selves and
foreign enemies. This was from Leicester, Jan. 23. and soon after this Letter
was printed and published by the Parliament Intelligencer.

Thus giving fair and plausible answers to all such as addressed themselves
unto him, he marches along and comes to Saint Albones about the latter end of
January; where still Addresses are made to him out of Suffolk, Norfolk, and
other places, which receive the like answers that others did. But these
Addresses (ye must know) were also tendered to the Parliament, though some that
tendered them, were clapped by the heels for their pains (as the Berk-shire
Gentlemen) and others threatened; whereas Watermen of London, for a
congratulatory Address made to them at the same time, received the solemn
thanks of the House.

While he was at Saint Albones, some Aldermen and Common-Councilmen, are sent
to him from the City of London, to congratulate his coming, and court him; but
are returned as formerly, with thanks for their respects.

From Saint Albones he removes to Barnet, where he makes a stay, refusing to
come to London, until Lamberts Soldiers were out of the City. Mean-time Saint
James's House is appointed for his Lodging, and the Custody of the Park is
voted to him, to hold during the pleasure of the Parliament, with some other
like honors, a magnificent Reward for such an undertaking.

The Soldiers that were late Lamberts, being voided the City, Monk and his
Army marches to London, on Friday, February 3. and is lodged at White Hall, at
whose coming, there is great joy and triumphing all over the City.

On Wednesday following, Febr. 8. The City continuing still in their
refractoriness and opposition to the Parliament, they meet in Common Council,
and there pass a Vote or Order, Not to pay or levy any Taxes, until such time
as they may have a full and free Parliament: For hitherto you must know, the
Rump had not agreed upon qualifications for filling up the House; and many
thought they never intended it; but only to establish themselves in perpetual
authority.

Upon this Vote or Resolve of the Common Council, the Rump are highly offended,
and send a strict order to Monk to march the next day with his Army into the
City; To pull up their chains and posts, to break down the gates and portcullis
of the City; to imprison forwith in the Tower diverse Aldermen and Commoners,
that were conceived to be chiefly active in passing those Votes. This command
of theirs, Monk executes next day, Febr. 9. to the great terror and amazement,
not only of the City, but of the whole Nation and Kingdom, when they heard the
report of it: All hearts are saddened, and now most men conclude, that Monk is
not the man designed of God for the delivery of this oppressed Nation.

The Gentlemen in the several Counties that had subscribed and tendered their
Addresses and Declarations, begin now to fear their own Stakes; there being in
some of their Declarations, expressions against paying taxes without a free
Parliament: It had (I must tell also you) before this, been moved in the House,
that those Gentlemen that tendered these Addresses, might be sequestered; yet at
that time, it was carried in the Negative. They had cause to fear also, that if
they intended at all to fill up the House by new Elections, they would impose
such qualifications, as should exclude all such Gentlemen in all Counties, as
either subscribed or delivered these Addresses: and so the greatest part by far
of the Gentry of England, would be made incapable of serving their Country, and
consequently the filling up of the House by such a choice, as would then be
allowed, would be but a means further to enslave both themselves and their
Posterities.

For these and the like considerations, they had some thoughts and resolutions
in most Counties (as it was reported) to second their Addresses or Declarations
with Arms, thereby to vindicate their Native Rights from the oppression of a
Combination of Tyrants, who had a long time usurped the supreme power of the
Nation, and were now perpetuating that usurpation upon the freeborn people, to
their utter slavery and oppression. And it was verily conceived, that had not
the face of affairs suddenly changed, by Monks unhooding himself, the whole
Kingdom would soon have been put into a general flame of combustion: for the
City of London, by this late affront, were rather incensed than awed: though
their Gates and Portcullesses were broken, yet their hearts and courages
remained entire, and were the more confirmed and hardened: and had the Counties
unanimously risen, it is like the Londoners would not have sit still: for the
whole Kingdom was generally exasperated against the Rump; and the dispersed
soldiers of Lamberts Army, not knowing where to quarter, nor how to live,
might probably be thought willing to adhere to any party, that were in a
capacity to entertain them with pay.

The Rump (as it is conceived) by putting Monk upon that base employment, of
being their City-Scavenger, had a design not only to terrify and curb the
City, but also to make Monk and his Army odious and irreconcilable to them,
whereby they might engage him hereafter more firmly to themselves.

Monk having thus executed the Commands of the Rump, he is troubled in his mind
at it. And upon Saturday following, Febr. 11. he draws his Army into Finsbury
Fields, and sending for the Lord Mayor and some of the chief Citizens, he had
some discourse with them: And presently after, he writes a Letter to the
Parliament, as from White Hall, wherein he tells them, that he had done their
commands, though not without some regret; never any such thing having in all
these late troubles, been done to that City, so eminent for their assistance
and adherency to Parliamentary Authority; He minded them, that the end of his
coming and first undertaking, as appears in his Declaration, was not only to
preserve them in their present power, but to vindicate the liberties and
privileges of Parliaments, with the Native rights and freedom of the people;
That he observed that some persons impeached of high Treason, were yet suffered
to sit in the House: That Lambert, Sir Henry Vane and others, persons of
dangerous principles, and highly guilty of the late dissension of the Army, and
of the horrid force put upon the Parliament, were yet suffered to be in and
about the City: That though they had voted the continuance of the settled
maintenance of Ministers, yet they were now upon contriving of another
engagement that would force many of the most conscientious of them, from the
enjoyment of their Means: That there had been too many oaths already imposed
upon the Nation, and that they had more need to mourn for the breach of oaths,
than to impose new ones. And that he observed, that those men were most forward
to impose oaths, who made least conscience of keeping them: He minded them also
of a Petition of dangerous consequence, that they had lately received and
countenanced from the Fanatic party. These and some other grievances he
complains of, and then adds his humble desires, that they would by Friday
following issue out Writs for filling up their House by new Elections, with due
and reasonable qualifications; And that they would put a certain and speedy
period to their present sitting, whereby the People may enjoy the benefit of
successive Parliaments which is (says he) the undoubted right of the English
Nation. And in the pursuance of these things, he will not fail to stand by them
and assist them to the utmost of his power with all fidelity. to this effect
(as I remember) was his Letter signed by himself and the chief Officers of his
Army, as from White Hall, Febr. 11.

This highly pleased and rejoiced the Londoners, and made full satisfaction for
the former rigidity done them: Monk herein granting the full of what they
formerly desired or expected from him. It was as great cause of joy to the
whole Kingdom, as to the City. All that Saturday afternoon, there was Ringing,
and Bonefires, and triumphing, till twelve of the clock at night, and feasting
Monks Officers and Soldiers with wine and good cheer; nothing was too dear for
them. At Norwich and in all places of the Kingdom, at the first report of the
News, there was the like rejoicing and triumphing, in hope of a free
Parliament. So much was the Rump in the affections of the people, as they
desired nothing more than to be rid of them.

Soon after Monk had thus declared himself, and joined with the City and whole
Kingdom in their just desires, The secluded Members (who a great many of them
had been all this time in and about London) addressed themselves to him: he
desires a conference to be had between them and some of the Rump: they meet ten
in number of either side, to argue and debate the business: One challenging
admission as Members of the House, and unjustly before excluded: the other
refusing to admit the, unless they will confirm all that was done since their
exclusion as just and lawful, or at leastwise engage (as themselves had done)
against a single Person or House of Lords. Two several meetings they had about
this debate, but could not agree.

A day or two after, Monk calls the secluded Members alone, and demands of them,
if they were still firm and constant in their resolution of not engaging
against a single Person; they answer him, yea; and that they are immovable in
that resolution. Whereupon he calls them altogether, a matter of fourscore of
them (almost twice the number of those that sat) goes along with them, and
puts them into the Parliament House, to sit with the rest of the Members, Febr.
21. being Tuesday: having first delivered to some of the Rump, a paper written
to prevent mistakes, wherein he declares, That after several debates had
between them, he had now received fuller satisfaction from those worthy
Gentlemen that were secluded formerly: But he yet expressed his own private
opinion and judgment, to be for a Commonwealth or free State, and gave some
reasons for it.

The secluded Members being thus restored, who had for eleven years and more
been kept out from discharging their trust, there is great rejoicing and
triumphing again both in London and all parts of the Kingdom, with Ringing and
Bonefires making, etc. but some of the Rump upon their restoring, (it is said)
withdrew and would sit no more.

Presently after their restoring, they vote Monk to be General of all the
forces of England, Scotland and Ireland, Sir William Waller (one of the
secluded Members, to be Leiutenant-General, and Rossiter a Lincolnshire
Gentleman, (and one that had formerly served the Parliament) to be General of
the Horse. They constitute Montagu to be Admiral at Sea, instead of Lawson; and
they appoint a new Council of State. Soon after they make an Act for settling
the Militia of the Kingdom, together with some Acts concerning Ministers. And
taking order for calling of a new Parliament to convene at Westminster, April
25. they dissolve themselves on Friday the 16th of March.

And thus by Gods great blessing, we have lived to see an end of that unhappy
long Parliament, that has been the cause of misery and calamity to these three
late flourishing Kingdoms, for these nineteen years and more last past. And all
this brought to pass without one drop of bloodshed, by the prudent and politic
conduct of General Monk, who with a small Army (an handful of men in
comparison) not past four thousand foot and eighteen hundred horse, and those
not very well accommodated, marched from Berwick through the heart of England,
to the City of London without the least opposition, and at length gained the
power and command of that opulent and potent City: Lamberts Army being at least
twelve or thirteen thousand men, well horsed and well appointed, breaking in
pieces and mouldring away in a moment; the Troops and Companies marching from
place to place, where they might find quarter, till afterward most of them
(their Officers cashierd) were received and listed under the command of General
Monk.

Afterward by degrees he purges his Army, putting out all Anabaptists,
Quakers, and other Fanatics, both Officers and common Soldiers, as they are
or can be discoverd, both in the Army and Garrisons, and places others in their
steads. Overton a fifth Monarchy-man, who pretended to hold Hull for the Lord
Jesus Christ, was yet notwithstanding commanded to surrender it to Mr. Charles
Fairfax, a Yorkshire Gentleman, which accordingly he did: and the like was done
in all other Garrisons, the Army-men displaced, and Gentlemen of the Country, of
other confiding persons put in their steads.

Soon after the putting in of the secluded Members, Lambert is committed to the
Tower: Haselrig, Scot, and others are under examination, but dismissed, upon
their promise or engagement to demean themselves peaceably.

Lambert not long after finds means to escape out of the Tower, and about the
middle of April, or soon after, appears in Arms about Northampton, in the head
of a party, many of the cashierd Officers and Soldiers of the Fanatic and
discontented party, being got together. And it is generally conceived, that all
the Anabaptists, Quakers, and other factious people in all parts of the
Kingdom, had a design to have risen and joined with him, had he not been timely
suppressed. But Colonel Ingoldsby being sent against him with a party, he
surrounds them all, (being not above five or six hundred), whereupon most of
the common Soldiers come in, and yield themselves; and Lambert with some
Commanders are taken upon the place, without a stroke striking, only a scour of
Lamberts (they say) was slain. Colonel Okey and some others escaped by flight.

lambert being thus taken, is brought to London together with Colonel Cobbet,
Major Creed; and young Haselrig, Sir Arthurs Son. These were all brought up in
a Coach through Hide Park, on Tuesday, April. 29. what time there was the
greatest general Muster of Citizens that ever was seen in or near London: Of
trained men and Auxiliaries there were at least twenty thousand (some say
thirty thousand) men in Arms; Some of the Nobility, and many Gentlemen of
quality trayling pikes voluntarily amongst them. The Prisoners brought through
the Army, and sufficiently hooted at, they afterward drove the Coach under
Tyburn, and there made a stand. This was done (I suppose) to mind them of
their destiny, or at least of their desert, and to disgrace them, who had so
long time insulted and domineered over the Nobility, Gentry and Commonalty of
the Kingdom. A just reward to use them uncivilly, who had so barbarously abused
both King and People.

The Parliament according to Appointment, began at Westminster, April the
twenty fifth, the House of Commons being elected and called by Writs, issuing
out in the name of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, by authority of
Parliament, (a Title invented presently upon the change of the Government from
as Monarchy to a Commonwealth in the year one thousand six hundred forty
eight) the Lords and Peers of the upper House taking their places by virtue of
their birthrights and ancient dignities.

Soon after the sitting of the Parliament, there arrived at London, the Lord
Mordant and Sir John Greenvile with a Declaration from his Majesty, as also
several Letters. One to the House of of P^e^s; another to the House of Commons;
a third to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London;
and a fourth to General Monk, to be by him communicated to the Council of
State, and to the Officers of the several Armies under his Command: which
Declaration and several Letters from his Majesty, were presented according to
their several directions, May the first.

In his Declaration, he offers, 1. A general Pardon to all of all sorts,
excepting only such as the Parliament should think fit to except: provided,
that they sue out their Pardons under the great Seal of England, within forty
days after the publication thereof.

2. He offers a Liberty to tender Consciences for matters of Religion so far
forth as the Parliament should think fit; and to consent to such an Act as the
Parliament for that purpose shall tender to his Majesty.

3. For the sales and purchases of Lands made since these late troubles, he is
willing to leave it to the determination of Parliament, whom he presumes best
able to provide for the satisfaction of all such as are concerned therein.

And Lastly, he promises full satisfaction of Arrears to all Officers and
Soldiers of General Monck's Army, and to receive them into his service upon as
good pay and conditions, as they now enjoy. This was the sum of his
Declaration, published at Breda, April 14. 1660. in the twelfth year of his
Majesty's Reign.

This Declaration together with his several Letters aforementioned, were
highly accepted. The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, after the reading
of them, cried out unanimously, God save King Charles; and presently took down
the Commonwealths Arms that hung in the Guild Hall, and (as they say) brake
them in pieces, ordering the King Arms to be hung up in their place, and gave
solemn thanks by their Recorder to his Majesty's Messengers.

The Lords received their Letter, by the Lord Mordant, with the like joy and
loyal affection. The House of Commons having read their Letter and the
Declaration, voted it satisfactory; and presently voted the Government of the
Nation to be in his Majesty, as the rightful and undoubted heir of the three
Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland; They ordered also a Committee to meet
for drawing up a Letter of thanks to his Majesty for his most gracions
Declaration: And to Sir John Greenvile who delivered the Letter, they gave five
hundred pound as a gratuity to buy him a Jewel.

Both they and the Lords further ordered, that six of the upper House, and
fifteen of the House of Commons should be forthwith sent to his Majesty, to
invite and attend him into to England. Montague the Admiral at Sea is commanded
to wait upon him, with a Squadron of Ships, and fifry thousand pound is ordered
for his Majestjes expenses, as also ten thousand pound to the Duke of York, and
five thousand pound to the Duke of Gloucester.

The Letter also and Declaration to the Army, gave no lesser satisfaction both
to the General, Officers and Soldiers; they all unanimously owning his Majesty
in an high degree.

On Tuesday the eighth of May, the King was solemnly proclaimed in London, with
the greatest expressions and acclamations of Joy that possibly could be; and
the like was soon after done in all Counties, Cities, Corporations, and inlet
Towns all over England. No King ever coming to his Throne, with so great
satisfaction and rejoicing of the People; thereby giving an evident
Demonstration to the world, that it was not the People of England, nor the
Parliament or Representatives of the People, but only a factious and seditious
party, encouraged and supported by a perfidious and traitorous Army, that
murdered the late King, disinherited his children, and overthrew the ancient
Fundamental and well constituted government of the Nation, turning it from a
Monarchy to a Commonwealth; and thereby occasioned these horrid confusions, and
frequent changes and reelings of Government, that afterward ensued, to the
high reproach and dishonor of the English Nation. For no sooner were the
People and Parliament of England, by the mercy of God, delivered from the
vassallage of an imperious and domineering Army, and put in a condition of
freedom, but they presently return to their Allegiance, and call in the
undoubted Heir of the Crown, submitting to his Government, with the greatest
cheerfulness and rejoicing that could be imagined.

And thus God who only does wonders, has wrought wonderfully for this sinful
Nation, turning our Captivity, as the Rivers in the South, smoothly, gently,
calmly, without any tumult or torrent, after so many horrid confusions, as we
have lain under for so many years together, even to the wonder and
astonishment, not only of our selves, but of all the Neighbor Nations round
about us; who must needs acknowledge in our behalf, (as was sometimes done in
the case of Israel,) that the Lord has done great things for them; and we must
needs with the Israelites answer, by way of echo, Yea the Lord has done great
thing for us already whereof we rejoice, Psalm 126. The People of England were
never conceived or reported to be so much against their King, as now they
manifestly appear to be for him; even all of all sorts, but such only whose
guilt makes them desperate, like Cain, thinking their wickedness greater then
can be forgiven. And here for a conclusion, we may fitly and truly (in a sense)
take take up that saying of the Psalmist, and apply it to the present occasion:
The same stone which the builders refused, is become the headstone of the
Corner: This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

To the same God be Glory for his great and Glorious Work. May 21. 1660.
FINIS.
Books printed for Robert Gibbs at the Ball in Chancery Lane.
STemma Sacrum, The Royal Progeny, by Giles Fleming, Minister of Waddingworth
in the County of Lincoln.

Epinicia Carolina, or an Essay upon the Return of his sacred Majesty, Charles
the second; by S. Woodford Gent. quarto.

The blessed Estate of them that die in the Lord; by Tho. Manton Minister of
Covent Garden, preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Jane Blackwell, Wife of Elidad
Blackwell.

An hundred choice Meditations Divine and Moral; by Henry Tubb M. A. of Saint
John's College in Cambridge.

Sensuality dissected, or the Epicure's Motto, opened, censured, improved,
preached at the Kentish Feast.

The Saints Gods precious Treasure, being a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Darcy Wyvil Esquire; Eldest Son to the truly honorable Sir Christopher VVyvil.

The Excellent Woman a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Scot.

The vanity of glorying in the flesh, in a Sermon preached at the Funeral of
Kingswel Lucy Esquire; These four Sermons all preached by Tho. Case Minister of
Saint Giles in the Fields, and may be bound in one volume in 120.

depiction of a man


