The Pastors Advocate. Together with The Peoples MONITOR.
By R. Junius Gent.
Add this as an Appendix to Gods goodness and Englands unthankfulness.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Gataker.



SECT. I.

AS in a Vine, what is taken away by pruning from the branches, is added unto
the fruit: so speech, says Plutarch, is made more piercing, by taking away
that which is superfluous. And Seneca affirms, that instructions pointed with
delight, pierce the more sharply, and stick the more steadfastly. For which
reasons, in speaking of this ensuing Subject, I will only present my Reader
with some loose Pearls, filed upon a string; or a few skeins of fine Silk,
close wound up in bottoms; which perhaps with a good needle, I could have
flourished into a far larger Work.

Nor need it offend any, that I more respect the weight and benefit of the
matter, then the order of handling: Much Gold for a little Oar: Words and
matter close and sweetly couched, was not wont to be meanlier, but better
esteemed.

. 2. There is a horrid sin spread all over this Nation, and lies lurking in the
hearts of almost who not? which has not a second like it; either to hinder the
blessings, or draw down the curses and judgments of God upon the whole Land.
And yet men are so far from thinking it a sin, that many (possessed with a new
start-up white devil) think it a virtue. Namely to contemn, rob and persecute
the Ministers of the Gospel: who above all other men should be honored,
respected, and rewarded. Of this sin a few Notions, Aphorisms, or Conclusions.
Only I wish those whom it shall concern would hearken unto me, as they would
have God another day hearken unto them.

. 3. Ministers are our Pastors, to feed us that depend upon them, Ephesians. 4.11.
They are Gods Husbandmen; to Till his Ground, and Sow his Seed, 1 Cor. 3.9.
They are Watchmen; appointed by God to give us warning of ensuing danger, Ezekiel.
3.17. They are Dispensers of the mysteries of the Gospel, and deliver to us
nothing but what they receive from God, 1 Cor. 4.1. They are the Stewards of
Gods house; to give every man his portion of meat, in due season, Luke 12.42.
They are the light of the world, and not only shine forth by a holy life, but
inlighten us also by their heavenly doctrine, Matthew. 5.14. They are the salt of
the earth; to season us with wholesome instruction and exhortation, Matthew.
5.13. They are Master Builders; to edify us the House of God, and body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.10. They are our Captains; to fight Gods battles against our
spiritual enemies: and our Leaders to instruct us in the spiritual Warfare, 2
Cor. 9.3, 4. They are Gods Ambassadors; to declare his message to us, Ephesians.
6.20. They are Coworkers together with God, in converting and saving our souls,
2 Cor. 6.1. 1 Cor. 3.9. And should not these be honored, respected, and
rewarded? Yea how can that man have any interest in Christ's blood, who is not
forced with admiration to say; How beautiful are the feet of them that preach
the Gospel of peace? bring glad tidings of good things, and publish salvation?
Romans 10.15. Isa. 52.7. St Paul's words are, Let them that labor in the word and
doctrine, if they rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17.

If men did but consider, that they cannot be nourished unto eternal life, but
by the milk of the Word; they would rather desire their bodies might be without
souls, then their Churches without Preachers: And the devil that roaring lion,
is more afraid of such a silly Cock (a poor faithful Minister) then all the
other great Beasts. Yet I tremble to think how little they are regarded.

. 4. The twelve heads of Israel, as Reverend and Judicious Doctor Hall thinks,
would never have written their names in their Rods so willingly, but in hope
they might be chosen to the dignity of the Priesthood. If they, all the
Princes, had not thought it an high honor, been ambitious of the preserment;
they had never so much envied the Office of Aaron. What then shall we think of
this change? Is the Evangelical Ministration of less worth then the Leviticall?
Whiles the Testament is better, is the service worse? How is it that the great
think themselves too good for this employment? How is it that under the Gospel,
men are disparaged with that which honored them under the Law? that their
ambition and our scorn should meet in one subject?

. 5. In Jeroboams time, the lowest of the people were made Priests, (whom they
resemble that make Tradesmen their Ministers:) And now Priests (...) made the
lowest of the people! In all things the Minister is held the ^^^^nest of the
Parish, till it comes to any Tax or Payment, and then they will honor him so
far, as to rank him with an Alderman. And what is the issue? they that would
study Divinity above all other Arts; when they look upon the contempt, beggary,
and vexation that the Ministry undergo, turn to Law, Physic, Trades, or any
thing, rather then they will enter into this contemptible Calling.

But O the sordidness of such! who think the term Minister contemptible; when
even Christ himself, who must save them, if ever they be saved, calls himself a
Minister, Matthew. 20.28. But let them mock on, like those ill-bred children to
the Prophet, 2 King. 2.23, 24. Isaac shall be Heir, when Ishmael shall be
turned out of doors. For as, He that despises the poor, (either in estate, or
impotency of mind or body) despises God that made him, Prove. 17.5. so he that
despises a man for being a Minister, or for the graces of God appearing in
him, despises, and almost despighteth Christ himself, and the very Spirit of
God which made him so.

. 6. But secondly, they not only slight their Function, but they rob them of
their maintenance: and that two wales: First, Their Patrons (Sacrilegious and
Atheistical Impropriators) rob them, perhaps of three parts of their
livelihood, in carrying away the principal Tithes, for they have no more right
thereunto, then to the Cloak on my back. Nor is this all; for many a cursed
Patron, and pattern of Atheism, holds a Benifice vacant in his hands, till he
has sounded many Chapmen, with a Who gives more? And then if Balaams Ass can
but dung him silver enough, he will sell him all the souls in the Parish. For
he looks more to the gifts of the hand, then to the gifts of the heart; and had
rather lose his inheritance in Heaven, then let Christ have his inheritance on
Earth.

I need not tell you, that when Judas is the Patron, Simon Magus must be the
Priest: Or if the Patron be a Formalist, or Good fellow, so must his Chaplain
be. If the Chaplain be Papisticall or Atheistical, his Clark must be so too:
At least if the Minister be conformable and Learned, it matters not though he
be lewd. But let me give you this hint, That Judas with his Quid vos dabitis
mihi on the one side, and Simon Magus with his Quid ego tibi dabe on the other
side, make wicked bargains together. That such Patrons as for lucre betray
Christ's flocks into the hands of Jeroboams Priests, make as good bargains as
Judas did, in selling his Master to the high Priests for thirty pieces of
silver. Indeed one would think that Judas his halter should make them afraid of
Judas his question: Or that all such Patrons and Priests, should be whip out of
Gods house, which were happy for the whole Nation, though it were by far too
small a punishment. For certainly, if the buyers and sellers in the Temple,
deserved whipping, the buyers and sellers of the Temple deserve hanging, or
worse: As who knows whether they therefore escape correction here, that they may
have the greater damnation hereafter?

. 7. True, while they are drunk with avarice, and out of their wits with an
ignorant partiality, they will maintain, and would fain persuade their
consciences to think, that they have a right to the Churches maintenance. They
gave good money for it, or they had it from their Ancestors, and they take but
what the Law allows, that is, what their law, not what the Gospel alows, or the
ancient Laws of this Land: and yet they hope not to be saved by the Law but by
the Gospel. And let me but appeal, as Bishop Grostead did, from Pope Adrian
private, to Pope Adrian public, and not interested in the cause: Or as
another, from his Passion as Clement, to his Holiness as Peter; even from them
drunk, unto them come to themselves, (which will be at least upon their death
beds, or in hell) they will see it to be a cursed sacrilege, the worst of all
thefts or murders; and that it were far better for Christ to have his
inheritance in his own hands, then to stand to their courtesies, who had rather
there were no Gospel, nor Preacher in the world, then that their Heir should
want a Parsonage. But now, the melody of gain whistles out the eye of
conscience; so they lavish it out on their lusts. As how often does the
Impropriator, some upstart Gallant, newly come to age, wear a Church upon his
back, and the Bells at his heels gingling? while the Minister whom he robs, is
forced to go in a thredbare Coat, and the poor Flock are starved in the
Country. So that the father most unjustly, with the spoils of Christ,
purchases fields of blood, that the son may Belteshazzar like, drink carowses
in the bowls of the Temple. But what is the issue? They that swollow Churches
(like dogs that eat knotgrasse) never thrive after it. Yea Church livings have
been more unfortunate to the Gentry of England, then was the Gold of Tholossa
to the followers of Scipio.

. 8. Again secondly, As the Minister is robbed by his Patron, so he is gulled by
his people; who if they can avoid it, will pay him nothing: or if there be no
remedy, will give him the worst of their younglings, and that by the halves.
The people in Moses time brought so much treasury, and so many gifts to the
building of Gods Tabernacle, that the Priests were fain to bid them cease,
Exodus 36.5, 6, 7. but men are now so sparing of their pains and cost, that they
think that very time misspent which is employed in the service of God; and that
money ill bestowed, which is given to the maintenance of his Ministers. They
use Preachers, in case they like them, as Carriers do their horses; who lay
heavy burdens upon their backs, and then hang bells at their ears to make them
music: or rather, as Gentlemen use post horses; whom they spur till they are
spent, and then a fresh is called for. Mean while they sit still, and think to
go to Heaven by giving them the hearing, which commonly is all they give them.

It it Satan's policy, that they that maintain the Truth, should not have to
maintain themselves. And it is the pride of this sacrilegious Age, that the
Minister be always the poorest in the Parish. They empty their Books, they
empty their veins, they empty their brains, but they must feed upon Turnips,
and leave their posterity beggars. Perhaps they will give a Minister great
thanks, and if he be a witty man, that tickles their ears, and pleases their
sense; they will extol him to the skies. But men cannot Camelion like, live by
the air of thanks, or feed ever the fatter for others praises.

9. Nehemiah complained, that in his time, the Levites for want of maintenance,
were fain to leave the Temple, and follow the plow, Nehem. 13.10. And Luther of
his Age; that this was the cause, why the unconscionable of the Clergy beat
their brains, and set their wits upon the tenters to invent such tricks of
superstition, as might be advantageous to them, prayer for the dead,
indulgences, etc. For, says he, when the covetousness of the Priests, and the
ignorance of the peeple joined together; then they invented Purgatory, Masses,
Prayer for the dead, works of Supererrogation, selling of Pardons, and all
their other trinkets. For if they had not held our forefathers in ignorance,
keeping them from the Word, they would never have been Papists But when they
cast a mist before the eyes of all the People, then the blind fell into that
ditch, which does contain so many gross corruptions. And you cannot but
observe, that they are Coffer Doctrines, that Rome is most violent to justify.
Masses, which bring in masses of wealth; praying for the dead, which is a trick
to prey upon the living; and so of selling Pardons, etc. Yea what is the reason
they forbid marriage, and commend vows of chastity? but that they may with the
more color allow of Stews, and have large fees out of Harlots hiers.

. 10. All which miscarriages, even of the Antichristian Priests, had been
prevented, if the people would have afforded them, either plentiful, or indeed
sufficient maintenance. Learning would have more plentiful allowance, then
other petty employments, or else it is in danger to be mischievous. For, if you
observe it, where wit and poverty meet, they seldom make up an honest man. As
what was the reason, that so many serpentine Preachers of the Prelaticall
faction, were so eagerly driving toward popery, until their mouths were
gagged, their arms shortened, and their horns broken by the Parliament? but
because Popery is a trade, whereby they might become exceeding rich: yea their
fingers itcht, and their teeth watered after those great revenues that are
conferred upon the popish Clergy; and which their covetousness and craft has
gained them. O that they had had no such inducement! or that (since they have
shown themselves so mercenary, and unfaithful to him that put them in trust,)
they were all so served. The Bishops for their own ends brought them into the
Church the Lord of his mercy cast them out, I mean all, as he has already done
some, that they may never return again: for if these Antichristian Preachers be
suffered, its impossible that ever the Church, or men's lives should be
reformed. Well may they obstruct and hinder all that tends thereto.

Yet nevertheless, against reason, and all this experience, even in these
days of Gospel Light, and so much means of Grace, they hold it as an Axiom;
That to keep Ministers poor, is the only way to make them study. Therefore they
must be dieted like Horses for a Race, not pampered. A fat Bird, say they, will
not sing; a fat Dog cannot hunt.

. 11. Men will have a care, that Ministers shall not be both wealthy and
faithful: rich and not true, or true and not rich; both together were a
miracle. Whiles we had leaden Priests, we paid golden Tithes: and were then
persuaded, that blasphemy and drunkenness were tolerable sins in respect of
sacrilege. But now, those that in our consciences teach us the true way to
blessedness, we think unworthy the worst of what we have. To advance
superstitious fopperies, the ignorant and superstitious think nothing too much.
Wicked Athalia and her children, brake up the house of God, and all the things
that were dedicated for his service, they bestowed upon Balim, 2 Cron. 24.7.
Gods Prophets were glad of bread and water, whiles Jezabels four hundred
trencher-Chaplains, were fed as daintily as the King himself. Should we have
superstitious and idolatrous Priests (as in Rome and Italy,) that more aim at
the Churches goods, then the Churches good: at their own benefit more then the
peoples profit, it were easy for them, to purchase both men's praises and
purses.: whereas every penny they part with, to a faithful and painful
Pastor, is drawn from them, as so many drops of blood from the heart. As O the
difference between these Sunshine days of the Gospel, and the darkness of our
Forefathers times: when even the comfortable use of the very Bible was
interdicted them, the known language concealed, and they bound with a Curse not
to read it. Whereas now, it lies open in our Churches, in out windows: God
grant we shut it not to our own souls. Which is mightily to be feared, if we
cannot be at the least cost for our Religion; if we can be content to do God
chargeless service.

. 12. It was gain that made Diana so great, and Demetrius to roar and make such
a tumultuous stir for her. Its far otherwise with our Ministers; they beat
their brains, and spend their spirits, pour out their prayers, plot and
contrive all they can to save our poor souls: which being our case, what cause
have we to fear the removal of our Candlestick! and that God should leave us
in the dark, since we love darkness more then light: And to take away our
faithful Ministers from us, when we so ill entreat them, and so unworthily
reward them. If we presume to cosen God, to purloyn the maintenance of his
Ministers, is not this to point God the way to plague us? and to send upon us a
famine of preaching, who have brought a famine upon the Preachers? Is it not
just with God, to take away the lamp from that Nation, which has taken away
the holy oil that should maintain it? And Lord I fear that England shall want
the Gospel, when the Barbarians receive it: because England had the Gospel, and
would not give a penny (more then forced unto) to keep it.

. 13. And this (whatever carnal hearts conceive of it,) were a greater
judgment, then the loss of the Sun out of the firmament. A famine of bread is
a sore plague, when a woeful Mother, for her self and son, is dressing their
last provision. The extremity harder, when Mothers by turns cat up their own
children, as it fell out, 1 King. 17.12. 2 King. 6.28. But this was nothing to
a dearth of the Word. Even Seneca an Heathen could say, It is better not to be,
then not to know. Better unborn then untaught. Which if true of humane
knowledge, how much more of the divine and supernatural knowledge of the
Gospel? For This is life eternal, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, John 17.3. And look to it my Brethren, least you rob your
selves and your posterity to the worlds end, of enjoying this matchless mercy,
this unparralleld pearl.

You indeed set a low price upon it, and thereafter deal with the publishers of
it: but O what large bribes would Satan give to have such men hold their peace,
if they were of some great Lawyers mind? Yea I dare say, his servant the Pope
would give them more to be silent, then you will willingly give them for all
their pains in Preaching.

. 14. Magistrates are the Arms of the World, Counselors the Brains, Lawyers
the Tongues, the Rich the Stomachs, the Poor the Backs, Merchants the Feet,
Officers the Hands, and Divines the Hearts. God made thee, thy Preacher (as a
coworker together with God) saves thee. Where is another equivalent to God and
his Ambassador? And yet as if God and his Minister had nothing to do with us,
and nothing had done for us; there is none whom we so boldly defraud. Our best
things should not be too dear for the Lord, whose both they and our selves are.
And those that sight for our souls, against spiritual powers, may challenge
maintenance from us, and it is a shameful unthankfulness to deny it. Nor do
Ministers more take pains then they pray for us. They beg and dig, and dig and
beg, as that good Vine-dresser did, whose Mattock kept off the Masters Ax, Luke
13.8, 9. Besides, he can never be truly thankful to God, who is unthankful to
the means, by whom God does him good.

. 15. When Abraham had vanquished the five Kings, and delivered Lot and his
family; the King of Salem met him with bread and wine. But we reward our
Champions, that stand in the gap to defend us, as the Jews did Christ, they
give us wine, and we return them vinegar. For either we traduce, and speak evil
of them, as Absalom did of his own father, 2 Samuel 15.3. Or we unjustly accuse
them, to get away their Livings, as false Ziba did honest Mephibosheth. Or like
Mules, we suck their milk, and then kick them with our heels, which is to outdo
mischief it self. Yea sometimes it fares with them, as it did with the two
milch Kine that carried the Ark of God back from the Philistines to
Bethshemish, that were for their labor burnt in sacrifice, as soon as they had
done that good office, 1 Samuel 6.14.

. 16. But fare they well or ill, they go on in discharge of their duty, which
proves them to be like the Apostles of Christ, who though they were beaten for
Preaching in the Name of Jesus, yet ceased they not to teach and preach the
Gospel, and to win all they could, Act. 5.42. Indeed some there are that will
square cut their positions, according to their peoples dispositions, as not
daring to speak to the full extent of their consciences, for fear least by
displeasing their Auditory, they should lose their salary. Nor dare they
reprove great men's particular sins, because such an attempt would bring them
into contempt. But how unlike are such Messengers to Eliah, in his personal
dealing with Ahab? to Elisha, about Jehoram? Jeremiah, with Pashur? Amos, with
Amaziah? John Baptist, with Herod? our Savior, with the Scribes and Pharisees?
Steven, with the high Priests and Elders? yea St Paul with Peter his fellow
Apostle, and with Elymas the Sorcerer, most of them mighty and potent?

And most pitiful is the case of such a people, whose sins are so connived at,
except conscience makes a supply, which were extraordinary. Indeed if that be
awake it will fear no man, but dares check a Magistrate, control a Prince And
admit it may sometimes slumber (as no woman is always scolding) yet when it
wakes, it will speak and speak home.

. 17. But I speak not of those trencher Chaplains, who out of coveteousnesse
and for want of courage, betray the truth; who are more careful for their own
profit and quiet, then of the peoples good, or Gods glory: for these were never
sent of God, and it is meet their wages should be according to their work: and
yet I would rather err in giving a Wolf his due (if he be appointed my Pastor)
then in the least detain from a faithful Shepherd what of right belongs to him.

But I tell you of such as fear God, and are of his sending, who think it
better to lose men's favors then their souls, and will be sure to discharge
their consciences from the burden of any ones blood. As Gods glory will make a
good man speak, even when terror it self has commanded silence.

A conscionable Minister resembles David, who would venture on a Bear, rather
then lose a Lamb: and Jacob, who would endure heat by day, and frost by night,
rather then neglect his flocks. And Moses, who would fight with odds, rather
then the Cattle should perish with thirst. Only a Balaam wants this mercy.

. 18. And what though men remain obstinate for a time? When wood is green, it
will not presently burn, yet if it be long blown, it will take fire, and flame
at length. Or admit the worst, yet he will not be silent. Good meat put into a
stomach corrupt, feavourish, or hydropicall, does not more nourish nature, then
the disease: yet we do not thereupon forbear utterly to give them meat, but
rather strive to purge out those bad humors which cause the offense. The Lord
by his Ministers, gives every of us light, let us beseech him also for clear
and sound eyes, that we may find benefit, and take comfort in the light he
has given us.

19. I grant, that in speaking of this sinful sin of Sacrilege, even the most
conscientious and faithful Ministers are too sparing: Not for that Sacrilege
scorns to be reprehended, nor for that he is taxed of indiscretion that meddles
with it, but that it may appear they least of all seek themselves. And for that
they should thereby so prejudice their hearers, that they would little regard
what ever else they do deliver. For such is the sottishness and sordidness of
most men, which makes me the rather speak; neither let any of these Godhaters,
Romans 1.30. blaspheam the Ministry for what I have or shall speak: For I am no
Minister, nor have I any particular relation to the Ministry: so that
self-interest can bear no sway with me, I only speak my conscience, as it is
informed from the Word: And to me it represents it self, as the most unjust,
unreasonable, ungrateful, abominable and prejudicial sin to our selves, of
all other sins.

.20. 1. Most unjust for we partake of the Preachers goods; they bring us the
glad tidings of salvation, would furnish and endow us with the spiritual,
unvaluable, and lasting riches of grace and glory:) and shall not they partake
of our goods, that are inferior, earthly and perishing? Let him that is taught
in the word, communicate unto him that teaches, in all his goods, says the
Apostle, Gal. 6.6. None but those, who would give sin a pasport to offend,
can deny this to be New Testament, and to be most just and equal. Yet to go
home to that place, or to bring that place close home to men's consciences;
would appear harsh, in these times of Gospel light, or New-lights as they call
them: if any man does not communicate, and communicate in all bis goods: God is
not mocked, Gal. 6.7. so it falls, and I fear it falls heavy on many amongst us.
Again (says the same Apostle,) If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we reap yiur carnal things? 1 Cor. 9.11. Do ye not know,
that they which minister about holy things, live of the things of the Temple;
and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar? Even so has
the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel:
ver. 13, 14. He uses many other arguments in the same Chapter, that he may
meet with men's carnal reasonings in this case: As, Who goes a warfare at any
time at his own charges? who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the
flock? and the like, the which read at your leisure. And in Romans 15. Their
debtors they are (which proves it not a benevolence or free gift,) for if the
Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, their duty it also
to minister unto them in carnal things, ver. 27. The Apostle calls it a debt,
and tells us it is our duty: observe that. All which is New Testamens, if
obstinacy would suffer men to take notice of it. But our Pharisees are worse
then the Pharisces of old: for what says one of the worst of them? I pay
tithes of all that I have: I should have thought he had lied, but that our
Savior justifies him; even to mint and cummin. A Pharisce of Jerusalem, was in
this an honest man, to many Citizens of London* yet that Pharisee went to hell,
in all probability.

. 21. Yea a Minister, must not require those dues that are acknowledged (though
perhaps those dues will not maintain him;) but he is too strict (especially of
the meaner sort^;) and yet sometimes, and in some cases, in losing his right,
he shall wrong and do prejudiee to other Pastors that live about him, and those
likewise that shall succeed and come after him in his living: yea foster his
people in that fond conceit, of thinking their labor and ministry so little
worth; which ought to be stood upon. Aristippus the Philosopher would take
money of his friends, though he cared not for it, to teach them that it was his
due, and how they ought to esteem of the riches of the mind.

Fourthly, Why should Ministers more then other men, take a testern for a
shilling? when themselves that make the objection, will not think it fair
dealing from their debtors, but take their full due, and think it neither
breach of justice, piety or charity? why then should they impose the same upon
others?

Fifthly, Admit he take his full due of a poor body; the poorest of all have
souls; and I see not, but as the poor may count it a happiness that they may
have their mite accepted, so that the Minister in giving to the poor, should
have the same liberty that all men have, viz. to bestow it where he pleases,
and where he thinks it will be best bestowed. Briefly, if men would have
Ministers de jure cedere, they should also learn jus reddere. But

. 22. 2. As it is most unjust, so it is most unreasonable. Men would have fire
kept in the Sanctuary, but allow no fuel; they would have the lamp burn, but
without oil: And how do they serve Christ and themselves in so serving their
Ministers? To take away the pr^vant from the Army, is to betray it to the
Enemy: and simple souls, they do no less to their power, then split or sink
that ship in the midst of the sea, which alone should save them. Sacrilege is
the greatest theft, yet of it men make the least conscience.

The Merchant provides bravery for our backs, the Farmer food for our bellies,
the Lawyer looks to our estates, the Physician to our bodies, but th Divine
saves our souls; which is infinitely beyond all: For says Christ in the
Gospel, Is not the life more worth then the meat, and the body then raiment;
and the soul more precious then all. And yet men envy not the prodigious wealth
of Merchants, of Lawyers, of any: But they cannot hear of a Minister that has
a Tithe of their means, but their hearts and splenes rise at it: Yea this upon
the point is the only conference, or parley, both in public and private, how to
decrease the Ministers maintenance, and yet increase his work: which is like
Pharaohs oppressing Gods people, Exodus 5. Get ye straw where ye can find it,
yet shall nothing of your labor be diminished. As good shat a Bird into a
Cage, give her no meat, and yet bid her sing.

. 23. But what say they? Though we give them not so much as they would have,
yet we give them sufficient: Though not at does, yet as of benevolence and free
gift Though this argument is held of no force in any other cafe. He that works
with us by the day, we say is worthy of his wages, we do not call it a
benevolence. Nor will the Lawyer or Physician give you thanks, though you
tender unto them a more considerable Fee, but for asking of aquestion. And are
Divines slaves in comparison of all other men? Are thousands but sufficient for
a Tradesman, and an alms enough for a Minister? O that men would but read what
is written, Levit. 1.10. and 3.1. and 23.19. and 27.30, 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 14. 22,
23, 24, to 30. and 15.21. and 12.17, 18. and 17.1. And 26.12, to 16. Numb.
18.20, 21, 24. and 28.31. Nehem. 10.37, 38. Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.4.8. Luke 11.42.
2 Chronicles. 31.4. Mal. 1.8, etc. and 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Amos 4.4. Hag. 1. and 2.
Chapters. Ezekiel. 43.22. and but seriously consider of them.

. 24. But admit the ones humility should satisfy the others pride, and take
what they think sufficient for Minister, and that as a benevolence, or free
gift, and not as their own proper dues. What is it they call sufficient? And
what is their great benevolence, of which they are apt to boast, and for which
they count him their servant? as their very children, by bearing their Parents
discourse, can in the School thus twit their Ministers children, Your father is
but our fathers servant, they maintain him, etc. which to hear, though from
foolish children, would make any good, or ingenuous man's blood to rise.

Their contribution is even such, as I am ashamed to name, nor can I with
patience once think of it. Perhaps the father of such a child gives to the
Minister or Lecturer, if he be worth five hundred pounds, three pence a
Quarter, as he gives to the Bclman, for laboring all the year like a Horse.

In Parishes that I could name, of late times, it is mostly left to every man's
choice, the more shame and pity, what he will give to the Minister, and what do
they give? Not one in ten gives any thing, though many of them no mean ones,:
yea some forsooth pretend conscience for their robbing the Minister: he has
taken degrees, is ordained, is a blackcoat, a Presbyterian, an Independent,
will not indifferently administer the Sacrament, nor give it men at home when
they are sick, as in former times; he had not their voice, nor consent when he
was chosen; or they do not like his Preaching, or he is a Roundhead, or I am of
another Church, or I hear at other Churches, or I cannot edefie by his
Preaching, or he preaches the Law, and therefore is a raylor, or the like. Of
the rest, the greater part give eight pence, twelve pence, or sixteen pence a
Year. And of those that give two shillings, four shillings or more, there are
not very many, though great Parishes, and the Ministers, both Learned, Godly
and deserving: So that in Parishes where were 6 or 10 thousand Communicants in
the Bishops time, there can scarce be collected clear to the Minister
threescore pounds per annum, to maintain him, his wife and family, and to
provide portions for his children.

. 25. And as for the Country, how many whole Parishes be there in the Land, yea
how many hundreds, that suffer their faithful and painful Minister (who lies
Ledger for the great King of Heaven and earth) to feed upon crusts, and spin
out twenty or forty marks a year, into a thread as long as his life? Or if in
other Parishes they allow their Minister more, is that more (if they can help
it) any more then a mean Mechanic will get, with keeping two Apprentises, and
a Journeyman, though he play himself. Or will their great benevolence afford a
laborious Be, books enough to furnish his study, and breed his children as
were fit, or provide them portions?

Or if so, whereas men of other professions, whether Attorneys, Shopkeepers,
Aledrapers, and.c. (not to name the richest, as Courtiers, Lawyers, Merchants)
think it a small matter, to get two or three hundred pounds a year, and leave
their children five hundred or a thousand pounds apiece to their portions. It
is counted a mighty business, if a Minister has an hundred, or sixscore pounds
a year, which will not comfortably maintain his Charge, and afford him to do
that good, which every one expects a Minister should do, have he never so
little.

Yea a Player, Fiddler, or Dauncer is better maintained then a Preacher. And as
if the better part were least to be cared for, men could be content, if need
were, to bestow more upon a License to eat flesh in Lent, then upon their souls
all the year. Yea many men's shoeties cost them more in a year, then God and
their souls. And does not all this speak men most brutish and irrational? yea
impious and ungrateful? As God forbid men should profit so little by their
Minister, as their Minister profits by them.

. 26. And yet they have some piece of reason for it: for their blockish
stupidity is such, that they think none live more idely then Scholars: yea
doubtless they think Ministers can preach without study as the Apostles did; or
live by miracle as John Baptist did. Mistake me not; I have no mind to meddle
with that perverse generation, that are so drunk with an opinion of the spirit;
and such enemies to learning, and pains in study, that they barrowcado their
hearts, not only against the admitment of what any one of another judgment can
attedge, but even against common sense: though these also are of the others
judgment, and that in the extreme. For these hold, yea will maintain, that a
Cobbler may sit at his work all the week, and yet preach two better Sermons upon
the Lords day ex tempore, then the best Scholar can do, that spends himself in
his library, alleging the Apostles for their warrant. And yet could I hear
Fishermen or the like, write and preach like the Apostles, and likewise speak
all Languages by the Spirit as they did; who of no Scholars were suddenly
changed into greater Scholars and better Orators then ever the world bred up in
the best Universities: I would see if I could prevail with my understanding, to
submit to their judgments. In the mean time I say, of all men in the world, I
mean not to meddle with them, and I should be as sorry to have them meddle with
me. And therein also my hope is depending, for like that Horse sent to Dr
Butler in Cambridge, they care not for books, yea they will allow of no books
to be read but the Bible (wherein by consequence, they condemn all preaching.)
So having a little stepped out of my way, to meet with our Enthusiasts, as once a
grave Divine stepped out of his text, to meet with King James about his swearing,
I return to the parties with whom my business lies.

.27. Men envy not the prodigious wealth of Merchants, Lawyers, Courtiers; but
they cannot hear of a Minister, that has a tithe of their means, but their
hearts and splenes rise at it. Nor must what they have be counted as due wages
for their work; though as I showed before, he that preaches the Gospel should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.7, to 15. Thought he that is taught in the word,
is commanded to communicate unto him that teaches in all his goods, Gal. 6.6.
Romans 15.27. Though our debt and duty to our spiritual Pastors is such, as that
Paul told Philemon, Thou owe unto me, even thine own self, Philem. 19. And
though the believing Galathians received Paul as an Angel of God; yea even as
Christ Jesus: and to pleasure him, would if it had been possible, have plucked
out their own eyes and have given them unto him, Gal. 4.14, 15. But it must be
called, a benevolence forsooth, or free gift.

. 28. And in case he seeks to mend himself, by accepting of better means, they
will make it such a heinous matter, as if he had stolen a horse; or as if he
had forsaken his lawful wife, and married another woman. As it, would amaze a
man to hear, how confidently these blocks will maintain; that a Minister in
this case, cannot with a good conscience forsake his people, yea though his aim
and end be principally the glory of God. As when all, or most in the Parish,
blind themselves with prejudice against him, and even stop their ears against
whatsoever truth he delivers, resolving against their own conversion: If he
shall remove to another people, that will receive him as the Galathians did
Paul; and help them to another whom they far more respect, and whose Ministry
is more likely to do good upon them: they will most basely calumniate him, and
not he alone shall suffer, but all these Churchmen say they, are so covetous,
that they never think they have enough. And what hospitality do they keep? when
they have scarce enough to fill the bellies of their own families: all which
not only argues them as brainless as beasts, but proves them to be as full of
the serpents enmity, as the egg of a Cockatrice is full of poison. But.

. 29. 3. As it is most unjust and unreasonable, so it is the most abominable in
Gods sight of all other sins.

How abominable it is, we may partly gather from the many complaints and
threatenings which God throughout all the old Testament utters for the robbing
him of his Tithes, Offerings, etc. See Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. and 1.7, 8, 13, 14.
Hag. 1, and 2d Chapters, etc.

Besides, What is the root and spring of this their spite and enmity to the
Ministry, but an inbred enmity and hatred against God himself? As when Satan
slew Jobs sons and servants, his malice was against Job. Or as when Saul darted
a spear at Jonathan, his spite was against David: He that loves not the
members, was never a friend to the Head.

30. And accordingly God takes what is done to his Ministers or Messengers as
done to himself. They have not cast thee away, says God to Samuel, but they
have cast me away, that I should not reign over them, 1 Sa^. 8.7. You are
gathered together against the Lord, says Moses, to Korah, Dathan, and Abiram;
when they presumptuously told him, He and Aaron had taken too much upon them;
and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him? Number. 16. 11. He that hates me,
says our Savior, meaning as he was a Minister of the Gospel, hates my Father
also, Joh. 15.23. which proves a world among us to be God-haters, Romans 1.30.
Many such places I might allege if I would be large.

If men honored Christ they could not despise his Ministers, his Ambassadors:
if they despise his Ministers they do not honor Christ: and if they do not
honor him he will never honor them. But it appears, that too-many value not
their Minister so much as they do their Horse, which is a sign of a desperate
condition. When Homer had spent many lines in dispraising the body of
Thersites, he briefly describes his soul thus; That he was an enemy to Ulysses.
And we need say no more of a bad man, then he is an enemy to his Pastor, that
is enough to brand him. But.

31. 4. It is not more unjust, unreasonable, and abominable, then it is foolish
and prejudicial to our selves. For our selves suffer most, and are the
greatest loosers in this kind of thrist. As mark diligently I pray you, but
these few Scriptures, Is it time for your selves to dwell in your seeled
Houses. and this my House lie waste, Hag. 1. Now therefore thus says the Lord
of Hosts, Consider your own ways; Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye
eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye
cloathe you, but ye are not warm; and he that earneth wages, puts the wages
into a bag with holes. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways in
your hearts; and go up to the Mountain, and bring Wood, and build this House;
and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified in it, says the Lord;
Ye looked for much, and lo it came to little; and when ye brought it home, I
did blow upon it; and why says the Lord of Hosts? even because of my House
that is waste, and ye turn every man unto his own House. Therefore the heaven
ever you is stayed from dew, and the earth it stayed from her fruit: And I
called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn,
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon all that
the ground, brings forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the
labor of the hands, Hag. 1.4. to 12.

. 32. And again in the second Chapter, from the 15. verse. And now I pray you
consider in your minds from this day and upward, even before a stone was laid
upon a stone in the Temple of the Lord: since these days were, when one came
to an heap of twenty measures, there were but ten; when one came to the
pressofat for to draw out fifty vessels out of the press, there were but
twenty. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hail in all the
labors of your hands; yet you turned not to me, says the Lord. Consider I
pray you in your minds, from this day and upward, from the four and twentieth
day of the ninth month, even from the day that the foundation of the Lords
Temple was laid, consider it in your minds. Is the seed yet in the barn? yea,
as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the Pomegranate, and the Olive Tree has
not brought forth: from this day will I bless you, Hag. 2.15, 16. to 20.

And again, Mal. 3. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, but ye say,
wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings. Ye are cursed with a
curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole Nation, Bring ye all the tithes
into to the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me now
herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open the windows of Heaven
unto you, and power you out a blessing without measure, so that there shall not
be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes,
and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your Vine
cast her fruit before the time, or be barren in the field, says the Lord of
Hosts. And all Nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsom
Land, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3.8. to 13.

By these places you may see, that if God be to be trusted, the only way to
abound in all things, and to have them blessed unto us, is to pay the Lord his
dues; Whereas from them that will not pay the tenth, or a considerable part, he
takes away, if not all the other nine, yet so much as may make us no small
loosers: A case worth the considering of all that study to be rich. Nor is it
possible with words to express the truth of a thing more clearly, fully, and
plainly, then the Lord has delivered himself to us in the forementioned
Scriptures touching this point.

. 33. There was a Gentleman, well known and observed by many Ministers, and
other conscientious Christians in this Land, that had the tithes of a Parsonage
impropriate; by right whereof he demanded tithe wool of a parishioner who was
very rich, and the owner of many hundred sheep: he sent him a very small
quantity, the servants showed it their Master, the Master his neighbors, who
all acknowledged that he did him wrong. He demanded more, the other denied to
give more; and vowed in his choler, that if he were driven to pay more, he
would never keep sheep again, and so deprive him of that profit. The Law
compelled him, whereupon he put away his sheep: after which he presently fell
into such decay, that when this Gentleman was burried (which was not long
after,) he among the rest of the poor people, stood to receive such alms as
were given at the funeral. And this my self can say out of experience; that in
serving the Commonwealth when time was, I gained in a lawful way many hundreds
a year: but being unthankful, and not once intending to glorify God with my
substance; what I got, God did blow upon, and it was put into a bag with holes,
as the holy Ghost speaks, Hag. 1.6, 9. for my estate rather lessened, then
increased: until amongst other things, I indented with my self, to make
conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath, and to return to the giver (as he should
direct,) the tithe of what I then was, or ever after should be able to expend:
whereupon I found such a sudden change, and that God did so bless and prosper
me, that it appeared miraculous! for no reason could I give of this his mercy,
but his mercy and O the depth! Nor was this the one half: for as in a short
time, the Lord framed my estate to my mind; which made me leave off all
public employment, he has ever since so framed my mind to my estate and
present condition (which amounts to more then all the millions this world is
worth,) that I think I may speak it without vanity, there is not a man alive
more brimfull of joy and content. I know I shall be counted a fool for this:
but if it may be an inducement to others, to trust God, or at least to try him,
in making conscience of this foul and consuming sin, it shall never trouble me.
It is a happy loss that makes God and his Church gainers.

. 34. I will take leave to close this discourse with a double suit; one to the
people in general, the other to supreme Authority: both which shall come from
an heart unfainedly devoted to the common good.

My suit to the first of these is: that what has been spoken may be an
inducement to all that have any fear of God, or love of their own souls, to try
the success of paying to Ministers their due: I speak not to the profane, for
who can wonder that those men disregard their Ministers that have cast off all
respect of God and their own souls. Neither do I need to press such whose
hearts are changed by the power of their Pastors preaching. For great is the
affection of a Convert, to the Ministry which has been the means of his
conversion: He accounts his very eyes but a mean recompense for so great a
benefit, Gal. 4.15 Yea, our debt and duty to our spiritual Pastors is such, as
that Paul told Philemon, Thou owe unto me even thine own self. And the
Primitive times prove it; insomuch that Luther says, so soon as the Gospel
took root in men's hearts, and after when it revived again, money grew dead. The
glad tidings of the Gospel, was so sweet to them, that in comparison, riches
had no relish.

. 35. I speak not unto these, I say, but to such as have not hitherto made
conscience of this duty: and all such I beseech as they tender the good of
their estates here, and their souls hereafter, to take Gods word; As what heart
is able to stand out, when he hears and considers what the Lord speaks, Mal. 3.
Do but try me, says the Lord, if I will not pour out a blessing upon you, etc.
ver. 10, etc. Count it not lost, what you give to your Pastor: think it not
gotten what you gull him of. Give him not the starvelings of your breed; the
best of all kinds, is ^it to be consecrated to the Lord of all. Every thing we
have is too good for us, if we think any thing we have too good for him. Say
not with Judas, why is this waste? but with David, I will not offer to the Lord
of that which cost me nothing, 2 Samuel 24.24. And by maintaining your Pastors
body, he is enabled the better to feed your souls. When the lamp is not fed
with oil, there will be but a dark house. Yea admit your Minister grows old;
and be no longer able, or fit to feed your souls with spiritual manna; cast
him not off: but maintain him and his charge, according to his former pains and
deserving. Yea, let not his wife and children want, though he be dead. Occasion
not the world, to laugh at the Minister, or his, when they come to beg a straw
of their own sheaf. The Levite might not serve after fifty. What then? must he
lose his maintenance? no, he had the same provision still. A man will not cast
off his Dog being old, because he has a long time done him service.

. 37. Secondly, My sure to Sovereign Authority is: that they will provide the
Ministry may be so maintained; if not by the name of Tithes, (which name only
is made a color to cosen the Clergy of all:) yet at least in some other way;
that they may live comfortably, without carking or caring what they shall do,
and where they shall get their bread, when their own temporal means is gone.
The Lord has committed the souls of Magistrates to their Ministers, but the
bodies of Minsters to the Magistrates. And indeed what should become of the
Levites, if there were not Laws: and what of the Church if there were no
Levites.

. 38. And so much of contemning and robbing Christ's Ambassadors of the
Ministry; which is enough to prove, that Millions who think they love God, do
indeed, and in good earnest hate him (For our love to God is best known by our
respect to, and usage of his Messengers,) Of wronging and persecuting them in
their persons and good names; which follows in the transcribed copy; together
with the residue of Englands sin and unthank fullness; when the Stationer
shall be encouraged by the acceptance that these find, which are already done,
to print the whole in a larger character; which may well be doubted, in that
men are so taken up with News and Controversy, (a, new trick of the devils)
that few read profitable Divinity: or if so, not many can hear these downright
truths; but they must also hear the sentence of their own condemnation.
Wherefore for the interim, If any out of a public spirit, would have many of
these without cost (to distribute to whom they concern) let them repair to the
Author.

The end of the first Part.
London, Printed by Abraham Miller and are to be sold by James Crump in Little
Bartholmewes Well-yard.


