ADVERTISEMENT
CHymico Medicus: Or, The Chemical Physician. Giving a rational and true
Account of the Fundamentals and Perfection of Chemistry and Physic, in Examples
and Demonstrations of, 1. Distillation. 2. Rectification and Exaltation of
Vinor Spirits. 3. Tinctures. 4. Oils. 5. Salts 6. Powers and Oleosums. Set down
in such a method, as to retain the Specific Virtue of Concrets in full Power
and Force; with their Medicinal Properties, Nature, Qualities, and Application
for most Diseases: Recommended to all Physicians, Chyrurgeons, Chemists,
Drugsters. etc. and all such as love the knowledge of true and natural
Philosophy. By W.Y. M. D.

Tryon's New Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to
render them more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, with less
Trouble and Charge than generally practiced; with the Art of making Malt. The
third Edition. 12 ves. Price bound 1 s.

-- Wisdom Dictates: Or, Rules Physical and Moral, for preserving the Health of
the Body and the Peace of Mind; fit to be regarded by all that would enjoy the
Blessings of this World: To which is added a Bill of Fare of 75 noble Dishes of
excellent Food, without either Fish or Flesh. 12 ves. Price bound 1 s.

The Measurer's Guide: Or, The whole Art of Measuring made short, plain and
easy; showing how to measure any plain Superficies, all sorts of Regular
Solids, Artificers Works, viz. Carpenters, Joyners, Plaisterers. Painters,
Paviers, Glaziers, Bricklayers, Tylers, etc. with the Art of Gauging; of
singular use to all Gentlemen, Artificers, and others. By J. Barker. 21 ves.
Price bound 1 s.

THE Britannian Magazine: OR, A New Art of Making Above twenty Sorts of ENGLISH
WINES, VIZ. Of Apples, Pears, Peaches, Cherries, Plums, Sloes, Damasins,
Quinces, Figgs, Goosberries, Mulberries, Currens, Blackberries, Elderberries,
Roses, Carnations, Cowslips, Scurvy Grass, Mint, And Balm, etc.
More Pleasant and Agreeable to the English Constitution than those of France.
With the Way of making Brandy and other Spirits: As likewise how to make
Artificial Clarets, Rhenish, etc.

The Second Edition.

To which is added, The Foundation of the Art of Distillation: Or the true and
genuine Way of making Malt into Low-Wines, Proof-Spirits, and Brandy-Wines,
compliant to the late Act of Parliament concerning Distillation.

By W. Y. M. D.

London: Printed by W. Only, for T. Salusbury, at the King's Arms, in
Fleet Street, 1694.

Dr. Worth's LETTER, IN Answer to W. R. Gent. In which the Foundation of the
Art of Distillation is handled, being a Key to the following Treatise.
Esteemed Friend,
YOurs I have received, and having consulted the Matter therein contained, I
shall in brief return you this, by way of answer, to what is there desired:
First, I need not to make any Apology to the Distillers concerning the
publishing the Grounds of that Art, seeing 'twas with a design to serve the
Public. And, secondly, as to the Book it self, and the Process therein
contained, which some, when they saw the Copy, were of opinion, that I had
there made the Art too plain; whatever others may think, I can sincerely say,
That I took a Medium in my Writing, that so the true Enquirer might receive
profitable Instruction thereby; and if any thing may remain yet dubious in any
point, for want of knowing the Phrase of the Land, I shall be ready to explain
my self, as I have promised in my Book, in order to gratify those that design
the public good, and I hope you are of this number, as the shadows of your
Letter seem to appear; and in Answer to your Request, I have sent you the true
and genuine way of working of Malt into Low-Wines, Proof-Spirits, and
Brandy-Wines: I have set forth my Experience concerning Distillation in such a
Method, that none of the London-Distillers can object: Thus,

First, Heat the Water a little above Blood-warm, that is to say, between
Blood-warm and scalding hot, and then, the Malt being in a Mash-Tub, add so
much Liquor to it as is sufficient, just to wet it, and this is called Mashing;
then row or stir it up very well for half an Hour together, Observe, Some let
every Liquor stand an Hour on the Grain.
till it is all mixed in every part; then cover it over close with a
Mashing-cloth; strew it over with fresh Malt, and let it stand an Hour and half
or two Hours; and then let off, and mash again with fresh Liquor, and row it up
as before, but let it not stand above an Hour, and so a third time, but then
let it not stand above half or three quarters of an Hour; some will wet their
Malt a fourth time, but in my opinion it is not fit to still, but only for
making small Beer, or being warmed to put on fresh Malt in another Mashing.

Now every Wort that comes is pumped up out of the under Back into the Cooler,
there to cool, and then from the Cooler into the Wash-Backs, and there let it
remain till all the three Worts come together; and by the way observe, thou art
neither to hop nor boil thy Wort as for Beer; now when this is down in the
Back, add to it of good Yest, and work it up as for Ale; now as the Yest rises
beat it down again, and keep all the Yest in, and let it work 5 or 6 days, in
which time 'twill be ripe, which thou may know by these signs: 'Twill work
it self down again flat, and then the thick Yest will sink to the bottom, and
what lies on the top will be a kind of an hoary or yesty head; and you are to
observe, That your Wash must neither be sour nor sweet, but taken in a medium
between both; for then 'twill be most profitable for the Distiller.

Now, when you have proceeded thus, pump up the Wash out of your Back into the
Still, and observe as you pump, to row or stir up all together, that so the
thick in the bottom may be brought up; the Still may be filled something more
than half, or two thirds at the most; then clap on your Head, and make a good
Fire, until it begins to work; the Head may be put into the Worm, and all luted
fast; and the Still being brought to work, the Fire may be damped with wet
Sinders, Ashes, or the like: Now in the first Extraction in drawing off your
Low-Wines, it is very observable, that some Malt will at the beginning run off a
Can or two of Proof-Spirits, and then it generally runs very long; other Malt
will sometimes run as long, although at the beginning not so fully proof; now
your Low-Wines being all run of, it is observable they will by lying much better
themselves; for which reason some clap them in the Sun to sharpen them, others
in a cold Cellar to make them mellow, which indeed ought to lie 10, 15 or 20
days, before you proceed to a second Extraction: now, as they come fine by
rectification, into high Spirits, they will lose by lying.

RULES to know what Quantities may be extracted from every Quarter of Malt.
YOu must in the first place make about 50 Gallons, or something more than
three Barrels of Wash, and that in the first Extraction will make 32, 34, or 36
Gallons of Low-Wines, and these Low-Wines, if you let them lie, will in the 2d
Extraction make 11 or 12 Gallons of Proof-Spirits, nay, some Malt will make 13
Gallons, especially if in the 2d Extraction you add a Can or two of Water into
the Still, and such Malt will run two or three Cans, or 7 or 8 Gallons
Proof-Spirits, if it be a great Still.

Thus much (Esteemed Friend) for this part: I shall now answer what remains,
sc. in Page 60. concerning Aqua Vitae; for I say, these Rules do agree with
that Brewing, where I say the Wort is not fully rich of the Malt, and therefore
to be distilled as soon as it is well wrought; but if it is to be made into very
strong Beer, then it must be boiled and hopp'd, and lie to stale, the longer
the better, so it keeps its body: For this reason stale Beer, Cider, old French
Wine and Rhenish, are at all times fit to be worked. And again, Concerning the
Dutch way of Mashing, in Page 61, 62. I say, it is the most advantageous way,
with this Proviso, that you prevent the Low-Wines from a tangue or the Still
being burned, by drawing of the Liquors, knowing the use of a Press, which will
bring forth all the substance. And again, What you query in Page 64. concerning
Honey, Sugar, and Molossus, the quantity of the Water there is an Error in the
Press, as you may see in the Errata; for it must be 34 or 40 Gallons of Water
at the least to that weight; and the Water being made a little above Blood-warm
it must be stirred and well united together; and being dissolved, add your
Ferment, and work as the Book directs. Glauber advises a sixth, seventh or
eighth part of Water; but I say, that is too much; for it will not yield so
large a quantity of Spirits; but he says, it makes it the more grateful. But
the other way you may have 10 or 11 Gallons of Proof-Spirits from 100 weight of
Molossus.

Now as you desire to know when for certain Spirits are fermented, take this
rule: Take three or four spoonfuls in a little Dish in the left hand, and a
Candle in the right, and throw the Liquor in the Dish on the Still-head, being
hot, and what runs down clap the Candle to, and if it burns, it is well wrought,
but if it burns not, and clings clammy to the Hand like sweet Wort, then is it
not fit for stilling until better fermented.

Now what you query concerning Backs going backward, and not kindly fermenting;
how to raise it again, I know no better thing than hot Liquors and new Ferment,
sometimes adding either Rhenish Lees, Tartar, or a stone or two of Calx vive
Mustard, Rape, French Sweets, etc. as we have spoke in the Book. Thus much
shall suffice concerning the first and second Extraction, we shall now proceed
to the third, called Rectification.

Indeed Rectification is that on which the whole of our Art depends, and about
which there is so great a Noise made in the Town, and he that does perform it
best must needs be the best Artist. Now we say, that the whole Art of
Rectification consists in bereaving every Spirit from its external Sulphur,
and reducing it to its Vita media, or middle Life, a middle Nature being
introduced, naturalizating it so that of Brandy; which to perform, some
rectify from Bay Salt, others from the Lees of Wine or Cider, with addition of
Clary, Orrice or Ginger, etc. in such a quantity as only to give it a tangue or
flavor, and every Extraction they add a pretty quantity of Water into the
Still, the more to mellow and fine the Spirits; and having brought them to fine
Wares, they may be allayed by Water or Liquors to proof. Now it is observable,
that most or all English Spirits are of that nature, as to return to their old
Friend, Mr. Hogo, if they lie long, as the Wares about Town do plainly
manifest, let them be ever so highly drawn; and therefore there is no other
way, but to perform it by such things, as by their homogeneous Nature will lie
and mellow and exalt the Liquors; concerning which we shall treat of more at
large, for your satisfaction, in our Second Part, as it passes the Press. So in
the mean while, desiring your acceptance of this at present, I remain Yours at
command in all that is agreeable to the Public Service:

W. Y-worth, Spagirick Professor, and Teacher of the said Art in all its Parts.

TO THE Friendly Reader By way of INTRODUCTION.
READER, whosoever thou art it concerns me not, so that thou art but diver
after the Knowledge of Nature and her Mysterious and Secret Operations; for
it is to such that I present these my Labors: The matter herein contained are
some Rivulets, flowing from the grand Fountain; for that all particular forms
^ook their Original from the most general, and are to this day maintained with
a quickening power and activity of that universal Spirit, that nourishes the
great Fabric of this World, and every Individual part thereof; and to speak
more plainly, numberless are the Infants, that suck Nourishment from the Breast
of this their general Mother; and the thing most to be considered is, that in
and through all this, she is not the least debilitated in her strength, or
exhausted in her vivificating power.

Therefore it is mostly requisite for every Artist, that bends his Wit to the
study of true Philosophy, to consider and endeavor to comprehend the nature of
things as they are; and as they originally received their impressed forms, as
'twas stamped on them by the great Creator, and how they flowed into the
Elementary World, where the blessing of multiplication was given, by means of a
Seed to that end incl^sed in them, and an irrevocable law established, viz.
that every thing was to multiply in its kind; for although the providence of
God was such, that the multiplication should proceed from the general Spirit,
yet it was so ordained, that the determination of the same should be by
particular forms; this great truth is plainly to be discerned, as the Spirit
flows and passes through the Ocean of the great World, and every part
thereof; for certain therefore man being a little World, and (as I may say)
Lord of the Creation, it was so preordain'd, that this noble Creature should
receive the comfort and benefit thereof in some degree or other.

For it is to be observed, that when the Microcosmical. World was finished, and
the Bl ssing of Multiplication given to all things in their kind, (as before
said) at the close of all man was made, a Microcosmical one, an abstract and
emblem of all the works of Wonder, and as he was created in a degree,
surpassing other Creatures, so had he degrees of Honor conferred upon him
equal thereunto; for he was not only made Lord of the Creation, but also was
placed in the superior Theater thereof, viz, In the Garden which the Lord God
had planted Eastward in Eden, Genesis 2. v. 8. and v. 16. the Lord God commanded
him, saying, Of every Tree of the Garden thou may freely Eat, except of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; that was the forbidden fruit, for doubtless
this Tree being adorned with so much Beauty, and pleasantness, was s^ as an
object, to see if man would trangress against his Creator for fading, Shadowy
delights, which could produce no other covering but Fig leaves, with which too
too many in this age are covered.

It Is very observable, that our first Parents were no sooner beguiled by the
Serpent's subtilty and pleasantness of the Fruit, but they found by experience,
that this Fruit of Disobedience, which they had Eaten, was tinctured with
death; for as they were in a state of Innocence, and in the favor and presence
of God, so on the contrary they became in a state deplorable; for the wrathful
Fire stirs up immediately Horrors, Fears, and dreadful Amazements, and hearing
the voice of God, were afraid, and hid themselves from his presence; and
although a general Woe was pronounced unto the whole Creation for Man's
transgression, yet the All-mercifull God provides for Man a fountain and stream
of Love, which by their Virtue was to extinguish this wrathful Fire; for
Christ is promised in these words, where it is said, The Woman's Seed shall break
the Serpent's Head, and many are living Witnesses of the blessed full-fillings
hereof, which, as it flows forth in its universal operation is to kindle in
the bosom of its receiver, principles and practices, agreeable to its divine
Nature; for such that are thus truly awakened, breath unto the Lord, and
travail in Spirit, with this earnest desire, that all their Species may have
the benefit thereof, as knowing that Grace is Universal, and extends to all
that will receive the ingraffed Word, which, as the Apostle says, is able to
Save to the utmost; therefore, O Man, if thou art destroyed, thy destruction is
of thy self, as the Scripture says; for 'twas evident, that our first Parents
did not only loose the Presence and Favor of God by transgression, but also
were driven out from their Habitation, viz. the Garden of Eden, and a flaming
Sword was set on the Cherub, turning overy way to preserve the Tree of Life;
for thus much I will affirm, that the Fruit thereof belongs not to such that
are in the state of Disobedience. Now Man having lost his greatest Dignity, I
shall consider him, and his Office, as he is placed in the great field of
Nature, stating in some degree, the difference between the Original and fallen
State, as may be discerned in these three Observations.

First, it is to be considered, that Adam (who was the Father of all Mankind)
was as the Names imports, created of a red quintessential Earth, yea, in the
very Image of God, and was endued with such Wisdom, that he knowing the Nature
was able to give a Name to all things, and as it had a symbolizing Harmony to
the general or particular Forms, and as the Caracteristical Power had its
degree of Purity on the specificating Sulphurs, or as they were more interwoven
with emerged corruptions, so were they named; let it be how it will, it is
plain, that the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air were brought unto
Adam, to see what be would call them; and whatsoever Adam called every living
Creature, that was the name thereof; for doubtless in this State he had all ^^e
advantages of beholding the same in the great Looking-glass of Nature, or that
Globe of Wisdom, whereon the Theological Mysteries did more on its Axis, by the
resplendant Rays of Light, which give sound Judgment, and opens the Nature of
created Beings as they are, and shows general Science; for that in this
vegetative Garden, the universal Spirit must abundantly flow, even the first
Ens of that which supplies the great Fabric of the World; and every individual
part of the same: For as the Learned, and truly Inspired say, that every Atom
is a Microcosmical Globe, and internally contains some Essential Idea's of a
Paradyssical Purity, and Man, Lord of all, who was created in the Image of God,
and endued with Superiority to Rule, and excellency of Wisdom to know things,
as they primitively were; such was the Dignity of Man in his Office in a
Primitive State; but in a Fall it State, Man is able to comprehend nothing
aright; for his Understanding is become darkened, being blinded by the God of
this World, running only after the carnal Imaginations of their own Hearts,
which are filled with Vanity, Pride and Self-conceit, living in a fading and
transitory World, subjected to Fears, Agonies, yea, Griefs and Sorrows,
Puneries, Wants and Diseases, and in fine, Death it self, which makes a change
between the Pure and the Corrupted, in order to prepare him for another more
lasting Possession, etc.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that Man was placed in the Garden Eastward in
Eden, to dress and to keep it, this was the excellent Office of Man in the
state of Innocence, when all things that were created by the great God, were
very good, which is abundantly more Superior then that which he is now in; for
he was put forth is Till the Ground, which has received the effect of the
Curse for Man's sake: For the Earth was to bring forth Thorns and Thistles; and
as Man was there to eat of every Tree of the Garden (the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil only excepted) freely; now must he eat his Bread by the sweat of
his Brows, and exceeding hard Labor; for why, the Creation is more thickly
covered over with the vail of Corruption, which does stand abundantly more in
need of a Help-mate, than primitively it did, so if Man's Office, as it is to
be a Help-Mate to Nature, so does it require more pains and Industry to perform
the same: For although this Nature (Gods Handmaid) does flow forth in her
vivifying Power, yet things could never be brought to any true degree of
Perfection, much less to any beautiful Form, without the help of Man, as plain
to be discerned, in the fruitfulness of a well inhabited Land, and the
barrenness of those that are not so; Nature therefore now stands in perfect
necessity to be helped forward by the excellent Artificer, Man* for now it is
not only to be dressed and pruned, and superfluities to be removed out of the
way; but also there must be Delving and Tilling the Ground, Manuring and
Setting with great diligence, if ever he designs to exalt the Beauty and Form
of her appearance to any degree of Perfectness, it must be by a continual and
regular ordering thereof: The truth of what is here said, is known to every
Vinedresser and Gardener, and such other Husbandmen, that do industriously
improve their Fields to the greatest advantage; and here some Men's excellency
out-does others, as may be seen by many examples in their improvements; but
still all this must be performed with abundance of more pains and labor, than
originally they were.

A Third Observation is, seeing the excellency of Man was such, as to be
adorned with Wisdom and Understanding, to know things in their Primitive state
as they were; so now he is deprived of the same, and it is impossible for him to
arrive to any degree of Perfection therein, either to rule or dispense aright
of his Office, except he ask it of the Lord, as Solomon did to rule the Kingdom
of his Father, that it might be for the Glory of God, by dividing and adjusting
things according to the balance of Truth, sound Reason, and firm Judgment,
this was so acceptable to the Lord, although his Petition was great, yet that
he asked was small, in comparison to what the Lord bestowed on him; for to him
was not only given Wisdom, but Riches, Honor, and Length of days, and in so
great Superiority to others, that there was none, either before or after him,
that were to be compared to him; and this proceeded from his right asking: Now,
this Solomon in all his Writings, prefers Wisdom before any other Gift; for he
says, That all things are but dung and dross in comparison of it, and O Man!
One of the principal Seals of Wisdom, is to know thy self aright, and in doing
that thou will know from what thou wast Created, and for what end; thou will
also know the difference between the Primitive and Fallen State; also by what
Power thou art upheld, and from whence Wisdom must proceed, and what that Power
is, that flows into the Center of thy Soul, that carries a transmuting Power
with it, of changing the vilest of Sinners into the best of Saints, and in
knowing this, thou will certainly know thy Office and Power, and what Degrees
and Measures are so to be taken in thy exercise thereof; for now thou will know
the right use of the Creatures, and in such a way, that God may be Glorified:
For as the Apostle says concerning such, The recompense of reward was before
their Eyes, looking toward a City, which was not made with hands, but the
builder and maker thereof was the Lord; they know that in all states, Man has
the excellent Principle of Immortality in the Synterrisis of his Fabric, which
was to be dissolved from thence, and to receive the reward of her Deeds, etc.
This will cause every Man to consider with himself, how he may walk, so as to
walk aright, For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, and to harken
unto Truth, that is Understanding; therefore I heartily wish that every Man
might know the station the Lord has placed him in, and how to improve his
Talent aright, for we are not to be like the slothful servant, that tied up his
Talent in a Napkin, and buried it in the earth, and when the Lord examined the
reason thereof, he complains that he was a hard Master; but this I can
testify, that God requires of no Man more than he has given him: For where
much is given, much is required; some had five, some ten, and others fifty,
here the improvement was to be according to the principles; for the right use
of five Talents had the same reward as the improvement of fifty; for the Widows
mite mentioned in the Gospel was accepted by the Lord; as a deed of great
importance, for that she had cast in her all.

Now I shall examine by what has been said, how the Inhabitants of this Land
do proceed in improving their Talent, or prising the great and manifold mercies
bestowed on them; In our opinion the returns are very small; for very few there
be (in comparison to the multitude) that are found, that do rightly consider
the greatness of the mercies bestowed on them; but on the contrary are
swollow'd up (as I may say) in the excess of abomination, the intemperance is
such, that they turn the grace of God into wantonness, as is too too evidently
seen by the grand debaucheries this Age abounds with; for the Sons and
Daughters of Men delights too too much to inhabit the wrathful sphere, and from
thence send forth principles and practices agreeable to such a Nature, for they
are not satisfied in their negligence in giving their obedience to the word of
God, but daily start up new Atheism and Schismatical Doctrines to plead for and
maintain their damnable lust, which indeed flows into the Pit of Destruction,
these have the Austere and Lustful principles so kindled by their
intemperance, that there ambition is such that they lust at all; and are never
satisfied without they could enlarge their Tents and Borders to the greatest of
dignities, they are for building and enlarging their Barns and Store houses,
which points forth the end of their desire, which can be nothing but to Eat and
Drink and be merry, and enjoy themselves in the pomps and pleasures of this
World; but let them remember what was said to one in the Gospel, Thou Fool this
very Night thou must or shall dye, and it may be in his Sins too; and what must
be his portion, seeing there is a Woe pronounced against such that dye in their
Sins, and it is a very heinous one not to use the mercies of God aright; for
that which was designed to them as a Blessing they turn to a Curse, and thus
are guilty of depriving their selves of the great benefits, designed by the
bountiful God for their Temporal and Eternal Welfares, and so may expect at
the final end, the dreadful Sentence of Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity,
and the Body, Soul, and Spirit, as they rise again, to be east into the
wrathful Fire, there for ever to remain, for as the Prophet says, the Worm
never dies, nor does the Fire go out.

Therefore while ye have time prize it, and esteem not the Shadowy Fig leaves,
beyond the covering of God's Spirit, nor the forbidden Fruit more than
obedience to God's Command; for who would willingly loose the comfort of a
matchless Paradise, for a dreadful portion amongst Dogs and Sorcerers, without
the Walls of the Holy City, which every true Christian both Man and Woman ought
to labor to be delivered from; so indeed ought all so to do by Temperance,
Humility, Fasting and Prayer, and by a steadfast Faith in Jesus Christ, by whose
merits, and by the blood of the Covenant, we are so bountifully redeemed, etc.
Thus much for such general Considerations; I shall now come to lay down some
Benefits as they arise from Temperance, and other disadvantages that proceed
from the neglect hereof.

First, the benefits that proceed from Temperance are many and wonderful, as
may be in part discerned from what has been already said; for then the body is
more free, and the judgment more sound to discern things aright, for the
illuminating Spirit acts most freely in pure Tabernacles, for as Moses, that
chosen Prophet of God laid down Temperance through his Four Books, as a main
hinge of Salvation; it is the very same in the great World, for a Temperate
Season makes a Fruitful Harvest, and in some sense the whole Creation stands
in an Harmony, both in the greater and lesser World, having a Sympathy and
Fellow-feeling together; so that, if any one part rejoice or suffer, as it is a
member of the great body that will feel of the effect.

And if it be so as really it is, why should not Temperance be observed in the
right and moderate use of the Creature, by which means health is wonderfully
preserved, and long Life expected; for why the Spirits, or the Chariots of Life
being kept brisk, serene or free, and not burned with stupifying and obnoxious
Vapors, retain their power in preserving the qualities in a due and equal
Temperature; thence the Archeius and internal fire have power Spagirically to
exereise the office in disso^ution, fermentation, separation, purification,
distillation, exaltation, digestion, and maturation of the alimentary parts, by
which the fabric of the body is supplied in all its parts, and maintained in
due decorum; nay by this means the Spirit, Soul and Body are strengthened, the
mind so fitted and qualified, as to search into the most obstruce Secrets of
Nature, and such by consequence may sooner expect to obtain Universal Science
than others, and understand what is delivered by Moses concerning the original
Chaos, viz. In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, and the
Earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep,
and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters, with a lux fiat, which
soon proclaims its embassage, and separated all the distinct natures that lay
unfruitfully hidden in the Pavillions of Confusion, such was the activity of
the All searching Spirit of God, as to exalt from thence a World of substantial
Harmony, adorning every part with unexpressable beauty; from which words it is
plain to be conceived, that the Original of all things was a Chaos, void and
without form, ye, a confused Mountain of Water, which was potentially all
things, yet actually nothing; from whence did not only proceed the World (as is
said) but also that Fountain and Universal Spirit, which preserves, nourishes
and maintains, multiplying and succouring being; to this very day from hence
also proceeds by the Fire of Conflagration the Chaos Magical, the true
Exaltation of which, is the greatest of Spagirical Operations, that ever the
great God revealed to mankind: For out of that proceeds not only the Authors
Sal Panaristos, but also Paracelsus's Sal Enixum, and the Sal Mirabilis of the
wise, together with the Liquor Alkaest, and Universal Mercury of the
Philosophers, with their Aurum potibile, and grand Panacea; as also the
perpetual lights of the Magi, with their Malleable Glass, their Tyron purple,
and Crimson dye, and other such like Mysteries, which are only ordained for the
wise in heart to enjoy: For such, by their temperate Life, are not only fitted
for a search, but also when obtained, know how to make a right use thereof; and
for their reward, they have not only Wisdom, but also Riches, Honor and length
of days; so that Temperance is a virtue highly to be esteemed of, seeing it is
an inlet to many others, and such as will produce the most blessed Fruits that
are to be enjoyed on this side Immortality; therefore recommended to all as a
most precious Jewel, which if received and practiced, that will find the
wonderful and effectual Virtues thereof; and thus I shall conclude Temperance
to be the cause of much good.

Now as to Intemperance, it is on the other hand the cause of as many Evils;
For we see by experience, that the Glutton never esteems the Benefies that
proceed from Temperance, for that he is never so well satisfied, as when he is
gormondising himself, making his Belly his God, as I may truly call it, for
that he rises in the Morning, and scarce ever cease lifting his Hand to his
Mouth, until he has made himself drunk, and absorbed all his Faculties in the
excess of the abomination of the Bestial nature; nay, worse than the Beast of
the Field, for they answer the end of the Creation, taking that in Nature which
is sufficient for their subsistence; their general sauce that agitates them is
the penetrating power of the Air; they commonly have no other Bed but Earth, or
Canopy but Heaven, when as the sensual Glutton has all that is needful, even
to a Superfluity, he lies upon his Couches of Ivory, and Beds of Delight, and
heeds not Mercy, and is unmindful of his fellow Creatures, even the cries of
poor Lazarus, which would accept of the Crumbs that fall from his Table, and
lies at his Gates, the Dogs licking his Sores till he died: The cruelty and
unmercifulness of this Intemperance is so abominable, that I want place to
resent it, therefore shall pass it by here, only recommend it to their
consideration, the difference of the future Estate of these Two; Lazarus was
carried by the good Angels into Abraham's Bosom; But Dives by the evil, into
Hell to be tormented, etc.

Now there is another sort of Intemperance, which in some sense may be said to
be like that of the former, viz. The Miser's Intemperance, which is the making
his Money his God, caring not how he pines his Body, so that he may be rich,
nor who he destroys, so that he may but attain his end, he will gripe it in
with a thousand Lies, taking all advantages, catching and over reaching, and
out-witting by circumventing Bargains, yet will wipe his Mouth with this, That
he is a wise Dealer, and that these are lawful Profits, and certainly the
Blessing of God attends, because he is so rich; and so calls Riches that are
gotten by such abominable ways, God's Blessings, and will further conclude,
that consequently he must be the Servant of God, when, alas he is a Bondslave
to Satan, who has lulled him asleep, and thus puffed him up with Pride, which
causes him to despise his Fellow Creatures, which are not of the same Abilities
with him, let their acquirements be what they will, they are esteemed not
worthy of his Converse; and if they are exercised in their Spirits, through the
multiplicity of Care that attend this Life, so, as to cause some various
changes in their Actions, then for certain they are supposed to be Idiots,
Maggots, or some pitiful Fellows, that have committed some secret and heinous
Sins, for which they are attended with such Internal and External Judgments;
but I thought it convenient to let such rash Judgers know, that they may for
certain be mistaken for all this; for as the Scripture says, Whom God loves he
chastises; and David said, It was good for him that he was afflicted, for
before he was afflicted he went astray; and the Gospel Commands are, That we
should hoard in Treasure in Heaven, where neither Moth nor Rust can corrupt;
for it is very observable to us, that the Devil often ensnares those that are
rich, and causes them to doubt, as the young Man in the Gospel did, and
therefore Christ said, It Is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a
Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, because their
Minds are so much on their Possessions; And again, I remember the Devil lays
claim to them; for when he took Christ up into an exceeding high Mountain, and
showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glories thereof, and said,
All these things will I give thee, If thou will fall down and worship me, etc.
-- But lest some should make this Objection, and say, The Devil was a Liar from
the beginning, in pretending to that he has no right to: In answer to which,
although we allow him to be so, yet we have infallible Truths which demonstrate
Riches to be such Objects, that hinder the Creature many times from pressing
Eternity-ward, and swallow them up in the Delights thereof; this kind of
Intempeance is generally attended with a Brother of the same kind, viz.
Covetousness, which in this place I shall explain to be a long Eye to other
Men's Estates, Goods, Knowledge, or Art, and will undertake many sinister
practices, and gilded pretenses, the better to accomplish their end, they are
pretendedly circumspect in their Words and Actions, covering their Hypocrisy
with the external Garments of Religion; but if they cannot get their ends fully
answered, they will soon manifest their bare Skin, and will either gratify
thee for what thou have done, with a pretended scorn of Mumchancy's silence, or
else they will ungratefully tell thee, that they are not so fond of thy
acquaintance, as thou may think of, without they could get more by it; but
let such know, that we are able to discern in the Forehead the Beasts marks,
principally Two, viz. Covetousness and Ingratitude, which is equal to the sin
of Witcheraft.

Lastly, there is an Intemperance, which involves in sin all the rest, viz.
That of Vain Glory, and to maintain the same, they run into such Notions and
Doctrines, which have no harmony with sound Reason, the Law of Nature, or
written Word of God. Now these are such Intemperances, as take off the Crown of
Glory from their own heads, and cause them to loose their dignity to rule as
Man, and deprives them of Wisdom and true Understanding, even as I may truly
say of that rational part, given him by the Creator of Nature, and would easily
discover to them that they are riding in Chariots of Death, driving John like
to the Pit of destruction; for Intemperance produces Diseases, and Diseases
are part of the effects of the Curse, and being death's Messenger, or as Arrows
sent from the Almighty; for not using the Mercies here bestowed aright; but
there is a Tophet prepared of old, for such as turn Blessings into a Curse, and
for self-Murtherers, and for giddy high minded, disobedient to Parents, and for
such as dishonor God and his Holy Word.

Such are become the crying and heinous Sins of this Age, and it has so
excited the wrathful principle causing a Centrall action on too too many in
this generation, who are like immature Fruit fallen from the Tree, that before
they are ripe they are half rotten: for Intemperance blows up the black Coal of
Death, that would extinguish the Fuel of the Lamp, before the natural pondus of
the Oil is exhausted, which peradventure is not immediately or so suddenly
affected in all alike, yet at the best it will cause it to burn with so much
fury and exhalation of corrupted fumes, as to slain the vital and sanguifying
Spirit, thence nature comes to be oppressed, and aff^icts the body, and
promotes terror and anguish in all the sensitive Spirits, that while such live
they live in misery, one sort trembles with the Palsy, another groans under
the Gout, another roars with the Stone, another laments with the Pox, another
pines away with a Consumption, and some other of the like rebellious Diseases,
which are so inverted in by custom, that they become Cronick and Haeredita^^^
Now these impostumated Se^^ (...) ^t which issues forth th^^^ w^^^^ful quality
to other generations, from whence bud such Diseases as being rooted become the
scoff of Galenick Medicines. Thus (Reader) as Temperance is the cause of much
good, so is Intemperance the Original of many Evils; Now as the learned
Physicians say, the Cause being known, and suitable means applied, then there
may be expected a successful Event to follow: Thus much for the virtue and
vice of Temperance and Intemperance, which I shall desist from here, and so
shall proceed on by way of observation concerning the right use of Foreign
Growths, and also the Nature of our own.

Observe, the all-wise Creator without exceptions created all things for the
Use and Service of Man, and gave him Wisdom to compreheud the same, placing a
free will in him as to their use, which ought to be aright, which I shall here
in great measure show for information of such, as as are unwilling to come
short of this point; then they are thus to conceive, that every Climate
produces some different effects, from that of another, whether it be from the
heat of the Elivation of the Sun, or Coldness from its depression, or as the
Climates have adherence to the torrid, temperate or frigid Zones: for although
the general Spirit that nourishes all things is one, yet different effects is
worked on it, by the various forms that every Matrix contains for the
specification of Seed, which may in great measure be conceived by this
following Example. Man the three various sorts, viz. White, Tawny, and Black,
are all one in Species or kind, yet very different in form and nature, of
constitutive Principles, for some are more Hot, and others more Cold, according
as the internal Sulphur is exalted by degrees by the external heat of the Sun:
for the torrid Zone causes great heat and dryness, destroying the Callidum
inatum, and therefore scarcely Habitable; the frigid Zones obstructs the
Circulation of moisture by the violent congelation of Cold; the Temperate Zones
have an unity of heat and moisture, and therefore mostly Inhabited: and all the
different Species that proceed from the different Climates, let them be
Animals, Vegitables or Minerals; and although of one kind, yet in Operation do
they produce different effects, the knowledge of which is that alone which
qualifies a Physician; and although this is of so great importance, yet few
there be, that consider it aright; for the Illustration of which I will
instance such Druggs and Simples, as are commonly administered, so by
experience, we know their Nature and different Operation; Instance Rhubarb, in
China, Turkey, Pontus, or Arabia, have all some different effects, for the
choicest of all is China, yet all these Foreign Rhubarbs from their inate heat
will work in half the quantity upon the English constitutions, to that of
Monks, or others of our own Growth; for where the affinity is most, the
Operation is least visible; somethings are so averse in qualities, that
although they may be Medicinal to the Inhabitants of the Land wherein they
grow, yet destructive to those of another; for the difference of Climates
produces different Effects, as has been before said. Thus the Turkish Opium is
natural to the Turkey Natives, and they are wont to feed upon it, esteeming it
as the most Balsamic Concret, a Juice that will maintain their Faculties in
such a vigorous Agility, that it is affirmed to give them strength and courage;
nay they delight so much therein, that it is said they are wont to debauch
themselves therewith; but whether it is so or not I shall leave and pass on to
that which we know by Experience, That is, the Turk being deprived of the use
of it, they dye sooner, and droop more from its loss, than otherwise they do,
when stinch'd to half their usual quantity of Food; yet how wonderful
different is the Operation of it on English Bodies, and what stupendous
effects does it work; for Twenty, nay sometimes Ten Grains, ^s sufficient to
cause an English Constitution to doze his last, like as a Mortal Poison; but
it is clear from what has been said, that in its Center it is not such, but
only works this effect upon Colder Natures, by the activity of the warmth of
its internal Sulphur, which sends forth the Vapor. Now this thing cannot
happen from English Poppys, although it is a kind of Opium: The same thing is to
be understood by the different products of Wine, viz. those of France, from
those of Germany and Italy, and these from those of Spain and Portugal; for the
hotter the Sun is, the more is the Fruit maturated, and dilated, from hence it
is that Rich and Luscious Wines admit of no Argell.

Thus it is plain to be conceived, that the all wise God has caused every Land
to bring forth such products, as be most suitable for its own Inhabitants;
therefore as Paracelsus says, It Is a mere dotage and carelessness in a
Physician, to neglect being a perfect one in his own Nation; that is, by
Experience he is to know the Nature and Virtue of those Minerals, Vegitables
and Animals, which its own Archeius affords, which is sufficient for a true
Operator in Physic; especially if they know the Nature of the Sal Mirabilis,
and Dalitate of Natare, in its fermentative Virtue,

But for encouraging that Traffic, which imploys thousands in great
Prosperity, and without which a Land would soon groan, as we see by experience;
we shall state some rules from whence may be conceived the right use of Foreign
Growths, as they are brought to us.

First, thou art to know, that it is heat that makes a perfection and maturation
of perfect bodies; for Example, There is abundance of the Sperm Powder of Gold
in England; but the Climate is too cold to bring maturation, the Air, being
more Crude, Gross and Impure in cold Countries than in hot: we have many
Examples of this by the maturity and immaturity of fruits; for as Sandivogius
says, The Orange Trees in Polonia grow like other Trees, as also in Italy, and
elsewhere, where this Native soil is, and yield any Fruit, because they are
oppressed with cold; but if at any time Nature be wittily and sweetly helped,
then may Art perfect what Nature could not; so that wherever the Fruit of any
Country has the full Rays of the Sun, there the fruit is more mature and ripe,
so that the lesser quantity of it will sustain Nature, especially of those that
live in colder Climates, for should such presume to Eat or Drink it in as large
quantities, as those of the same Climate do, 'twould prove disadvantageous to
them; for a great Fire soon extinguishes a small one; and although the
Philosopher's Tincture is a Panacea against all Deseases; yet as Sandivogius
says, Many of the Wisemen have destroyed themselves, by not knowing the right
use thereof; so is it in this very case, for the more subtle any fruit is, the
lesser quantity does suffice; now it is warmth only that causes subtilty: For
we know by experience that Fruits of colder Climates may be taken in the
largest quantities, etc.

These may be observed as general Rules, until I shall enlarge more on them,
which doubtless will be in other Volumes, Written by this Author, for that
purpose, and in the mean while, he knows that the careful Observers will
conceive his Mind by what is already done; I shall therefore conclude with
this, concerning the use of Foreign Growths, and so proceed to give some
wholesome Directions, concerning the Growths and Products of the Netherlands,
and its Neighboring Country England; 'Twas chiefly for this end the Book was
Written, as may be discerned by these following Reasons.

The First Reason obliging me to write this Book, was to let the Industrious
know, that there are Wines and Vinor Spirits to be made out of all sorts of
Growths, as will be delivered in the ensuing Treatise, and principally from
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Plums, Apricocks, Cherries, Rasberries, Goosberries,
Blackberries, etc. And again, the Taste of these Wines may be altered and
exalted by the Signature of several Herbs, and by consequence, many Artificial
Wines may be made, and brought to show forth some excellent Virtue, which may
be yet more and more advanced by the Noble specificated Sulphurs, or Balsamic
Oils, so prepared as to be fermented in; but this being a Spagirick Operation,
together with the Essence of Wine, and the Essential Salts, and my highly
exalted* Sal Panaristos, Sal Mirabilis, and Sal Elaborate, and the Eliment of
Fire of Venus, and such like Arcana's, which do Refine, Exalt, and cure Sick,
Ropy and Diseased Wines, without Arsenical Poison; but these belong so
perfectly to a Son of Art, together with the making small Wine strong, and
making Wanes-Royal, that I have in this Edition labored the more, to
demonstrate the same by such Words and Examples* which may really inform the
true Desirers of Art, which was omitted in the former Impression: I have also
laid down very plain and easy Receipts, which may comply with and fit all kind
of Genius's: I have endeavored to omit all Prolixity in Words, throughout the
whole Treatise, lest it might prove as unfruitful, as some others have done,
which serve more to amuse than instruct the ignorant, especially in such things
they are not accustomed to; and so, many noble Inventions have been laid aside,
as unpr^cticable, to the great disadvantage of the Land, and dishonor of the
Authors thereof: In Fine, for the prevention of all this, and much more (that
might be said) of this Nature: I have proceeded in Teaching this new Art of
making Wines, according to the Rules and Method observed by the Wise
Schoolmaster, in Teaching his young Scholar the first beginning with A. B. C.
and thence gradually proceeding, until they are able Gramatically to
demonstrate the root of Languages; And although this was originally but as a Mite
in Philosophy, or as an early born Babe, just able to speak the innocent
Language, yet it is now so nourished up, that it may be said to be grown up to a
Manly stature in Art; and I am resolved to continue my favorable Aspect to it,
so as to make it become serviceable to its choicest Friends.

Therefore, O ye Nobles and Gallants of this English World, I thought it
convenient to let the excellent Spirit amongst you know, that we highly accept
of your encouraging useful Arts, which may be yet in a far higher degree
performed, than hitherto; because your Land does ri^hly abound with such
growths* and products, as few Lands do excel. For this Britanish Island brings
forth that Chaos, from whence arises the first Matter and Seed of the Mineral
Kingdom, out of which, all those substantial Glories of the Mineral Kingdom,
and Medicinal Monarchy, which the Philosophers have written of. As to the
Woollen Manufacturage, it helps to cloth the Inhabitants of other Lands. As to
the Linen Manufacturage established by the Parliament, since my last
Impression, under so honorable a Title, gaves me great satisfaction, since it
is so industriously encouraged, I can suppose no other, but that it will so
flourish, as to abound. As to Food, it is with such great variety of Dishes, as
is not only sufficient to refresh, but also pleasingly, to answer the greatest
Curiosity, that the most difficult Palates may modestly require: The like is to
be understood concerning Wines and other Liquors, which might be brought to a
Superabundance, and the more especially, if the almost Sacred Law of Temperance
was but duly regarded.

A Second Reason that obliged me, was, That although there was various Books of
Distillation extant, yet they are now of little service; because the Basis they
went on is overthrown, and the Constitution of Distillation is so altered by
the Parliament, that no Wares are to be made or Sold, but what is Distilled
from sound Grain; I have therefore offered to the Industrious and honest
Minded, some Considerations concerning the encouraging and erecting of a Brandy
Manufacturage here in England, and by such Manudactions we shall not only be
able to supply our Defects at home, but also upon such good and advantageous
grounds, that our Wares may become vendible in other Lands, to the great
advancement of our own, and then we might in time expect the wast, and
Forests, and Hills, to be couverted into fenced Fields, and pleasant Gardens,
filled with all such sort of Growths, viz. Orchards, Vineyards, Flax and Hemp
Fields, according as the natural Soil will best bring forth; by this means many
thousands of the Poor might be so employed as to reform therefrom a much more
comfortable substance than otherwise.

For these and such like reasons was this Book Printed* and taken a part from
my Chymicus Rationalis, which was composed from my serious review of that Art,
which way in time also see the Light; Therefore I thought it^ convenient to let
the Reader know, that as I have come amongst the Lovers of Art, and ingenious
Men; so that Discourse of things of this kind have happened; that some have
been very d sirous, that I would first in plain words communicate to them the
Re^^ipts, contained in the subject Matter, here Treated of; or else that I
would be so public spirited, as to Print them; Now for substantial Reasons, I
was not willing to deny both, therefore I made choice of the latter; for that
the former would have attended me with Difficulties and Expense, to have
obliged the great variety of acquaintance; and when this had been done, 'twould
have fallen short, peradventure, of satisfying the hundredth part of the
Desires of Things of this Nature.

Therefore as it is generally Published, so I hope 'twill accordingly be
accepted, seeing I recommend not so much my self, as those practical Essays, in
making Artificial Wines from those Growths, which to our Knowledge, was so
fully demonstrated before; and if they were, it makes nothing against this,
seeing it is so generally acknowledged, that there is nothing so well done, but
something may be added to it, in any Art or Science, and more especially in
this of Man's Office in the great Field of Nature; which if promoted in an
acceptable way, I have my desired Recompense, and I shall labor in my Day and
Time, to be as serviceable (as in me lies,) to the Sons of Men; In the
Resolutions of which, I shall conclude this Introduction, Subscribing my Self a
Friend and Lover of all Industrious Imprevers of Art, under what denomination
soever. Written, and abundantly enlarged by the Author, so that the Original
Copy that was delivered a^^ his House, at the Collegium Chimicum at Rotterdam,
is not comparable to it, etc.

And so Subscribes, W. Y-WORTH, Geboortigh Van Shipham, and Van Rotterdam,
Borger.
Now Resident at London, June 6. 1691, at the Academia Spagirica Nova, being
Professor and Teacher of the said Art in all its parts.
Vale.
THE CONTENTS: OR, CHIEF HEADS OF THE Ensuing Treatise.
CHAP. I. OF Vineyards, Orchards, and their Improvement; with the best way of
Planting Vineyards, and how to make make the Wine, with the Virtues that
proceed from the Vinor growth in general. CHAP. II. The Spagirick Way of
dissecting Concrets, and the offic^^ of Essences in exalting Wine^ CHAP. III.
The way to make Wines of Apples, Pears, Peaches, Cherries, Plums, Sloes,
Damasins Quinces, Figgs; also from Goosberries, Mulberries, Currens,
Blackberries, and Elderberries; also from Roses, Carnations, Cowslips,
Scurvygrass, Mint and Balm, and other Trees, Shrubs, Flowers and Herbs. CHAP.
IV. Observations in making Wines, and how to make Artificial Wine, Artificial
Clarets and Rhenish, and to make Mead, etc. with several other useful
receipts. CHAP. V. Of the clause in the Act of Parliament concerning
Distillation; and how the six common Basis's, as of Malt, Beer, Syder, the
Grounds of Beer, and Syder, Br^wers-wash, Molassos, Damnify'd Raisins, low and
flat Wines, are now converted into the three general pillars of Distillation.
CHAP. VI. Aqua Vitae, and English Spirits, being made according to the late
Act, from thence to reduce good and wholesome: Brandy, little inferior to that of
France, and several considerations for the encouraging of a Brandy
Manufacturage to be Erected here in England. SECT. II. The Office of these
Spirits, concerning making Cordial Waters, as Cardamum, Caraway, Angellico,
Mint, Balm, Heartsease, an excellent Plague Water, Stomach-Water, Irish
Usquebaugh, Aqua multa series, a trible Water. SECT. III. To Dalcify, Color,
Refine, and perfume Waters for Sale.
CHAP. VII. Of Spirit of Elder, Spirit of Scuray-grass, and other high Spirits,
fit for China, Japan, and Lack Varnish, with their several Uses. CHAP. VIII. A
General Treatise of the Original and Nature of Diseases; together with their
Cure by S^agirick Medicines, with an Advertisement concerning the Author's
other Books. A Post script, containing Rules in the Exalting Syder, etc.
A New ART Of Making Wines, Brandy, etc.
PART I.
CHAP. I. In which we Treat of Vineyards, Orchards, and their Improvements.
NOW as to what concerns the Vitis or Vine, we shall briofly but heartily
handle; First as to the Soil that agrees most to the Vine, is of a nitrous and
sulpherous nature, which is black, loose, and moist, which proceeds from its
great unctuosity, of which kind we have great store in England, in many waste
places, but in Ireland much more abundant, where I suppose that Vineyards might
be planted with great advantage; but however, if the story is true which
Glauber tells us, viz. that Vines might be made to grow in hard Rocks, without
Earth or Dung, only by dissolving and reducing the hard Rock to dust by
Vegetable Vinegar, and supplying it with the same at the fall of the Leaf, he
says it is much better than Cow Dung to nourish the Root, and if we will but
rightly consider the things as they are, we find that out of such Stones is
made Lime, out of which Lime by the acid juice of Vegitables is produced a
Nitre, which is the nourisher of Seeds, because it has its original from a
sulpherous fatness, which attracts a salt from the Air, which is the Chariots
of the Universal Spirit, and so become satisfied by the cold Gas: I have seen
by experience this thing, for in Holland in the Winter time, great quantities
of Niter have workt it self out of the Walls, which by Distillation would give
a sweet, pleasant, red, sulpherous Spirit; but it is to be observed, that
generally this Lime is made from Shells, as Oysters, Muscles, Cockles, etc,
these being calcined as you make Lime, and the ground manured therewith, it
makes a richer and more fertile Soil than hitherto has been known or practiced
in England, especially for moist and cold Lands, which want the salt niteral
Virtue, which is the feeder thereof, and by this means, the ground might be so
ordered, as Vines might be well planted upon all the Hilly parts of this
Country; nay Orchards might be made fertile, by this and soot mixed together,
and the root being opened about February, and the old Soil taken away, and this
added in its place, and after three days exposing to the Air, let it be covered
up as before, and so your Tree shall bear much more abundantly than otherwise;
neither is this so difficult or chargeable, for if you bear the Root about the
latter end of February, and expose it seven days, 'twill attract from the Air
sufficient nourishment, being again covered, and this method observe'd and
followed, they will bear plentifully several years. Now there is a late Writer
(which speaks against all kind of Science, knowing little of any, and yet would
be esteemed the only reformer of Old Errors) objects against the opening the
Earth about the Root of the Tree, saying it is an exact way to render them
incapable of bearing, when alas, this man is highly mistaken in this, as well
as in some other of his rough notions, for that true Philosophy does
demonstrate, that the Air is the life of all things, in whose wings is conveyed
up and down the Vital breath and Spiritual moisture, that is the nourisher and
upholder of beings, and he that would be better satisfied, in this point, I
refer him to Sandivogius, page 97. where he treats of the Element of Air; and
Philosophers say that Minerals have their Roots in the Air, but Heads or Tops
in the Earth, and this must proceed from the salutiferous and nourishing virtue
it has to beings, whether Animal, Mineral or Vegetable. I will therefore lay
this down as an infallible Maxim in Philosophy, that the Air as it acts and is
concreted in sulpherous Matrix to a nitrous Ens, is the nourisher of all
things; for as the Rain dissolveth the Salt Nitre, that sharpens the Water by
its Acrimony, this dissolves the Seed in the Earth, and this dissolution is the
key of generation. Now by the same power things are generated, by the same
likewise are they nourished, for the nitrosaline Virtue is by the internal
Arche us or Central Sun sublimed into the powers of Trees, Shurbs and Plants,
and supplys the radical moisture and essential juices thereof. I remember a
passage to this purpose, written by John Welsh Van Shandragh, that in some
Plants it is good to turn the Roots upward, as the Philosophers do their work,
which the Vinitorians do imitate at Ramsthat, who order the Roots of the Vines
so, as they bring Grapes, according as they will have them to their fancy. If
in February the Vine is cut, as Yearly it is done, the cuttings are reserved
and dressed, their length is a Cubit; these are put into the Ground presently
(yet the point to go out) where they are kept, still to a certain that they do
not lose their moistness, but remain fresh; in May they are taken out again, on
the thickest part they are cut even one after another, with a sharp knife, they
must not be cut slooping but even, of these cuts one or two hundred are tied up
in bundles, many such bundles are made, these bundles are thurst into the
ground in an even place and set in smooth one by the other, then a round pit is
made knee deep, and the bundles of cuts are laid in the pit, yet so that the
heads are turned upwards toward Heaven, and the points in the ground, these
bundles are set close one by another orderly, and the parts are alike, none
over-tops the other, standing something out of the ground, all smooth and flat,
they being set in, the pit is filled with Earth, the heads, where the Roots
should be set on, looks upward, which must with Earth be laid round, that no
Water may run into the pit when it Raineth, these being all set into the pit,
and so ordered as is said, the whole place is covered, and the outstanding
naked heads with Moss bespread over, and over that again lay 3 fingers high of
Earth, and let them remain there 5, 6, or 8 Weeks, as is needful: Observe that
it is most commodious for these pits to be made near to a Channel, where the
Water may run away, and not sink into the pit; having thus stood, they will
contract over their tops flesh pleasant to behold, which sometimes is in 5 or 7
Weeks, according as the Weather is good or bad; you may at the end of 5 Weeks
make a little hole from above, and see whether by the said sign it is time to
take them out, for the cuts growing to the Moss is the sign, these must be
presently set into the ground again, which must be very good, turn them again
in their new setting, that is the part where the cut is overgrown, and the
place where the Roots should be driven new must be turned downward, this order
must be kept with the second setting, dividing the bundles asunder, and setting
3 and 3 together, and place them a foot asunder, and with the three in the
middle a little open, looking downward or backward, for they must not stand
straight one by another, but in the form of a Goose-path or step, called, erdo
quincunciislis; on the point of the out-standing yard must stand three and
three, that they may yield a point, and thus do with all your cuts, which may
be put in one plat in lines by one amongst another; these twiggs on the other
end thus overgrown, must be set not upright but slooping, which gives the
quadrant of a Circle, that is the middle betwixt an upright and lying line, and
the leg or guard about a foot long upward covered with Earth slooping, so that
the nether part where 'twas overgrown be but half a foot long in the ground,
from the super jicies; and if that part has sore Eyes or Joints, it is to be
thrust in till the upmost Eye which stand out, that must give the growth; if
you have thus proceeded you have done well, ye are to observe that things
thrust too deep in the ground, be it Trees or others, will not prosper, it
cannot help it self, it is better to set them shallow. Now these are to be let
alone 2 years, but Roots at the first year, and at the time when other Vines
are dug about or opened, which is the Week before Easter, the inlaid Roots
must be opened, not only to make the ground more porous, and the Weeds to be
rooted out, but the roots must also be rid of the by-shots, and plucked off
which grow not downward on the Roots, these off plucked Roots are not taken out,
but let them set, because the roots be not stirred.

But if thou will repair an old Vine, these are taken out, and are now called
Wortlings, because they have gotten about the overgrown heads; the best root
on the nether part is fine to behold, looking like a Swiherbeard; then you may
cleanse them from superfluous roots, and may set them in for a Vine if you
please, in the manner as it is set down in the foregoing rules; and such
prepared Roots and overgrown Vines is far better than others: for these out
Wortlings, after they have their root well together, are the better able to
defend against the Frost, when others hanged about an Ell high with roots, are
killed by the Frost, and so the Vines are the more weakened, and are like old
Vines, in respect of ours. Besides, such a stock in the driving is stronger,
than those which are put in the ground presently after they are cut from the
Vine, where they must take root, not taken out till they be set in the rebstuck.

If a new Vineyard be made of a ground, which formerly was full of bushes and a
hedge for Hares brood, the first new set of such twiggs drive so strongly, that
the double number of such twiggs must be laid in, as 8 or 10 twiggs into one
place, all which may prosper, yield and bear Grapes in other Vineyards: for to
one stock are laid but 3 or 4 twiggs, called Palmites; and that must be done
for some Years together in a new break, he that does not know this, and does
not do so, the blossom then will fall off yearly, the which I have seen come to
pass: for the driving in such a new plat, if the ground be good, is too strong,
thrusts out and off the Blossoms, that you must look for your Grapes in the
Spring under the Vines amongst the B^o^^oms: but if you let your stock grow
into Wood, it spreads in that new tilled ground, and is weakened thereby, and
brought to a temperature, for each twigg receives so much strength, and
driving as much as it has need to the full seed, and enough for the saving of
it; and thus your Vineyards being dressed in this manner will prove and yield
double more in the Vintage than other men's will.

Thus according to Van Shandragh, the which I shall pass from, the Vintage
being come, let them proceed how they will so that they have a good Vintage
from the well manuring, ordering and dressing their Vines, they may expect good
store of Bacchean Virtues, the usual way of making Wines from the Grapes is as
follows.

Example,

In these Countries that abound with Vineyards, they proceed thus; The Grapes
when ripe, are pounded in Troughs; or the more common way is, to put them in
large half Buts or Tubs, and tread them with their feet, and afterward with a
large press they press out the juice, as is done in making of Syder here in
England, this is Barrel'd up and let stand to ferment, and to clear and resine
it self; and then they draw it off into smaller Casks from its dregs, and this
is performed naturally and artificially by fermentation, until the Wine comes
to a good body, and is fine. Observe, they stop not the Bung hole in its
fermentation, but let it stand with a pibble-stone on the Bung-hole, by which
means it is kept fresh and brisk the longer, and is not so liable to become
sower. Thus in Rotterdam I have drank Rhenish Wine of considerable age.

Observe, that Wines are preserved from Corruption powerfully and effectually
(as experience shows) by the sumes of burning sulpher vive.

These are general rules for the making all sort of Wines from the Grapes, but
every Country may have some variation in their way, and instruments used; but
however, from what has been said, thou can not be ignorant how to make a
guess and of the other; for by a Penny we know how a Shilling is Coined.

The best that are on the Rhine are from Baccharach, Herbipolis, Klingenberg,
and Hoccheime, also Muscadine from Candy, Riballa is a strong Zant Wine,
Rappidavia is a mild Wine from Gallatia, and White-Whine and Claret from
France, Canary from the Canary Islands, Sherry from Spain, and several other
good Wines from other parts, which I shall pass off and come to its general
Virtues.

The Vine is above any other Vegitable in virtue, being medicinal from the
Roots to the Branches, as thou may ^e at large in Doct. Robert Lovel's
Herbal, p. 481. and as Soloman says Oil makes a cheerful countenance and Wine
makes the heart glad, not only so, but we can speak something of its Medicinal
virtues, by our own experience; for the Rhenish-Wine is the best vehicle for
any Medicine administered in the Stone: White Wind for the loss of Appetite or
Surfeits, and Obstructions in Women; Sack for Weak and Consumptive people; the
Spirit of Wine to bath grieved and bruised parts; the Argell or Tartar has a
virtue surpassing; for as Bassillius Valentine says he wants words to express
its virtues; for a Spirit made from the crude Tartar, well rectified and tinged
with Verjuice, is excellent for the provoking the Menses; also good in the
Jaundice, Dropsy, Leprosy, Plurisy, Frenzy, and French Disease; the Cream of
Tartar for Obstructions and Hypocondriack Melancholy, and Worms: Tartar
vitriolate for Fevers, abating Thirst, opening Obstructions, and killing
Worms; the Salt of Tartar cleansed by decoction is not only powerful in opening
of Minerals, but being brought over the Helm, as the Author does it, is the
true Key (called the Circulatum minimum) by which succedanous and true
specific Medicines are prepared, which as Helmont says) cures all Diseases, in
such a way, that what such will not perform, nothing in the Vegitable Kingdom
will be found to do it; also the Essence of Wine, (which is the union of the
fixed Salt and Oil of Tartar with the Spirit of Wine, so as to be brought to a
Balsamic Nature) will I say, cure musty, sick, and ropy Wines: Indeed I have
many more things to write of the Nature and Virtues of Vinor growths, and
principally of the friendly and balsamic nature of Raisins; but seeing it will
be done in another place, I shall omit it here, and so proceed to the
Anatomizing of Concrets.

CHAP. II. Treats concerning the Spagirical way of dissecting Concrets, and
the office of Essences exalting Wines.
FIrst we shall consider the various sorts of dissections there be, to be
performed through Chemical and Spagirical operations, between which I put a
considerable difference.

For by Chemical ye are to understand such dissections as are made by the
violence of the Callenary Fire, which rends asunder those tender parts and
interwoven attomes, which nature had so friendly united by her internal motion
and hidden power of digestion, fermentation and concretion, and where this is
performed in a pure Matrix, generally there proceeds a perfect and pure birth;
but these being thus separated, and especially in those things which are tender
and volatile, the precious Life and Virtue thereof is put to flight invisibly,
as the Spirit is at Man's decease, and nothing but the bare Principles remain;
but that you may the better understand what I mean by this invisible Life of
concreted Beings, by which the Principles are held in Unity, so as to maintain
the Texture of that Being, I shall give you an Instance, which to demonstrate,
proceed thus;

Twenty Gallons of a fragrant Wine, put it into a Refrigitory with its Helm,
lute all close, and distill off the Spirit, as long as any will come good, then
let all cool, draw forth the Fleame, in which there is a Salt of Wine, and add
the Spirit drawn off, to it again, and the Pondus will be very little
diminished, but the alteration will be very considerable; for as it was before
pleasant and fragrant Wine, the tie being broken, it becomes stinking and
obnoxious, and unsavory to be drunk; for why, the Life is fled away invisibly,
as is plain, because all Savor proceeds from thence; and I do affirm, that he
that can reduce this to its first state of fragrancy, deserves the name of a
Philosopher, and to wear the Garland amongst Spagiricks, not that I think it
impossible to be done, but difficult, and cannot be performed by any other way
and means, but that, which adds a new Life by fermentation, and and yet not
destroy the Original, Nature and Form of the specificated Sulphur therein
contained, called the Callidum innatum, of which, no Being can be destitute;
and yet this reuniting Medium must have power to blot out the evil Character,
and hidden wrathful quality of Death, which the violency of Fire stirred up,
and appease again so, as to make an harmonious Unity. Of this Nature, is the
Essence of Wine, and Sal panaristos, but these are Spagirical Operations, and
shall be touched at in their proper place; we shall now return to speak of the
Office of Chemistry, and that part of it, which may seem pertinent and
advantageous to us in this Discourse, which is principally that of
Distillation, which retains and condenseth the loose Atoms, especially those
of Spirits, after Fermentation, and those let them either be Vinor or Urinous,
or very Volatile; now Essential Oils, are also made by Distillation, requiring
a greater degree of Fire, being the Sulphurs, in another and more ponderous
Form; it is also profitable for making acid Spirits, and also to make Sal
alkali; for why, the Fire of Calcination burns up all evil and combustible
Sulphurs, and fixes down the more ponderous Sulphur, and incorporates it with
the grosser parts of the Body, and so assumes a new Form, containing its
Sulphur in occulto, for all Salts are salimo-sulphureous, and all Sulphurs
sulphurous Saline, as will be manifested by union and retrogradation of Form
and volatalization, but this being a spagirick Operation, it shall be spoken
more largely of in its proper place; and so conclude the usefulness of
Chemistry, as to this part, only to consist in Distillation and Calcination,
for the other, viz. Union and Exaltation are Spagirical, which we shall now
come to Treat of.

Spagirical Operation is not only a separating of the pure from the impure, but
also a re-uniting the Principles, and bringing of them to a Balsamic and
friendly Nature, for we see by experience, the more any pure Bodies are
exalted, the more do they contain of the vital fatness, the greater is their
Virtue and operative Quality on others, but most principally on Vinor Spirits,
which are always enriched by a sulphurous fatness; for as Glauber says, That
Vines draw Odors and Savors from the Earth beyond all other Plants, and that
Savours may be communicated to the Vine by the skilful at pleasure, both in
their growth, and after they are maturated; for if the Herb Scarlet be cast
into Rhenish Wine, it becomes very little inferior to Muscadine; and again, he
says, that those rich Wines on the Rhine, before-named, are (as he calls it)
upon a Mineral Soil, and therefore suck up the universal and balsamic fatness
from thence, as may be seen in Page 126. Par. 2d. where he says, That if the
Scarlea, or any other odoriferous Herb be applied to the root of the Vine,
'twill bestow its Odor on the Grapes; he farther says, That if you pour any
Oil upon the Root of a sweet and odoriferous Nature, the Vine will produce
Muscadine for Ten years; and it is observable that he lays stress upon the Oil
of Seacoal, thoroughly cleans'd, and rectified with the Spirit of Salt; his
reasons (as I conceive) be, because abundance of Seacoals grow, and are dug
from thence; and if this is really so, why may not there be an encouragement
for Vineyards here in England, and other pleasant growths, seeing there is such
rich Soil, and so well stored with Minerals and Sea-coal, and we are well
assured, that the Mineral, or moist Vapor, which is a principal Life to
concreeted Beings, in that by its Spirituality it unites with the universal
Powers and Forms it self into a nitrous or sulphurous balsamic Oil,
nourishes the Vegetables as it flows forth, and is sublimed by the Archeius to
their Roots, which afterward is elevated into the Branches, and Fruit thereof,
and are changed by the forming Sulphur, all one as the different Aliments,
which we take in, are changed into the substance of our Bodies, viz. into
Juices, Blood, Flesh, and other parts as uphold the Fabric of the body; just
so is it in the Mineral and Vegitable Kingdom; for it is as is said the fat and
sulpherous vapor, that nourishes them, and is by degrees converted into their
own nature, and if any of these want this nourishing vapor, they soon decay,
pine and wither. O how wonderful is nature in her operations, and how many ways
has she unsearchable and past finding out; for as the Philosophers say, Life
is short, and Art is long; but let us return, I say then, that the Earth does
abound with this sulpherous fatness, and sometimes is so over-gorg'd therewith,
that it spews it forth through the pores thereof, as is evident by Petrelaeum,
an Oil that flows naturally from the rocks, and this we know, that Art both may
and often does supply Nature's defects; for if thou take pure Salt of Tartar,
and pour distilled Vinegar thereon, until it is assatiated, every time drawing
off the Fleam, and then distill it in a coated Retort by fire of degrees, and
lastly rectify the Oil thorough the Spirit of Vitriol, 'twil become lucid,
pleasant, and fragrant grant of so great virtue, that I call it my Olcum
regeneratum. With this Oil much may be done, for frutifying, and nourishing the
Vinor natures, either externally or internally; I have also much to write,
concerning the sulpherous Oil of the Magnesia, which will revive, and cause to
vegetate afresh the most declining Tree, Shrub, or Plant; How wonderful is the
Operation and virtue of such sulpherous fatness in the nourishing of growths,
let it be judged of by the Judicious, and let a determination be made therein,
only by the experienced Philosophers or true knowers of Natural things, which
are greatly discovered to us by our Spagirical Operation, as they are made in
Imitation of Nature; and furthermore, Wines may be wonderfully exalted by
Essential Salts, thus, First Chymically separate the Oil of any Concret, and
the remainder Calcine to ashes, the pure Salt extract and christalize from
thence, and reunite Spagirically the fixed Salt and the Essential Oil, and
bring them to a Christalline Salt, or with the Spirit of the Concret distill
and cohobate so long until it is all brought over in a Balsamic Spirit, this
Spirit being imbodied by the Essential Salt, plainly manifests its Callidum
innatum, or drying enriching sulpher, which gives life and sulpherous fatness,
and durable, lasting and substantial virtues unto Wine, exalting both the taste
and smell thereof. Thus the Salt or Essence of Wormwood will make rich Wormwood
Wine; the like will that of Mint, Balm, and Angellicoe, etc. It also gives
fermentation thereunto, and makes it pure Wine indeed, as Wine refined from its
Lees, and gives it such qualities, as deserves the highest of commendations, as
I could prove by undeniable reasons in philosophy, which we must omit here,
lest this Volume should swell beyond its prefixed Volume, and pass on to the
meliorating and enriching Wines, which is yet more highly to be performed by
the Element of Fire of Venus, which is made by seperating the Sulphur from the
Mercury, and mortifying the Sulphur, and distilling of it into a Spirit, and
Glauber does wonderfully commend the Element of Fire made from common yellow
Sulphur, and says, that if it be put to defective Wine, it is a present
Medicine; for if any one put a little of it in a Cask of Wine, the Wine
acquires a grateful taste and odor, and will be so comforted, as not easily to
admit of changing or perishing as otherwise is wont to happen to common Rhenish
Wine; see more in his Works page 3. par 3. and I say that Wines are also
enriched by essential and fragrant Oils, so prepared as to unite with Water or
Spirit of Wine or other Wines; for being dilated by a proper ferment, they are
easily united, and so the Wines are enriched thereby; thou may remember,
that I said in the last Chapter, that the fumes of Sulphur Vive wonderfully
preserves and enrich Wines, and therefore such excellent Medicines as these
cannot fail of performing much more high; and that I may fully accomplish the
desire of the Ingenious, I think it convenient to speak concerning the Red Wine
of the Philosophers, which produces and makes my Sal Panaristos to appear;
for that is prepared from the three first principles, christalliz'd in the
three last, contained in the fiery Spirit of Wine, as Sandivogius says, it
burns up three and leaves one, which is the Diamond like powder, the true fixed
Salt Nitre of the wise; and as much may be performed by it, as Glauber has
attributed to his Sal mirabilis. But what shall I say, I fear the time is not
yet come to reveal such Secrets in; for from hence proceeds the very Key to the
chiefest of Arcana's, and principally to Tinctures, Essences or Elixirs,
universal or particular Medicines, according to the specificated degrees of the
exalted Sulphurs; for as Basilius Valentine says, that the Spirit of Wine, or
the true Aquavitae of the wise, has been sought for by many, but found by very
few: It is the Vegitable stone indeed, and man loved Gold and Wine above all
other creatures, which may be beheld with Eyes. Gold loves man and Wine,
because it lets go its noble parts therein; for if true Spirit of Wine be put
to it, being made potable, it gives strength to man, and prolongs his Life and
Health: For thus much I am bold to assert, that an Aurum potabile is an
Universal Medicine; and without a true Spirit of Wine, an Aurum potabile cannot
be made; for Wine bears affection to man, as also to Gold, because it easily
unites with the Tinctures of Sol; then it expells Melancholy and Sadness,
rejoicing Man's heart: For there is originally three stones so called, viz. the
Urinous or Microcosmical one, therefore called Animal, which may be beheld in
the beautiful Azoth or Lunar Oil; the Vegetable, discerned in the Vinor Spirit,
the Mineral in the golden Tincture or Sulphur of Laton. The three Triumphant
stones of the Wisemen viz. Medicinal, Transmutative, and Angelical; the Triune
stones or Universal, most Universal the Caballistical, Elixerating Tincture for
Men and Metals, so much talked of, but so little known; for why? they do not
understand the true subject Matter, from whence these three stones are
obtained, for it proceeds from one confused Chaos, containing a spermatical
Essence of all created beings, the Book of Wonders, and Looking-Glass of
Nature, wherein so many Mysteries may be discerned face to face, that I dare
not discover them here, because time and place is too short; I shall therefore
conclude with the words of Basilius, where it is said, He that catches this
fiery Spirit, has got victory in this Chemical Battle, etc. because from hence
proceeds the foundation of all Spagirical Medicines, and consequently the
true exaltation of Wine, which we have here heartily treated of, and so shall
pass on to the making Wines from the Growths of England.

CHAP. III. Treats concerning the way to make Wines from English Growths, viz
Plums, Quinces, Sloes, Damsins, Cherries, Figgs; also from Goosberries,
Mulberries, Currants, Blackberries, and Elderberries; also from Rofes,
Cornations, Cowslips, Scurvygrass, Mint, Balm, and other Trees, Shrubs, Fruits,
Flowers and Herbs.
FIrst I shall define Wine to be a spiritualized Sulphur, incorporated with a
Mercurial Juice, and so exalted by Natures Concoction, to its degrees of
purity, according as the internal Spirituallity has power to act; but the
maturity and perfect ripeness comes and is perfected by the aid and help of the
Heavenly Sun, which exhales and detracts the acid and superfluous moisture,
which causes the fruit to be unsavory and harsh; for we see by experience,
that in cold years, the Wines are much more imperfect, than in hotter ones;
therefore we shall show you, that Wines truly maturated admits of no Argel; but
of this in its proper place. Our intended purpose is here to let you
understand, that the Sulphur of a Concret manifested, is that which gives the
different taste to Wines, so that Wines may not only be made from the
Vegetables before nominated, but also from other Herbs, Roots, Barks, Flowers,
Grains, Honey, and Sugar, by fermentation, and again these by distillation
yield a true Vinor Spirit, which when rectified from the Vitreoline
Alkalizates, looses much of the external Sulphur, and so only the Vita media,
and such like qualities remain of the Concret; so one Spirit may be made so
near, that it cannot be discerned, from that which is made from another
different Texture; as shall be more largely demonstrated in the 6th Chapter,
where we treat of the way of making artificial Brandy-wines. I shall come to
consider and speak of an ill Custom made use of in England, which is since the
Medicinal Wines have come so greatly in use amongst all sorts of people, the
Vintners have been so unjust, as only to infuse these Herbs, in small Wines, or
that which was worse, in pricked, low or damnify'd Wines, which have lost much
of their vital strength, and that which is yet material, is, they let the Herb
infuse so long therein, that it does not only attract their Medicinal
Qualities, but also the austere and wrathful one; for it is very observable,
that if these Wines remain long, they lose their brisk and pleasant Nature, and
so become nautious in the drinking thereof, and so by such unworthy practices,
the people are many times deceived in their expectation; for although they
drink these Wines, yet they come short of those Virtues that might justly be
expected therefrom: The like is to be understood by Scurvygrass Wine, and all
others so made: For these, and other weighty Reasons I thought it needful to
furnish every Family with Wines made from their own Products, which being
prepared without Sophistication, will show their greater Superiority to others,
by giving the satisfactory Effect desired, etc. having thus laid down and
demonstrated the Truth concerning Wines, and the abuses thereof, I shall now
come to give the Receipts to make right ones.

First, the way to make Wines of all kind of Fruits, is generally one, which
is, when the Fruits are ripe, they are stamped, and the Juices pressed forth, and
then Barrell'd up, and firmented with a Syrrup made with Sugar or Honey, and a
little fixed Nitre dissolv'p therein, sometimes we use Izinglass, Flower, and
Whites of Eggs to resine them down, and being Refined, withdraw them out into
fresh Casks, or else bottle them up, which may be preserved wonderfully by my
Sal Panaristos; but by the way, I cannot choose but take notice of a new
pretended Reformer (though peradventure he might cull his foundation out of my
first Impression) who says, that Water must be only poured on them, and drawn
off without a Press, and then with Herbs or Seeds, Sugar, Treacle or Honey,
being relished or sweetened, and firmented with Yest, this he commends above all
others; when alas, he is greatly besides the mark; for first, Wines thus made,
have not the full Body nor Virtue of the Fruits; Secondly, being made with
Water, they will soon rope and sower. Thirdly, Treacle has no affinity to
Wines, it is only prescribed for the dulcifying of Waters, wherefore I rather
suppose he knew not how to distinguish the difference of my Receipts; Lastly
and chiefly, the one general receipt he pretends to, will not answer the
different sort of Fruits; for according as their Natures are, either sweet or
sower, so must they be diversely handled, etc. as will be seen by the following
Receipts; for Plums, Quinces, Damsins, Goosberries, and such like, ought to be
made thus; Example on, Vinum Grossubare, or Goosberry Wine. Eight pounds of
Goosberries, bruise them very well, but not to marsh, and put them into a
Vessel, and pour upon them a Gallon of pure Spring Water, or rather its own
distilled Water, made in a cold Still, and let them stand stopped in a cold place
24 Hours, and then put them into a strong Canvas, or Hair Bag, and press out
all the clear; then measure how many Quarts of Liquor you have, and to every
Quart add three quarters of a pound of fine Sugar, and stir it till it be
thoroughly melted, then put it into a Vessel, and set it in a cold place, or
else it will be sower: and so let it work three Weeks or a Monrh; the Vessel
must be filled full, and Bung'd down close, that no Air can come in: after it
is well wrought and settled, let it be drawn off into smaller Casks, or else
bottle it up, and set it in a cold place. Thou art to observe in the choice of
the Goosberries, they are neither fully ripe, nor too green; for the full ripe
will make it thick, and the green will make it sower; but let them be taken
just as they are turning; be careful that you stop not the bottle too hard at
first, nor fill them too full, etc.

Its Virtues.

It Is excellent in hot and burning Fevers or Agues, to be drunk as a Cordial;
it stays the Belly, and cools hot Stomachs, and stops Bleeding, mitigates
Inflammations, it wonderfully abates the heat of the Face from hard Drinking, by
its cooling of the Liver; provokes Urine, and therefore of great use in the
Stone; but it is not altogether so proper for cold Stomachs, for fear of
clogging the Tones thereof.

Vinum Ribesium, or Current Wine. Four Gallons of fair Water, and let it very
gently simper over the Fire, but not boil, then put in Eight pound of the best
Virgin Honey, and dissolve it well therein, and take off all the scum that will
arise, and when it is cold, put it into a Barrel, and add to it equal its weight
of the juice of Currents pressed through a Bag in a strong Press; these Liquors
being together Twelve hours, then add to every Gallon of the said Liquor, Two
pounds of loaf S^gar, stirring and agitating them till dissolved; then add half
an Ounce of Cream of Tartar, a little Flower, and whites of Eggs for
Fermentation, till it refines it self, and becomes very clear; then draw it
into smaller Barrels; observe, the White Currents make a most excellent Wine,
which will imitate some sort of the Wines that come from the Grape: The Red
also makes good Wine, and drinks very briskly: But the Black Currents are most
Noble in their Medicinal Operation: Rastberry Wine may be made thus, but the
French prescribe it a very chargeable way, which is thus; A Gallon of Sack, in
which let Two Gallons of Rastberries stand steeping the space of 24 Hours, then
strain them, and put them to the Liquor, and three quarters of a pound of
Raisons of the Sun stoned; let them stand together 4 or 5 Days, being sometimes
stirred together, then pour off the clearest, and put it into Bottles, and set
it in a cold place; if it be not sweet enough, you may add some Sagar to it;
but they esteem the aforesaid Liquor better, and to be used in the place of
Sack. Observe that Mulberry-wine may be made the same.

IIts Virtues.

These Wines are excellent to resist Putrefaction, quench Thirst, strengthen
the Appetite, stop Vomiting, fortifying faint weak Stomachs; it is excellent in
Fits of the Mother, provokes the Courses, and diverts the Epilepsie.

Vinum Sambuceum, or Elderberry-Wine; Elderberries, when ripe, pick off the
green stems, pound them, and press them in a great Press, as you do Grapes,
Barrel them up, and you may add to every Barrel three Gallons of strong Wort,
or the Honey-liquor before described, and ferment with Yest or Flower, and the
Whites of Eggs, and a little fixed Nitre; and let it Ferment well, and refine
down, and then draw it off into other Casks; and at the Spring, add into every
Barrel, Five pounds of its own Flower, and Five pounds of Loaf Sugar; and this
Wine will in Seven Days time, become so rich and pleasant, and so full of
Medicinal Virtues, that it outstrips any single Vegetable in those things, that
the specificated Sulphur: attributed to, as may be seen more at large in the
16th Chapter, where I Treat of the Spirit of Elder; by this same Rule may be
made the Wine of Black berries: Now if you will have Wine made from Apples, or
Pears, then take Sider or Perry, and proceed thus; For Cider, use the Herb
Scarlea, the Quintescence of Wine, and a little fixed Nitre, and to a Barrel, a
pound of the Syrup of Honey; and after Fermentation, it is little inferior to
Rhenish Wine; for Perry, make use of the Herb Clare, Quintescence of Wine, and
to every Barrel 6 pound of the Syrup of Blackberries, after Fermentation and
Refining of it, will outstrip some of our neighboring Wines. The ways of
making artificial Wine, will be shown in the next Chapter; therefore I shall
desist here, as knowing that by these Examples you cannot come short of
preparing Wines from Fruits, etc. Now of Flowers and Herbs.

Vinum Rosaceum, or Rose Wine; sit a Glass Basin, or Body, or well glas'd
Earthen Vessel, and put in three Gallons of Rose Water, made with a cold Still,
and put into the Liquor a convenient quantity of Rose Leaves, cover it close;
now if your Body is made of Pewter, you may have a head to screw on, and put it
for an hour in a Kettle of vapouring water, to purchase the whole strength and
Tincture of the Roses; then take it out, and when cold, gently wring the Liquor
from the Leaves, and steep more fresh Leaves in the same Water, work as before,
repeat this seven times, ^^ll the Water is very strong with the Tincture; and
then to every Gallon of Liquor, add three pound of Loaf-Sugar, and stir it till
it be thoroughly melted, and put it in a Cask, and set it in fermentation with a
little fixed Nitre, and Flower, and two or three whites of Eggs, and let it
stand in a cold Cellar, and in a Month 'twill be fit to drink: Thus may be made
the Wine of Cornations or other Flowers.

Its Virtues.

The Wines thus made are not only rich, but also wonderfully advantageous
amongst the diseased, by a manifestation of true Medicinal Virtue, and
therefore excellent for the strengthening the Heart, it refreshes the Spirits,
and gently cools the Body, making it lenitive, and so purges the first
digestion of Phlegm, sometimes of Choler: It abates the heat in Fevers,
quenches thirst, mitigates the Inflammation of Intralls; and in fine, it may be
used as a good Counter-poyson.

Vinum primularum Veris, or Cowslip-Wine.. Three gallons of fair clear water,
and five pound of Loaf-Sugar, and boil them for half an hour, and scum it well,
then let it cool, ready to be wrought, then put in 4 quarts of picked Cowslips,
gently bruised, with 2 spoonfulls of Ale-yest, and one pound of Syrrup of
Lemonds beaten with it, and a Lemond peal or two, and let them stand close
stopped 3 days in fermentation; then strain the Liquor from the Herbs, and put it
into a Barrel, give it just room to work, and so let it remain one Month; then
draw it off into Bottles, upon a little Loaf-Sugar, cork it, and lie it down
close, and 'twill keep a Year. The like may be done with Prim-Roses, or any
other Flowers: for I have showed you different ways, to let you know, that I am
not byast to one ground; so I hope by these Examples you may be better able to
make the variations at pleasure.

Its Virtues.

Cowslip Wine being drunk, is good against the Palsy, Convulsions, Cramps, and
all diseases of the Sinews; also against the pains of the Joints, and Gout, and
also excellent for those that are burst.

Vinum cochleariae, or Scurvy Grass, or Spoonwort-Wine.. Scurvy Grass in May,
June, or July, and stamp it in a stone Mortar, and put it in a large
Earthen-pan, and sprinkle it over with a little powder of Crystal of Tartar,
and smear it over with Honey, and being covered close let it stand Twenty four
hours, in the mean time decoct to every gallon of Water three pints of Honey,
and gently simper it half an hour, scum it, and take it from the fire, and let
it cool, then put your Scurvy Grass into a Barrel and pour your Liquor to it,
let the Barrel stand on its end with the Tap to the bottom; and after 24 hours
draw off the Liquor, and from the Herbs press all the Juice, then put fresh
Herbs into the Barrel, and put the Liquor upon it again, adding a little Barme
let it ferment three days, then cover a piece of bread with Mustard, and put
the Mustard side downward, and so let ferment in a cold place 14 days, or till
it drinks brisk, then draw off the refined Liquor, and add more Herbs the 3d
time, and then ferment with the whites of Eggs, flower and fixed Nitre and a
little Verjuice or the Green Juice of dry Grapes, to which add 6 pound of the
Syrrup of Mustard, all beat together, ferment and refine down and draw it into
other Vessels, and in a Month 'twill be fit to drink; with this and the flowers
may be made the True Spirit of Scurgrass, by a sevenfold repetition. I shall
omit the Virtues here, because I refer it to the ninth Chapter, where I treat
of the Spirit. Observe, that the Wine of Mint and Balm and fragrant Herbs are
best made thus; First distill the Herb in the cold Still, then add Honey to it,
and work as in Scurvy Grass; and lastly refine it down by a due proportion of
its own Syrrup, and so the Wine will become wonderfully fragant, containing the
whole virtue of the Herb.

CHAP. IV. Containing observations of making Wines, and how to make artisicial
Mallago Wines, artificial Clarret and Rhenish, and to make Mead, etc. with
several other useful Receipts.
IN this Chapter we are to draw some general observations, concerning Wines, in
which we shall consider whether or no, new Wine, new Beer are lessened in their
virtue by decoction as the pretended reformer says? No; but on the contrary,
they are made much more wholesome and durable thereby; for in the Elixeration of
Malt, the Chief virtue that is extracted by the Water from them is Gummy and
Sulphurons, as may easily be demonstrated, if upon the strong infusion of Malt
you pour a strong Lixivium of Sal Tartaris, there shall immediately precipitate
a Gummous substance, which is the substance drawn from the Malt, and seeing it
is really so, we know by experience that gentle decoction can never exhale
these Oleous parts, but rather concati^ate them, making the Wort more clammy
and rich; and if you make Vinegar of it, the more it is boiled the stronger
will your Vinegar be; but for Beer, when the Wort is fermented, and brought so
ripe as to dilate this Oleosity into a Spirituallity, then I say decoction
destroys it because 'twill send off its Spirituallity, and so 'twill do in Wine
too; but yet the Learned and knowing Glauber says, page 300. Part 1. That Wine
may not only be brought to Must, and by gentle evaporation so condensed to the
thickness of Honey, that it may be the better transported, but also it is for
the bettering weak and acid Wines, and making them the more noble thereby; nay,
he says they are to be made abundantly stronger, than when they came first from
the Grape, only by adding thereto water, or small Wines, and fermenting again,
with the Quintessence thereof, as thou may read in him at large: Hence it
may be clearly discerned, how easy it is for unexperienced men to be deceived
in their Judgments. But however, I shall pass them by, and proceed further to
the improvement of Wines. It is well known to every Vintner, that by the
natural action of the Hoggs-head, abundance of fat, rich Lees, or Mother, will
fall down, which I have heard a man in Holland affirm that he could with ease
make thereby an Hogs-head of Wine again equal to its original; but this is also
difficult to any but a Spagirick Philosopher, who knows the virtue of the
Quintessence of Wine; but however it is common to draw off small Wines and put
them on such rich Lees, and then refine them down again, by which the Wines are
wonderfully bettered: We also see that Wine is fed with proper food, which is
sweet Flesh, Salt of Tartar, or more principally the sweet and volatile Spirit
of Tartar, and yet higher with the Quintessence of Wine, as was said in the 2d
Chapter, by Essential Salts and prepared Oils, also by Herbs and things of an
Aromatical nature; we are also satisfied, that of two pipes of small and weak
Wines one may be made: for as Glauber says page 158. Part 1. Nothing can be
found, which may render small Wines better than the Animal or Quintessence
extracted from other Wines; for the Animal of Wine only, and nothing else, can
increase the strength of Wine. Neither is the comparison of this melioration of
Wines incongruous with two torn Garments, neither of which can be worn; but if
either of these is cut, and that which is whole and good is sewed to the other,
and so of two one whole Garment is made; then that Garment may be worn, when
yet, before, neither of them was useful; which points out the very manner by
which it is performed, to draw forth the Spirit and Quintessence of one, and
let part of the whole be fermented and dilated into another: these and many
other ways there be to enrich Wines, which we shall here pass by, and proceed
to our intended purpose, viz. artificial Wines, and first of Hydromeli, or
Mead. 20 Gallons of the best Spring Water that can be gotten, and put it over
the fire, and let it stand for 2 or 3 hours, but suffer it not to boil; and to
every Gallon add 3 pound of Virgins-Honey, and let it gently boil an hour or
more, and take off the Scum in boiling; and when it is almost cold, add two
spoonfulls of Ale-yest to every Gallon, and so let it work two days; then
Barrel it up, and add to every Gallon of Liquor, Nutmeggs, Mace, Cinnamon, in
powder of each half an ounce, tie it up in a bag, and cast it into the Liquor,
then stop it close for a Month, two or three, the longer the better; draw it
out and Bottle it, putting in a bit of Loaf-Sugar.

Another highly esteemed of to every Gallon of the cold distilled water of
Cowslips, or Spring Water, two pound of the best Virgins-Honey, and to every 20
Gallons add in the boiling a good handful of Marjerom, Balm, and Rosemary, and
before it is quite cold, strain it through a Seive, and ferment it as before is
said, then add in the Barrel Cinnamon, Nutmeggs, Mace, Ginger, Orice-roots of
each half an Ounce, and 3 or 4 Lent-figgs, and let it work and refine as the
former, and Bottle it in the same manner. Observe, that French show the way of
making Methegline or Mead stale quickly, by smearing over bread with Mustard,
and laying the Mustard side downward, as is said in Scurvy-grass-wine.

An artificial Claret. The Juice of Clary, or the Water of Clary distilled in a
cold Still, one part, Redstreak or Pippin Syder half a part, Mallago Raisins
beat in a Mortar 6 pounds, the fat mother of Claret one pound, of the Christals
of Tartar half a pound, and being close covered let it ferment the space of 15
days, then draw off the Liquor clear into a Barrel; to every Gallon thereof add
half a pint of the juice of Blackberries or Goosberries, and a pint of Spirit
of Clary to the whole; then take three Spoonfulls of Flower, the white of two
new laid Eggs, a dram of Ising-glass, being all beat together, add it into the
Barrel with two pounds of the Syrrup of Clary, and it will refine down and
become wonderful rich.

An artificial Mallago-Wine. First take a Wine-Barrel hoop'd and dressed with
one end being open, to which a close cover must be fitted, which must be to
take off and put on at pleasure, set it in a warm place Winter or Summer, and
fill it full with clear and pure water, to each three Gallons put six pounds of
the best Mallago Raisins, which you must bruise in a stone Mortar, and upon 20
Gallons of the said water you must strew a handful of Calx vive; then cover
the Vessel close with the cover, and cast clothes upon it to keep it warm, and
let it stand 4 or 5 days, to work as Wine or Beer does, when they be new; then
see if the Raisins be risen up to the top of the water, if so, then put them
down again, as before; let them thus stand 3 Weeks or a Month together with the
Raisins, being every 4th or 5th day put down if in case they rise up; then put
a tap into the Vessel three or four Fingers above the bottom, and try if it be
good, and taste like Wine, if not, let it stand a while longer; but if so, draw
it off into another Wine Vessel, and to every 20 Gallons, that you have drawn
off, put a pint of the best Aqua vitae, two new laid Eggs, and a quart of
Alligant, beaten well together, and let it stand in a Cellar as other Wine
does, till it be clear and fit to be drunk, and thus not only artificial
Mallago may be made, but also other artificial Wines; for the Author cannot but
presuppose, that thou may by these examples invent and prepare other sorts
of Wines, which are not here set down, by the same Method as that of Muscadine
is prepared; for having the knowledge of the different Herbs that bears a
signature with the different sulphurs of the true Wine, whether stiptick, acid,
mild, pleasant, luscious or fat and balsamic, so must the imitation of the
different sort of Wines be, whether Rapadavia, Ribella, Canary, Tent, or any
other, etc.

Mum, according to the Authors way is thus, A Vessel containing 63. Gallons of
water, boil it to the consumption of the third part; then let it be brewed S.
A. with 7 bushels of ground Beans, and when it is turned let not the Hogshead
be sill'd too full at first, and beginning to work put to it the inner rinds of
Fir Tree, three pounds of birth, and the leaves and tops of Fir Tree each one
pound, Cardus Benedictus dried three good handfulls: Burnet, Bittony, Rosemary,
Majorem, Avens, Penniroyal, Elder-flowers, Wild Thime, of each one handful and
half; Seed of Cardemums bruised 3 Ounces; Bay Berries an Ounce; put the seed
into the Vessel when it has wrought a while with the Herbs and after they are
added, let the Liquor work over the Hogshead as little as may be; fill it at
last, and before it is stopped put into the Hogshead 10 new laid Eggs, the shells
not broken nor cracked; then stop it close and drink of it at two years end; if
it be carried by water 'twill be the better. But Doctor Egidius added
Watercresses. Wild Parsley, and 6 handsulls of Horse-Raddish to each Hogshead;
and 'twas observed, that the Mum which had in it the Horse Raddish drank more
brisk than that which had not.

To make Punch-Royal.. Two quarts of Water, one pound and half of Loaf-Sugar,
and dissolve it fully therein, and if need be filter it through a Holland
cloth, then add a pint of Rhenish-Wine and 6 Ounces of Limejuice, or the Juice
of 4 great Lemonds, and 7 or 8 drops of the true Spirit of Salt, and a dram
of Alkermes, or 2 grains of Musk, and 3 of Ambergreece, a quart of Brandy, one
Nutmeg grated, and stir it till it be incorporated, and then head it with
toasted Biscakes; this Liquor, without bread, drinks exceeding briskly, being
Bottled for a time.

A good way to bottle Wine, Beer, or any other Liquor, (if it should be a
little pricked) make a Syrrup of Clary, and ferment it with Barm, and to every
Bottle put in a spoonful or two, with a bit of Loaf Sugar, and that being well
Cork'd down, will do very well: The same does well for bottling Syder or Mead,
and preserves it wonder fully.

Now if you are minded to have variety of different Ales, then make a Syrrup of
the Herb, and put in two or three Spoonful's in bottling, and a Spoonful or
two of the Essence thereor, let it be Oranges, Lemonds, or Scurvy Grass,
Cyprus, Wormwood, Mint, Balm, or the like; and if you practice this way, your
experience will prompt you beyond words.

A Cathartick Physical Ale good against the Scurvy, and several other diseases.
Of Sourvy-grass one peck, Watercresses. 12. handfulls, Brook-Lime 6 handsulls,
English Rhubarb 6 Ounces, Horse Raddish 4 Ounces, Annis-seeds and
Carraway-seeds, of each one Oance, sweet Fennel one Ounce, Sena one Oance,
Pollypodi of the Oak 4 Ounces, Raisins stoned and Lentfiggs of each 8. Ounces,
new Ale 5 Gallons; make it S. A.

To make Ale stale or new. To every quart of new drink drop in 10 or 12 drops
of the true Spirit of Salt, and it is performed; and to make stale drink new,
Chalk performs it, being scraped in.

To make Coffee and Tea. Boil Spring water 12 hours, and draw it forth into
smaller po^s, and add to every pound of this Water an Ounce or an Ounce or half
of Coffee powder, and stir it well in, and set it before the Fire till ^t
becomes in taste rich of the Coffee, and well settled, then is it fit to drink
Tea is one with the Coffee, but to a pint of Water you add of the Herb Tea a
dram and half, and put it before the fire to settle, but not so near as to
let it Boil again; for then 'twill not be so good.

To make Chocolate-Cakes and Roles.. Caoco-Nuts gently dried in an Iron-pan,
and then peel off the Husks, powder them very small, so as to be sifted, then
to every pound so prepared, add of White-Sugar 6 Ounces, Cinnamon half an Ounce,
one Nutmeg, one Bonile of the best; Ambergreece and Musk of each four grains,
if for high price or Spanish Chocolate, but in the English it is left out. The
right way to prepare it, is in a stone Mill or else on an Iron-plate, clean and
bright, and a roll of Iron two hands longer than the Plate; and about Ten pound
Weight; let your weight be placed on a wooden frame, so that you may put a
little fire of Charcoal under it, and give a gentle heat, and so first melt the
Sugar and Cacao-Nut together by rouling the Iron over it, moving it from the
plate with an horn, and so work it till it becomes like dough, adding in the
Cination, Nutmegs, and Bonile, the more you work it the finer the Mase will be,
and be careful to preserve its Oyliness, and keep it from burning; the plate
must not be too hot, neither must there be wanting of labor in rouling of it,
often stirring and moving it from the plate; and lastly, add your Musk and
Ambergreece, and while it is warm it may be made into Rouls or Cakes, or cast
into moulds, or what form you: please.

To make the Liquor of Chocolate.. Milk and Water of each one pound, and let
them boil a while, and then add of your Chocolate grated an ounce, an ounce and
half, or two, as you will have it in richness; let it simper a little, then take
it from the Fire and add to it the Yolks of two new laid Eggs, well beaten with
as much Meevus Sugar as will sweeten it, and then Mill it with a Mill for that
purpose, till it be thick, Secundum Artem.

To pickle Cucumbers so that they may look Green. Take of Water and Vinegar
alike, and make the Liquor strong with Bay Salt, and other Salt mixed together,
and having boiled it very well, your Cucumbers being in a Vessel in rows, with
Dill betwixt every row, and a little of Verjuice or the Green Juice of Grapes
upon the uppermost row, then pour your Liquor boiling hot upon them, then cover
them close, so that the steem may not come out, and let them stand 14 days and
Nights; then cant off the Liquor, and boil up the same Liquor again, with
Pepper, Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, or other Spices as you think fit, and put on
your Cucumbers again, and cover them very close for use, by this means they
will look Green. The Pickle of them is good to be used in Inflammations, and
Scorbutic Nodes, and other diseases; as being a kind of Elatorium, dissolved
by the Acidity, etc. So much for this Chapter, I shall now proceed to that of
Distillation.

CHAP. V. Treats of the Chief heads in the Act of Parliament, concerning
Di^^illation, in which is sh^w'd how the Constitutution of Distillation is
altered.
DIstillation is a separating and extracting of the most Spirituous Liquor from
the grosser part of the body by heat, and therefore the purer your Basis is,
the more pure will your Spirits be, for this end and purpose we are now to
consider how we can proceed, that our Hypothesis may have affinity with the
Law; for the Parliament has constituted a path way for all Distillers to walk
in, and because we will make no breach in this point, I shall make use of the
chief heads therein contained etc. in the Act entitled, The Encouraging the
Distillation of Brandy, and Spirits from Corn. First, the Trade and Commerce of
France being prohibited, and all their Goods from being imported into this
Kingdom; And whereas good and wholesome Brandys, Aqua-vitae, and Spirits, may
be drawn and made from Malted-Corn; For the Encouragement therefore of the
making of Brandy, Strongwaters, and Spirits from Malted Corn, and for the
greater Consumption of Corn, and the advantage of Tillage in this Kingdom,

The King, Queen, and Parliament th^n assembled, have thus ordained it, that
every Gallon of low Wine of the first Extraction, made or drawn from any
foreign and imported materials, or any mixture with foreign materials, 8 d..

For every Gallon of low Wines, or Spirits of the first Extraction, made or
drawn from Brewers Wash or Tilts, or from any sort of English Materials, other
than from drink Brewed and pepared from any sort of Malted Corn, or from Perry
or Syder. 1 s.

For every Gallon of low Wines of the first Extraction, drawn and made only
from Drink brewed, and made of any sort of Malted Corn. One penny.

And for every Gallon of low Wines of the first Extraction drawn or made from
Syder or Perry or any mixture therewith. Three pence.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Distillers and
others, who shall draw or make any low Wines, Spirits or Brandy from Corn,
shall brew or cause their Corn to be brewed, and made into clean and wholesome
drink, and from such drink so made and prepared without any mixture with any
Molossus, Wash, or Tilts, or other materials whatsoever, shall draw their low
Wines, or Spirits of the first Extraction, etc.

So that the Basis that Distillers are to erect upon, are well brewed Beer,
Syder and Perry; therefore the matter of Distillation cannot be so hard, seeing
the making of these is so well known in England: but however, there is one
thing yet difficult, which is to give a taste to English Spirits, and make it
in the second Distillation, like to that of Brandy, and that by the addition
only of the Products of England, so that this would be very advantageous to
cause the Wares to be transported to most of the European parts, and this would
be wonderfully advantageous both to the Factrage and Products of England, as I
shall more largely touch at in the next Chapter. And although I may justly
claim right to this S^cret, yet I shall be very ^ree to give my Secret to
others, with this provisor, that it might advance the good of the public,
which can be no otherwise done than by the Establishment of a Brandy
Manufacturage, for otherwise the Proverb may prove true, viz. That private E^ds
carry away public Profit: Therefore such a Facturage would have some general
tendence. First, the chief Cities and Towns in the Kingdom may be supplied with
good Wares, which now many come short of. Secondly, the growths and products of
the Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, may be more
easily brought to a Country Town, than undergo the troublesome carriage some
scores of Miles, there being also the convenience of Fires for Distillation at
cheaper rates, and again they he more ready and for that reason may be afforded
cheaper in the transportation thereof for if they were to be Distin'd here in
London, and carried to E^eter, the carriage by Land (as Pam informed) i^. 7 l.
a Pipe, and so by consequence proportionable to every part in England, and this
would so greatly exalt the price, that People would rather be contented with
indifferent Wares, than pay so dear for better.

And that which is yet more principal, by such a public Manufacturage, the
King's Customs would be highly advanced, and more certain, than in any private
hands, whatsoever; for that their Commissioners and Collectors might have open
recourse thereunto, with abundance less trouble than now possibly can be: But
of this in its proper place; let us now return from this Digression to
Distillation.

Where let me beg this boon of the Honorable P^^ that no exceptions may be
taken, concerning my prescribing various Products in Distillation; for I desire
not to do it to infrigate the breaking any English Law; but on the contrary,
own a due obedience thereunto, only am willing to serve the Netherland, where I
have a Brothership, and Natives privilege too; and also to be serviceable to
several Islands that belongs to their Majesty's, or any of their Dominions,
where various things are made use of in Distillation* which we shall here treat
of, but First of Malt.

Aqua vitae is nothing else but well Brewed Beer, that is strongly Hoped, and
well firmented, but if it should not be fully rich of the Malt, they Distill it
as soon as it is well wrought, for fear it should flat, and then great part of
the Spirit is lost; but if it be very strong, you may keep it to what age you
please. The way to Distill it, is thus; Take a large Still, with a Serpentine
Worm, fixed in a great Hogshead, with cold Water, to condense the Spirits; or
in want of that, an Alimbeck; but at first be not too hasty with the Fire, but
by degrees, make all hot until the Spirit come; if the Still is large, the way
I best approve for the receiving these Spirits, is, to let it run through a
Funnel into an Hogshead, that is placed on the Ground for that purpose, and you
are to Distill as long as any goodness will come, which may be known thus, The
Taste will be like an unsavory Water, when all the Spirit is off; this Spirit
is called Low Wine, which let stand 6 or 7 days, and then Distill it a Second
time, which is called Rectification, in which it may be brought into
Proof-Spirit, or artificial Brandy, which you please: Now in this you may know
when the Spirit's off the Second time, by throwing some of it into the Fire, if
it burns it is good, but if it puts forth the Fire the Operation is at an end.
These Low Wines and Spirits are proper for making most sorts of Waters, as will
be seen in the application thereof. Now if you rectify a Third time in Balneo,
'twill be the better freed from its Fleam, and a true Aqua-vitae is made.

The Dutch way is thus, When the Malt is well made, and new Ground, not above
three Hours before it is used, take thereof Six Bushels, and put it into a large
Hogshead made for that purpose, to stand upon its end, with a Cover to keep in
the Steam, with an hole in the middle, to put in a stick to stir it upon
occasion, moisten the Malt with some cold Water, and then the other water being
made Scalding hot, but take care it boils not, put it to your Malt, and stir
them well together, and when almost cold, add half a pound of Hops, and let it
stand till it is cold and fit for Barme; and let it work and ferment four or
five days, till it comes to the height of Fermentation; then put all the Liquor
and Grains into such a Still is before directed; Make a gentle Fire, and put
not the head into the Worm at first, for fear it should boil over, and so foul
the Worm; but if he vapo^r do kindly ascend, then you may l^te^all fast, and
Distill and Rectify as before directed: This is a very profitable and
advantageous way of Distilling.

Glauber's way, Take as much Malt as your Distillation will require, and in a
Kettle full of Water let it bo^l (...) long till the Grain is broken, and then
pour it out into a Wooden ^^ssel, and when it is lukewarm add fresh Druggs or
Grounds of Beer, when it is fermented enough, which is usually (...) the end of
2 or 3 days, then Brandy is made in a common Still by Distillation: He
recommends this above all other ways, saying* that this protube^ating and burst
Corn cannot be burnt and therefore makes good Brandy; Also he says, by
Decoction the ill Taste is taken from the Corn, which the Brandy otherwise
retains; Further he says, That if the Corn is so boiled as to be broken, it
produces much more Brandy; therefore calls it an excellent and profitable
Secret.

The Spirit of Cider. The way of making Cider is well known, when it is well
fermented, and come to its full strength, then Distill it as is directed in the
making Aqua-vitae, it may be rectified to what height you please* the same way
will serve for Perry; of either of these, or both of them an excellent Spirit
is made to make an Artificial Brandy.

To work up the Grounds of Cider, Perry or Beer. Thou art first to observe,
that if your Grounds are thick, they must be pressed through an hair Bag in a
great Press; or else in Distillation, they will be apt to burn the S^ill* you
may add to these, equal parts of small Wash, or warm Water; which it is fit,
head it well with Barm, you may add in some Molassus, and if it ferments not
soon enough, then cast in some Powder of Rhenish-Tartar, and this will cause it
to come to the height of Fermentation, fit for Distillation, nd then to be
Distilled (as directed) in Malt.

Of Honey, Molassus and Sugar; Take an hundred weight of Honey or Molassus, and
12 or 14 Gallons of Water, to boil, as is fit for Brewing of Malt, and pour it
into an open Vessel, as is prescribed for Malt, and stir them well together,
until they are dissolved and united, then when they are cold enough, head them
well with Barm, some use small Beer or Wash instead of Water, and then the less
Barm will serve: Now in the Fermentation you may add what fragrant Herbs,
Flowers or Spices you please; and if it ferments not well, then throw in some
Powder of Rhenish-Tartar, as before directed, the quantity must be
proportionable to that of the Liquor; this will wonderfully heighten its
working; thou must let it stand until it is well headed, and truly fermented,
which, to know, thy experience must be the chief guide; it also must be taken
in the nick of Fermentation, for otherwise, if the head of the Tunn begins to
fall, much of the Spirits will be lost, if thou work'st well, thou may have
9 or 10 Gallons of Low Wines from ever hundred of Honey or Molassus, which thou
may rectify as thou please.

For Sugar, by which Flowers, Herbs, Berries are so Fermented, as to yield Good
Wines and Noble Spirits, being distilled. Take what Flowers or Herbs you
please, as for example sake, let it be Elder-Flowers, and bruise them in a
wooden Mortar, and to every peck of Flowers add a Gallon of Water, and 2, 3, or
4 pounds of Sugar, as thou would have it in strength, Barrel it up, and let
it stand till they Ferment work, froth and flower, and smell very fragrant;
this Fermentation may be promoted with Rhenish-Tartar, Ale-yest, and the like:
The Spirits must be kept; the way to exalt these Wines into Spirits, will be
showed in the 7th Chapter.

Of Raisons, and damnify'd ones* take Raisons and pound them in a stone Mortar,
and put them into a Barrel, and put boiling water upon them, and when cold,
throw in a good handful of Christals of Tartar, or Rhenish-Tartar, but some use
Calx vive; ferment them very well by adding Ale-yest, Stum, or fixed Nitre and
Flower; work it up in a warm place, draw off the Liquor, and press the Dregs
out dry, and Distill all, and you shall have very excellent Low Wines, which
being rectified, makes good Brandy-wine.

Of low and dead Wines, and their Dregs. Observe, that in the Distilling of the
dreggs of Wine, you may ferment them with their low and decayed ones, or with
the after running of Low Wines, warmed and put into a covered Hogshead, and
ferment with Stum a pint to every Galson; or for want of that Barme, they being
truly fermented, draw off the Liquor, and let the Dreggs be put in a Canvas
Bag, to press out all the moisture, which some perform before they are
fermented; but however, being ready, they may be Distilled as long as strength
will come which after 6 or 7 days may be rectified to proof Spirit.

Observe that Stum, which is the Flowers of Wine fermented, kept in strong
Vessels, with Iron Hoops, will make an excellent fermentation. It is to be
observed, that from low Wines, small Wines, and Lees, Brandys are made in
France and Germany through Fermentation.

I cannot omit one thing, which is too too much practiced by the common
Distillers, in order to make their Spirits seem strong, hot and fiery in the
Mouth, which to accomplish, they add in the Distillation a pound or two of
Spanish Grains, which are sold at the Druggists, and these perform their
desire; but this is little advantageous to the Spirit, otherwise than to make
it fiery in the Mouth. Now these are the subject matters, from which low Wines
have been drawn hitherto; but now the Constitution of Distillation is altered,
and reduced to three material Pillars, viz. Well-brew'd Beer, without any
addition, Syder and Perry, to which and in which, may be included all those
Wines made and prepared from any of the growths of England, because these have
a greater adherence to and more proper for Medicinal use; and therefore
presented to Physicians, Apothecaries, and others; which being made use, will
answer their desired end.

Now I say out of such growths the Customs may be well paid, according to the
Tenors of the said Act; and the French Manufacturage may be considerably
detrimented, if that Distillation were but rightly encouraged; because now all
are free, or as many as please to labor therein, as may be seen by the
conclusion of the said Act.

Provided also, and be it Enacted, that all Charters and Letters Patent
already made, or hereafter to be made or granted for the sole making of Brandy,
Spirits (...) Strongwaters from Corn or any other sort, or in any manner
whatsoever, as a new Invention, or whereby the power and liberty given by this
Act to all persons, for the Distilling and making Brandy, Spirits, or
Strong Water from Corn, shall be in any manner restrained, shall be, and are
hereby declared and adjudged to be void to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever.

CHAP. VI. Treats concerning English Spirits, and Aqua-vitae being made
according to the said Act, from whence it is easy to prepare good and wholesome
Brandy, little inferior to that of France, with some considerations of the
usefullness of erecting a Brandy Manufacturage here in England, etc.
I Say then good and wholesome Beer being brewed, according to the said Act, or
from Cider, Perry, or from the Wines of the English growths, may be made from
all and every one of these good wholesome and vendible Wares, as low Wines,
proof Spirits, and Aqua-vitae, and artificial Brandy, as we have often made
mention of in this Treatise: I say that I would have none think it strange or
difficult to perform this from well brewed Beer, seeing we are able to bereave
the strongest Vegetable Concrets, many ways of its external Sulphur; so that ^t
shall only retain the taste and quallity of the Vita media, and then it is not
discernable from others, and a proper Sulphur being introduced will perform the
same all one as Rhenish Wine is converted into Muscodell by the Scartea, to
this agrees that profound Glauber, where he says, that if you will make Corn
Spirits into Brandy-Wine, in a relish like that made from Lees of Wine, then
you must rectify it upon the Lees of Wine; for this way by the Oil of Wine,
which is plentiful amongst the Lees, the end is obtained, and may in all things
be used instead of that. But now we have not in England the advantage o^ Wine
Lees, as they have in Germany, France, and on the Rhine; and Prohibition being
made with France, that which we have will be soon spent, so that great business
of Art is to perform this by the growths and products of England, I say then,
that we know a way very advantageous in the sweeting of Spirits, both in the
action of Fermentation and Distillation to propose a middle way without any
infusion or distillation of any of the Vinor twiggs to produce an artificial
Brand (...) wine in England, and from its own growth, so good and as vendible
as that of France; and so near in taste, that none but the most acute pallates
can discern the difference; and this we are able to give public demonstration
of.

The way to perform it, is in general thus; The low Wine being made, you are to
bereave it of its gross Sulphur, which is very easily done, then its strong
smell and taste will be lost; as to the Specificated and Domineering qualities
thereof, this may be performed even on Rum, which is the strongest in smell and
taste of any other Vinor Spirit, drawn from any of the Vegetable Concrets, and
then a middle nature must be introduced, naturalizating it to that of Brandy;
we say then, that Caparaticks and Signature thereof belongs to Venus, and so do
Vitriolicks; but the Christals of Tartar and Alkalizates belong to the Sun, to
which Venus is near a kin; for Venus is found to better the Tincture of Sol, to
which the Vine belongs; now Parley and Malt belongs to Jupiter, which must be
warmed by the friendly rays of Venus to be impregnated with the Idea's of Sol;
and what shall we say of Wheat, seeing it is the staff of Man's Life, whose Oil
has a principal signature with the Vine, having its sweet and friendly
quallities from Jupiter, its generating power from Venus, and its strength from
Sol, and by its Lunar Milk the Chyle is strengthened, from whence the Mercurial
life proceeds: But oh! oh! where are you got, methinks, the Man and the Mare is
fled up in the Air, and there to seek their Nests. But however, if so, the Sun
is there rarifying the same, and giving forth of its solar Virtue to the lunar
Matrix, which is conveyed through the Air unto beings; we say then, that he,
who knows the Airy Life of beings, and how to concatinate the pure Effluviums
thereof, so as to make it corporeal, may boldly depend that he knows the nature
of that by which a transmutation of form is made; of this nature is Glaubers
Sal Mirabilis; Paracelsus's Sal Enixum, and my Sal Panaristos: We see it is an
easy matter to take the Garments off a poor man, and give him more rich ones;
so it is the same in this case, if we have a true Knowledge of the Fountain of
Nature. And if the Philosophers in the Mineral Kingdom, can transmute Jupiter
into vendible Sol; why then may not the true Spagiricks in the Vegetable
Kingdom change the nature of Saturn and Jupiter into that of Venus and the Sun,
seeing Transmutation is so generally allowed, and we suppose at this time of
day no rational man makes doubt of its verity: Thus much for the way of making
Artificial Brandy-Wines. We shall now offer some Considerations for the
Encouragement of a Brandy Manufacturage to be established here in England.

The First Consideration that offers it self is, that by such a Facturage great
consumptions of Corn would be made, and so the Tillage in this Kingdom would be
considerably advanced, the Malt-Corn and such other grain used would be
advanced in its Price, so that the Farmer might well live on it, and yet make
Just payments to his Landlord, which is by many now found to the contrary; and
many Farms (to our Knowledge) are in diverse places in this Kingdom vacant,
which might well be employed.

Another Consideration, this being a public thing, the public stocks of those
concerned therein would be able to uphold such a Facturage above all by-ends
and self Interest of any particular person whatsoever; so that Distill-houses
and Warehouses being erected in every County-Town in England, or the Dominions
thereunto belonging, the Neighboring Inhabitants might have easy recourse
thereunto to bring in their Wares at Market price, and receive either Wares or
ready Money for the same; so for Wood or other materials requisite: by this
means, trading would be promoted, and Money brought to circulate more freely.

Another Consideration is, by this way and method abundance of Carriage and
Recarriage would be saved, and yet the Wares lie ready for Transportation, for
which reason they might be afforded abundantly more cheaper to all the Foreign
Plantations than otherwise; and by this means we should considerably outdo our
Neighboring Countries, and yet very considerably advance our own.

Another Consideration is, whereas Spirits are to be Distilled from good and
wholesome Beer, we say then, the first mashing is only sit to be distilled, and
the second mashing might be brewed into very good 2d gallon Beer, which would
be of great service to the poor Inhabitants, many of which now drink Water for
want of conveniences to brew; we therefore wish it was united with and joined
to the Linen Manufacturage. Then as to the Grains, they might be fetched off
while sweet, to feed their Oxen, Cattle, and Hoggs withal; by this means, we
say, not only many thousands of poor would be employed, and so Trading
advanced, and the Land enriched; not that, but the Kings Revenues (as we
touched at before) more certain than otherwise. We have many more
Considerations to offer of this nature, but we shall omit them till we see how
these are received. And so proceed to show the Use and Application of these Low
Wines, Spirits and Aqua Vitae's, in making several sort of Cordial Waters
proper to be used in Families, etc.

SECT. II.
WE shall here only lay down the way to make Aniseseed, Caraway, Cardamum,
Hearts-ease, A^gelico, Wormwood, Mint, Balm, according to the simple Intentions
thereof, because it is convenient to have their respective Virtues per se, and
in many cases better than those sold in snops; but however if you are willing
to make compounds, we then refer you to a Book, Entitled, The London-Distiller.

To make Aniseseed: water. Take to Gallons of good Low Wines, or Proof Spirits,
one pound of Aniseseed, or more as you will have it in strength; now if your
Spirits are high proof, you may add a little Water in the Distillation, and
then draw off the same quantity you put on; this rule serves well for Seeds,
but only the quantity is diversified according as they be in strength; for of
Cardamums you must put two pound to the like quantity of Spirits; as to the
Herbs Angellico, Mint, Balm, Wormwood, and the like, they ought to be gathered
in their prime, and gently dried; the proportion is more or less in quantity,
according as you will have the Water in strength of the Herb; for one is
stronger than another, and an handful of Wormwood will go further than 2 or 3
of another Herb.

To make Hearts-ease, Aqua Vitae, or rather artificial Brandy. Take as many
Gallons as you please, and to every Gallon add a pound of the Seeds of Hearts
ease, and the like of the Blossoms dried in the Sun, tie them up in a Bag, and
throw them in the Still, and draw off as long as it comes pleasant, then
dulcify with a Syrrup made of Hearts-ease and white Sugar put it in the Cask,
adding 2 or 3 spoonfulls of Barm, and the white of an Egg or two, beaten up
with Flour; this will give it Fermentation, and refine it fit to be drawn off
for Sale. Observe, that in the Distillation of these Waters, there will be apt
to come over an Oil or white thick Spirit thus to be sined, as it comes. Take a
fine Holland-cloth, and rub one side of it very well with Black-Lead, and bind
the side so rubbed inwardly toward the end of the Worm, and this will keep the
thickness back, as experience demonstrates; these Instances may serve as
general rules, for all sorts of Waters of the first order; but we shall only
give you another instance.

Now if you will make any rich and Cordial Waters, you had best make use of
Brandify'd Spirit, which is the Spirit of Malt, or any others brewed of their
taste, and impregnated with an azural Salt of a Vinor nature, and so will the
Spirit taste more fragrant of the concret than otherwise: Instance, Take of the
best Cinnamon 5 pounds, of artificial Brandy 5 Gallons, Sugar of Honey one pound
and half, let them infuse 20 days, and then distill off the Spirit, which
dulcify with its own Syrrup; and we say then, this is best and truest Spirit of
Cinnamon, that can be made, and most fit for Phisical use, and thus much for
Simple Spirits made per se.

SECT. III.
THE best and most proper way for dulcifying, coloring, and persuming of the
ordinary Waters fit for Sale.. Of Two Quarts of the cold Distilled Water of the
Herb, and of the dried Herb 2 Pound, Brasil half a pound, or more or less,
according as you would have your Water in height of color, to which, add of Sugar
six pounds, stir them well together, and put them into an earthen Pot with a
close Cover, and gently decoct them 2 or 3 Hours, now and then stirring of it,
immediately shutting the Cover, and lastly, Clarify it with the White of an Egg
well beaten, and when it is cold enough, strain it through a Fustian Bag, called
a Canopy, and to every Barrel of Water, add 5 or 6 pints of this Syrrup, with a
Spoonful or two of Barm to work, and clear it, and in 20 days 'twill be fit for
sale.

A Syrrup for making a Red Water, excelling that of London. Take of the best
Rose water 6 Pints, of Red Sanders in Powder, a Pound, Rose Leaves a Pound,
Treacle, Honey, or rather Sugar 10 Pounds, decoct as before directed, and
clarify it well with the White of 6 Eggs, let this whole quantity be added to a
Barrel of Aqua vitae, and then make a small Bag, and put therein the White of 3
Eggs, a spoonful or two of Barme, all beat together, to which, add a scruple of
Musk, 10 Grains of Ambergreece, and let the said Bag hang by the Bung-hole in
the Liquor, and in 14 Days 'twill be fit for Sale. Now these following Simples
are generally made use of for coloring your Liquors withal, viz. Red Rose
Leaves, Poppy Leaves, Turnsole, Cochineel, and the Root Alkaneet; As we have
thus prescribed Simple Waters, useful in Families; we shall now add proper
compounded ones.

Right Irish Usquebagh. Take the best Aqua vitae, made from the strongest Beer,
Ten Gallons, Aniseeds one Pound, Cloves Two Ounces, Nutmegs, Ginger,
Caraway-seeds, of each 4 Ounces, and Distill them into proof Spirit S. A. then
add to this Distilled Liquor, Spanish Liquorish, Raisons of the Sun stoned, of
each Two Pounds, let both be bruised, of Date-stones, the white skins plucked
out, 4 Ounces, Cinnamon 4 Ounces, stop all close for three Days, then add in
Three Grains of Musk and Ambergreece dissolved and dulcified, with 5 Pounds of
Mevis Sugar, stir them well together, and after Ten Days let it run through
Hypocrates's Sleeve, and Fine it down with Whites of Eggs and Flower; but some
only draw it off the Lees into other Casks when Fine; the Author has a way of
making Usquebagh-Royal, worth Eight shillings a Quart, a great Cordial in
Nature, wonderfully strengthening the Heart, and all the principal Faculties.

Aqua-Corrob^rans, or a Cordial Water. Take Balm, Sage, Bettony, Bugloss,
Cowslips, all gathered in their prime, of each an handful, Low Wines Two
Gallons, Distill it into proof Spirit, then add Galanga, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Cubebes, Cardamums, Melolet flowers, of each 6 Ounces, the juice of Celandine 3
Pounds, the proof Spirit the whole quantity, White Wind, or rather Current-wine
a Gallon digest 24 hours, and then Distill in Balneo, till dry; this is a great
Cordial, wonderfully strengthenging the Heart, Stomach, and principal
Faculties, being taken as a Cordial.

The Author's Aqua Stomatica, on Stomach water. Take a Gallon of Gaskin-wine,
or instead thereof, a midling Spirit of Wine, Ginger, Galanga, Nutmegs, Grains,
Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennel, Carraway-seeds, of each one Ounce; Sage, Mint, Red
Roses, Thyme, Pellitory, Camomel, Lavander, Avens, of each one handful; bruise
your Spices in a Mortar by themselves, and cut your Herbs, and put altogether
into your Spirit or Wine, and let them stand three Days in the cold, keeping
the Vessel very close, and then Distill and Dulcify it with Syrrup of
Rasberries.

The Author's Aqua Pestilentia, or Plague-water. Take Angelica-leaves, and
Roots of Rue, and Sage, of each three handfuls, long Pepper, Nutmegs, and white
Ginger, of each an Ounce and half, the Spirit of Elder one Gallon, Malaga wine
two Quarts, Venice-Treacle and Methridate, of each four Ounces; digest them Ten
Days, then Distill so long as 'twill come pleasant, and add to what comes over a
pound of Hungarian Water, and a pound of Syrrup of Vinegar, and a piece of
Loaf-Sugar, and let it ferment with the white of an Egg, and a little Flower
tied up in a Bag 5 or 6 Days, and then it is fit for use. It Is virtues. This
Water is an excellent preservative against the Plague, Small Pox and Measles,
and all Pestilential Diseases; two Spoonfuls being take 3 or 4 times a day, as
a Cordial: It Is good also for all cold Stomachs, want of Digestion, and the
like.

The Author's Aqua Multifaria; or Water of many Virtues. Take Balm, Sage,
Bettony, Bugloss, Cowslips, all gathered in their prime, of each one handful,
Motherwort, Bay Leaves, of each one handful and half, of Marigold Flowers two
handfuls: Flowers of Rosemary, Lavander, Lillies of the Valley, and Rosasolis,
of each, handfuls; the juice of Celau^^^e two pound, ^^ffron two Ounces. Lig^^^
A^ce^^ an Ounce and hal^. T^^merick four Ounces, Spirit of W^^^^^^ Quatis
d^^^st all six days, and Distill it in Bal. Sal Art. its virtues. It Is
excellent in the Diseases of the Head, Breast and Heart, Liver, and principal
parts; fortifying the Faculties, and strengthening Nature, so far as can be
expected from simple Cordial Spirits, without being enriched with some Mineral
Sulphurs, which will be shown in our Spagirick Philosophy asserted; also in
Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph. Now by the way observe, that most of these
Waters or Spirits are too strong to be taken alone, Nature not loving to ride
in fiery Chariots; it is best to be dilated and reduced into Cordials, the way
by which it is performed, will be shown in the succeeding Lines.

The Author's Aqua Triplex, or Triple Water. Take Venice Turpentine four pound,
Frankincense, Mastick, of each two Ounces, Aloes, Epatica, Date-stones,
Laudanum, Castor, the Roots of Bettony, Elicampane, of each two Ounces,
Cardemums, Cloves, Nutmegs, Ginger, Galingale, Zedoare^ Pepper, Spiknard,
Laurel-berries, Sma^^ lage-seeds, Mugwort-seeds, F^nnel-seeds, Annis-seeds,
Flowers of Brasil, Elder-flowers, Red and White Roses, Lignum Aloes, Cubebs,
Calamus Aromaticus, Mace, Germander, Tormenmentil, Juniper Berries, Agrimony,
Centory, Fumetory, Pimpernel, Dandelyon, Eyebright, Endive, Seeds of Sorrel,
Yellow Sanders, Fethersue, Aloes-hepatick, Ana of each 2 Ounces, Rhubarb 3
Ounces, dried Figgs, Raisins, Dates stoned, sweet Almonds, of each 4 Ounces,
Honey 6 pound, Sugar 10 pounds, Spirit of Elder highly rectified, enough to
overtop all, sour Fingers breadth, Musk and Ambergreece of each two Drachms,
Saffron 2 Ounces and half; all being put into a Retort, and its Mouth being
very well closed with a Cork, and then luted over; and Lastly, tied fast to the
Bladder, and let it putrify 40 days in Horsedung, and then remove it, and
Distill it in a strong Bal: First will come a white Spirit, then a Saffron
color; and Lastly, Red, with some floating Oil; let each be received apart;
and when the operation is over (...) Baln, thou may Distill it in violent
Fire, in Sand, to see what more will be produced.

Its Virtues.

The first Water is proper for new Wounds, old Aches, and Plague Sores, for
weak Eyes, and those that have a Pearl in them; for the Strangury and Stone:
The Second Water for corrupted Blood and Leprosy, for weak Members, and for
Agues. The Third Water for a weak Brain, and Catarrh, and for the Palsy and
Gout: And what I have to say further, is, that these Bodies being opened by a
proper Menstruum, viz. The sweet Spirit of Salt, or true Spirit of Tartar, much
might be expected from it, for Wounds, Ulcers, Neli me tangere's, Plague-sores,
Pearl in the Eyes, Strangury and Stone, Leprosy, weak Members, Agues, Rheumes,
Impostumes, Fistula's, Hemorrhoids; but now observe, by means of the Menstruum,
they will not rise in those diversities, but in an united Form, ponderous and
balsamic, and yet more, according to the degrees of exaltation imposed thereon
by the Spagyrick Physician.

To reduce Spirits for the making of Cordials Reduction of Spirits, is in order
to bring them to a middle Temperature, by uniting the Aquous part with the most
Spiritual, and fermenting to a Union, as may be seen by the following Example.
Take a quart of Water, and a pound of white Loaf Sugar, boil them well together
half an Hour, or more; then let it cool fit to put Barm to it, but while it is
Blood-warm put in Spices, such as you best fancy, as Jamaica-Pepper, Cinnamon,
Cloves, or Orice roots sliced, and and when cold enough, add your Barm, and let
it work as Beer; and after it has well worked, you may use it for bottleing of
Ale, Mead, Cider and Wine; if you add to every Bottle two Spoonfuls thereof, a
little Orice-root, and a sew grains of the Crystal of Tartar, and a bit of
Loaf-Sugar, and being laid close, 'twill make it drink exceeding brisk.

A Cordial. Take a pint of this Liquor, and a pint of our Aqua Corroborans, and
4 Ounces of the Syrrup of Balm, and mix them together, S. A. (...) Another
very M^dicinal, Take Plantain and Balm-water, of each a pound, Cinnamon half a
pound, digest three days, and Distill off the Water, and add of this to any
strong Cordial Spirit, equal parts, and half the weight of Syrrup of Violets,
or Clove-gillyflowers, as you best like, adding a little Cocheneel, and thus
you have a Noble Cordial. The way of making Cordial, will be more largely shown
in my Chymicus rationalis, and Medicina rationalis, to which I shall refer 1
you.

CHAP. VII. Treats concerning the exaltation of high Spirits, and how to make
the Powers of Scurvey-grass, Elder-berries, with their Virtues; also to make
other high Spirits, fit for China, Japan, or Lack-varnish, etc.
IN this Chapter we shall Treat concerning the highest Exaltation of Vinor
Spirits, viz. so perfectly bereaved of their Phlegm, as to fire Gunpowder: Of
this nature is the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and Spirit of Elder, and
Hungarian-water, which I shall show by several Examples, beginning my
Foundations from the Wines of the Third Chapter, and First of,

Potestates Cochleariae, or the powerful united Spirit of Scurvy Grass. The
Scurvy grass Wine, and Distill therefrom its Spirit, which, put upon fresh
Scurvy Grass, and Distill again, repeat this operation, till it become very
strong and fragrant of the Grass, and will burn all away in a Spoon, then by
Distillation, make the Oil of Scurvy Grass, and by Calcination, its fixed Salt,
and Spagirically, reunite these, and so have you the Powers, or whole Virtues
thereof; and if it is rightly done, 'twill look very green, by which the Authors
may be known.

Its Virtues.

These Powers abundantly surpass the Spirit in Virtue, being only originally
prepared by me in Holland, and presented to both Universities, did parallel;
nay, in some degrees outstripp'd that of the greatest Pretenders in the
European Parts; both for strength and pleasantness of Taste; The Modus Operandi
thereof, I never fully discovered; but however, for the popular Service I
taught several of my Disciples in their Chemical course, the true and genean
Spirit, and this I have observed, That this very Spirit, although much inferior in
preparation to the Powers, has been sophisticated, and when brought to the
Public, we have clearly discerned, that it has not been Distilled by
Fermentation per se, but they have supplied their defects here, by adding
Horse-reddish, which has not affinity therewith; this has much lessened its
value, in coming short of its Original; for too too many there be, that care
not how indifferent a thing is, so they can but make it at a cheap rate, and in
great quantity, especially if they have their Name up --. Now, considering
this, together with the prevalent Arguments of Ingenious persons, and of what
great service the Powers of Scurvy Grass might be (more than the Spirit) if
Published, I have in answer thereunto, done it accordingly and the more
especially, seeing its virtue is such as to continue its use, etc. For the
Powers of Scurvy grass have an excellent Virtue in many Diseases, but
particularly against the Scurvy; because the Herb has a singular signature
against the Disease; and thus much I will be bold to say of those my powers,
that they give Circulation to the Blood, by dissolving and dissipating
congealed humors; for by their Alkalizated Nature they mundify, and by their
Vinor nature the Venoms are embib'd, and the humors thin'd, giving sanity to
the principal Faculties; for being duly taken, they destroy not only the
Saline, but also the Acid and Crude humors, from whence the Scurvy has its
original, whether bred by the eating of Gross, Raw, or Crude ^ruit, or Raw
Herbs, or Salt Fish of long continuance; for they are Enemies to many, as is
plainly seen, by the Incident of the disease upon Seafaring persons, and
especially such as use long Voyages; for through the multiplicity of Salt food,
the Scurvy there greatly abounds: And it is agreed upon by all the Learned
Physicians, as well Modern as Ancient (which experience daily confirms) that
there is not one Herb in the Vegetable Kingdom, of a more particular specific
Virtue, for curing the Scurvy, than the aforesaid Scurvy Grass: for its
internal Texture is made up of a volitile Armoniack and Vinor Essence, united
with a fragrant, Vital and Medicinal Crasis, as may be demonstrated by the true
Powers: Therefore the Scurvy, withal its Symtoms, may in great measure be
abated, were but these Powers duly taken in proper time and season, not only
for prevention, but also for healing, if the Disease is not by long continuance
too Rebellious; for these have a specific Virtue, both at Sea and Land,
wherever this popular Disease reigns; as also in Camps and Armies, against
the Chill-bane and Rot, which are usually there, by which Men die as
Chore-Sheep.

Its Use and Dose.

For the Scurvy, Jaundice, Dropsy, Consumption, Phthisick, or shortness of
Breath; these Powers may be used at all times, the oftener the better: The Dose
is from 10 to 30 drops, in a glass of Wine, Beer, Tea, or Coffee, as the
Patient best likes, and after the spending of three or four Bottles of these
Powers, take half a Bottle of the Golden or Purging Spirit once a Week, keeping
moderately warm, and promoting its Operation by Water Gruel, or such warm
supping the Patient best likes: and this will carry off the Relics of the
Disease, purifying the Blood, and such crudities, from whence Worms are bred,
etc.

Potestates Sambuci, or the powerful united Spirit of Elder.. The Wine of
Elder made according to the Third Chapter, adding thereunto Elderflowers, and
ferment it a second time, and be sure to take it at the nick of Fermentation,
and in the greatest fragrancy, for, for if you let it flat, most of its
strength will be lost, put this in the Still, and Distill it as long as
goodness will come, S. A. But observe, that those Wines you make for
Distillation ought to be made from the Juice pressed out only, adding its
proper ferment, and some Sugar and Honey to help it on. Now these Spirits so
distilled, if you design to have them strong in taste, and smell of the
Flowers, then add fresh, and taken in their prime, and reiterate the
Fermentation and Distillation, and so will thou have an excellent fragrant
Spirit, purely impregnated with the virtue of the Concret, according to its
Ideal and Spiritual Qualities: so then to every pound of this Spirit add an
Ounce of its Salt, and 2 of its Oil, and unite them Spagirically, for this
Operation belongs unto it.

Its Virtues.

These Powers abundantly excel any preparation of the Elder, and it is now
some years since I began to enquire after the Knowledge, Virtues, and Operative
power of the Elder-Tree, and the Dwarf-Elder, and experience has acquainted
us, that this said Tree is richly furnished with Medicinal qualities, in all
and every part thereof, even from the Root to the most tender Buds and Branches
thereof, so that it stands parallel with any single E^s in the Vegetable
Kingdom; and if you consider the reason, it is no wonder it should be so, for
that this Tree has its Character or Signature from the friendly Planet Venus,
and by her Circular correspondence abates Mars's fury, in the Center of which
is the Sun, who sends his Virtues to the Archeius thereof, and furnishes the
Callidum Inatum, with the bountiful concreting Sulphur, which by Nature's
Fermentation, and artificial Circular Sublimation of those Juices through its
Pipes, with a kind of a Pulse, hence proceeds subtilty and purity to the
fruit, which returns so richly laden with a virtuous Tincture from the
Fountain of Nature. Now Tincture shows maturity, and that brings Sanity, and so
by consequence other properties of health, etc. For this Tree has to the
Microcosme. First a Cephalic Virtue, Secondly an Elixipharmick, and by
consequence a Diuretic and Diaphoretick: Finally a Balsamic, and Paragorick,
thence prevalent in Fits, Scurveys, Dropsies, Strangueries, etc. which may be
evidently discerned by another Authority besides mine; for Herballs contain
pages of the virtues thereof; Nay the Judicious Houswife has her remarks
thereon, which may easily be discerned by its various uses; for out of its Buds
is made a Springbroath, which cleanses the Blood of Scorbutic and Hydroptical
humors, and is good in Obstructions; the Wine wherein the Flowers are
impregnated is most fragrant, and an excellent Febrifuge, cleansing the Blood
of Acidity, Venom and Putrefaction, therefore a powerful Medicine in Surfeits,
Measles, Smallpox, Swine-Pox, and Pestilential Corruptions; the Vinegar made
from the Flowers is used in the like causes, also for Inflammations on any part
of the Body: The Distilled Water for weak Eyes, and to clear the Skin. The Oil
for Scorbutic Itches, Bruises, Sprains, and good in the Piles; also for
Burnings, and external pains of the Gout, etc. The inward bark of the Elder,
and Dwarf-Elder, is generally prescribed in Dropsies, the dried pith for
Issues: The Wood of the Tree is very durable, whence may be an Oil prepared for
long Life; and therefore pity it should be used by so many Mechanic
Artificers; it is also observable that from the innate Virtue it is early in
budding, and late in declining: Moreover, the Berry or Fruit is made into
Syrrup, and preserved to be used in many Diseases; there is also a Balsom of
great virtue made hence. Wherefore then should not the Powers of Elder (seeing
the Principles are therein radically united) contain all the aforesaid Virtues,
and in great Superiority; First, because the Spirit is made by Fermentation,
and exalted to a Vinor ens, wholly sulphurous and inslamable, which to
perform, some have esteemed so great a secret. Secondly, the Spirit is enriched
by its own Oil. And Thirdly, Strength, and by the Salt, so that these Powers
are advanced so high, as to contain the medicinal Virtue of the whole; now
perceiving of what general service these Powers might be, I thought it
convenient to publish it; and the more especially, discerning the things of
single Virtue, have taken place in the World, by some kind of Service, as
namely the Spirit of Scurvy Grass, and Spirit of Rosemary, or Hungarian-water.
These Powers of Elder carry with a more general benefit, and will manifest from
their own central Virtues, the popular service they have for the multitude;
especially for that they are so effectual against the contagious Diseases, that
now Reign: Indeed, should I be particular in every Virtue they have, I might
fill a Sheet; but well knowing that their Operation is such, that will
demonstrate themselves beyond words; I shall therefore leave the rest for the
Patient and Prudent Experiencer thereof, and so come to give their Use, and
Dose. For the Diseases of the Head, as Convulsions, Falling Sickness,
Vertigo's, Calentures, and sudden Swoonings, it is very prevalent, and
therefore let those that Travel by Sea or Land, never be without a Bottle of
it: For upon the approach of a Paroxisme, if you drop 30 or 40 drops into a
glass of Water, and drink the same, 'twill wonderfully abate the violence
thereof, and strengthen Nature; also you are to dip the end of your
Handkerchie^ in the Powers, and snuff up the Savours thereof, and strike the
Temple^ therewith, repeating the same, till relief is found. For young Children
(...) or so drops is sufficient in a Spoonf^^ of Water, and sweetened with Sugar
but let the Mother drink a full Dos^ while the Child is sucking, and the^ their
prevalency will be seen; if th^^ method be observed, not only in cuting those
that are afflicted, but also prevents it in others; They also abate the
oppression of Wind, which Children are so generally subject to. They also are
prevalent for the diseases of the Breast, as Astma's, Dropsies, Consumptions,
spitting of Blood, and the like; and for those of the Stomach, as want of
Appetite; and principally in Surfeits; and in the beginning of Fevers; let from
30 to 60 drops of these Powers be dropped into a glass of Water, and sweetened
with its own Syrrup, and after taking of them, drink a good hearty draught of
Marigold Posset drink, and sweat plentifully in Bed, and as often as Nature
thirsts for refreshment, let 20 drops betaken in the Liquor, and by this
means the offending Matter will be abated, and carried off by Sweat and Urine.
These Powers are also prevalent for the Gripes of the Guts, Cholick and
Strangury, and want of Rest, you must take a Brandy Caudle, and as it is fit to
drink, put half a bottle therein, and sweat in Bed, and thus in few hours,
admirable relief will be found; It Is also prevalent for the Dropsy,
Hypocondriack Melancholy, Scurvy, Oppressions of Fear; You are to take
constantly of these Powers in your common Beer, till relief is found. It Is also
prevalent for such diseases, as infect the whole mass of Blood, as the Measles,
Small Pox, and Swine Pox and other pestilential diseases; for which you are to
proceed thus; Take of Cocheneel and Saffron of each a Dram, and a quart of
Spring Water, and infuse them two or three hours upon the Embers close stopped,
then take the clear, and mix a Bottle of these Powers therewith, and as much of
its own Syrrup as will make it into a Cordial; and if this is taken as common
Drink, the malignancy will thereby be abated, and the fountain of life
fortified, and the disquiet Spirits settled; but you are to observe, that as the
disease begins to abate, you must take every third day of our Royal Cordinum
lenitivum, and of these Power^ the intermitting days, and so will the relics
of the Disease be carried off and Nature restored to her wonted current. It Is
prevalent for the Gout for weak and pained Limbs, for Sprains and Bruises, and
for Rickets in Children, and to ease pain in any part of the Body: If you take
of these Powers inwardly, and externally chafing the grieved part therewith,
and dipping a Scarlet Cloth therein, laying it on the same, repeating it every
six hours till ease is found. You are to observe that these Powers are an
excellent Cosmatick, wonderfully cleansing the Face and Skin, making the Flesh
smooth; Lastly, you are to observe, for diseases of long continuance, this
wholesome Medicine must be continued in its application, then thou may expect
to find by it satisfactory and admirable effects; but however, by the way I
think it fit to give thee one precaution, which is, thou art to observe that
these Powers belong to me, that I am the first Author and Publisher thereof;
those therefore that are minded to have a Medicine of such general service as
it is truly prepared, let them repair to my House, where it is only to be had in
its exalted degree of Virtue, and very fragrant, of a Purple color, by which
it may be known. I signify this to prevent the mock imitations of illiterate
Pretenders, which Agabus-like, destroy many a fragrant Flower in this Art.

Potestates rosmarini, or the powerful united Spirit of Rosemary, which is made
by the Flowers thereof, sermented and distilled into an high Spirit, and then
united with its own Oil and Salt, which abundantly out-does the Hungarian
Water. Observe that by these Examples, you may be able to prepare what Powers
you will from Herbs, or Flowers, or Gums.

To make a Spirit so high and etherial as to fire Gunpowder, and fit for China,
Japan and Lack varnishes. Take three or four pounds of Bay Salf, and
decripitate it very well, and give it a great degree of Fire, but keep it from
melting by stirring of it with an iron Rod, till it comes to a very fine
Powder; before it is quite cold, throw it into a Still, and pour upon it two
Gallons of Aqua-vitae, Brandy, or any of the proof Spirits, made from those
former Wines, and gently distill your Spirit in Baln. until all is come over,
and so your Phlegm will remain in the bottom, and your Spirit shall be more fine
at one Distillation, than at two or three without Salt; This Spirit is of great
use in Spagirical Operations, as well as in Varnishing. The proof of its
goodness is thus known; put some Grains of Gun powder in a Spoon or small
Silver Taster, and fill it with Spirit, and hold it in cold Water, being fired,
but let not any water in, and if it is good, 'twill fire off the Gunpowder:
but if moisture remain, so that the powder is not burnt, then it is not high
enough. This Spirit from English growths is worth Eight shillings a Gallon.

Now of its use in preparing Varnish, and first of the Gold Lack.. Or Seed Lack
8 Ounces, of the finest Gumsandrack in fine powder 4 Ounces, mix them well, and
put them into a large glass body, and add to it, of the strongest Spirit of
Wine pounds, and observe, that one third part of the glass is filled, and with
Hay twisted about it, place it in B. M. and let it stand there until as much of
the Gums are dissolved as will be, which will require about 8 or 10 hours,
minding to shake it sometimes over the Baln. Then take Guttagamba one Ounce,
Sauguish draconis half an Ounce, and as much Spirit of Wine as will dissolve
them, which may be about 4 Ounces, and after they are dissolved mix them hot,
and let them stand so about half an hour, then strain it out, and keep it close
stopped for use. Observe, that in the place of Guttagamba some use Turmerick,
others Saffron, to raise the golden color. Now Gum Anima makes a white
Varnish, and Gum spelt a black.

To make China Varnish.. Of rectified Wine, one pound put into a clean Bottle,
and add thereunto of Gum lack 5 Ounces, shake them well together, and let them
stand 24 hours in a moderate heat, such as the Sun in Summer, then strain it
through a Canvas bag, and let it settle by the fire, and keep it in Bottles by
it self for use.

To make the black ground from the Japan-work.. The grounds is of the abovesaid
Varnish, and mix in a Gally-pot, with some of the following black, with which
cover the work 3 or 4 times, then with clear Varnish wash the work over 10
times, and let it be done in a Stove, and at the end of 8 days pollish it with
Trippilo.

To make the rarest black in the World.. An Earthen Lamp, and put in a very
large cotton, then fill it with Linseed Oil, and receive the Smoke in a new
Earthen dish, and with a Feather brush it off from time to time, which keep for
use.

To make a Red Varnish.. Mix Vermillion with the ground of the Varnish, with
which cover the work well 3 times, then strain in Cornation Red through a fine
Linen Cloth into the clear part of the Varnish, with which Varnish the
virmillion till the color please your Eye, then with the clear Varnish alone,
Varnish over 10 times, and then let it dry a Week, and so pollish with Trip. as
the other.

How to make the Ingredients for the raising work. Mix six parts of Whitening,
with one part of Bolearmonick finely powdered, with Gumwater, till it be the
thickness of Cream, the which lay on.

How to make the Gum-Water. Dissolve an Ounce of Gumaraback in a pint of clear
Water.

How to make a Varnish for Silver. To a pint of Spirit of Wine, put 4 Ounces of
Gumsandrack, and one of Mastick, shake them well, and let them stand 24 hours
in a moderate heat.

How to make use of the Gold and Silver. Buy Silver and Gold in Shells, and put
to it Gum-water, and then mix it extraordinarily well with your Pensil, and if
it prove too stiff, put a little fair water into it, and so you may Draw or
Write as you please.

To make another China-Varnish.. Of Seed Lack 10 Ounces, of Sandrack an Ounce
and half, put them in a Can of rectified Spirit of Wine, shake them well
together, and let them stand 48 hours in a moderate heat, then strain it
through a Canvas Bag, and let it settle in a moderate heat 4 or 5 hours, then
drain off the clear, which keep apart.

To make white Varnish. The white. is made by putting 3 Ounces of picked Sandr.
and 2 Ounces of Mastick, in one pound of Spirit.

To make a raw Varnish for Violint and other Instruments.. Of the deepest
colored Amber 3 or 4 Ounces, and put it in a well leaded po^, and let it melt
on a Charcoal Fire, surring it with an Iron Spatula, when it is melted, 'twill
be dark like clarified Rosin, then pour it on a Marble stone.

To purify the Oil.. Of the best Linseed Oil, q. s. e. put it in a new well
leaded pot, let it boil well, and skim it often, when it is boiled enough, which
you may know by putting in a Goose-quill, for then it will not burn it, strain
it and keep for the use.

Then. Of this Oil one pound, of Amber above mentioned 6 ounces, beaten small,
let them heat on a gentle Fire, continually stirring it, ^^ll it be dissolved,
if it be too thick, ^dd more Oil, if too thin, add more ^^mber; when your
Varnish is of a ^ood thickness, strain it through a C^oth, and keep it for use.
Sometimes (...) will be 2 or 3 hours before the Am^^^ be dissolved; be not
discouraged (...) the blackness, for it is not turned (...) it is ^ot always
transparent at the first, you must begin at first with a gentle fire and
increase it by degrees.

To Bl^ck Wood. First make a water of 2 pound of Brandy, of well-water 2 pound,
of Galls 2 ounces, of Salt M. boil them in an Earthen pot well stopped half an
hour, then take a sponge, and with this water cover the work once in 4 or 5
hours at least 30 times, every time before it is quite dry lay on the following
die.

. Of strong Vinegar 2 pound, of Filings of Iron one pound and half; of rusty
Iron one pound; a little Salt; of Verdigrease an ounce and half; of Galls a
pound and half, a penny worth of sublimed, a piece of the bark of Bois deanne,
and a Lemond cut into 4, let them steep for 15 days in an Earthen or Iron pot
stopped, then when it is dry pollish it with Trippillo.

To gild it. The proportions are of Bole one pound, of Sanguin stone, or Red
one pound, of black Lead an ounce, of Tallow an ounce and half; put the Bole to
steep in water, then pound the red Chalk and black, and after grind them fine
with the Tallow, grind the Bole by little and little, and then mingle all
together and cover them with water.

To a spoonful of this put 2 or 3 spoonfulls of Water, and the quantity of a
Wallnut of strong Sike, lay on 7 or 8 couches, this will keep in a cold place
half a year.

Thus (Reader) we have presented thee with various things; but indeed they are
the draught of a rough Pen, written for thy profit by one of Natures Pupils,
which I hope the Learned disciples in the secret Mysteries of Nature will take
in good part, seeing it is a true Birth and no Foster-Child, which, as it is
nourished may grow to the full stature of a Man, and be able to plead something
on the behalf of its Progenitor; and seeing it is done in good will thou must
accept of it so.

Farewell.
A General Treatise OF THE ORIGINAL OF DISEASES: Together with their Cure by
Spagirical Medicines.
IN this Treatise we shall write concerning the Nature of Diseases; together
with the office of Physic or Medicine in general, which is comprehended in the
word Medicina, which contains five kinds, Nosognomick, Boethetick,
Pharmaectuick, Chirurgick, Dietetick; but we shall here comprehend them under
three, viz. Physiologick, Pathologick, and Therapeutick: Now this division
agreeing best with Spagirical Doctrine, we shall erect upon this Hypothesis,
beginning first with Physiologica, is to know and understand the structure of
Human bodies, both Anatomically and Physically, from which we may know to apply
suitable Medicines; whether they are prepared from the Animal, Mineral, or
Vegetable Kingdom.

Pathologica is that which describes, and wherein is considered the general
Method of Indications of Diseases; Diagnostick, Aetiologick, and Prognostic.

Therapeutica is wherein are considered the general Indication of Cure, under
what denomination soever, because in the Spagirical way we never observe the
Dietetick part, for we allow the Patient their kind of Food in Moderation, as
we have largely shown in our Spagirick Phylosophy's Triumph. As to the
Chirurgick part, we esteem not of it any more than for Wounds, simple or
compound Fractures, Dislocations and such like external accidents; but as to
Ulcers, Fistula's and Cancers, N^ll we ^augeres experience does demonstrate
cannot belong to this part, for if curable it must be performed by internal
Specific Medicines, which will take off the original cause thereof; for
instance, we had a Patient in Rotterdam, was afflicted with a virulent Ulcer in
the Leg, and had been up and down under cure for 6 Months, or more, in some of
which time she was under the Masters of the Hospital, but to little effect, for
they used their hot corosives so long till she was down right Lame, yet (by the
blessing of God) was relieved and cured by me with one double bottle of my
Vinum vitae proprietatis Ensencificated with the aurify'd Sulphur of Antimony:
We could give several other such Instances, which for brevity's sake, (and lest
the Volume should grow too big) we shall omit, till we publish our Spagirical
Philosophy Asserted: And again, that part in Surgery, which to the Operator
is most beneficial, we cannot assent to, as Phlebotomy, Fomentation,
Scarrification, and such like; because they are cruel and unmercifull, and
after all that very little conducive to a Cure.

Now of the Pharmatick part we only esteem that, which prepares such Medicines,
as will radically cure by a Specific virtue; for of violent Vomits, Purges or
Salivations, we cannot admit, because whilst drugs thus operate, they are
clothed with their venomous and unnatural crudities, and not fit to be given
by the hand of an Honest Physician, such, we mean, as prefers a good conscience
before popular applause.

The Quaery therefore will be, how true Medicine (and such as will really
relieve the Diseased) may be prepared, in answer whereunto we refer you to ^t
Third Head, where we shall demonstrate, that such are only prepared by the
Knowledge of Nature; as true Rivulets flowing from the Fountain, for from
thence proceed the Mediums and Menstrums, that have power to open the most
compacted bodies, and cause them to send out those Friendly Balsamic, and
Medicinal virtues, where by the afflicted are relieved; but more of this in the
place before cited.

We shall now come briefly to state our Hypothesis, concerning the Original,
Nature and Cure of Diseases, in such words, as may so inform the well-minded
desirer, and to receive satisfaction thereby: The Original, Nature, Variation
and Cure of Diseases may therefore (as we before said) be comprehended and
understood in a threefold respect.

First, in the Knowledge of the Microcosmical structure, and how Diseases arise
in human kinds, so as to assault the Animal Life, and sensitive Soul; for we
find that all the Diseasy Idea's are conveyed in the vehicle of the Spiritual
Juices to the constitutive parts.

Secondly, In knowing the proper Indications of Diseases, and how changes and
variations are made in simple and complicate ones; for it is very necessary,
that the concurrences, in the Nature and Eventual accidents thereof, be
praeominated.

Thirdly, these being understood, we may boldly insist upon the Cure of
Diseases, by a Judicious Administration of proper Medicines, and by such
variations, as are requisite for removing the Cause thereof.

But before we proceed to lay down the Rise and Nature of Diseases, we think it
convenient (to make our Intention the more plain) first to define what a
Disease is; a Disease therefore is defined to be an assault made upon the
Spiritual Life, in human kinds, in order to make a breach of its natural
Harmony.

For it is plain to us, that Diseases have their first Existence in the very
principles of Life, and sensitive Soul, by which they are conveyed to the
Archaeus, (who is, as we say, the central vital Spirit, exalted to the highest
state in the Microcosm) which distributes a vital ray, of which Ares is
Specificator, to all the parts and Members of the body, which being assaulted
by the Diseasy Idea's, whether Superior Influences, Epidemick Venoms, or other
accidents, causing Terror, Fury and Amazement, whereby Nature becomes unmindful
of her own office, and admits of Diseases, and sometimes death without
resistance: Because by such preternatural actions the wrathful quality is
stirred up, which otherwise lay silent in the Center of the body: for (as we
have said in our Medicina Rationalis) the feed of Life and Death is placed, and
originally existeth, in the Center of every Body, and of Man, in order to
subdue him to fear, and reverence his Creator; for, (as the Apostle says) From
Adam death reigned upon all men.

Now this Archaeus has such a pure Central Life, that it is immediately put
into fury and distraction, by those clouds the diseases Idea makes, which being
antipatherical to its purity, it cannot but oppose, endeavoring so long to
cast them off, till enraged thereby, and so neglecting its own office, many
times immediately admits of death; but, if not so soon, these untoward guests
take place, captivating and destroying, and as they have admittance, assume
Matter, and become corporeal; whence, according to its continuance, proceed
chronick diseases, or such as be of difficult cure: For this matter (as we have
said in our Spagirick Philosophy asserted) is by degrees dissolved, and spread
through the Body, and so universally assaults the whole Fabric, or at least
wise some principal part, or organ thereof, whence sometimes proceed
Obstructions, Hypocondriack Melancholy, and many others; for the Humors,
especially the predominant, have thereby power to overflow; thence Diseases
from the inequality of Humors, which often are remotely promoted by the six
Non-naturals.

We therefore assert these to be the accidental, not the original or
Procafarctick Cause of diseases, as many will have them, and that by these.
Nature is deprived of her own State and Office, and led into that which is
contrary to her; which prevails so long, as the Anatomia Essata has power to
Dart forth her venom, in order to extinguish the Fountain of Life.

We shall therefore state this as a general Aphorism in Physic, that if the
Spirit, the Fabricator and Conservor of Human Bodies, stands clear and
undefiled, being not infected by the clouds of Diseases; the Body, which is the
Receptacle of the Spirit, must needs remain in a vigorous activity, for no
morbifick Matter can exist therein, but by the Spirits Error, which afterward
forms Matter, and becomes corporeal.

For as Christ says, Mat. 12.28. How can one enter into a strong Man's House,
and spoil his Goods, except he first bind the strong Man; In reference
hereunto, the Spirit may be said to be a strong Man, and the Arche, as the
Watchman of the Microcosme, which examins all, therefore must be first bound
and captivated, before the House or Body can be destroyed.

Thus much in general concerning the Original of Diseases, and their forms
impressed by the Diseases Idea on the Spirit, through which they become
corporeal; we shall now consider by what Medium they act; We say then, as the
external Air of the Macrocosm, is the Medium between Heaven and Earth,
containing the universal Spirit, by whose Power Life proceeds from Generation
to Generation, and by the deprivation thereof, Death, Corruption and
Destruction; for being darkened, corrupted and infected with diverse Spiritual
Forms, whether Superior or Inferior, by exhalation of corrupted Fumes, for it is
a Matrix that receives all, till over-burthen'd or infected thereby, it sends
forth its venom both on Man and Beast; as is too too evident in Pestilential
times, etc.

So it is in the Air of the Microcosm, where the Spirit acts, that being the
medium between Life and Death, and consequently, the effective Instrument of
Health and Diseases; for that being over-burthened, either by the superior
Influences, or Spirituality of the different exhalations, proceeding either
from a subsequent Cause, or the immediate Passions and exasperation of the
Mind, by Anger, Grief, Fear, or the like; or of the Body by sudden motion, or
Cold, by which the Spirit is too much inflamed, or contracted, or from the
superabundance of Meat or Drink taken: For although these are the handmaids and
nourisher of Life, yet when taken in excess, they many times become the very
instrument of Death, like as the most choice Panacea, which by a ray of its
light, is able to cure all Diseases, yet too many rays thereof will overpower
the natural one, and so extinguish it: wFor as Sandivogius says, a great Fire
soon extinguishes a small one, and that many of the Philosophers have destroyed
themselves, by not knowing the right use of the grand Panacea; for we are to
receive things in Temperance, so as to strengthen the natural heat, and not to
overcome it, as we have touched at in the Preface.

It Is no wonder indeed, why there should be such variation in Diseases, and so
many new and complicate ones arise; if we rightly consider how great the excess
and intemperance, this age abounds with, is, for from thence proceeds a
debilitation of the Spirit, a defect of the Spiritual Juices, and an inlet to
cacochamick ones, and from thence corruption; and this being united with the
Debaucheries, receiving from each other the Spiritual vapor of their poisonous
Venom's, the Grand Pox is contracted; which, being not timely cured, corrupts
and stains the Vessels with its Diseases Malignancy, and is often sent forth to
the superficies of the Body, and internally stains the radical moisture,
causing an Impostumated Seed, and decayed Body; from whence, in the act of
another Generation it stamps its Ideas, or its Matrix; from hence hereditary
Diseases, and the cause of so many weak and imperfect Children, which also in
process of time, produce the same effects, and so cause such other new
complicate Diseases, and such as become the amaze and astonishment of
Physicians; for it is not only the Diseases varying, and diverse symptoms thereof
appearing, but also some new ones are commonly and yearly produced, vastly
different from the other: And this is observed, and for a truth generally
agreed upon by most of the Learned and Curious observing Physicians, that I
have met with in my European Travels.

And indeed, the craziness and imperfectness of Bodies, in this our Age, are
much to be pitied and lamented: for let the Physician come where he will, he
can seldom fail of discrning some Symptoms and evil Effects thereof; and it is
much to be feared, that the Intemperance of this Age will cause such evil
Fermentations, as to produce yet worse Diseases, which (I pray God) the
Inhabitants may prevent by timely Repentance, for I dread the soreness of the
Judgment, etc.

From what has been said, it is easy to be conceived, that Intemperance has
been as a Procatarctick Cause of many Diseases; staining the Spirits,
corrupting the Humors, and many times the principal Vessels, causing similar,
organick, and common Diseases: For we say, that one original Cause may in
different Bodies or Constitutions, produce different Effects, and the more
different symptoms, according as it has its situation, or power to assault the
Synteresis of Nature: We shall therefore state another Aphorism, viz.

That the Spirit being the first admitter of disseasy Idea's, those also must
be Spiritual, and carry with them their own Seed, and forming Power; or else no
specification of a disease, could be made.

Now this being so, we are to consider, what those diversity of Forms are, that
produce diversity of Diseases For we see, that in Epidemick diseases, which
tho, generally proceed from corrupted venoms, yet each of them cause different
Characters on the Body: The Measles one, the Small Pox another, the Swine Pox
another, the Spotted Fever another, and the Plague another: For that has the
most raging power, or violent burning, painful Blains, Carbuncles, or Bubo's,
as a test of Rage, changing the same, in, and with the solid parts to the
blackness of a Coal, or stinking Pus, etc.

Now by all of these the Life is eminently threatened, according as the Form
has power immediately to work upon, and prevail against the light of Nature.
This diversity of diseasie Idea's may not seem difficult to be conceived, if we
but consider, that the general matter of all things was originally one, and
that the diversity of Species came in the World, by, and from the character and
stamp of Form in the Animal, Mineral, and Vegetable Kingdom, in all the kinds
thereunto belonging: For (as the Apostle says) every Body has its own Seed,
and every Seed its own Body. In the vegetable Kingdom, the Body is Salt, the
Form Sulphur or Oil, which are discernably different in Taste and Smell, one
from another, which whilst the Texture remained, had power to retain its Form
in multiplication of its kind, through the power of the universal Spirit. In
the Mineral Kingdom, the Body is Mercury, but that which gives the various
Forms, is Sulphur, which through the Medium of the Universal, grow, and are
multiplied. In the Animal Kingdom, the Body is Flesh, but the Form is that
which makes the diversity, according as it is pure, purer, or most pure; the
most pure is Man, being animated with the Divine Light; the Pure is Fish and
Foul; and the less Pure is Flesh in its diverse and brutish kinds; yet all live,
increase and multiply through the Medium of the Universal Spirit: Moreover, Man
(being a Microcosme, an Epitomy of all Forms, a Compendium of all Powers, and
System of Superior and Inferior Beings) must doubtless be acted upon by all
Forms: For, as Legions of Angelical Spirits are for ministering Comfort to Man
by the Rays of Light; so on the other hand, Are there Legions of Diabolical
ones, stirring up their Instruments to dart and poison him with the black cloud
of Leath: Therefore we say, that as the Spirit of Man is acted upon by the
diverse diseasie I dea's; and yet the Primary Matrix of Diseases one, viz. a
moist, mercurial poisonous Air, which we call the Anatomia Essata, whose
existence is in all the urinous Spirits in the Body, and is fed by the same, in
which the different Idea's Act and Form several Species by the Medium of the
Spirit, in the little World, even as it is in the Spirit of the great World.

Wherefore we say, that all kind, or species of Diseases are produced by the
Spiritual Action of the dismal Form; and according to the nature of the Humor
acted upon, or of the Vessel, Organ or Passage, that it is incorporated in, and
as it is nearer or more remote situated to the Archaius: For we see that in the
Itch and Scabs, the Blood is corrupted and infected; as also in the Scurvy and
Scrofulous Humors; yet each of these are considerably different one from
another, and all different from the former: which still demonstrate diversity
of Forms in the specification of Diseases: And again, in the French Pox, which
having its rise from complicate Vapors, produces in like manner complicate
Symptoms, which have some or other resemblance of various sort of Diseases.

Now if the Form is of a Saturnal Nature, dull and languid in Motion, from
thence Hypocondriack Melancholy, and inveterate Obstructions, hard to be
removed. Now the further operation of these sulphurous Idea's, or black Clouds,
will be more fully shown in my Spagirick Philosophy asserted, where the
Original of Diseases is more fully demonstrated.

These things being rightly known, and considered, we may be able to make
proper Indications of Diseases, whether produced simply from one Cause, or
compounded with different Forms; whence proceed rebellious and complicate
Diseases: Ex. Gr. The corruption of the Grand Itch in one uniting in Coitu with
the acid or muriatick Partiticles in another, produces, or brings forth a
venomous Vapor, which may prove as a Progenitor to the Pox; and especially
when it is heightened by a volatile Acidity in a second Action. The manner of
which, ought truly to be known.

And again, when the Scurvy after the same manner unnites with the grand Pox,
it may cause such a violent fermentation in the blood, as to produce a Fever;
some of which I have known so violent, that death has immediately ensued.

These, and many more of the like nature, produce such complicate Diseases, as
have before been touched at, so that the most learned of Physicians at the
first sight by the Diagnosticks and Aetiologicks are put to an onset, how
rightly to give their Prognostics, which we shall endeavor to unfold,
according to our experience, in our Medicina rationalis, and briefly in our
Spagirick Philosophy asserted, and therefore omitting here

We shall therefore conclude, that diseases are envenomed, poisonous Idea's,
either more or less corporify'd; and so emitting their various effects and
symtoms, and by degrees working upon the radical Moisture, or vital Spirits,
till they are exhausted, and then by consequence death ensues.

Now seeing it is a duty incumbent upon every Physician, to endeavor by true
Specificks to heal those breaches and inrodes, made upon Nature, whilst the Oil
remains in its determined Pondus unexhausted: To the end, our mite may be
contributed, we shall thus demonstrate the Therapeutick part as follows.

Finding therefore, that Diseasy Idea's are dismal Clouds, whereby the Spirit
of Life is stained, in order to produce death, for Diseases are its Messengers;
we shall therefore recommend to your Consideration the search of such Arcana's,
or suitable Medicines, such (we mean) as will emit some rays of light, whereby
the sensitive Soul or Spirit of Life in human bodies may be illuminated, and
which being rightly applied, have power to remove the Cause, and restore Nature
to sanity.

Of which number are all those, that are Spagirically prepared from the Chaos
of the Adepts: and more especially their grand, universal, Tincturing Sulphur,
against which no reasonable man dare object, seeing there is such an unanimous
concurrence in the writings of the learned and Judicious Spagiricks: For they
maintain the Possibility of one Medicine to have virtue sufficient to cure all
Diseases. And it is no wonder it should be so, seeing it is an Essence of such
Purity, as to have Predominancy over the Elementary and corrupting powers,
being a Domicile, wherein the first form of light is concatinated in the
Effl^viums of Life, and thence having a central Homogeneity, preserves the
fuel of the Lamp from being stained with the Diseasy Idea's, and Nature from
erring in its Harmony; and when it does err; it is a sure Panacea to restore it
again to sanity, maintaining the Microcosmical Wheels in due Decorum till the
appointed time of Death, there being an Irrevocable degree, passed, against
which there can be no Balm, etc.

Furthermore, it is to be observed, that all Arcana's proceeds from the Power,
Action and Virtue of this Chaos general; as also the Menstrum Alkabest* which
is the Medium, by which Medicines, are prepared, and indeed without which there
can be no true Essences, Elixirs, Magistrys, etc. whatsoever high names are
given to many extant.

Moreover it is to be observed, that by the help of this general Spirit, we open
the body of Tartar, uniting the extremes so, as to bring it to act in a
succedanous way, and Spagirically to operate on most inferior bodies, and
thereby to obtain their true Specific virtues, which Medicines are esteemed
the succedanous ones, and short of these there are very few that will raise any
considerable advantage to the Sick, let the commendation imposed by the makers
thereof be ever so soaring; and it is daily confirmed by experience, that there
be all-to-few Medicines, that by far answer what is attributed to them; because
there be no Specificks, but what are prepared through a dissolving Agent, of
which number is Tartar, which is of such a Nature, as to coagulate upon the
body dissolved, but 'twill obtain from the Concret its Caracteristical Powers,
and hidden Specific Virtues; and on the other hand, the Concret obtains from
the Dissolvent an abstersive Nature, and by the action and passion the points
center into a Globical or Balsamic Ens, which is agreeable to our constitutive
Principles, and so operate in those pure Effluviums, as to perform real Cures,
to the comfort and satisfaction of the Patient, and Honor of the
Honest-hearted Physician.

Therefore this Consideration must not be omitted, viz. That it is necessary to
observe variation in their administration, according to the alteration of the
Disease; for our Ten Years experience shows us, that it is necessarily required
in Practice, to make a Judicious variation in the Dispensation of Medicines, if
we design that they should fully answer: For the way and Method, we observed 5
years ago, must be altered in the Prescriptions of this present year: For though
the Method was certain then, in the Disease of the same kind, or species, yet
such have now other Twiggs, Branches, and Symptoms, which necessarily require
to be pruned off: For these, and such like reasons, the Author would not
willingly out speak the virtue of any single Medicine; yet his experience is
such, that he will thus much boldly declare for the encouragement of the
Diseased, that if these do not demonstrate their Virtue on them in 30 or 40
days, so as to give a grounded belief of a real Cure, he advises such Patients
to desist from means, except the Physician that follows him, can demonstrate,
that he is in Possession of the Grand Panacoea, or Universal Medicine;
otherwise the Cure is highly to be doubted. Those true Sayings have been found
by experience, by such, that have not been willing to regard our Advice, but
would be tampering and spending their Money, and yet alas, the Disease has
remained, until the Eyes have been closed, and they have given their last
farewell to the World: Of this we are ^ble to give undeniable proofs.

The last Observation is that these Sovereign Specific Medicines are more
certain in their Operation, where the Patient observes with heedfulness the
methods prescribed, and is temperate in exercise, Meat and Drink, and yet we
allow all things in Moderation, so far, that the most curious Palate may be
pleased with such variety as Nature affords.

Now for the satisfaction of all that are truly desirous to promote Art, I
shall now come to demonstrate, and lay down the Basis we go upon, and the
manner observed in preparing these our Medicines, viz. by the Medium of Tartar,
as before hinted, which must be the pure and fixed Salt, truly volatized,
whereby it becomes a pure fermenting Medium, an opener of Bodies, by Virtue of
the reconciler of Extremes, and the very key for preparing true Specific and
succedanous Medicines: Therefore observe as follows;

The fixed Salt of Tartar is to be volatiliz'd three distinct ways, viz. by
acid Spirits, and then being distilled over into a middle Spirit, they assume
the name of Arcana Pontissitata; also by urinous Oils, and Spirits, and then
they assume the name of Arcana Microcosmica; also by essential Oils and vinor
Spirits, and then they assume the name of Arcana Samick; not undeservedly,
because of its friendly Balsamic Nature, homogenious to, and in the preparing
of Medicines; therefore I shall touch at that, and omit the others, seeing we
have distinctly laid them down in our Spagyrick Philosophy's Triumph, where we
have treated of the Mineral work, to which I refer you for more ample
satisfaction, and proceed to lay down the ground on which the Arcanum Samick
depends, etc.

Circulatum Minimum, or the least Keys opening the door of entrance to the
Spagirick Art.

of the best Rhenish Tartar, what quantity you please, and calcine it three or
four days, until it looks bluish, then let it run per deliquium, which filter,
and then by evaporation cristallize it into a Salt, which by an internal
Decoction may be butterified, then take thereof Three pound, and of any
fragrant essential Oil Nine pound, of our Reconciliator Microcosm. Q. S. E. to
elixerate it, and then with an aromatiz'd Spirit of Wine, Cohobate it seven
times, until it has drunk up, Q. S. E. to satify its Thirst, and so a noble
tincturated Balsom is brought forth, which by Circulation must be united with
its volatile Spirit, and then it may be exalted into a volatile Salt or Spirit;
but it is sufficient to carry with it its fermentative Virtue, and to cure many
stubborn Diseases: For this being truly and artificially prepared, gives the
Preparer thereof, the deserved Name of a Spagirick, and in the ransacking of
the Books of Nature, gives him to understand the Nature, as well as the bare
name of Things; and confirms unto him the Truth of what we have written,
showing it to be a Balsamic Ens, which does exalt the Specific Virtue of
Concrets to a greater degree of Nobleness for the Corporality of the Bodies are
dilated, and the internal Sulphur more fully obtained, with the union of
Tincture, from whence the healing rays of Light proceed. Therefore I shall give
you a Catalogue of my Medicines; marking such as are prepared by it thus
{sulphur} therefore let it be observed.

Catalogus Medicinarum.
First, Of Spirits.
1. THE Spirit of Corn, or, true Aquavitae, bearing Proof of Gunpowder.

2. Tartarizated Spirit of Wine; both of which serve for Cordials, and drawing
forth Tinctures:

3. A Paragorick, or Bathing Spirit, for pains of the Head, Bruises and
Squalls, and Inflammations in any part of the Body.

4. Spiritus Mundus, or the enriched Spirit of Sal Armoniack, proper in Fevers,
Pleurisies, Jaundice, and Obstructions, for it cleanses the Blood in most
Diseases.

5. Spiritus segitivus, or a middle Elixir proprietatis Spiritualized; good in
the Measles and Small Pox, and other pestilential Diseases, fortifying the
vital Spirits.

6. The volatile Spirit of Vitriol, prevalent in Hysteric Fits, Convulsions
and Diseases of the Head, also for curing Green Wounds.

{sulphur} 7. Spiritus Prophelactick imperialis noster, or, the Antipeleptick
Powers, Sovereign for all the Diseases of the Head, and Womb-fits, sudden
surprizal, and infectious Diseases, and is a general Cordial for all Diseases
incident to the Body.

8. Spiritus Odontugiasus; or the Tooth-Spirit, prevalent to make black Teeth
white, and to cure the Scurvy in the Mouth, or Gums.

Secondly, De Potestatibus and Oleosis,
1. Potestates Cochlearia, or the powerful United Spirit of Scurvy Grass,
prevalent in the Scurvy, and the other Diseases mentioned in this Book.

2. Potestates Sambuci, or, the powerful united Spirit of Elder, prevalent in
Surfeits, and other Diseases, as beforementioned.

3. Potestates Succinii, or the powerful united Spirit of Amber, prevalent in
Mother-fits, and externally to Bath any grieved part.

{sulphur} 4. The Royal Cordonum lenitivum, or friendly purging Cordial,
victorious in Health-promoting Virtues, for it being so mild and sweet in its
Operation, may be given for all Diseases, and to all Ages, Sexes, and
Constitutions whatsoever.

5. Oleosum Sylvii, prevalent in Fevers, Pleurisies, Surfeits, want of
Digestion, and the like.

6. Oleosum Helmontii, prevalent in Fits, Consumptions, Weakness of Nature, and
the like.

7. Oleosum nostram generale, prevalent in Fevers, Pleurisies, Surfeits, want
Digestion, Fits, Consumptions, Weakness of Nature, and the like.

{sulphur} 8. Vinum vitoe proprietatis, or a middle Essentia membroram, in that
it contains the forming Sulphur, and is enobled by the specific Concrets, and
so it is powerful for Women in Childbed, to hasten their Delivery, easing
After-pains, and relieving in deplorable Cases.

{sulphur} The volatile Tincture of Red Corral, and the Milk of Crabs Eyes,
both powerful in Hysteric Distempers, and Ulcers, from whence proceed various
Diseases, as Palpitations, Vertigo's, and Palsies.

Thirdly, De Speciebus.
1. Species Antimonii Russilii, whose Virtues are so well known to have a
general Tendency to Man, in all those Operations, requisite for curing Diseases.

{sulphur} 2. Species Veneris gradus aureosa, prevalent in Fevers, Agues
Dropsies, Scurvy, Gout and Stone.

{sulphur} 3. Species nostra Mineralis, the same in Operation with the former,
but rather more powerful, and less in Dose.

Fourthly, De Salibus.
1. Ens Veneris, powerful in Obstructions and Rickets in Children, working as a
general abstersive through the Body.

{sulphur} 2. The Volatile and Magisterial Salt of Tartar, prevalent in opening
of Metals, dissolving the Stone in the Reins and Bladder; also in Ulcers,
Fistulas and Cancers, laying a good foundation in order to their healing.

{sulphur} 3. Sal Calybis, or Salt of Steel, prepared in a way succedanus to
that of the Alkanest, and therefore powerful in opening Obstructions in the
Female Sex.

{sulphur} 4. Sal essentialis Holmensii, besides the Virtues in exalting Wines,
it cures Diseases, according to the nature of the essential Oils, by which it is
made; As for example. That of Juniper for Wind; That of Cinnamon for Epilepsies,
and Convulsions; and so of the rest.

{sulphur} 5. Sal Nepenthe, or a Salt that eases pains in any part of the Body.

Fifthly, De Arcanis.
{sulphur} 1. Arcanum Samick nostrum, whose Virtues are so great, that its
worthily esteemed, and called Alkalium, Apex, or Top of Alkalies, and the crown
of the Physician; because it is not only a wonderful Medicine, but also the
Medium and means, by which true ones are prepared.

2. Arcanum Butliare, and Glaubare, for it being made, either from Venus or
Antimony, will answer all, that Glauber attributes to it in Page 64. Part, 3.

{sulphur} 3. Arcanum Minerale nostrum, or, The Sulphur of the Boodstone,
which being dilated in the Oil of Turpentine, stops Bleeding either internally
or externally.

4. Arcanum Specificatum Metallorum, or the Specific Sulphur of Venus,
dissolving Mercury radically, and united into an Arcanum, curing the Grand Pox,
and other rebellious Diseases.

Sixthly, De Magisteriis, and Essentiis.
1. Sal magisterialis panaristos Nostre, acting as an Universal Menstruum,
being too fiery to have any Medicinal Virtues, therefore called Alkahest.

2. Magisterium solare, or Aurum Potabile, working and operating with general
Intentions, in order to preserve the body of man in sanity.

Seventhly, De Sulphuribus.
1. Ens vitae Metallorum, or Lively virtues of the Narcotick Sulphur of Venus
manifested, which allayeth the enraged Archaeus, as with a Charm admirable in
Fevers, Pleurisies, Frensies, and Madness.

2. Elementum ig. Sulphuris communis, or the Element of Fire of Common Sulphur,
which Cures not only Sick and Ropy Wines, but also the body of Man; as Glauber
has laid down in page 3. par. 3.

Eighthly, De Balsamis.
1. Balsamum Sulphuris nostrum, prevalent in the Consumption, and for such
whose natures are weak and decayed.

2. Balsamum fuliginis Gonorrheum, prevalent in Curing the Running of the
Reins, and all weakness in the Back and Loins.

3. Balsamum Minerale and Vegetabile, curing Agues and Fevers, and by its
fragrancy refreshes the Vital and Animal Spirits in most Diseases incident to
the Body.

4. Balsamum Vegitabile and Catholicum, or the general wound Balsom, radically
curing Wounds, Ulcers, and Fistula's.

Ninthly. De Mel.
1. Mel Vegitabilis and Mineralis, both for the enriching and dilating Cordial
Spirits into a friendly nature.

Tenthly, De Aquis.
1. Aqua Occularis, prevalent for red, weak, sore, and imperfect Eyes.

2. Aqua Vehicularis Vegitabilis, and Aqua Mineralis, both of which are for the
conveying of such Medicines, which otherwise are too fiery and strong into the
body.

Eleventhly, De Pillulis.
1. Pillula Matthias Starkey, made by the Sapo, good for Surfeits, Gripes,
Coughs, Colds, and the like.

{sulphur} 2. Pillula Anodina Specificata and Cathartica, and Pillula Samick
Nepenthe; both of which are powerful Medicines, but the last the most
effectual, for the Opium is radically corrected, and brought to a Balsamic
Nature, powerful in Arthritis, Sciatica, and Rhumatisms; for it eases pain,
and causes nature to rest from the burden of many stubborn Diseases.

Thus have I in brief, given you an account of the Medicines we prepare, being
indeed almost Superabundant for any ingenious man to practice by, and that it
may be the more clearly conceived; we shall once more show their general
Virtues, by applying them to the parts afflicted, as follows.

For Diseases of the Head, as Coma, Lethargy, Apoplexy, Convulsion, Epilepsy,
Palsy, Madness, and the like, proceed thus: First, let the body be well
cleansed, by taking every second Night of our Royal Cordonum Lenitivum, and
constantly taking drops in the day of our Spiritus prophelaetic. imperialis,
for violent Madness rather the Spiritus Mundus: but for Epilepsies, the
Volatile Spirit of Vitriol; and after 7 or 8 days take in drops of our Vinum
vitae propr. and once in two days of the Narcotick Sulphur of Venus, or the
Arcanum Antimonii; often externally striking the Temples and forepart of the
Head with our Oleosum, or Thomson's Stomatick Tincture; this Method must be
followed, with some judicious Variations, till a Cure is perfected.

Scaled heads are Cured by the Vinum vit. propr. only we apply to the Scalp
Empl. diascrosulum. It is also excellent being inwardly taken to strengthen
sore and weak Eyes, and to abate any Inflammation therein, only externally drop
in 2 or 3 drops of our Aqua Occularis; also it is excellent for the diseases of
the Ears internally taken, and being mixed with Oil of Sweet Almonds to be
dropped into the Ears, stopping the same with a little black Wool; it also
cures the diseases of the Mouth, as Ulcerations, Cancerations, being inwardly
taken only for pained Teeth dissolve in it Pill. samech. nepenthe, putting it
into the Ear of the Aching side, and holding the same in the Mouth, and this
generally gives ease and twice or thrice; but we have sometimes cured the pain
of the Teeth only with our Paragorick. Spirit snuffed up the Nostrils: but for
to make Yellow, Black and corrupted Teeth white and sound, and to cure the
Scurvy in the Mouth, I wash them with my Spr. Odontugiasus.

For the Diseases of the Throat, Thorax, or Breast, as Quinseys, Coughs,
Asthmas, Plurisys, Peripneamony's, Consumptions, Spitting blood, Apostems,
taken in drops three times a day, and now and then, of the Spr. Mundus, and
once a Week to purge with our Royal Cordonum lenit. and every third Night a
dose of our Species Mineralis, and the intermitting Nights of our Pil. sam.
nep. often smelling to our Spir. proph. imper. if the Spirits are faint, drink
often of our general Cordial, which will comfort as much as Food, and let the
Cure be completed with our Ens vit. metal. but in Consumptions make use often
of our Magisterium solare; and thus proceed till a Cure is perfected

For the Diseases of the Abdomen or Belly, as Heart-burn, Vomiting,
Squeamishness, Belching, Rumbling in the Guts, Heat of Stomach, Want of
Appetite, Hicoughs, Diarrhea, Lientery, Caeliaca, Vomiting and Looseness,
Dyssentery, or Bloody flux, Iliack-passion, Chollick, Jaundice, Dropsy, the
Hepatick-flux, Excess or Supression of the Homorrhoides, Hypocondriack disease,
Scurvy, Diseases of the Kidneys and Bladder, the Fixed and running Gout, French
pox, Gonorrhea, and nocturnal Pollutions, we presribe every second Night a dose
of our Pil. samech. nep. and in drops of our Vinum vit. pr. constantly, once a
Week purging with our Royal Cord. lenit. but in the Cholick add a little
essential Salt of Camomile flower; and in the Dropsy our A^^^^. Antim. for the
Hypocondriack disease add the Potest. samb. and Ambr. in drops, intermixing
between the Vin. vit. pr. for the Scurvy Pil. anod. sp. and cathar. and Potest.
Cochleare. and Arcan. Speci. metal. For the Stone the Spirit of Tartar. For
the Gout, take a large Dose of our Pil. sam. nepen. and Sweat thereon, bathing
the grieved part well before the Fire, with our Vint. vit. propr. and now and
then take a Dose of our Spec. Miner. But for a Clap, Running of the Reigns,
Swelling of the Yard, pain in making Water, which, if not well Cured turns into
the Grand-pox, which is known by the Symptoms, a sore between the Glans and
Prepuce, which then will soon infect the body with Scabs, Blotches, Aches,
Eating Ulcers in the Nose and Throat, Nodes in the Shinbones, and those with
horrible nocturnal pains, palpitations and dangerous Coughs; and in fine, a
miserable end if not timely cured; for these are prescrip'd our Royal Cord.
lenitiv. to be taken every second Night, and our Vin. vit. pr. constantly in
drops, and the intermitting Nights our Species Ven. gr. aureos. For violent
Gonorrhea's intermit these, and take the Balsam. fulig. and if there be very
violent pains, take now and then a dose of Pil. sam. nep. and principally
Arcan. Spec. Metal. which will wonderfully perform the Cure, as the Author has
often demonstrated, in a way far more easy, private and safe, pleasant and
cheap, than hitherto has been practiced or know in England; all which the
Patient and prudent Experiencer may find to their great satisfaction.

For Fevers, as Ephemora, putrid continual Fevers, Causus or burning Fevers,
Quotidian, Tertean, or Quartan, the slow Hetick-Feaver, the Colliquative or
Melting, and the Lymphatick and Catharrhous Fever, malignant Fevers, and
those of the Plague, Spotted Fever, Hungarian Disease, and others Epidemical,
Small Pox and Measles, intermitting Fevers, or Agues, Quotidian, Tertian or
Quartan Agues, Symtomatick Fevers or Agues, and the like; you are to proceed
thus: Take every second Night of our Ens vit. Metal. and the intermitting
Nights of our Pil. sam. nep. in drops Potest. Samb. or Spir. Sagit; but
principally of our Vin. vit. propr. and then intermit and take of our Sp. Ven.
gr. aur. or Are. Butl. and as the Diseases begins to abate, carry off the
Corruptions with our Royal Cord. lenit. taken as a Cordial; sometimes the
Species Antimonti, Russel and Species Nostr. Mineralis, mitigating the violency
of pains by Sal nepenth. or rather Ens Vitae metallorum; now for the bating
Thirst, take of our Spir. Odontugiasus from 10 to 20 drops in Beer, etc.

Now for the Diseases incident Women, as Wind; Dropsy, and falling down of the
Womb, Hysterick-Passion, or Fits of the Mother, the defect, Imminution and
disorderly Flux of the Menses with pain, the Excessive Flux of the Mensis, and
the Whites, Barrenness, Symptoms of Women with Child, viz. Nautiousness,
Vomiting, Longing, Spasm, False-Conception, Miscarriage, Mola: Difficult
Travail, a dead Child, breaking Water, the Symptoms of Lying-in Women, Lochia,
etc. The Green Sickness, Furor U^erinus, and Women's Melancholy: You are to
obserxe that whatsoever is requisite to be done by manual operation must be
dexterously performed, as in the falling down of the Womb, and more especially
in difficulty of Travail, either by some truly expert Woman, or rather a Man
Midwife. Now for Medicines proper in the aforesaid Diseases, are my Vin. vit.
propr. Pillula sam. nep. The Magisterial Salt of Steel, the Powers of Amber;
but more especially the Narcotick Sulphur of Venus, dilated in my Vin. vit.
propr. For it is not only good in hastening the delivery, but also eases
after-pains, and takes off those Symptoms which are incident to Women, that lie
in, etc.

For Diseases incident to Children, se. the Jaundice, Children's Gripes,
Belching, Hiecough, Nautiousness. Heatburn, Vomiting, Curdling of the Milk,
etc. Looseness and Costiveness, a Thrush, Fitts, difficult breeding of Teeth,
Childrens Coughs and Asthma's Worms, Consumptions, Rickets, the Stone, stoppage
and incontinence of Urine, Agues and Fevers, etc. take my Royal Cordonum
lenitiv^m, as it is prescribed in our Spagirick Philosophy Asserted, also our
Vinum vit. propr. Pillula sam. nep. and Ens vit. metal. which will answer all,
that can be desired by, or from a specific Medicine: and seeing I have given
their true Use and Dose as-before cited, I shall omit them here, and refer you
thither for your ample satisfaction.

Now for External Maladies, and such as belong to the Chirurgical part, as
Wounds, Bruises, Squatts, Ulcers, Cancers, Fistula's, Noli me tangere's, etc.
There is no better Remedies can be prescribed, than our Balsamum vegitat. and
Catholic. the Volatile Spirit of Vitriol, and Paragorick Spirit, and
principally, out Vinum vit. proper. and the Narcotick Sulthur of Venus, and the
Spirit of Tartar, which will perform the Cure, when not to be reached by other
Medicines; and that with great case and safety.

Now Friendly Reader, you are to observe, that what we have writ of the Virtue
of the forenamed Medicines, we know by long experience to be certainly so, as
having relieved many thereby, in such deplorable Cases, that they have been
given over by other Physicians, as we have instanced and demonstrated, in our
Spagirick Philosophy asserted; to which I refer every true and ingenious
Inquirer, for their full satisfaction; it being an Epitome or Abstract,
containing the Marrow of George Starkey, Van Helmont, Paracelsus and other
Ancient Philosophers Writings, according as we have obtained the true
Interpretation thereof, by laboring in the Fire, and (as I may truly say) with
the expense of several hundreds of Pounds; neither have I been slack or wanting
in any thing, which might contribute to the obtaining of true Art and Science,
having Traveled much, and in that, have had the benefit of the greatest
Curiosities, esteemed by the most Learned Professors in any of the European
Universities, conversing with many Artists of several Nations, etc. So then
these being compiled for my own practice, yet we having a desisign of general
service, or for the good of such, which have not had the like advantage;
therefore if they apply themselves to me in difficulties, they may be
Instructed or fitted as they desire.

Thus ye Brittanian A^tists, let me see your Smiles, (viz.) The use and
Encouragement of this so useful an Art, that so its product may become
serviceable to many Lands; for this end was it Published, Farewell.

From the Academia Spagirica Nova, where those aforenamed Medicines are truly
and faithfully prepared for the Public Use.

Observe, Such as are desirous to make use of any of them, must apply
themselves to me, or our Operator, THO. NEWTON, Chimicomedicus and Discipulus
Spagirica Philosophia.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
WHereas the Author of this Book has Composed seveother useful Books, and
dsigning them for the Public Service, and being made ready for the Press,
these are to advertise those who are willing to take off, or Subscribe to any
number of Books, let them apply themselves to the Author, or to Mr. Salusbury,
Bookseller, at the Sign of the Temple, near Temple-Barr, Fleet street, London;
The Books are as follow.

1. Medicina Rationalis, Or, the Young Physicians Complete Guide, containing a
grounded Definition and Fundemental Rules, concerning the Original Cause and
Nature of Diseases, and what different Effects are made by the Morbificated
Matter, being Lodged on the various parts of the Body: To which is added, A
Choice Collection of Experimintal Medicines, proper for the Cure of any, the
most rebellious Diseases, incident to Human kinds: Exemplarify'd by Three
various Courses, viz. Pharmaical, Spagirical, and Philosophical.

2. Chymicus Rationalis, Or, Chemical Doctrine stated on Vinor, Vrinous, Acid,
and Alkalizated Spirits, reducing from thence proper and powerful Medicines,
for the Cure of many stubborn Diseases: All which are Illustrated by various
Examples, in a way never so plainly performed before. To which is added a
Philosophical Discourse, concerning the Microcosmical World, viz. Man.

3. Spagirick Philosophy Asserted, Or, The True Physicians Principles
Demonstrated, by way of answer to several important Queries, stated by Dr.
Boylwharfe, Collegiate, living at Rotterdam in the Province of Holland. Being a
Brief, but yet Candid Account of the Original, Nature, Form and Preparation of
Noble Specific Medicines, obtained by Knowledge of Nature, and her secret
Diploma, by the help of Labor and Art. To which is added their Virtues, Use,
and Dose, for the Honor of the True Art of Healing, or Exaltation of Spagirick
Medicines. Seeing so great Benefits proceeds from them, in order to relieve
those grievously afflicted with stubborn Diseases, or sorely distressed with
rebellious Maladies; for by an Homogenious Affinity to Nature, they Act, and
thence strengthen her in those Assaults, made by the Anatomia Essata, which
endeavor a breach of Harmony; and by this means the Microcosme is restored to
Sanity. To which is added, A Cabalistical Discourse of the Original,
Primigeniture and Procatartick Cause, Nature, and Difference of Diseases: All
stated on a new Hypothesis, agreeable to the Blood circulation, and first
Principle of Nature: Written for the Lovers of Philosophical Verities. etc.

4. A Magical Magazine, Or, Natures Storehouse, Divided into Two Volumns, each
of which is again subdivided into Three Books, etc. The first Containing the
Three great Miracles of Art and Nature, viz. The Volatile Salt of Tartar; The
Liquor Alkahest, and Mercury of the Philosophers: In all of which we have
handled, as well the Medicinal Mysteries, as the Transmutation of Metals; Our
Matter being delivered from the first general Chaos, whence alone, the Triune
Key is prepared. We have also showed its various Uses and Applications in the
prepartion of all those Noble Arcana's of the Addepts. The Second three Volumes
is of Mercury's Caduce Rod; The Doctrine of Principles, and the Worlds Harmony:
Containing the Fundamental Doctrines, concerning the Texture, Seed, Growth and
Reservation of Natural Things; all reduced to a plain and regular Method: That
so the Industrious Searcher, after the Secrets of Art and Nature, may be truly
enabled to comprehend whatever has been so hiddenly and obscurely delivered by
the ancient Philosophers in so many large Volumes, which is here collected and
cast up, as a Pathway, in which the Sons of Wisdom may safely Walk.

P. 1. Spagirick Philosophy's Triumph, Or, the Doctrine of separating the Pure
from the Impure by Fire, Water and Spirit, as 'twas practiced by the Ancients,
that here asserted and maintained against the Pseudo Philosophers, or Abortive
Physicians, that for the shaking off their rotten Foundations, and establishing
a sure one, such an one indeed, on which the Sons of Art may Build, for we have
there delivered Fundamental Rules concerning the Nobleness of the Spagirick
Art, clearly demonstrating the infalible Office of Fire, Salt, and Light, in
the preparing of true specific Medicines, and those Magical Arcana's, wherein
Nature and Art Triumph over Diseases.

Being a Treatise grounded on the Doctrine of Alkalies; Showing their Original
Birth and Nature; also how I feed them with proper Food and Sulphur, to bring
them to a full Stature in the Medicinal Monarchy, wherein is showed those
various ways, by which they are to be exalted, so as to become Noble Arcana's,
through true Volatilization, from whence is obtained the True and Genuine
Spirit of Tartar, and Balsam Samech of Van Helmont and Paracelsus, which truly
is the Circulatum Minimus of all the Adepts in that they dissolve and open the
Texture of Mineral and Metalline bodies, by which the Sulphurs are to be
extracted, from whence Specific and Succedanous Medicines are made for the
Cure of most Cronick Diseases; as also the Helmontian and Essential Salts,
wherein is the Crasis of the Herb in its true Vita Media, with an Exaltation as
to its Medicinal use; also the Elixer Samick Proprietatis, and Vinum Vitae
Paracelsus, in the Mineral Kingdom: Also the glorified Sulphur of the Metallus
Masculus, which are the true and only remedies for either Acute, Chromick, or
Hereditary Diseases, that can by Art be prepared, without the great Hileck, or
Sal Circulatum Minus.

P. 2. Trifertes Soladinis, or a Declaration of the Fiery Spirits, and the
Clavis Ignis Adeptorum, called Circulatum Minus. Containing a brief Discourse
concerning the matter and manner of preparing the Immortal Dissolvent, called
by Van Helmont the Liquor Alkahest, by Paracelsus the Great Hileck, or, Sal
Circulatus, which is the second Key of the Treatise, whose use is given in the
opening of bodies so that they may be reduced to their first Ens: but this Fire
or Water remains immutable, being the same in Weight and Virtue, after a
thousand actions, as at first. Also the right way of its use is delivered for
the preparation of Magisteries Arcana's, Panacea's, Quintessences, or other
Secret Medicines of the Adepts, whether from the Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral
Kingdom. Drawn from the Treasures of Nature, proved and confirmed by Manual and
Practical Experience.

P. 3. Ignis Astralis Adeptorum, Containing a Discourse of the Astrum of Sol
and Mercury; being a Discovery of the first matter of Metalls; also of the
Philosophical Tincture, grounding its Original from the crude, white Salphur
unto its Exaltation of Glassy Azoth, by discovering the Threefold furnates and
Mineral Fire of Artephius and Pontanus, and the fiery Water of all the
Philosophers, the only Agent in the World, that has the Fermentative. Virtue
to unite Coelestials and Centralls, so as to produoe the Sophical Mercury or
Mother of Metalls; Also the first Ens of Gold is shown with the Conjunction of
the two Spermes, Sulphur and Mercury, in order to bring forth the Royal Babe,
which is here performed, without Vulgar or Common Gold, etc. Being the Method
used by the Ancient and Modern Sophi and Adepts in the Preparation of the great
and wonderful Secret, commonly called the Lapis Philosophorum, or rather the
Tincture or Seminal Matter of Metals uniting in that Triune Key, that Unlocks
Democrates's Fountain, and gives open Entrance to the Kingly Palace of the
Cabalist. To which is added the Virtue of the Stone, as to the Transmutation of
Metalls; also its general Use and Application for Curing all deplorable
diseases, incident to Humane body: also the right way of its use in multiplying
Precious Stones; Lastly is showed the Supernatural Power that this Elixer is
endued with.

P. 4. Mercury's Caduce Rod, or Aquila Hermatica: Containing a clear Discourse
of that Fountain of Christalline Waters, which may be dedicated to the Virgin
Goddess Diana; being a Magical Accedy or Everlasting Spring, which flows to
the Paradisical World of the Sophi, wherein the office of Mercury is handled in
general; also its particular Vegitative Power in the Metalline Kingdom, etc.
Being a practical Treatise written from the Light of Nature, and Fountain of
Experience; In favor of all the curious Inquirers of Art.

P. 5. The Doctrine of Principles, Containing the Doctrine and Office of the
Three First Principles of all things. Being a Discourse concerning the
Sperm-seed and Office thereof, in Production, Growth, Vegitation and
Multiplication of Minerals, demonstrated on a Sphere and Circle of the Heavens
by the Rul^s of Natural Astronomy.

P. 6. The Book of Harmony, being a Philosophical Discourse of the Macro and
Macrocosmical World; demonstrated from the Harmony of the Spheres.

Observe, that these Six last Books make up one entire Volume, and will be
Printed together if any considerable Subscriptions are made; but if not, they
will be Printed apart, etc. All written by W. Y -- Worth, Spagirick Physician
in both Medicines, and Philosopher by Fire, Hermetical Disciple, and Natures
faithful Ambassador.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN this we shall give a short review of what is Written, and lay down the true
Method of Exalting any of the Small and Imperfect Liquors to a great degree of
perfection, which may be properly called Vinum Fortificatum, because doubled in
its strength etc. Now in the next Impression of this Britannean Magazine, we
design to add some Excellent Rules concerning the Planting, Raising, and
Grafting Apple Trees, Pear Trees, Currant-Trees, etc. and the quickest way for
raising Nurseries, which will be contained in our first Chapter; in the Second
we shall show the office of Art, in making and exalting of Liquors, principally
of Artificial Wines, that being the scope and end of this Book; and in Page 31.
we have said that one Receipt cannot be sufficient for all sort of Liquors; for
some kind of Fruits being made with Water into Wine, will soon sour and rope,
as having not bodies sufficient for their subsistence, and will not yield in
Distillation Spirits sufficient for the making of Vinum Fortificatum, or that
which some call Syder or Wine Royal; therefore I think it convenient for the
full Instruction of those that design to Encourage or Advance these Liquors, to
give them these four following Observations, concerning the most exact way of
exalting the same.

First, if you desire to have your Cider, Perry, or Wine durable, the Fruits
must be gathered in such a time as no moisture is on them, but that the Sun
has exhaled the fame; For to be sure, if they are gathered in wet weather,
they will be Musty; now your Fruits are not to be gathered Green, nor rottenly
ripe, but in their turning and fullest richness, etc.

Secodly, Thou art to observe, that your Fruit being well gathered, and taken
from their Stems, they may lie in a Tub three or four Days, by which means,
being broken and pressed, 'twill sooner admit of Fermentation: For it is
observable, especially for Apples and Pears, that they are not so fit for the
Press, till they have lain so long on heaps, as to sweat and dry again; for by
such a natural Action, their friendly Virtues are the more easily manifested;
For we have observed this in making our Vinum ribesium, or Current Wine, and
for every Gallon of Currants, if we add Three Pints of Honey, or Sugar-water, or
letting of them lie about 14 or 18 Hours, the Wine will gain abundantly the
stronger Body; for a small quantity of Sugar acuates and strengthens the Water,
so as to cause it to draw forth the whole Virtues of the Fruits, especially if
they be well broken and mixed together, and being pressed out, you may let it
refine from its first Setlings* and then rack it off from those gros^ Lees, if
you desire to make a Vinum Fortificatum thereof.

Thirdly, These Wines being made must lie at the least, 8 or 10 Weeks to come
up to their full Body and Strength; for it is observable that no new Wine will
give any more than an aqueous Phlegm in Distillation, until they have fully
passed the Fermentation or Working, and begin a little to sower, for then they
afford the greatest plenty of Spirit, but I mean, not so sower as to make
Vinegar, for then the Spirit is oylified and concentricated, and again, admits
of its weakest part first, therefore, I mean such a Sower as manifests the
Cessation of Fermentation only.

Fourthly, Those Syrups or Sweets, that you add to your Wines, are most proper
to be made from the cold Distilled Water of the same, in which the Body of the
Fruits are macerated, or else from the Juices decocted with Sugar, and well
clarified with Whites of Eggs from time to time, until your Syrup becomes
exceeding fine and pure, this will (being added to your Liquor) better satisfy
hungry Nature, which must always have something to feed upon, as we see by
experience in Foreign Wines; For there is no Champaigue, Burgundy, Frontineack,
Greek or Florence Wines, but what are in some measure or other upheld by Art.

You may remember that I said in the Two First Chapters, that the Fumes of
burning Sulphur wonderfully preserves Wines; For although you may observe all
these aforesaid Observations, yet if you meet with an improper Cask, it may
give an ill tang to your Wine: In Holland, the Method we have to prevent this,
is thus, They make large Brimstone Matches, and some dip them in Coriander
Seeds, and burn them in the empty Cask, just before they put their Wines in,
and thus they do so often as they are racked, and so you may do with your
Ciders, and Artificial Wines, this being an excellent Expedient to prevent ill
Tastes and Fermentation; as also to preserve the Wine.

There are many other ways in preserving of Liquors, amongst which, my Spiritus
Odontugosus is of wonderful efficacy: For it is found a rare Preservative against
Corruption, recovering dying Beer, Ale, Cider or Wine from their decaying; and
a Cure for Beer, when sick and roping; and it is not only a preserver for these,
but also for Flesh, keeping it so long from corruption, as that there is not
any Embalming in the World can go beyond it for the keeping of a Dead Carkase;
nor no Salting comes near its efficacy as to Conserving Meat, Fowls or Fish,
which by this means are not only kept considerably from corruption, but made a
Mummial Balsom, which is it self a preservative to such as shall take thereof,
being a rarity very advantageous for such as have bad Digestions, whence
Corruptions do proceed, etc.

The Wine that is preserved, has also many excellent Virtues, as is aforesaid;
as also prevalent in abating the Thirst in Fevers, and taking off of Feverish
Symptoms, which we shall desist from here, and come now to the advancing of
small Wines, into a Vinum Fortificatum, which may be by the Quintescence of
Wine, or my Sal Panaristos, be made Superior to Wine or Cyder-Royal, as some
name it, whereof we shall now speak.

Vinum Fortificatum. A Barrel or Hogshead of small Wine, Cider, or any other,
and put it into a Copper Still, and Distill ir as long as any goodness comes,
according as we have in Page 63, and in Page the 60th. where we have advised,
that the Spirit should run through a Funnel into a Vessel placed under ground,
according to the Dutch method; This Spirit having stood 10 or 12 days, may be
Distilled a Second time, which is called Rectification; then proceed thus;
First draw out so many Beer pints from the full Cask or Hogshead, as there are
Gallons contained in it, and fill it up with the Spirit, only adding 5 or 6
pounds of its own Syrup, made, as before touched at, and stir it all together,
then stop them down very close, and once in 7 D^^^ (...) thereabouts give it
Air to the Vent, and in 10 Weeks time, or thereabout, 'twill be fit to drink:
Observe that this mixture be put into good Wine Vessels, for in Glass 'twill
not easily admit of Fermentation, for that is prevented by the Salts from
whence the Glass is made, keeping out the spirituality of the Air, which brings
the Liquor to drink fragrant and well, by reason of the hidden and internal
Fermentation, which gives it its ripeness and maturity; and if you hang in this
Liquor two Ounces of fixed Nitre, put up in a Linen Rag into the Bung-hole, at
the top of the Cask, and let hang down in the Liquor, 'twill soon ripen it, or
any other new Wines, and render sower ones drinkable: For this Art of bettering
Wines, we are beholding to the worthy and ingenious Glauber; according to what
is laid down in his Works, Par. 1. p. 158. as we before quoted in p. the 44th
of this Book; for that is the true ground of making Vinum Fortificatum, which
said Authors Works was Published, before any Cider Royal was thought on; for
it is a great error not to render to every Author his due Honor for his
Invention, and to assume to our Selves that which really belongs not to us, etc.

Now by those Ways and Methods, any of the English Liquors, ( viz.) Cider,
Perry, etc. may be advanced to the full strength of Foreign Wines, and more
especially those of Currants and Goosberries, which will give a Wine much like
some of those that come from the Canary Islands, and may in all things be as
profitable to English Bodies, nay, in some kind, more advantageous, as having
affinity to the Climentary Constitutions, as we have said in the Preface.

Now you are to observe, that if any of these aforesaid Liquors, or Wines,
should come upon the Frett, which will destroy it, you must, as they do in
Germany, draw it off into other Vessels, and do so once in eight Days, until it
has done spattering, for by this spattering the Lees are taken from it,
wherein the gross and fretting Sulphur is contained; You must observe, that
whilst it thus frets, your Cask must not be too full, nor close stopped, but
after it ceases, you may stop it as close as may be; but if you should fear,
that any action still remains, give it Air at the Vent-hole once in 4 or 5 Days
for your satisfaction; Observing that my Spiritus Odentugiasus being imbodied
by Salt-prenelle, and hang it in the Cask, as before directed, will stop the
violence of such a Frett, but more especially, my Sal Panaristos.

Furthermore, if any of these aforesaid Liquors, Wines, or Vinum Fortificatum
should become unpleasant and unfit to be drunk, then take a Cask of it, and a
Cask of new Liquors or Wines of the same Fruit, before it be quite clear or
fine, and mix them together in two other Casks, well sweetened as before
directed, and adding a due quantity of Syrrup and Spirits, and in two or three
Months time, 'twill become excellent and pleasant Liquors, and the more
especially if you add thereunto some fixed Niter, Philosophically prepared, as
the Author does it.

Thus much at this time for the way of preparing, advancing, and preserving
Liquors, wines, etc. which I shall now leave, and proceed to speak of the
remaining Virtues of the Authors noble and unparalled Spiritus Odontugiasus,
or a singular and excellent Spirit for whitening and preserving the Teeth,
curing the Scurvy in the Mouth, and preventing the Original cause of the
Toothach, taking off the cause of Putrefaction, and so cures a Stinking Breath,
etc.

For if you scowr your Teeth therewith 2 or 3 times they will become purely
white, like Ivory; the Mouth being washed therewith, it prevents the growing of
the Yellow Scales, which usually adhere to the Teeth, diverts Rheums, and takes
off the cause of Putrefaction, and so preserves them from a future Corruption;
it kills Worms in the Teeth, fastening those that are loose; and if this Spirit
was generally used, it would so prevent the pain in the Teeth, that the
Tooth-drawer for the Future might expect but little work. It Is likewise
observed, that it brings good Flesh upon the Gums. It Is also excellent against
Sore Throats, being Gargled therewith, 'twill abate any Swelling, as Angina's,
Struma's; it is also prevalent against the Inflammation of the Palate of the
Mouth, Uvula of the Throat, or Almonds of the Ears, which are then usually said
to be fallen. It Is also prevalent against the Headache, and to divert Rheums
from the Eyes, by washing the Temples therewith; likewise to take away Tetters,
Morphew, Itch or Scabs.

It Is wonderful also in internal uses, being taken six or eight drops twice a
day in the usual drink, or before each Meal, it does not only cure the Scurvy
in the Mouth, but also any Scorbutic humor wheresoever; it sweetens the
Breath, prevents Corruption, frees the Body from Rheums, opens Obstructions,
cures tickling Coughs and harshness, abates the preternatural heat and thirst
in Fevers, beyond many other Remedies; it is prevalent in the Strangury,
Chollick, and Arthritical pains; and by its excellent abstertive quality
cleanses the Body from that, which is the beginning of many Diseases, taking
off the very bud of Putrefaction both in Young and Old. In fine, I recommend
this Spirit to the World from Experience as an excellent interval and external
Remedy, demonstrating those Virtues attributed to it, and that it is not to be
paralleled by any short of its own Ens.

Now for a Conclusion of this Postscript, I thought it necessary to advertise
all that are desirous to be satisfied in any point herein contained, that the
Author will be very ready to lend his aid for that end, with this Proviso, that
what Letters are sent by Post may be paid, otherwise I shall not be free to
receive them, because the Expense, that has been of late, has been so great
about Nice Queries, which if continued would sink a considerable Sum of Money,
to the Authors great Detriment; but from such that I teach any part of the
Chimical or Spagirical Art, whether according to the Schrodarian, Cartesian or
Helmontian way, may be free, as being a real concern, wherein I am paid for my
trouble, Time, or Expense, etc.

Observe, for common Convenience, and my beng sometime distant from the City
you may direct all paid for Letters to Mr. John Baker's, Periwig-maker, at the
Wool-pack in the Strand, near to the Savoy-Gate, London.

ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 26. for satisfied Read salified. P. 8. l. 4. for Erdo, r. Ordo.
P. 18. l. 14. for Salimo, r. Saline. P. 23. l. 20. for Volume, r. Bounds. P.
31, l. 13. being r. some sorts being. P. 40. l. 23. for Ninth r. Eighth. P. 60.
l. 20. for on r. under. P. 64. l. 6. for 12 or 14 Gallons, r. 30. or 34. P, 79.
l. 14. for the white of an Egg, r. the whites of 8 or 10 Eggs. P. 110. l. 14 or
7. for Pharmaectuick, r. Pharmaceutick. P. 112. l. 29. for Pharmatick, r.
Pharmaick, or Pharmaceutick. P. 113. l. 19. r. Medium. P. 117. l. 9. r.
Procafartick, r. Procatartick. P. 120. line the last. for or r. on. P. 121. l.
14. r. Curious, and at l. 20. r. discerning. Now all along where you see
Archa^us, r. Archaeus. P. 136. l. 10. for Squalls, r. Squatts. P. 138. l. 23.
for Ulcers, r. Uterin phrancys. P. 139. the last Line for Alkanest, r.
Alkahest. P. 140. l. 2. for Holmensis, r. Helmonfis.

BOOKS Sold by Tho. Salusbury at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar.
AN Exact Description of Ireland: Chorographically Surveying ^ll ^its Provinces
and Counties, after a more Accurate, Plain, Easy and Particular manner than
any before d^ne in this kind. Showing the Exact State of that Kingdom, and all
the Principal Things that are Necessary to be known. Very Useful for the Right
Understanding the present Affairs of that Kingdom. Done according to the latest
Surveys, and agreeing with all the New Maps. By Laurence Eachard of
Christ-College in Cambridge. 12's. Price 1s. 6.d.

Wisdom's Dictates: Or Rules Physical and Moral, for Preserving the Health of
the Body, and the Peace of the Mind, fit to be regarded and practiced by all
that would enjoy the Blessings of the present and future World. To which is
added, A Bill of Fare of Seventy five Noble Dishes of Excellent Food, far
exceeding those made of Fish or Flesh. By Tho. Tryon, Student in Physic.
Twelves, Price 1s.


