At the Court at White Hall the 24th. of July 1677.
By the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council.
UPon the Humble Petition of George Carew Esquire Administrator of the Goods and
Chattels of Sir William Courten, and Sir Paul Pindar, Sir Thomas Meres Knight.
Executor of Sir Erasmus de le Fountain, Thomas Coppin, Gilbert Crowch, and
William Hinton Esquire Valentina Bazilla Lloyd, Executrix of Sir Peter Vanloar, and
Elizabeth Bartlet Windows, Mark Fletcher, and Thomas Carter Merchants, on the
behalf of themselves, and many Hundreds of His Majesty's Subjects of England
herein concerned, setting forth the Sinister Practices used by Peter Boudaen of
Middleburgh Merchant: Nephew and sole Executor of Sir Peter Courten, in
Possessing himself of the Estate, Real and Personal of the said Sir Peter;
avoiding to come to any Account for the same, and obstructing the ordinary
Course of Justice during his life, as his Sons, and Heirs have since done;
whereby the due Administration of Justice has been often denied, and the
Judicial Acts and Decrees of the Prerogative Court, and High Court of Chancery
in this Kingdom, nighted and contemned in the ordinary Courts of Judicature in
Holland, and Zealand; Where by Order from the States in the year 1676. Justice
was positively denied the Petitioners to the great Oppression of them, and of
many Orphans and Widows, claiming the Effects of Sir William Courten's Estate
and his Sons, as also of Mr. John Moncy's, and Sir Paul Pindars, gotten into
the hands of the said Boudaen, Pergens, and others Inhabitants of Amsterdam,
and Middleburgh, to the value of two hundred and fifty thousand pounds. And
therefore praying that speedy satisfaction may he required from the Ambassador
Extraordinary of the States General, or that Commissioners on either side may
be forthwith named to inspect the Accounts, between both Parties, and determine
the same according to Right. His Majesty was pleased to appoint Wednesday the
10th. of October next, for hearing the Petitioners at the Board, concerning
this business; at which time the Parties concerned, are to give their
attendance, and bring their Council Learned, if they please.

John Nicholas.


