A Few Words in Tenderness TO THE WELL-MEANING PROFESSORS, suiting the Present
Season.
UPon the serious Consideration of the various and long continued Contests and
Oppositions of all Sorts of People against us, the contemptible People of the
Lord, called Quakers; it has seemed most strange and grievous, that any of the
Professors of Christianity, who have had any Simplicity of Heart to God, and
known any inward Work of the Spirit of Truth, should join with the Gentiles,
who know not God, to make void that Blessed Work, which the God of Heaven by
his pure eternal Spirit has begun to work in our Days in these despised
People, who have given up their Souls to serve him, and for whom their very
Lives would not be dear unto them to give up for his Name sake.

O unto you, who have had any experimental Knowledge of God and of Christ,
through the Operation of the Spirit in you; unto you is my very Soul drawn out
in tender Love and Compassion, desiring that the God of Heaven would open your
Eyes, and give you a clear, spiritual and certain Knowledge of the inward State
of your Souls before him, and bring you to the Obedience of his Heavenly Will,
for, for this very Cause, for not being Obedient and answering the Lord in his
Requirings Hardness of Heart is come over you, and Darkness has covered you;
so that that Simplicity and Tenderness that was once in you in the Time of
God's Visitation, is much defaced, and an Enmity sprung up in you against the
Appearance of God amongst us.

I beseech you bear with me; for the Zeal of God is upon me, and dear and
tender Love to your immortal Souls: Know you this all you who have any
Simplicity and Tenderness left in you, that I now directly stand for God, and
in his Name I plead with you and for you, that you may be reconciled to him,
and that the Enmity that is yet in any of you against God's Heavenly Appearance
and Revelation of his Son in us might be taken away; for God is exalting his
Son over all, even this is the Work of God ^n this his Day, to exalt his Name
above every Name, and we, the despised Remnant, are made Witnesses of the
Heavenly Appearance of the Son of God, and cannot but testify of him: I say,
we are made Witnesses by God, through the Revelation of Christ in us, a Holy
Constraint is upon us, and not of or from our selves or any Act of our own, but
through the Begetting of Life we are made willing to exalt his Name in the
Earth: And herein our Hearts are single before him, having no other Thing in
our Eye, but the lifting up and spreading that blessed Name; and herein I can
appeal to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth of the Integrity of my Heart to him,
having this Faith begotten in me of the Lord, that while I stand in Simplicity
and Singleness of Heart to him, he will be my Strength, and keep me in the Hour
of Temptation, that I fall not, or ever turn my Back upon him; for truly I must
confess that this Way of Truth which the Lord has brought me to, is a very
narrow and straight Way, so straight, that if I could have found Peace and
Satisfaction out of it, I had not now been a Travailer in it: for being once
tempted by the God of this World to withdraw my self from the Lord's People,
and to retire and get from under his Yoke, the Lord pursued me with his
Judgments, and Rest and Peace was taken from me, that I cried out, That it was
a great Strength to be willing to live in the Earth: But the Lord fetched me in
from my Wandering, and I was made to return to the God of my Life, and in my
very Soul bowed to him, who is become my Defense and Holder up of my Head in
the midst of many Enemies raised up by the Power of Darkness against us, to lay
us wast, and to make void our Testimony for the God of Heaven in this
Generation: But God will exalt his Name, and in vain do Men strive against him;
for their very Strivings shall turn to the Advantage of his Name and People,
and the Shame of his Adversaries.

Oh my Soul has travailed for our Adversaries; for having in Years past been
one with them in Profession, I cannot but have Love to them, and have cried to
the Lord for them; Oh that they had an Ear to hear, they would then certainly
bow to that blessed Truth ministered in God's Authority by his chosen Ones: And
a strong Belief is in me, that the Lord will bore the Ears of many simple
Hearts amongst them, and cause the Sound of his Everlasting Gospel to enter;
and it shall be a Day of glad Tidings to as many as shall receive it.

The God of Heaven open the Eyes of all the Professing People in this Nation,
that all may dread and fear before him, and consider what they are doing in
setting themselves against that living Word of God revealed in us. O Friends,
it will be too strong for you; for it is not any fine coined Notions that we
publish to please the Ears of the Curious, Wise and Lofty; No, no; but it is
the living Word, the mighty Word, the very Word of the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth that we exalt among Men, that Word that redeems from the Power of Satan
all such as in Love receive it: It is that Word that comes not to us by the
Will, Power or Wisdom of Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; nor no Man
on Earth can attain to the Understanding of it, but by the Spirit of Jesus; a
Man must be born of the Spirit before he can know the Things of the Spirit.

And here lies the chief Ground of all that Warring and Contendings against us,
a different Birth, Children of an other Birth, though high and lofty in their
Notions of God, and Christ, and the Scriptures, that if they were indeed what
they speak, they were honorable; but the Root of the first Birth, and all
Words from it are of another Nature, and want a living Spring: It is the first
Man in his best Robe, that runs before he is sent, and in his own Wisdom would
manage the Things of God and his Kingdom, before he knows the Power from on
high, to break and confound all his curious Wisdom of Words, and to make him as
a little Child; first, to desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that he might
grow thereby, and then in the Strength of the Word of Life, to minister
according to the Gift received.

And in this first Birth are all the Children of the Flesh and Shadow exalting
themselves, and opposing the Heavenly Appearances of Life in all their several
Forms of Religion; and herein lies their greatest Unity one with another, in
setting themselves against the enlightened People of the Lord, who own their
Enlightnings and Teachings from himself alone, and cannot satisfy themselves
in their own Willings and Strivings in their own Wisdoms and Understandings,
but wait for the Ministration of the Spirit of Life and Power.

Now wherefore is it that you all join together against us, and have Enmity to
us? Have you Peace in so doing? Are you justified before God herein? And have
you Hope hereby to lay us wast? O know assuredly, such Hope is vain, and shall
certainly perish; for our Foundation stands sure.

O the Sen^e I have had of the Power of Darkness, strong Workings at this Day
against us, to render us infamous in the Eyes of all People, not only as No
Christians, but as Deceivers, Juglers, Equivocators and Impostors, and as
having a Diabolical Spirit. O thick Darkness, that we should be so judged by a
Professing People; but we know we have a Testimony in the Hearts of many, which
the Enmity of our Adversaries cannot destroy.

Lord, what have we done? Whose Cause have we espoused? What Kingdom and
Interest seek we to exalt, but the God of Heavens? We can in the Integrity of
our Souls appeal unto him, and stand over the Heads of our Adversaries, and in
true Patience bear with all the Revilings and Reproaches of Men of all Sorts,
counting it not a new Thing for the true Servants of the Lord to be so dealt
with, when Christ himself found the hardest Measure from the strictest
Professing Jews, who doing such wonderful Things, even to Astonishment, and
which they were Witnesses of, and could not deny; yet their Darkness and Enmity
was such, as to strike at his very Root and Spirit by which he did those
wonderful Things, saying, He had a Devil, a Diabolical Spirit, and that by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils he did those mighty Things; and never rested
till they murdered him. Oh that the same Spirit were not to be found among
some of you.

But I dare not charge all among you, believing that some have true Desires
after God and his Truth, and truly desire more of the Knowledge of him, for
whose sakes I had some Constraint upon me to publish these Things, to provoak
you to a Retirement of Spirit, and to an inward Feeling of your States before
the Lord, what you are in his pure spiritual Light; and if in the true Measure
of the Light of the Lord in you, you feel not a closing with our Testimony, and
have some Savor of our Life, then wait in that true spiritual Light, that the
Lord may reveal it to you; and judge not those Things you know not, nor turn in
Enmity to us, lest Hardness come over you, and Darkness cover you.

But if in the Singleness of Heart before the Lord you can receive our
Testimony, then be not hasty, but wait in the Light of the Lord for Strength,
that you may come to the Obedience of his Heavenly Will; For it is the Obedient
that inherit the Good of the Land, and whose Souls delight in Fatness.

And until I was brought to Obdience and Subjection, I could never witness
Satisfaction; for great and long has the Travail of my Soul been after the
Lord, even from a Child the Fear of God was upon me, and some Desires stirring
in me after him under several Forms of Religion, and still I followed that
Ministry and People where I found most of the Life of Jesus, and when I saw too
much exalting of Form and idolizing of them, and an inward Decline of that
first Simplicity and Zeal that was once among many, and that Religion was grown
a Worldly Interest and a Footstool to Promotion, my Soul loathed it.

And upon the very hearing of a poor despicable People in the North of England
called Quakers, of their Behaviors, Words and Conversations, my Soul closed
with them, with Sense and Feeling of them, that they were the Chosen of the
Lord, and then saw and declared of the Seas^nableness of their coming forth,
That when the pure Simplicity and living Testimony was just expiring among the
Professors of the Nation; the Lord, who would not leave himself without Witness
in every Age and Generation, in due Season raised up his Witness afresh in a
poor inconsiderable People to bear up his Name in the Earth, whose Testimony
was in Spirit, and in Life, and Power: Upon which most of the Priests and
formal Professors in the Nation was stirred, and provoaked, and joined together
to oppose them; and though they themselves in their Zeal had cried to God, to
send f^rth his Light and his Truth, and that the Kingdom of Christ might be
exalted, and that he would pour out of his Spirit upon his Sons and Daughters:
yet when the Lord had chosen and raised a People thus to bear his Name, and to
exalt his Truth on Earth, and to proclaim the Great Day of the Lord to level
the Mountains, and to lay low the Lofty of the Earth, and to bring Proud Flesh
into Contempt, and to raise the Poor to inherit the Kingdom: Instead of meeting
with the Lord, who was about to perform those great Things themselves desired
in the Day of their Tenderness, they evilly entreated those blessed Messengers,
and overlookt them for their Meaness, and spoke all Manner of Evil of them,
Imprisoning, Whipping, Stocking and reproachfully reviling them, many of whom
dyed in their Imprisonment: And I do believe had not the Lord in his Righteous
Judgment taken Power from them, they would have been farther deeply guilty of
the Blood of the Innocent.

But my hearty Desire for all that are tenderhearted among you, who have the
Fear of the Lord upon you, that you take heed that you be not leavened with
that Persecuting and Antichristian Spirit; for the very same that now reproach
us, and would unchristian us, would destroy us if it had Power.

But the Hand of the Lord is to be seen in suffering all these Storms of
Oppositions against us, to provoak us to the more Watchfulness and Diligence,
and to brighten our Testimony for the Righteous God, whom in Spirit and Truth
we serve.

Therefore unto him do I commit our Cause, who sets Bounds to the Seas, and
stills its Raging, who can appease the Wrath of Man, and scatter the thick
Clouds of Dark^ess. with which he is compast, by the bright Shining of his Day,
in which ^ll Works, Doctrines, Principles and Spirits shall be made manifest;
and in the Breaking out of this blessed Day does my Soul rejoice before the God
of Heaven.

So Friends, in Faithfulness to the Lord, and in true and dear Love to all
simple-hearted People, who have the least of Vprightness of Heart to God, and
sincerely desire to follow the Lord wherever he shall lead them: I shall
conclude, leaving this my Testimony to the Witness of God in all your
Consciences, who am

Your Real Friend in the Service Truth and Love,
The 5th of the 9th

