THE SECOND PART OF THE Nonconformists Plea FOR PEACE.

Being an ACCOUNT of their Principles about Civil and Ecclesiastical Authority
and obedience, (as far as the Author knows it), and about Things Indifferent,
and evil by Accident or Scandal: and what their Nonconformity is not: and
whether the Ministers encourage Sects and Schism: With their judgments and
earnest desires of the Churches Peace and Concord, and the true and necessary
means.

Mostly written many years past, and now published to save our Lives and the
Kingdoms Peace, from the false and bloody Plotters, who would first persuade
the King and people that the Protestants and particularly the Nonconformists
are Presbyterians and Fanatics; and next that it was such Presbyterians that
killed his Father; and next that our Principles are rebellious; and next that
we are plotting a rebellion and his death; and lastly that this is the genius
of the Parliament; and therefore that they and we must be used as enemies to
the King.

By RICHARD BAXTER.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock at the three Bibles near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil. 1680.

THE PREFACE.
THese Papers were written some of them in 1668. and some since, when the
Nonconformists Judgment of the Interest of Reason in Religion was printed,
with but 15 subscribed names: Those about Grace and Morality, and Things
indifferent, and what our Nonconformity is not, were also perused by many and
consented to (of whom Doctor Manton, Mr. Sanger and Mr. Bedford are since dead)
and with that of Scandal were printed many years ago. But my prudent friends
persuaded me to lay them by, (though the printing cost dear) partly as not
sufficiently elaborate and accurate, and partly lest any defense should but
exasperate our (then) afflicters, and occasion more wrath and unpeaceable
writings. This Counsel I have till now obeyed: But seeing such as the
Counterminer, the Popish Dialogue and many others, continuing loudly to accuse
us, and make men believe that we are plotting a new war, and that our
Principles are rebellious, and remembering what a suspicion of us is left on
record in the Oxford Act of Confinement, and hearing by the Published
Narratives of Oats, Bedlow, Prance, Jenison, Smith, Dugdale, and specially
Dangerfield, that it was part of the Plot for the destruction of the King, and
change of Government and Religion, to make King and People believe that the
Presbyterians had such a Plot, and finding so little said to vindicate the
Innocent, and lastly finding great reason to think that my change is so near,
that I must do it now or never, I durst not die in the guilt of silence. 1.
Lest I should betray the King into a belief of this pernicious plotted slander.
2. Lest I should betray the Nation into a self-destroying belief of seditious
Liars. 3. Lest I should betray both the Reputation and Lives of many thousand
Innocents. What dismal effects must needs follow, if the King should believe
that so many of his People and Parliament as are thus accused, are his enemies
and seek his hurt? Whilst the odious and horrid usage of his Father is in his
memory, who can wonder if he destroy those who he believes would destroy him?

Therefore though this Book be truly guilty of much defectiveness, disorder,
repetitions, being but many Papers written on several occasions, long ago, now
set some how hastily together, necessity constrains me to think that it is
better thus than not at all.

I have already published the first part of our Plea, written many years after
almost all this: which you must especially observe when you read, What our
Nonconformity is not: For then I thought to go no further. That about scandal
and evil by accident was written purposely to answer the gross mistaking charge
of B. Morley, and the new Eccles. Politician, just when that Book came out; and
somewhat occasioned by Mr. Durels Book: Therefore that I am there so distinct
as will be troublesome to common readers who love but few words, was long of
the quality and charge of the learned accusers whom I answer.

I thought it time to speak the Truth in how broken a manner soever, when I
read that even some that seem to condemn the Papists Plotters, do yet publicly
join us with them, as more dangerous than they, and make our designed Rebellion
to be a Necessitating Reason, for doing that against us, against Parliaments,
and the Peoples choice of them, which I dread to mention; as if it were
necessary to all Loyal Subjects to enter into a League, or subscribed Covenant
to save the King from us.

It is now about twenty years since Dr. Gauden, Mr. Calamy, and my self
preached at a Fast to the Parliament for Loyalty, and the King the next morning
was voted home to his Crown and Government: and since the Duke of Lauderdale
caused the Printing of Mr. Gaches Letter to me for the King. What is it that we
have Preached, Printed or done ever since to this day that should bring us
under this horrid accusation? Have we been proved guilty before any Judge?
Besides Preaching the Gospel (to which we were devoted, and dare not for fear
of sacrilege and persidiousness cast off) what have we done these twenty years
against the King or State? Unless it be our crime to live under reproach and
scorn and poverty, and sometimes imprisonments, and never once so much as
Petition a Parliament either to pity us, or to hear us once speak for our
selves, and give us leave to tell them or the Nation the true case and reasons
of our Not-Conforming. What is it that we have said or done? and how came our
accusers to be so merciful to us as never to call us before the Judicatures,
for any thing but Preaching and coming within five miles of Corporations, or
some for not communicating with them, which yet other of us never refused? If
any odd persons, or whosoever have said or done any thing against the King or
Kingdom, or their neighbors right or peace, or have been guilty of any fraud,
drunkenness, perjury or immorality, besides their unavoidable Nonconformity,
let them be punished as the Law requires, but let not the Innocent, yea
thousands be slandered and designed to destruction for them* But I never yet
was by any abused, or hurt, but I was accused by them as deserving it.

Our accusations are, 1. That we are Presbyterians and Fanatics. 2. That we
began the War in 1641, and 1642. 3. That we destroyed the King. 4. That our
Principles are disloyal. 5. That we are plotting a rebellion. To all these.

I. What a Presbyterian is with these men is to us unsearchable; what he is
with those that have written for and against them is easily known; we take Dr.
Heylins Description in his History against them: They are such as hold not only
Church Government without Bishops (for so do the Independents also) but also by
Presbyteries, consisting of two sorts of Elders, Preaching and Ruling (called
by some Lay) and over th(...)se Classes, and over these a National Assembly,
consisting of the same two sorts. Be it known that whiles I disown any thing of
this, it is not that I think my self wiser or better than such as I have been
acquainted with of that opinion. My own opinion I have often enough declared,
viz. 1. That Jure Divino, one Church has no Governing Power over another. 2.
That every particular Political Church should be a society capable of personal
presential communion, and have their own Elders to govern them all of one Order
and Office, and if each one have a Bishop that shall have a Presidency and
Ruling or Negative voice, I shall like it the better, for Antiquity sake, and
Unity. 3. That these Churches should keep necessary correspondency for Love,
Concord, and mutual helps, by Messengers and Synods of their Bishops or
Pastors; but not as Lawmakers to their brethren. 4. That it will not be unmeet
for the Magistrate, or if he permit it, for the Bishops or Pastors by consent
to appoint some of the wisest and gravest and best, to visit and oversee the
rest of the Pastors and Churches in several Precincts, so far as to teach the
young and ignorant, and exhort them to holy, prudent diligence, and reprove
them that are blameworthy, but not to have the forcing power of the Sword.

But it is not my judgment only that is in question, Reader, judge by the proof
that I shall offer thee what truth or modesty there is in our accusers.

1. I have elsewhere told you, when the King called us to signify our desires
in 1660. the Ministers of London were commonly invited to come to Sion College
that their common consent might be known: And there we agreed to desire or
offer nothing for Church Government, but A. B. Ushers model of the Primitive
Episcopal Government as it was then Printed (which to me the A. Bishop owned)
And was Usher a Presbyterian? What new names have our adversaries made, as
Presbyterian A. Bishops and Primates? Are not all the Dioceses, Lordship,
Wealth and Power of Bishops secured in that Model, and is that Presbytery?

2. Bishop Reignolds, B. Worth, and Dr. Wallis and other Conformists agreed and
joined with us in this Offer. And were these also Presbyterians?

3. When his Majesty would not grant us that model, nor the Bishops once treat
about it, he was pleased in his gracious Declaration about Ecclesiastical
Affairs to offer and prescribe the Episcopacy of England as it stood, with
little alteration, save that the Parish Ministers consent was allowed to the
Confirmation of any in his Parish, and the Rural Dean with the Ministers of his
Deanery to meet often for mere Parish persuasive work, to the scandalous. And
this Declaration we joyfully and thankfully accepted, as a hopeful means of
common Conformity and Concord. And was this Presbytery too?

4. That this might might not pass as the private Act of a few, a meeting of
the London Ministers was desired to give the King thanks for this Declaration
in signification of their consent, which was done, and at that meeting there
were but two dissenting Votes, and those two (both dead) professed their
thankful acceptance, though they subscribed not.

5. Vncontradicted fame told us that the House of Commons gave the King their
public thanks for that his care so to unite his people. And if that House of
Commons also were Presbyterians, I know not who is not.

6. And I never heard that any of all these consenting and subscribing
Ministers recanted his consent to this day.

7. Nor did Iever hear that any absent Ministers in City or Country, sent us
any notice that they dissented. Only honest Dr. Conant who no(...) Conformeth,
at one meeting said, Our attempts for reconciliation with that party were vain,
as to reconcile fire and water.

8. Abundance of Country Ministers, (and all that ever I heard from) joyfully
expressed their approbation of what we did.

9. In all the County of Worcester where I lived there was but one Minister
(Mr. Tho. Hall of Kings Norton) taken for a Presbyterian from the year 1647.
till the King came in, 1660. Nor did I hear of many out of London and
Lancashire, that ever set up that Government.

10. I know not of one Congregation now in London of English men (the French
and Dutch are not accused as plotters) that exercises the Presbyterian
Government, nor ever did since the King came home: what they may be in secret
judgment I know not, nor how far the experience of our late Prelacy may have
changed any; But, 1. Certainly they have no National assembly: 2. They have no
Classes: 3. They have no coalition of many Churches to make a Presbytery. 4.
And I hear of none (unless perhaps the Independents, which I know not) that
have so much as Ruling Lay Elders.

Set all this together and tell me whether it be likely that those men believe
a life to come and a judgment of God, who would make King and people believe
that Parliaments, Nonconforming Ministers, and their hearers are
Presbyterians, and so many and so bad as that King and Kingdom are in danger of
them.

II. As to the second point of the late War, it is unseasonable here to say any
more but this, 1. The King has said so much for the Act of Oblivion that it is
no sign of Loyalty and peace to violate it. 2. Though false reporters say, that
the Papists were the Kings party, and the Presbyterians the Parliaments at the
beginning of the English war, (not meddling with Scotland and Ireland) the
contrary is so well known to men yet living, that the Reporters can hope to
seduce none but young men and strangers. I again desire him that would know the
truth, but to read Rushworths Collections and Heylins life of Laud, and the
names of the Parliament and Lord Lieutenants and Commanders, and ask those what
they were that knew them: Heylin will convince you that the quarrel was long
growing up between two parties of the Episcopal Church: of which he makes in
Ireland Archbishop Usher the Head, and the Convocation there to follow him;
and in England, Archbishop Abbot to be the Head, and Bishop Laud to be the
Head of the other party, and a very few Bishops at first to follow him; so that
the Church of England and Ireland (if the Convocation be the Church) were on
the side that Laud dissented from; And the Parliaments went the way of the
Church as then they called it, and one after another continued accusing the
other side, 1. as promoting popery, 2. and Arminianism, 3. and arbitrary
absoluteness; against Law, privileges, Liberty and property: And where former
Parliaments left, that of 1640. began, and between these two parties of the
Church of England it was that the war began, and not between Papists and
Presbyterians, (though the Presbyterians in Scotland, and the Papists in
Ireland began there). The Papists were but Auxiliaries to the King, and most of
the Presbyterians Auxiliaries to the Parliament, long after the beginning of
the war. By God great mercy there are yet living the truly worthy and Right
Honorable Lords, the Earl of Bedford first General of the Horse, and the Earl
of Radnor, Lord President of his Majesty's Council, a Colonel then in the Earl
of Essex's Army, and the Lord Wharton (and the Lord Hollis is but lately dead)
Ask these faithful Lords yet living whether the Earl of Essex, or any four or
five of all his Colonels were Nonconformists, or any two of them Presbyterians;
But of this elsewhere.

III. As to the death of the King, I have in the times of usurpation, proved
that the Presbyterians detested it. That it was a proud conquering Army, by the
Contrivance of Ol. Cromwell, and the applause of a few fanatics that did it by
the consent of a small part of the old Parliament called The Rump, that durst
not trust the King in power: That they could never do it till, 1. They had new
modelled the Army, and got out the Earl of Essex's Soldiers, and all the
Parliament men save Cromwell; 2. Till they had first driven away the Eleven
accused members; (Hollis, Stapleton, Maynard, etc.) 3. Till they had got all
the Brigades and Garrison Soldiers besides disbanded, lest they should resist
them. 4. Till they had forcibly imprisoned a great part of the worthiest
members of the Parliament, and kept and cast out the most of the House, and
left only the foresaid smaller remnant. 5. Till they had conquered the City by
sudden surprise; when Massy, Hollis, Brown and others tried to have armed the
City against them. 6. Till they had conquered Scotland, and their Armies. 7.
The London Ministers went to the General to charge him to resist it. 8. They
printed their abhorrence of it to the world. And Mr. Love was beheaded and
others imprisoned and fled beyond Sea. 9. I have reason to believe that Monks
Army that restored the King had twenty if not forty times as many Presbyterians
in it, as the Earl of Essex's Army had when the war began. 10. The London
Presbyterians and Sir Thomas Allen Lord Mayor were they that turned the Scales
for the King by inviting Monk and declaring their conjunction with him. 11.
What the Presbyterians did with Sir George Booth, and what Ministers were
imprisoned for it, and other such things I need not report. 12. As soon as ever
the members of the old Parliament were restored, they took effectual care for
the Kings restitution: especially the Council which they settled and left. The
Right Honorable the Earls of Anglesea, and Shaftesbury, and many others yet
living can tell you enough of this: And if you believe not me, besides the
forementioned worthy Lords, ask the worthy Master of the Rolls Sir Harbottle
Grimstone, and Sir John Maynard his Majesty's Sergeant at Law, who were eminent
members of the foresaid Parliament, from the beginning, or any other of them
yet living, whether the Parliament was Presbyterians and Nonconformists when
the war began, or Conformable members of the Church of England; and they can
resolve you.

IV. But if all this had been otherwise, must this age answer for their fathers
deeds? What Is all this to the present Nonconformists, of whom I do not believe
there is one of 40. now alive that had any hand in any wars against the King?
Are the Hollanders or French guilty of it because they are Presbyterians? If
not, why are the English? will Names make men Traitors? If so, do not they make
us Traitors who falsely gave us those names? Either they must prove that we hold
rebellious principles, or they show that they do but in Plot accuse us.
Therefore I have thought it my duty to give this account of our Principles as
far as they are known to me.

In 1649. I wrote a Book called Political Aphorisms, in which, 1. I asserted
the Universal Monarchy of God, 2. The Pre-eminence of Monarchy before Democracy
against Mr. Harington's Oceana, 3. The way to secure a pious Monarchy; 4. And I
added the reasons why I then had adhered to the Parliament, out of a desire of
conviction if I had erred: But for great Reasons I have since desired that the
book be taken as non scriptus. But what I judge undeniable I here declare.

Were sin and madness any wonder in the world, it were a wonder that England is
not as happy and concordant a Nation as any under heaven. God has kept us from
tasting of those miserable wars, which have distressed many other Nations: God
loudly calls us to peace: old and sad experience of the mischiefs of war, do
call unto all that are in their wits if possible to avoid it. The militant
Nations round about us, have left us to sweet peace. But sin, folly and pride,
will not consent: How many years have we begged for peace, of those that should
have been the preachers and wisest promoters of peace, and cannot yet obtain
it, nor quiet them that call for fire and sword, not knowing what spirit they
are of? A miserable Nation's afraid of confusions, prays for the King and all
in authoty, that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and
honesty: and the Declaration about Ecclesiastical affairs tells us that the
King would have given the people Peace: but with unpeaceable Clergymen, no
plea, no petition could prevail. The things that have been, are; and the
confusions of our age have come from the same causes and sorts of men, as the
confusions in former ages did; which in an Abridgement of Church History* I
have lately opened: we rejoice with Paul that Christ is preached: but alas,
that so many preach him not sincerely, of good will and love, but in envy,
strife and contention, to add affliction to the afflicted, Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17,
18. We are all bound; if it be possible, and as much as in us lies, to live
peaceably, yea to follow peace with all men: Romans 12. 18. Heb. 12. 14. But none
are more obliged to it than Princes that must preserve the peoples peace, and
Christian Pastors that should preach it.

Man's soul has three faculties, understanding, will, and executive vital
power: The Image of God on these three is 1. holy knowledge, faith or Light, 2.
Holy Love, 3. and holy Life. The Devils Image is the contrary to these three,
1. In dark ignorance, error and unbelief, 2. In malignant enmity to good things
and persons; 3. In deadness to good, and hurtfulness or evil works. Therefore
the Devil is described by Christ, 1. As the Prince of darkness and deceit, 2.
As the enemy of God and Goodness and good men, and, 3. As a destroyer. And so
he is called A Liar, A malignant enemy and A Murderer: And by these properties
his children may be known, whatever they profess.

I unfeignedly declare that I wish no cruelty against Papists, nor any hurt but
what the necessary safety of those whom they would hurt requires: But I must
say that their Canons and their writings and practices have had so much of
these three properties, Lying, malignity against good men, and hurtfulness and
bloody cruelty, that the nature which God has planted in me, is no more
reconcilable to it, than to the life of highway robbers. And let who will
make a prudent trial, and I am confident he will find as I have done, that on
whomsoever you find these three Diabolical Symbols or properties, Lying; Malice
and Bloody-hurtfulness against men that are most serious and practical
Christians, they will prove either open or secret Papists, or by nearness much
prepared for them.

Could they be content to forbear DOMINION and BLOODINESS, we might live
quietly with them as with other erroneous men. But how can that be hoped for
while their Religion essentially is, 1. That all Christian Princes and People
on earth, must be the obedient subjects of their Pope, or else be no members of
the Church of Christ? 2. That approved General Councils must be believed and
obeyed, of which (besides others) that at the Lateran sub Innoc. 3. obliges
all temporal Lords on pain of EXCOMMVNICATION, DEPOSITION and DAMNATION to
exterminate all their Protestant subjects if they are able, (and other Canons
and Decrees are for burning them) And he that understandingly professes
himself a Papist, professes both these.

As I have here described the judgment of such Nonconformists as I have
conversed with (not undertaking for every odd person whom I know not) I do
desire those that seek our blood and ruin by the false accusation of
Rebellious principles, to tell me if they can [what body or party of men on
earth have more sound and Loyal principles of Government and obedience.]

I. If they say the Papists, Let them read H. Fowlis history of them, and
Bishop Barlows recitations of multitudes of their Doctors, and my Abridgement
of Church History, and then believe it if they can: The world knows that the
Papists set two superiors over Kings, 1. The Pope and his Councils, who have
decreed it to be the Henrician Heresy and Simony to hold so much as Princes
Power of Investing Bishops, and that the Pope has not power pro meritis to
depose them. 2. The People are commonly made by their Divines and Politics the
Givers of the Princes power, who should not so much as tolerate him if he be an
Infidel or Heretic.

II. Is it the Church of England only whose Principles they prefer? 1. Wherein
do we differ from them? Do we not subscribe their Articles, Canons and Homilies
as to civil Government? And if we subscribe not the New Covenant or Profession,
for the Phrases [Any Commissioned] and [on any pretense whatsoever] that
proves no Doctrinal difference from them, that subscribe them only in a sense
which we never were against, and who would not do it, if they understood them
properly. 2. Were B. Jewel, Bilson, and Mr. Hooker, none of the Church of
England? were not the Bishops and Convocation in A. B. Abbots days, the
Representative Church of England? Were not the Parliaments that followed them
of the Church of England? Was it only Dr. Sibthorp and Dr. Mainwaring and a few
such cried down by Parliaments and Prelates that were the Church of England?
Does not B. Bramhall own Grotius as designed for preferment in this Church? 3.
And are not the worthy Conformable Clergy, and Parliament, who are yet against
the Principles of Sibthorp and Mainwaring part of the Church of England?

It may be you will say [All the Nonconformists be not of your principles, and
what then is this to excuse the rest?] And many talk of one Goodman and
Buchanan in Scotland, and of Vindiciae contra Tyrannos (falsely charged on Beza,
and written by Hubert Languet.)

Answ. And indeed, are all the Church of England of one mind? Are they all of
Sibthorps mind on one side? Or are they all of Jewel, Hooker and Bilsons mind
on the other side? Did they not differ when most followed Abbot (the refuser of
Sibthorps book,) and the rest followed Bishop Laud? and when the two parties
began the war, were they all of the mind of Williams Archbishop of York who
was a Commander in arms for the Parliament? Show us the doctrine of the Church
for Loyalty which we receive not, and wherein in this we come behind you. Do
all the Church of England agree with Mr. Thorndike, Mr. Dodwel, or Dr. Heylin?
Read this man's History of the Reformation, and see how he exposes it to scorn?
Read his history of Presbytery, and his life of Archbishop Laud, and tell as
whether you are all of that mind. There is a Papist that has written an
Historical Collection of the horrid confusions of the English Reformation
almost all verbatim out of Dr. Heylins History, half as reproachful as Philanax
Anglicus; or the Image of both Churches, or any that a Pateson or a Parsons
could have written. Yet this was a Dr. of the Church? I do not think that all
the Church will join with Bishop Bramhal and Dr. Pierce in the Vindication of
Grotius as a Protestant, who writes for Romes common Mistriship, and for
belief of the Doctrine of all the General Councils, even that of Trent. I do
not think you all hold that our Reformers followed the measure of Erasmus,
though some say so? Nor that you all blame the casting of Images out of the
Churches as much as Dr. Richard Cox did in his epistle to Cassander? Was the
sharp Archbishop Whitgift and the rest that were for the Lambeth Articles, and
our great Divines that went to Dort, and the Parliaments that decryed
Arminianism, of the same mind as Archbishop Laud, Neal, Buckeridge, Corbet and
Mountague? Why then do you tell us of an odd dissenter, or of sects that we own
not, or expect that among us there should be no differences? Are we not men?

III. Is it the Principles of the Old Greeks and Romans which you prefer before
ours? If you never read them, believe not me, but believe Hobbes and multitudes
of other sorts that say, They mostly hated Kings; and even Aristotle, Plato,
Cicero, Plutarch, etc. took it for a meritorious act to kill tyrants: (and whom
did they mean?) Of all men set not them before us.

IV. Is it the new Philosophers; such Cartesians as Spinosa, and such as Hobbes
that you prefer? I shall tell you after, what are their politics.

V. Is it the famous Lawyers and Politic writers of Europe, Papists or
Protestants? I have told you after what they hold. What heaps of Testimonies
does the Great Lawyer Hottoman in his Franco-Gallia bring, to prove the Power
of Nobles and Parliaments limiting the Monarch formerly in France? And Bodin is
against him as to the Constitution of France, and by the information of Dale
the English Ambassador, takes England also to be an Absolute Monarchy, and
that the Parliament has no Authoritative part in making Laws, but only a
requesting and advising part, and the King the only Legislative. Yet see what
are even Bodins Principles. 1. Page 98. He says [Soveraign Majesty and
absolute power, consists principally in giving Laws to the Subjects in
general without their consent.

2. Chap. 5. He takes slavery to be unlawful.

3. Page 88. c. 8. He makes Monarchy to be the gift of the people, voluntarily
disseising and despoiling themselves of the Sovereign power to seize and invest
another in it. (As if a man should by pure gift deliver to another man the
propriety and possession that to him belongs): And so he makes the Ruler to
have just so much power as the people give him. And at this rate Lawyers
ordinarily speak both Protestants and Papists.

4. He ever excepteth from the absolute Sovereigns power, all that is commanded
or forbidden by the Law of God and Nature, which no man can abrogate, page 89,
etc.

5. Page 85. He tells us how of old the Chief Justice thus invested the King of
Arragon. We which are to thee in virtue nothing inferior, and in power greater
than thy self, create thee our King, Yet with this condition, that one among us
shall have more power and command than thy self] But he believes not that the
people of Arragon chose the King.

6. He says that a Prince is not subject to his Laws, but he is to his own
just and reasonable Conventions: and that many are deceived that confound Laws
and a Princes contracts which they call also Laws (Constitutions or Fundamental
Laws they are called) The Law depends on the will of him that has the
Sovereignty. But the contract between the Prince and his Subjects is mutual,
which reciprocally binds both parties, so that the one party may not start
therefrom, to the prejudice, or without the consent of the other. (As
Constitutions are made by contract, so some countries make Governing laws by
contract).

7. Page 95. He says the Prince cannot derogate from the Laws that concern the
state of the Realm, and the establishing thereof.

8. Page 97. He says [It is not in the power of any Prince in the world (no
more than the King of Englund) at his pleasure to raise taxes on the people, no
more than to take another man's goods from him, as Philip Commines wisely showed
in the Parliament at Towers.]

9. Page 97. He objects [that the Estates of England have power to condemn; as
K. Henry the 6. was condemned by the Estates to be kept Prisoner in the Tower
of London.] And answers [That was done by the ordinary Judges of England, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal of the Upper House, at the request of them of the
Nether House] I thought it was done by traitorous usurpation.

10. Page 200. L. 2. c. 2. He distinguishes of Lawful or Royal Monarchy,
Lordly Monarchy and Tyrannical Monarchy: The Lawful or Royal Monarch is that
where the Subjects enjoining their natural liberty and propriety of their
goods, obey the Laws of a Monarch, and the Monarch the Laws of Nature. The
Lordly Monarchy is that where the Prince is become Lord of the goods and
persons of his Subjects, by Law of Arms and lawful War, governing them as the
Master of a Family does his slaves. The Tyrannical Monarchy is where the Prince
contemning the Laws of Nature and Nations, imperiously abuses the persons of
his freeborn Subjects, and their goods as his own.

11. Though he justly blame Aristot. (p. 206.) for defining a King to be him,
who chosen by the people, reigns as they desire] from whose will if he never
so little depart he becomes a tyrant; And though Althusius blame Bodin for
being for absolute Monarchy, yet Bodin l. 2. c. 4. describes a Tyrant just as
Althusius (after cited) does, if not more copiously and odiously: The learned
Reader may peruse page 212. his difference between a King and a Tyrant, too
large to be recited, and scarce safe for the vulgar to read, lest they should
think most Princes by those Characters to be Tyrants: I am sure it goes far
beyond our Language.

12. And it is the more dangerous in that c. 5. p. 220, 221. he teaches [that
it is a fair and magnifical thing, for a Prince (of another land) to take up
Arms to relieve a whole Nation and People unjustly oppressed by the cruelry of
a Tyrant. [And that [it is lawful for any stranger to kill a Tyrant,] that is
to say, a man of all men infamed and notorious for the oppression, Murder and
slaughter of his Subjects. But as for Subjects to do the same, it must be known
whether the Prince be an Absolute Sovereign, or not: For if he be no absolute
Sovereign, then must the Sovereignty of necessity be either in the people or
the nobility, in which case there is no doubt but that it is lawful to proceed
against a Tyrant by way of Justice, if so men may prevail against him: Or else
by way of fact, and open force, if they may not otherwise have reason. As the
Senate did against Nero and Maximinus. -- p. 222. It shall be lawful not only
for strangers but for the Subjects themselves also to take them out of the way].

Albericus Gentilis was made Professor of the Civil Law in Oxford (where he
unsuccessfully wrote for Stage Plays against D. Jo. Reignolds): And therefore
he was one of the Church of England: And in his book De jure Belli he holds,

1. That unavoidable ignorance may make a war to both sides lawful, l. 1. c. 6.

2. He joyneth with Bodin against war or foreing men to Religion, c. 9, etc.
with notable testimonies of Tertullian, Lactantius, Arnobius, etc. Bernard,
Cassiodorus, Erasmus, Hospitalius, Victoria, Govarruvia, Baldus, P. Aemilius
and others.

Approving Cujacius that says [Religio non est quae calet in caedes civium and
perniciem patriae.]

3. C. 11. He says distinguishing [Ita censeo; ut qui subditus privatusque non
est, is se defendere contra Principem in ista causa religionis, etiam per
bellum possit: Qui subditus simul and privatus non est, is ultimo loco and pro
remedio ultimo potest se and in aliis causis bello tueri, ut quem non juvat
ratio propter potentiam dominii, arma eum defendant -- ut Baldus, Defensio ista
contra omnes est, nec debet ullum Patrono honorem: Privatus qui homo est, nihil
horum potest.

4. C. 13. Defensio etiam brutis jus est naturae; non opinione nobis, sed
innata quadam vi persuasum and constitutum. Et necessarium jus est: Nam quid
est quod contra vim (ait Cicero) fieri sine vi possit. Hoc super omnia jura est
probatissimum: vim vi repellere, omnes Leges, and omnia jura permittunt. Lex
una and perpetua, salutem omni ratione defendere.

5. And to prove that men must defend each other, contrary to Hobs and Spinosa,
he notably shows that Christians and Heathens agreed that all the world is
one Body, house, city, of which all are members, made under one law, c. 15. and
cites Bartolus, Baldus, Alciatus, Albericus and many more Lawyers to prove
that the omission of defending others is a sin: especially when they are our
near friends: citing Ulpian and Tully for it as the Law of Nature.

6. C. 16. He writes for Princes defending the Subjects of other Princes, if
unjustly oppressed, yea sometime though the Subjects were unjust, to keep them
from immoderate penalty: Much more I pass by. And are these Lawyers Doctrines
more loyal than our here professed?

In a word, Libraries and Booksellers shops abound with such Books, as teach
such Doctrines, Philosophers, Historians, Papists and Protestants; and yet no
such outcry of Treason and Rebellion has been raised against them, but the
Books commonly tolerated and read: And we that never owned such things are by
Plotters represented as if we were ready by our disloyal Doctrine to destroy
the King and Kingdom.

And the foresaid Greg. Sayrus says Clav. Reg. l. 3. c. 6. p. 134. That men's
Laws bind not, unless the people receive them. For it is not meet that men
should be so governed by humane power, as that they should against their will
be driven by a Law, to do any thing, which neither by the Law of Nature nor of
God they are bound to do: -- And this must not seem hard or absurd to any one,
seeing that the power of the Prince who is the maker of the Law, seems in a
sort to depend on the will of the people, because the authority of Secular
Power is delegated to the Prince himself or Magistrate by the people, for the
making of Laws which shall seem profitable to the good moderating of the
Commonwealth; so that the Laws which are made by Princes or Magistrates, are
therefore to be called valid, because they are judged to have come from the
consent of the people themselves.

Hence Alph. a Castro gathers, That if a Prince or Magistrate having such
power from the people, would by a Law of his making compel the gainsaying
people to any thing which is not necessary by the Law of God or Nature, he is
to be judged a Tyrant; because he exercises greater power toward the people
committed to him than he truly has. But a Castro shows, that this is to be
understood only of the Lay power; because only this receives its strength from
the people.

And p. 120. he shows, that a Law binds not, if it extend to those things,
which exceed the Lawmakers power: and that therefore the Civil Magistrates
cannot make Law of matters Ecclesiastical. -- Also if they are not for the
common good --

I name Sayrus, because you are not to look for better from a Papist, his Book
being the best of Cases of Conscience, not only in mine, but the common
judgment. And see here how near he and Mr. Hooker agree.

It seems heretofore some Canonists thought otherwise: But the great Politic
Writer Ad. Contzen li. 5. c. 5. tells you, That now the common vote is against
them: And he concludes as the true and common judgment, that the power of
making Laws, is by nature in the multitude or whole Commonwealth; and that no
one Prince has more than the people give him. And that the people when they
choose a Royal Person or Family, may reserve this right, that he shall abrogate
or make no Law without them: that all Civil power flows from the people; and
that none without Tyranny can take this power from them: And that such a Tyrant
is worse than he that beats the innocent, because he wrongeth and oppresses
more.

And of all forms of Government, he concludes [Monarchiam temperatam, in qua
Optimatum, sive Senate svaleat authoritas, in qua Civitatum, atque aliorum
Ordinum sit nonnulla potestas, praeferendam esse, li. 1. c. 21. p. 43. And he
defines Tyranny to be [Imperium quod ad imperantium, aut alicujus partis in
Republica utilitatem spectat -- ] c. 16. p. 31. Et p. 32. ait [Prima and
vetustissima tyrannidis origo est Regum in pejus mutatio. Ambito, avaritia,
libido, potestatls comites sunt and pestis. -- p. 33. Utinam, utimam, quam
serio Tyrannidem and Tyrannum omnes detestantur, ita sedulo fugiant! Si ulla
res est orbi perniciosa, sibi gravis, illa est Tyrannis. -- p. 34. Accedit and
illud ad miseriam Tyrannorum quod quocunque modo caedantur etlam per fraudem
and injuriam, magna tamen in laud apud improbos sunt illi, qui hoc ausi sunt,
etiamsi per scelus -- Etsi injusta sit credes, multis tamen grata: Causam
reddit princeps philosophorum, l. 2. pol. c. 7. [Maximas injurias propter
immoderatas homines inferunt, and non propter res necessarias -- ut libidines
impune expleant. Idcirco magna praemia proposita sunt, non ei qui furem; sed
qui Tyrannum occiderit -- ]

But enough of this comparing of our Doctrine with other men's, whose Books are
commonly sold and read. An impartial hearing when accused, is that which we
have in vain long desired of our hurtfullest enemies. But well says the
foresaid Contzen. l. 9. c. 44. p. 732. Absolvit Judex quem audire formidat.

I have often wondered that when Christ was accused as an enemy to Caesar, the
Jews nor Romans did not charge him for gathering the multitude as his guards,
to the awe of the Rulers, who durst not lay hands on him lest the people should
stone them or rise for him against them: For they feared the people, Luke 22.
2. and 20. 19. Mark 12. 12. Mat. 21. 46. when they sought to lay hands on him,
they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet, Yea, K. Herod
durst not put John to death for fear of the multitude that took him for a
prophet, Mat. 14. 5. And when the Pharisees bid Christ rebuke the multitude
that cried Hosanna, he would not. Yet he declared that his Kingdom was not of
this world, and he was not made a divider of inheritances, and paid tribute to
Caesar to avoid offense. I wonder that the Rulers did not prosecute the people
rather then fear them. But I will not believe that Christ sinned in this,
though Infidels think so.

VI. But stay: Perhaps it is the ancient Bishops and Canons which they say
agreed in more Loyal Doctrine than I here profess? But 1. I have newly in my
Abridgement of Church History said so much to answer this that I fear not the
censures of any impartial reader. 2. How greatly does the great Antiquary
Albaspineus reverence the Apostolical Constitutions, as the Greek Churches
ancient rule: But I disown their Doctrine, l. 8. c. 2. Neque vero Rex impius
Rex est amplius, sed Tyrannus: Neque Episcopus ignorantia aut malo animo
oppletus, Episcopus est, sed falsus Episcopus, non a Deo, sed ab hominibus
promotus. If I should cite abundance such I should but anger some. Read
Nazianzenes description of Bishops and Councils, and Socrates and others of the
cases of Theoph. Alexand. and Chrysostom. and the horrid insurrections at
Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, etc. and judge impartially between them
and us.

Among a multitude I will add one instance of my own usage, that you may see
more of my reason for this writing. The Transproser rehearsed p. 48. says M.
Baxter in his holy Commonwealth maintains that he (the King) may be called
to account by any single Peer.] Must we say nothing to such bloody slanders?
Never such a thought was in my mind, nor word spoke or written by me, but all
is a mere false fiction: Nay, in all the times of usurpation, and since, I
said, and wrote that the Kings person is inviolable, and to be judged by none,
either Peer or Parliament; and that it is none but Subjects that they may call
to account and judge and punish; and that neither the King may destroy or hurt
the Kingdom, nor the Kingdom the King (much less a Peer) but their Union is the
Kingdoms life. And the very Book accused goes on such Principles, and has not
a word meet to tempt a man in his wits to this accusation. Judge now by this
one instance, and by the cry of the Plotters now against us, seeking our
destruction and the Parliaments as supposed to favor us (which for ought I
know never did any thing for our relief or ease) whether it be meet that I
should die in silence under such horrid accusations: against which I appeal to
the great and righteous Judge, before whom I am shortly to appear, begging his
pardon, and reforming-conviction, where ever Ierre.

April 16. 1680. R. e.

The Contents of this Extorted and Distorted Treatise.
CHAP. I.
THe judgment of the Author and the Nonconformists* of his (...) as far he
know(...)h it, Of the Fundamental (...) of Government; specially against Bened
Spinosa's fall foundations, whose shameful words are recited, and other
Bruitists confuted who subvert all religion, morality, government and humanity:
And a touch of Popish principles. p. 1 Chap. II. More of Gods Government, his
Laws and their perfection, and men's additions. p. 22 Chap. III. Of the Power of
Sovereigns and the Obedience of Subjects p. 35 Chap. IV. Arcdundant added
profession of the Author, with his Renunciation of a multitude of disloyal
Principles: written to silence malicious accusers, but unmeet to be expected
from all others. p. 50 Chap. V. The Conformity of our Principles of Loyalty, 1.
To the Constitution of the Kingdom, described by King Charles I. in many of his
Declarations: 2. To the Articles of Religion, Canons and Homilies, about the
Power of Magistrates, the obedience of Subjects, and the sin of Rebellion: 3.
To the judgment of the most esteemed Prelates: Bishop Jer. Tailors words in
his Ductor Dubitantium, of Civil and Church power, recited at large. p. 81
Chap. VI. A Scheme of Political Principles compared, or the Political Alphabet,
1. Of the sincere Christian Loyallist, 2. Of the treacherous flattering selfish
Royallist: 3. Of the understanding real Papist; 4. Of the unruly seditious
Rebel; and, 5. The sum of Spinosa's Posthumous works, with a Confutation of
the Principles of Hobbes de Cive, and the doctrine of some Lawyers and Politic
writers about Power and Tyranny compared with ours. p. 107 Chap. VII. Of the
true Nature of Church Government, Communion and worship. p. 133 Chap. VIII. Of
the true and only way of Church Concord and peace in generals, and of the
Causes of Schism, and of Toleration, etc. p. 149 Chap. IX. The true and easy
terms of Concord particularly and briefly stated (of which I have written much
more since in a Treatise only on that Subject.) p. 184. Chap. X. Of the quality
and faults of those called Our followers and Puritans, and whether we are
guilty of any of their mistakes; In answer to the Politician, the Debater and
many others, who from the unmeet words of some odd persons, would render us and
them contemptibly or intolerably erroneous in doctrine.

Our judgment of the Interest of Reason in Religion, was before published by
it self: And our judgment of Schism, in our former Plea for Peace. p. 187

Chap. XI. Our judgment of the difference of Grace and Morality, against some
that accuse us as destroying morality; Hobbs, that says it is a seditious
principle to hold that faith must be inspired or infused. p. 3 Chap. XII. Our
judgment of the Lawfulness of Things Indifferent commanded by authority. p. 21
Chap. XIII. The Authors account of his judgment of Scandal, and things evil by
accident, if commanded: in answer to Bishop Morly and the young Eccles.
Politician; (written 1668. somewhat tedious through much distinction, which
accusation made necessary). p. 45 Chap. XIV. What the Nonconformity of my self
and the Ministers of my familiarity is not; in many particulars in which we are
mistaken (written long before the first part of our Plea, in which I show what
it is.) p. 83
The Judgment of the Non-Conformists about the difference between Grace and
Morality was Printed, 1676. and cast by, and has many Errata, viz.
PAge 3. line 17. for Moralities: r. Immoralities: p. 13. l. 26. r. Treasury:
p. 84. l 5. after why put?: p. 96. l. 4, r. were: p. 112. l. 15. blot out at
Sion College: p. 113. l. 5. for shall r. may: and l. 20. for suspensions r.
suspicions: p. 116. l. 9. for Lordships r. preferments: p. 112. l. 17. r.
consent to.

Omissions are p. 79. at the end, And if any (not accusing others) should
think, truly or mistakingly, that all these or any one of them are imposed on
him by man, his obedience thereto cannot be expected, till his judgment be
changed: and if he (...)rreth not, he sins not: p. 100. l. 12. add, we apply
this bu(...) to the general question, and not to any par(...)icular case or
persons: p. 115. marg. add, at Qu. 4, 5, 6. None of these Questions are put to
our Superiors, who have received many Ministers into the Church upon their
Conformity, who some preached, some wrote, some fought against the Kings cause;
But they are only to those that would have the Act of Oblivion forgotten, and
st(...)ll talk of th(...) war in a malicious plot, to silence and ruin
multitudes that had no hand in it.

Note that nothing in this book is written to dishonor our Rulers, nor the
Conforming Clergy, nor to deprave the Liturgy: But as I greatly rejoice that
England has yet so many Learned and able and laborious public Preachers,
(especially London) and write this much to abate their unjust censures of us
that we may come to our necessary Concord; so having read all the Old
Liturgi(...)s in the Biblioth. Patrum, I do with old John Ball that excellent
Nonconformist (in his Treat* of Liturgies against Separation) thank God that
England has a better Liturgy than any of them all, and one of the best in all
the World (that is so particular and long.)

Glory to God in the Highest, on earth Peace, to men Good Will. Amen.

THe sense of the House of Commons in Queen Elizabeth's days, (who sure were no
Presbyterians) is thus related by D. Heylin, Hist. of Presbyt. page 288. [A
smart Petition is presented to the Lords in the name of the Commons, for
rectifying of many things which they conceived to be amiss in the state of the
Church: The whole Petition did consist of 16. particulars; of which the first
six did relate to a Preaching Ministry, the want of which was much complained
of in a supplication -- In the other ten it was desired -- That no Oath or
subscription might be tendered to any at their entrance into the Ministry, but
such as was prescribed by the statutes of the Realm, and the Oath against
Corrupt entering: 2. That they may not be troubled for Omission of some Rites
or Offices prescribed in the book of Common prayer: 3. That such as had been
suspended or deprived for no other offense, but only for not subscribing, might
be restored. 4. That they may not be called and urged to answer before the
Officials and Commissaries, but before the Bishops themselves. 5. That they
might not be called into the High Commission, or M^ot out) of the Diocese where
they lived, except for some notable offense. 6. That it might be permitted to
them, in every Arch-Deaconry to have some common exercises, and conferences
among themselves, to be limited and prescribed by the Ordinaries. 7. That the
high censure of excommunication may not be denounced or executed for small
matters. 8. Nor by Chancellours Commissioners (Commissaries) or Officials, but
by the Bishops themselves with the assistance of grave persons. 9. That
non-residency may be quite removed out of the Church. 10. That at least,
according to the Queens Injunctions Art. 44. No-nonresident having already a
License or Faculty may enjoy it, unless he depute an able Curate that may
weekly preach and Cutechize, as was required by her Majesty in the said
injunctions] Against (says Heylin) the violence of this Torrent the
Archbishop interposed both his power and Reason -- But finding that the Lord
Gray and other of that house (of Lords) had been made of the party, he drew the
rest of the Bishops to join with him in an humble Petition to her sacred
Majesty, and the Queen put an end to that dispute, not only for the present but
all Parliaments following.

Here you see, 1. What was the sense of the Lords and Commons: 2. What was the
heinous evil desired that seemed intolerable to the Bishops: 3 By whom and how
it was defeated] The Lord have mercy on his Church; and the souls that men have
little mercy for, and save them especially from themselves, and next from their
Reverend Overseers. Dr. Stoughton cites Luther saying, Nunquam periclitatur
religio nisi inter reverendissimos.

As this was coming out of the Press, a Sermon of Dr. Stillingfleet's often calls
me to account, about Separation. When I see a satisfactory answer to what I
have lately said hereof in my Book of Concord and the first part of the Plea
for peace, if I have life and liberty I shall return my thanks to the Consuter:
But I am not now at leisure to open other men's confounding or mistaking
touches, who have not leisure to say that which requires an answer, for them
that impartially have read the books, which he excepteth against.

A Pacificatory account of my judgment and such Nonconformists as I converse
with, of Government and obedience, and some other Doctrinals about which the
Nonconformists are accused or suspected as dangerously erring.
CHAP. 1.
The principles of Spinosa and such Bruitists against Government and Morality
recited, and confuted, and the fundamental reasons of Government asserted.
. 1. WE have no reason to blame our Rulers, for being offended with all
principles of Anarchy and Rebellion, and being jealously watchful against all
real appearances of them: for that such are among us, and that the tendency of
them is to pernicious effects, is past denial: and all lovers of God, their
Country and their King, will hate and oppose them, when they do discern them.

. 2. What the Papists principles are, is so largly proved by Henry Fowlis, and
by Doctor Barlow, the present worthy Bishop of Lincoln, after many others, that
no addition is necessary; but that such as the Counterminer and many others in
Press and Pulpit should lay somewhat like it to the charge either of the
present Nonconformists, or to Nonconformists as such, and cry out to Rulers and
people, as they love their power, Estates and lives not to tolerate us (that
is, to destroy or banish us) and specially that the Parliament in the beginning
of the Oxford Act which banisheth us from Corporations, should leave on record
such suspicions of us as the reason of their Act, are things that have long
seemed to me to make such a Defense our duty, as tends to the satisfaction of
the suspecters and accusers; Lest we seem 1. To own the charge, 2. and thereby
tempt the people to think that we take not rebellion for a sin; 3. or to
despise both the Lawmakers, their Laws, and the said Preachers that thus
accuse us.

. 3. I have not yet heard of any such severe prosecutions of the Bruitists that
are for Hobbes, Spinosa, Pomponatius, Vaninus, etc. as have been used against
truly Loyal Nonconformists. But their principles are so pernicious, subverting
humanity, morality and Government, that I will begin with the recital of them
as Spinosa lays them down, and then add the true fundamentals of Government
and morality which confute them.

. 4. Bened. Spinosa in Tractat. Theolog. polit. cap. 16. page 175, 176, etc.
says [ Jus naturae nihil aliud est quam, etc. The Right of Nature is nothing
but the Rule by which every thing is determined to his manner of being and
operation, as fishes are to swim, and the great ones to eat the little ones.
That natural Right extends as far as power. That every Individual has the
Highest Right, to all things that he is able to do: That it is the chief Law of
Nature, that every thing do its utmost to continue in its own state, having no
respect to any other, but only to it self; that here there is no difference
between men and other things, nor between rational men, and Fools or mad men:
that while men live under the Empire of nature only, they live by the only Laws
of Appetite, and that by the highest Right: that the natural right of every man
is not determined by sound reason, but by Lust and power: All being born
ignorant, it being long before they know the true reason of living, and get the
Habit of Virtue, though they have good education, they are no more bound this
while to live by the Laws of a sound mind (or reason) than a Cat by the Laws of
Lions. Whatsoever any such shall judge profitable to himself, either by
guidance of sound reason, or by the force of affection, it is lawful for him by
the highest right of nature to desire it and to take it, and that by force or
fraud, or request, or by what other way he easiliest can; and to take him for
his enemy that would hinder the fulfilling of his desire: so that the Right and
Law of nature under which all are born, and for the most part live, forbids
nothing, but that which no man desires and which no man can do, not
contentions, not hatred, not wrath, not frauds. Whatsoever in Nature seems to
us absurd, ridiculous or evil, is because we know things but in part. It is the
universal Law of humane Nature, that no man neglect that which he judges good
(for him) but in hope of a greater good, or the fear of greater damage; nor
endure any evil but to avoid a greater, or in hope of greater good: that every
man of two goods choose that which he thinks best (for him) and of two evils,
that which he thinks least, be it so or not: and this is so firmly written in
man's nature, that it is to be numbered with the eternal verities, which no man
can be ignorant of. Therefore no man is to promise without fraud, nor to stand
to his promise made, to give up this right (in civil sociation) unless for fear
of greater evil or hope of greater good. As if a robber force us to promise him
our goods, we may frandulently promise and not perform it; yea if I mistakingly
think I have promised a thing to my hurt, I may break it: whence we conclude
that Covenants can have no force but for our profit sake, which being taken
away, the Covenant is taken away and remains void. Therefore in constituting
Republics, it is foolish to require fidelity, further than you make sure, that
Covenant Breaking shall prove the breakers hurt: For every man by natural
right, may deal deceitfully, and is not bound to stand to his Covenants. He
has the supreme Right over all men, who has the greatest power, by which he
can retain them by force or fear of the greatest punishment: which Right he
shall have no longer, than he keeps the power of executing what he list:
Otherwise he shall rule precariously, and no one that is stronger than he shall
be bound to obey him, unless he will. And thus societies may be formed without
any wrong to the right of nature: and he that has most power is bound by no
Law. And thus we are bound to execute all his commands that has most power, be
they most absurd: because reason bids us choose the less evil: But then this
Right of commanding what they will, no longer belongs to chief Powers, than
they have chief power: which if they lose, they lose their Right of commanding,
and it falls to him or them that get it and can keep it.

Then having extolled Democracy he proceeds to show that, There is no injury
but in a Civil life (the crossing of his will that has most power) and that
all things are lawful to them that are strongest, and they can do no wrong, and
Justice is a constancy of mind to give every man that which by (this) civil
Right belongs to him, (that is, which he cannot get from him without his own
hurt) And that if two States Covenant, none but a sool that knows not the
right of supreme Powers, will expect they should stand to it, longer than is
for their own ends or good; and so in matters of piety and Religion. Also, that
all are to be taken for enemies save subjects and confederates, though they
never did us wrong: and we may compel them to subjection or confederation, if
we are able, with much more to this purpose, taking off all obligations of
charity, justice and common honesty, except what men's private interest, or the
will of him that is strongest does infer. Otherwise making it as lawful, yea as
much duty to murder any man, or as many as we can, as to save men's lives, to
steal and rob as to forbear, to lie and be perjured as to speak truly, to be
adulterous as to be chaste, to be a Traitor as a Loyal subject: openly
dissolving and deriding all divine obligations, save man's, and releasing all
men's consciences from them: As if he proclaimed to the world, that if once they
can but think it to be for their own good, they may kill any man, they may
murder Kings and turn their Guns, their swords, their poisons against them,
notwithstanding any oaths to the contrary, without any scruple of Conscience or
fear of punishment in the world to come. And if once all men's consciences were
thus turned loose, no guards, no Army could secure the lives of Kings, as the
cases of Henry the 3. and Henry the fourth of France have proved. Yea he thus
tells, Every General of Armies, or any other subject that can but kill the
King, and take possession of his kingdom that he has as much right as the King
had as long as he is strongest, and that all the subjects have the same
obligation to defend him that has deposed the King, as they had before to
defend the King. In a word, that no man is to be trusted by another any further
than he thinks it good for himself, nor owes any duty to any, but himself,
not excepting Parents to children or children to their Parents.

It is the will and mercy of God to Princes and to mankind thus to permit those
that will be Atheists and Rebels against him to show the consequents of it, by
their inhumane and rebellious opinions against Government: That if Princes will
ever set up Epicurisme, Atheism and Infidelity, they shall set up Rebellion
with it, and expose their Lives to every man that has but list to venture upon
a secret or an open assault.

And the root of all this man's inhumanity is his Epicurean principles of
Philosophy about God and (...), supposing God to be but the Eternal necessary
necess^^^ing first cause of all things and motions, as the Sun is o(...) ^^ght
and heat, who can do no more, nor less than he does, moving the world as a
Clock or Watch by mere invariable necessity, that never did or can do a
miracle, or alter the necessitating course of nature: And that man has no self
determining free will at all, but is moved as necessarily as an Engine; And
that God is no governor, nor has no Laws (but men's) nor no Justice, nor
Mercy, these being not to be attributed to him, but only natural motion or
necessitation; And that he that lies, murdereth, steals, rebelleth is
equally moved to it by God, as he that speaks truth, and does all that is
just and good: and therefore it is but our narrow minds and ignorance, that
takes one thing to be better or worse than another, or to be sin or duty, save
in respect to our commodity and the will of the strongest.

And is it not a wonder that a man should think all this to be the undoubted
Light of Nature and the product of free enquiries, and of the true Universal
Idea of God, when as nature taught the contrary to almost all the old
Philosophers, save the Epicureans (who as Cicero shows were in common
contempt with sober men): yea to all the most Barbarous Nations of the world,
even to our American Savages at this day, for the most part: And is not that
liker to be the Light of Nature, which is found in almost all mankind, than
that which an odd Philosophical Hypothesis or dotage leads a few such Atheists
to, who could not without hard study, have extirpated the belief of a God (a
morally Governing Deity) from their own minds: and so un^^litur(...) have
blotted out all Morality, Religion, Humanity, true Policy and Honesty at once.
And because they believe no rewards or Punishments in another life, they make
man but an Ingenious Beast, and his Reason to be given him but to serve his
Appetite, and sensitive Life; so that by their open principles, if any one
Bedlam or Idiot could set all the City on fire for his own commodity, he did as
well as he that would save it: and if a Traitor could but save himself by the
destruction of a whole Kingdom, or the world, it were well done,

And thus, that yet Kings may not think him unkind to them, he sets them above
God as to all civil obligations: for cap. 19. he over and over tells you that
God has no other Kingdom or Reign over men, but by those that rule us (that is
the strongest) and therefore all Religious worship and exercise of godliness is
but the determination of Rulers for the public peace, and is wholly in their
power and at their will: yea that Justice and Charity are not matters of Right
and commanded, but by Rulers, and all Religion has the force of Law or Right
only by their Decree: for in the state of nature, Reason has no more Right
than Appetite; but those that live after the Law of Appetite, as well as those
that live after the Law of Reason, have Right to all they can do or have: and
are incapable of sin, and not punished by God, but carried about with the
Universe by natural motion: That the Jews gave God his Kingdom over them, and
he had none but by their resignation of their power to him; and then it was no
other than Moses his Reign; and when they had given their power to the King of
Babylon, Gods Kingdom and his Right did presently cease: That God having no
Kingdom but men's, cannot be conceived, as a Prince or Lawgiver, giving any Laws
to men, but as involving all in necessity: That all divine documents revealed
by the light of nature or prophetically, have no force of a command from God
immediately but from Rulers; that as to God, all things come alike to all, and
Salus Populi (that is every man's commodity and lust) is the highest Law to
which all both humane and divine must be accommodated: and no man knows by
Nature that he owes any obedience to God, or can know it by Reason, but
onl(...) by Revelation (which his Book is written to deride) page 184.

We suppose the Reader will think we have tediously digressed against this
Apostate Jew: but the reason is, because the pernicious book having most
subtly assaulted the Text of the old Testament, is greedily sought and cried
up (with Hobbes his equal) in this unhappy time, even among those whose place
should make them more regardful of the interest of Magistrates at least; even
by those Atheists whom God calls Fools, Psalm. 14. 1. but by themselves are
called Wits, and our business is more to defend the truth than our selves.

The sum of our Judgments against these pernicious principles is this, 1. That
there is a God, and were there not a God, there could be nothing.

2. That God is not known to us immediately here, but in a glass, or by the
means of some effects.

3. Therefore we have no Notion or Name of God which is not in some sort
Borrowed, or which is formal and adequate to his Essence.

4. Yet nothing invisible is so clearly and certainly intelligible and certain
to man's mind, as God, as to the (...) sit, that he is, and to much of the Quid
sit, what he is; though imperfectly apprehended; and though nothing be so
incomprehensible; even as no visible thing is more visible than the Sun, and
its being and part of its (...) furthest from uncertainty; and yet has in it
most unknown.

5. The Notions we have of God, though Borrowed and Analogical, are not useless
nor fallacious, but imperfect and such as lead to perfect knowledge: And he
that will not use these, must use none.

6. We have no immediate knowledge of any higher nobler essence than our own
souls, from which to borrow our Notions of God: still separating all that
signifies imperfection and acknowledging their defectiveness.

7. He that laying by these, will from any other lower baser Nature, form
Notions of God, shall have lower, baser Notions of him.

8. Man's Soul is a Spirit, having essentially the Virtue, force, or inclined
power, of Vital-Activity, Intellection and Volition (Three in one): all which
are certainly notified by their Acts.

9. As Vital-self-moving is more noble than the motion of mere passives or
inanimates, so Vitality with Understanding and Free Will, is more noble than
brutish motion without Intellection or Free Will: else worms and Beasts were
nobler natures than men, and should be our Covernours.

10. Therefore to feign God to be a mere principle of Universal motion as the
Spring in a Watch, or the poise of a Clock, is to debase him below the Vitality
of Beasts: and to feign him to be a mere sensitive principle of motion, is to
debase him below humane nature. And to feign him to be a mere
Vital-Intellectual mover without Will, Love and Voluntary Goodness, is to think
of him in a maimed defective notion, as baser than man's, whose Will is one of
his noblest faculties, without which he has no Love to or complacency in
himself or any other. Even as we think of a man of mere speculative knowledge,
who nevertheless may be stark naught: (And so men think of the Devil himself).

11. Gods will is the cause and Conserver and end of all things, and therefore
to deny his will is to deny all things.

12. Gods will has all that Liberty which belongs to Perfection, but no
liberty or indifferency which implies imperfection.

13. The True Idea of Gods Nature then is, That he is a SPIRIT of LIFE,
INTELLECTION and WILL, MOST PERFECT.

14. All the Being, with all the Vitality, Intellect and will, the Power,
wisdom and goodness, which is in man or any Creature, being from God, he must
needs have more than All himself, either formally or eminently, for he can give
nothing more noble than what he has and is.

15. Man having Vitality, Intellection and Free Will, and being a Sociable
creature, each one having need of others and disposed to converse, and placed
among others, is a Creature made to be Governed according to his Reason, by
Verities, and according to his Free Will by proposed Good; and not merely moved
as a Stone, or Engine, nor merely moved as Bruits by sense: that is, he is to
be ruled by Laws. This one of us has so fully proved in a treatise called the
Reasons of the Christian Religion, part 1. cap. 8. that it must not here be
done over again.

16. If the Nature of man were not to be morally governed by proposed Truth and
Good, his Reason and Will were vain; he should not be ruled as a man but as a
stone or beast: sense must do all: all humane government were impossible or
evil, for want of capable subjects: no Villainy must be controlled: folly must
bear equal sway with wisdom: children must not obey their Parents, any more
than Parents their children. Yea by the Principles of this Maledictus Spinosa
and his tribe, the children that can but conquer natural instinct, and escape
humane punishment, may as lawfully kill their Parents to get the inheritance,
as Love and Honor them: and the Parents may as lawfuly murder all their
children, to avoid the trouble of keeping them, as to nourish them.

17. Man being naturally made to be Governed, God must needs be his supreme
governor, as having the chief Right and sole capacity and aptitude. For 1.
there is no other can rule Universally, but partially. Kings rule their
Kingdoms, but God rules the world. 2. Else there were no Governor over
Sovereigns, and so no Blasphemies, no Murders (even of Millions) no Perjuries
etc. were unlawful to them, nor were it possible for them to sin. 3. Then no
plagues, slames, wars or death were divine punishments, nor any to be feared
here or hereafter, but men might as safely defy and blaspheme God, as Love and
Honor him. 4. Else there were no Law of Nations obliging many to mutual
justice, but only interest and contract. 5. Else no heart actions were morally
good or evil, (because not under the Government of men) He that hated God and
Goodness and all good men, for his lusts sake, and studied to do all the
mischief he could; he that longs for the murder of his own children, Parents or
friends, or of his King, were as good as he that Loved them all: for where
there is no Law there is no transgression: and so all morality is nullified. 6.
If God were not the supreme Governor, no King or person could have true Right
to govern, for there could be no effect for want of a cause. The People cannot
give the Ruling Power which they never had (their personal Rule being of
another kind) and God having prevented them by his establishment of Government
in the world, who gives Parents their Governing Power, which is the first.

18. Gods actual Laws do prove him to be a Lawgiver: even those of Nature,
which all such Atheists shall never be able commonly to obliterate. And the
consent of all mankind still do and will condemn such principles as deny them.

19. A law is the signification of the Rulers will, constituting what shall be
due from and to the subject, as an instrument of Government.

20. Gods Laws are first natural, and next by special Revelation.

21. Gods Law of Nature is all That in the stated natura rerum in all the
world, by which his will is signified to us as aforesaid about our duty.

22. So that Gods Law univocally and properly is in genere objectivo, and in
genere signi.

23. Man's own nature as in order it stands related and disposed toward God
and all things and persons circumstant, is the chief part of this objective Law
of Nature; from whence his duty resulteth, and Gods will is notified.

24. When the Law is said to be written in our Hearts, it is called the Law
univocally, antecedently to the Heart reception, and the reception it self is
not another Law.

25. This reception is by the Intellect, will, or executive power: And 1. to
know a Law, is not a Law; 2. To will or Love a Law is not a Law; 3. To be ready
or disposed to practice a Law is not a Law, unless equivocally.

26. They that confound these things by the name of a Light or Law within us,
and then talk of the sufficiency of it, do but deceive when they are deceived.

27. What can they (with sense) mean by [The Light or Law within us] but, 1.
either the Reception of the objective light or Law which contains, 1. the
Act, 2. with its object (as it is become an Ens Intentionale Essential to the
Act, as in it self it is Ens Reale) or else an innate disposition hereunto: 2.
Or else some influx of God (natural or supernatural) by which as the chief
efficient he exciteth the faculties to receive the Objective Light or Law? And
if they meant this second (that all men have sufficient help from Gods influx)
they should say so, that men might understand them. If they mean that all have
sufficient knowledge, faith, Love and Goodness; even Infants and wilful
despisers of knowledge, and those that think it service to God, to kill his
servants, and all the blinded sinners in the world, why do these men pretend to
teach them more or blame their errors; and do not forbid all teaching in the
world even of Parents or any other? Why did Christ and his Prophets and
Apostles teach men that were born wise enough? If they mean that all men's
Nature it self is a sufficient intellectual objective Light and Law, without
any external light or objective Law, that is without seeing or hearing or
thinking of any creature of God but ourselves, then they that are born blind
and deaf, have all the same Light and Law as others. If they mean only that
men's faculties are sufficiently capable and receptive of the effects of Gods
objective Law of Nature, what does the confounding Metaphor of a Light within
us do to the notifying of their minds? But men that neither understand the
matter nor themselves, will trouble the world with teaching them that they need
no teaching.

28. We call those Revelations natural, which the ordinary nature of things in
themselves, and effects, exhibiteth to us: and we call those Revelations
special and supernatural, which God exhibiteth to us, by means extraordinary,
quite out of the way of his common operations, and such as no natural cause
uses to produce, (as to raise the dead, to cause the fire not to burn one, to
send an Apparition, an Angel or a voice from heaven, etc.) Though we pretend
not to know how much of any natural cause unknown to us may be used by God in
any of these.

29. It is impudency in them that pretend to Cartesian clarity and certainty in
all that they will receive, yet to take on them to be so well acquainted with
God and his operations, and the frame of nature as to tell the world, that
Liberty of will is inconsistent with Gods nature, that he never does a miracle,
nor alters the course of the smallest particle in nature, nor does nothing in
the world which is not the necessary effect of natural second causes, as well
as of his own will, as he put them in a set course of motion from eternity, or
from the creation, with abundance of such dreams, which whatever they are in
themselves are certainly unknown to them to be so, and therefore an unfit
medium whence to infer the nullity of all divine Government, Laws and morality.

30. Both natural and supernatural Laws or Revelations are to make man wise and
good: and so are said to be written and put into his heart, when they have
these effects. But if the effects themselves were all Gods Law, then, 1. God
had as many Laws as persons in the world; 2. And his Law in the same person
changed, as his knowledge and goodness changed; 3. And those that can but keep
themselves ignorant and bad enough, shall therefore not be bad or have no sin
because they have no Law.

31. There is no actual knowledge born in man (unless possibly an unexpressible
consciousness of our own being); but only a Disposition in the Intellective
faculty to know some things presently, and easily, and some things hardly and
by slow degrees.

32. What ever the understanding can know at last with the most diligent
search, it had naturally some power to know from its Original. For nothing does
that which it cannot do (mediately or immediately): therefore the noble nature
of the soul is better gathered from the seize of some, than the baseness
of it from the Ignorance of others, that excite not their natural faculties.

33. Gods Law of Nature binds mankind (ordinarily) to live in Governed
societies, and has not left it free to them to do otherwise. Parental
Authority is conjunct with our first being, and natural necessity obliges to
the rest.

34. Civil Ecclesiastical and Economical Governors, being instituted by God,
are his Officers, and receive their power from his Institution and Universal
Laws, and not from the people, who do but choose, or consent to the person that
shall receive it.

35. God only is the Universal Ruler, and no Pope or mortal man is capable of
it: and God only makes Universal Laws (what ever General Councils may pretend
to.)

36. Gods Laws bind Kings as well as subjects, and give force to their Laws,
and nothing of man's is obligatory to us, which is against them; for none can
dispense with them.

37. All Government that is lawful is for Gods Glory and the Common Good. And
Laws that are certainly and notoriously against God and the common Good, have
no true obliging power to formal obedience on the soul.

38. Yet such particular Laws disoblige not the subject from subjection, nor
from keeping up the honor of Governors, while they Govern for God and the
common Good in the main.

39. Though the common description of Tyrants in Politicians and Lawyers is
(quoad exercitium) that they are such as Govern not for the common good, but
for their own, yet men must take heed, that hence they infer nor either, 1.
that we are made judges of the secret intentions of our Rulers hearts, or 2.
that one or a few Laws or actions may denominate them such, 3. yea though we
knew that they preferred themselves in their intents, it is enough to us, if
they preserve the common good in their practice. Else almost all ungodly Rulers
would be Tyrants, for it is their common vice to be most for themselves.

40. This Atheistical Politician, who allows every man to prefer himself
before all the world, does make that in Princes, which all men have called
Tyranny, to be the very Law of Nature.

41. One man is less worth than multitudes caeteris paribus; and every man is a
part of the Universe, and is not born for himself alone: therefore howsoever
sense may reach but to the Individual fleshly interest; common reason tells us
that he lives not like a man, who prefers himself before his Country, and
had rather Millions or Kingdoms perished than he alone.

42. Our common Nature tells us, that man's will was made to Love Good as
Good, and not to Love our personal commodity alone: and that an excellent
person or thing in another part of the world, is amiable, though never like to
be a commodity to us: therefore the greatest Good should be greatliest loved,
even in our Neighbors as well as in our selves, and our Country above our
selves.

43. Though a Prince have not Authority to make Laws to the hurt of the
Commonwealth as such, or sub hac ratione, yet he has Authority to judge what
is for the good of the Commonwealth as a Ruler, and subjects must acquiesce in
his judgment, when cogent evidence of the contrary does not forbid them. And
when they know that a Law is against the common good, and obliges not to
formal obedience, yet because the general Law of Honoring our Rulers still
continues, and sometimes disobeying may tend more to the common hurt, than the
obedience of that hurtful Law may do, where God himself forbids it not,
material obedience in such cases is a duty.

44. No private personal injury may be revenged upon the King, nor upon the
Commonwealth: no not by words.

45. The Sovereign or the Body of the Commonwealth may neither of them seek
the hurt, much less the destruction of each other; nor do any thing that
tends thereunto: for their union is the Existent Constitution, which
dissolution destroys.

46. Those that dispute for a Power in the Body of the Commonwealth to destroy
the Head, or a Power in the Sovereign to destroy the Body, if he please, do
(either as ignorant or cunningly treacherous enemies of both) sow the seeds of
suspicion and enmity between them, and seek to make them afraid of each other as
of Tigers or enemies, and by the terrible word of [A power to destroy] make
them apprehend Destruction as at the door, and a civil war almost begun: and
such are the most pernicious and unsufferable Counselors.

47. And so various and cross are personal interests, and so weak men's
judgments, and so many their errors; lusts and passions, their temptations
and ill Counselors, that if it be maintained lawful for the Head or Body to
destroy each other, and all the safety of each lie merely in the others will,
it will scarce be possible long to keep up a mutual confidence, without which
societies are sick or lifeless.

48. Those that persuade Rulers to Govern only by a frighting force, do
treacherously tempt them to seem to the people as their enemies.

49. God has not made any one form of Government universally necessary,
Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy; and who has the highest power, and in what
degree, and under what limits, is not to be decided by Divines from the word of
God alone, but by Lawyers from the Constitutions of the respective
Commonwealths. And it is usually of ill consequence, when Divines are too
forward to go out of their calling, and to be determiners herein; Especially
when few of them use to be well studied in the Laws of the Land; at least not
comparably to Lawyers, who have made it the business of their lives.

50. Those who dissolve the obligation of Oaths and Vows are most perfidious
enemies to Kings and Commonwealths: much more those Infidels, who make every
man's personal sensuality and lust to be the Highest Law of Nature, besides
which nothing obliges him to keep his Covenants or vows, nor to spare the
lives of Kings, Parents or any neighbors. And though it is true that every man
loves himself and fears him that can hurt him, yet so cross are men's sensual
interests, so blind and various are their opinions, so violent their lusts, so
desperate their passions, so cunning their contrivances, so many their
opportunities and temptations, that the lives of Kings are never safe, if all
men's consciences are once disobliged from the bond of Oaths and divine
commands: which if the Atheists themselves did not perceive, they would not
make Religion a necessary humane project for keeping Vulgar Wits in obedience:
but they will shortly find that it was necessary from a nobler foundation and
to a nobler end.

In sum, They that, 1. make man but a subtle beast, and make his Reason but a
projecting Servant to his sense, 2. and deny all the Law of Nature save
sensuality, 3. and make all the vitiosity of man to be his natural Law, 4. and
then take up an answerable Idea of God, as being no moral Governor to whom no
man owes obedience, not just, not merciful, but only the equal spring of an
unalterable engine called the universe, 5. and make all things that man can do
to be lawful, and all that ever is done to be equally good, as being all but
the effect of necessitating premotion, 6. and that no man owes Love, justice
or duty to Parents, King or Country, but what his personal sensuality
perceives to be a fit means for it self, 7. and that it is no sin to kill King
or Parents or Children or Neighbors; if he can escape revenge and hurt, and
serve his lust thereby, 8. and that no Oaths bind him to his King or Country,
longer than he finds it for his sensual good, 9. and that he that can kill or
depose the King, and get possession, has as good a Title, as he had, 10. and
that all men are to be held by us as enemies except Subjects and confederates,
11. and that no man is to fear any punishment, nor hope for any reward from God
in this life or in the life to come, 12. and so that Epicurean Physics are the
sole Phlosophy, and morality is nothing but a vulgar deceit: I say they that
hold and publish this, are such as we hold more worthy to be banished five
miles from all Cities and Corporations, than our selves: And we leave their
Principles and ours to the judgment of posterity, wishing (in vain) that those
Conformists who are thought sufficient for the sacred work without us, and have
access to those whom we may not coverse with, had proved more sufficient to
have preserved Cities and Corporations and the Land from Infidelity, Popery and
raging sensuality.

II. WE should next have compared our principles of subjection with those of
the Papists, that it might be seen whether we are more worthy to be driven from
our Superiors, from Cities and Corporations, than they: But their Doctrine and
Practice is so copiously cited out of the express words of multitudes of their
chiefest Writers, lately by Henry Fowlis, after abundance more that have done
it heretofore, that we will not now desire of the unsatisfied any more than to
read the words of the seventh Council at Rome under Gregory 7. in Bin. Tom. 3.
par. 2. page 1288. [Agite nunc Patres and Principes Sanctissimi, ut omnis
mundus intelligat and cognoscat, quia si potestis in coelo ligare and solvere,
potestis in terra Imperia, Regna, Principatus, Ducatus, Marchias, Comitatus and
omnium hominum possessiones, pro meritis tollere unicuique and concedere. Si
enim spiritualia judicatis, quid de saecularibus vos posse credendum est? and
si Angelos dominantes omnibus superbis Principibus judicabitis, quid de illorum
servis facere potestis? Addiscant nunc Reges and omnes saeculi Principes quanti
vos estis, quid potestis: and timeant parvipendere jussionem Ecclesie vestrae.]
Go to now most Holy Fathers and Princes, that all the world may understand and
know, that if you can bind and loose in Heaven, you have power on earth to take
away from every man or give Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities, Dukedomes,
Markquisates, Earldoms and all men's possessions according to their merits. For
if you judge things spiritual, what is to be believed that you can do about
Temporals? and if you shall judge Angels who Lord it over all proud Princes,
what can you do with those that are their servants? Let Kings and all the
Princes of the world now learn, how great you are and what you can do, and let
them fear to slight the command of your Church].

And Council. Romans 3. ibid. p. 1282. where Gregory the 7. depriveth the Emperor
of all his Dominions, and absolveth all Christians from their Oaths to him, and
forbids them to serve him.

And that he will but read Can. 1. and 3. Council. general. Later. sub Innocent.
3. where it is Decreed that [the Metropolitan shall excommunicate all Temporal
Lords that exterminate not Heretics (who deny Transubstantiation) from their
Dominions, and if they amend not, the Pope shall give their dominions to
others, and absolve their Vassals from their fidelity].

Where note, 1. That one Heresy here is Believing the senses of all sound men,
that Bread is Bread and Wine is Wine, when they see, feel, smell and taste it:
and whereas Spinosa allows sense to be the Law of Nature, these men make it
Death and Damnation to believe our senses: and so we must not only renounce
Reason and Humanity, but all our senses; and Temporal Lords must lose their
Dominions that will suffer men, that renounce not manhood and sense too, to be
their subjects. A hard lesson to Princes and people! 2. Note that this is an
approved General Council; and though charitably questioned by Bishop Tailor,
Bishop Gunning and Bishop Peirson and some others, yet fully owned by the
Papists, and defended by the Answerers of Dr. Gunning and Dr. Peirson: so that
whether the Canons be Authentic in themselves or no, is nothing to the point
in hand, while they are taken to be such by them: Surius says [no man in his
wits can doubt but it was an Ecumenical famous Council in which etc.] Binius
(To. 3. par. 2. p. 1449.) calls it Council. Later. Oecum. 12. Approb. in Crab.
To. 2. p. 945. they are called decreta council. General. In Caranza, Acta
Council. Lateran. etc. 3. Note that General Councils are the Religion it self of
the Papists and not refusable by any as private Doctors opinions are. We desire
the Reader to compare our Doctrine with theirs. We take nothing for our Faith
or Religion but the Scripture, and therefore can have no seditious Religion,
unless the Scripture be such; which if any man misinterpret, it is his Private
opinion: which being proved against him, he only is accountable for, and
therefore to be banished five miles from Cities and Corporations if he deserve
it, and not his Neighbors for his sake.

CHAP. II.
Of Gods Government and the perfection of his Laws, and of men's Additions.
1. THere is one only GOD, who is the Absolute Universal Rector of all mankind.

2. He and He only has the power of universal Legislation and judgment, that
is, of making Laws obligatory to all mankind, and judging all thereby.

3. This work of Universal Legislation he has performed, and his Laws are
extant.

4. The Law of Nature and the Canon of sacred Scripture are this Law.

5. The Law of God and only it, is obligatory by Primitive, (underived)
authority.

6. Divine Revelation or testimony or assertion, and it only is absolutely
infallible by the absolute Infallibility and Veracity of the revealer.

7. Gods Laws are not only sufficient but Perfect, as made by him that has no
imperfection.

8. Their sufficiency and perfection is not to be measured by humane
presumptions, or by Carnal wit, that would teach God what to speak, and how:
and then accuse his Law of material or modal imperfections, because it is not
such as they think it should be; or else affirm that to be there which is not
there, because they judge that it ought to be there: But it consists in their
perfect Aptitude to their proper ends.

9. It is wise and valid reasoning to prove first that it is Gods Law, and
thence to infer that it is sufficient and perfect: But it is a foolish
Reasoning to being with the more uncertain assumptions, and to argue that It is
not perfect, Ergo it is not Gods Laws; or to dream, that to be Gods Law, and to
be imperfect are consistent.

10. When we say it is Perfect, we mean only as is said, formaliter and
respectively as to the proper end, but not, 1. Materialiter, 2. modaliter, 3.
vel finaliter absolute and simpliciter; As if the Angels in Heaven had not, 1.
more perfect work prescribed them, 2. and by a more perfect mode of Revelation,
3. or to more perfect immediate ends: But as the sinless Saints in Heaven may
be less perfect in positive Holiness than some Angels, and yet as perfectly
Innocent and free from all sin; even so Gods Law for the Government of
imperfect man on earth, is positively in the foresaid respects less perfect
than the Heavenly Laws; and yet as blameless and perfect in its kind as to its
proper use and ends.

11. Therefore the Historical method and the repetitions, and the vulgar
phrases, and the absence of Philosophical niceties, is part of the perfection,
and not of any imperfection of the Laws.

12. The work of Gods Laws is by Authoritative Institution to determine what
shall be due from man by way of obedience, and what shall be due to man by way
of Reward and Punishment, and so to be the Rule, first of Duty, and then of
judgment.

13. Only Gods Laws can make due everlasting Rewards or Punishments.

14. No man is to make himself a public judge or Executioner of Gods Laws,
without Gods Commission.

15. Gods Laws are not only Perfect as to Essentials, but as to Integral parts
also, yea and to all Accidents and appurtenances of them.

16. It belongs not to Gods Universal Laws to command in particular all that
ever shall become a Duty to particular persons, to the end of the world.

17. As the particular case of Countries, persons and things do vary, so many
things may be one man's duty that are not another, and a duty at one time, and
in one place, which are not so in another: which therefore were not to be
particularly determined in an Universal Law; but only General Laws given for
their future determination.

18. Gods Laws are as perfect for duties of Love and Justice to man, as for
duty of Love and worship to God.

19. But because the materials of humane justice and Beneficences are more
mutable than those of holy love and worship, therefore there is incomparably
more left to humane determination in that, than in this.

20. It belongs to the sufficiency and perfection of Gods Laws, to determine
of all things in specie (or particularly) which as moral means are Universally
necessary to the good of all mankind (whether greater or lesser good) in all
times or places of the world. And to make all that Duty for men, which shall be
Universally duty to all the world; and to forbid all that evil which shall be
sin Universally to all. For there is no Universal Governor but God and our
Redeemer, therefore there is no universal Law but his. It is usurpation against
the Right and Laws of God and of Jesus Christ, for any either Person or
Collective body, Prince, Pope or Council, to claim an Universal Sovereignty
over all the persons, Kingdoms or Churches in the world. For as none of them
are naturally capable of such a trust, as to the exercise, so de facto God has
not committed such a Sovereignty and trust to any personal or collective
Vicegerent under Christ. Therefore they accuse Gods Laws of Imperfection, who
say that he has left out any thing (both in Nature and Scripture) which is of
universal necessity, or which man may make to become a duty by any one
Universal Law.

21. Every particular Kingdom and Church, being part of Christ's Universal
Kingdom and Church, no man may Usurp any of Christ's power, or office, over a
part, no more then over the whole (Though the universal usurpation be far the
greatest sin against him).

22. Therefore no man may do that which either imports that they have the
same Power in that Church or Kingdom as Christ has, (but only subordinate
power) or that his Laws are defective and imperfect, as to that particular
Church or Kingdom.

23. What Christ has appropriated to himself, as the work or matter of his own
Law, must appear from the perusal of that Law it self, and by seeing what he
has there determined of, and so not left for man to do, (unless as the
executioners of his Laws, repeating them by commanding that they be practiced.)

24. It is certain that as Christ as Mediator is King of the Church, and has
Legislative power, and did exercise it partly by himself on earth, so he
commissioned his Apostles in general to teach all Nations to observe all things
whatever he had commanded them, and promised them the Holy Ghost, as his Agent
or Advocate to bring all that he had taught them to their remembrance, and to
inspire them infallibly and lead them into all truth, so that the work of
Legislation was performed by Christ, by the Holy Ghost as his Advocate or Agent
in the Apostles, Matthew, 28. 19, 20. Ephesians. 1. 21, 22, 23. Ephesians. 4. 8, 10, 11. Joh.
14. 26. Joh. 16. 7, 8, 13. Mic. 4. 2. Isa. 2. 3. and 8. 16; 20. and 42. 4. Heb.
7. 12. James 1. 25. and 2. 12.

25. It is visible and certain that Christ by himself and his spirit in his
Apostles has particularly ordained, what Articles of faith shall be believed,
by Revealing to us so completely the will of God, that there shall no other
supernatural Revolation be needful of things to be believed as necessary to
Salvation, or to the right worshipping of God. Gal. 1. 7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Heb. 11. 40. Jam. 1. 25. Col. 4. 12.
etc.

26. The Law of Nature and of Christ also have ordained that God shall be
worshipped publicly in solemn Assemblies, in a reverent and holy manner, at
certain stated times.

27. Christ has ordained, what persons they shall be, and how qualified, who
shall be admitted into his Church, as the members of it; and who shall be kept
out.

28. Christ has ordained that Baptism shall be the door into his Church, and
described that Baptism, and required that all that will enter do thus
Sacramentally Covenant with God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and dedicate
themselves to him. Matthew. 28. 19.

29. Christ has ordained that certain persons qualified for that office, shall
be separated as his Ministers to preach his Gospel, and baptize those that are
converted, and gather Churches, and to be Pastors of the Churches gathered, and
this to continue to the end. Matthew. 28. 20. Act. 14. 22, 23. Tit. 1. 3, 4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14.

30. He has appointed to these Officers, a threefold work in subordination to
his own Prophetical, Priestly and Kingly office, that is, to Teach the
Churches, to guide them in public worship as their mouth to God, and to Rule
them by sacred Discipline. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2. 2, 24. 1 Cor. 14. 15,
16. etc. Act. 20. 7, 11. Act. 2. 41, 42. Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24.

31. He has given them in Scripture a complete body of the doctrine which they
must preach, as the word of God; and has ordained that public prayers, and
praises of God, and administration of the Sacrament of the Lords supper, shall
be the public worship which they shall offer to God; and has left them
instructions how to exercise Church discipline, as to admonitions,
excommunications and absolutions. 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. Act. 2. 41, 42. 1 Cor. 11.
20, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 14. Math. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 1. Cor. 5. 2 John 10, 11.
Tit. 3. 10. 2 These. 3. 6, 14.

32. Christ by his spirit in his Apostles has separated the Lords day, the
first day of the week, to be the weekly stated day for the sacred Assemblies
for the public worshipping of God: As Scripture and Church history fully prove.

33. These things ordained by Christ himself are called Gods Worship, in a
double respect, both as they are Actions done to his immediate honor; and as
they are means by himself appointed to that use, and so are his
Worship-Ordinances or Institutions: And so they are called Gods worship, in the
Primary and eminent sense.

34. There are abundance of Actions subordinate to these, being but the right
modifying and circumstantiating of them, which may be called Worship and
secundary diminutive sense (as being uncovered, (...)bowing, (...)standing,
kneeling, the words of prayer and praise, etc. anonenumerated); which as to
these Worship-ordinances are but Adjuncts or modes; which God has not
commanded in particulars; but given general Laws for the performance of them,
requiring men themselves to choose and use them prudently, not as they will
themselves but according to these General Laws: And such an act of man is no
sinful addition to the Laws of Christ.

35. Christ has taken down the Judaical Law of Moses.

36. No man has any authority to make Laws about Gods worship, but what Christ
has given him; he being now made the Universal King.

37. When a controversy arises between Christ's prerogative and man's, we take
it for a case to be tenderly handled. We would go as far in acknowledging the
Authority of Princes, as will stand with our Loyalty and fidelity to Christ;
But as we must be tender of their Rights and honors, so we must be more tender
of his. And nothing can be due to the servant which derogateth from the honor
of the Master.

38. Therefore Princes and Pastors should not unnecessarily bring their
subjects into so great a strait, by needless Laws for additions in Religion,
where the consciences of men fearing God, must unavoidably be troubled and
tormented by the difficulty, viz. between a fear of Treason and disobedience
against Christ, and of disobedience to their Prince or Pastors.

39. And it is the more unexcusable to rack and torment and divide the Church
by unnecessary Additions in Religion, because Christ has commanded us so much
himself already, as the carnal heart of man repineth at, and therefore will not
be brought to practice it; but most men fly it as a precise and too tedious
and strict a course. And when we grudge at Christ's Laws as too great a burden,
and too much ado, we should not condemn our selves by adding more.

40. Christ has declared it to be against his mind and Law, that unnecessary
Laws and burdens in Religion should be made for and laid upon the Churches,
Act. 15. 28.

41. It is against the will and Law of Christ, that we should use things
otherwise indifferent, scandalously or temptingly, to the ensnaring and
endangering of men's souls and the dishonor of Religion. Romans 14. and 15. 1
Cor. 8. No man therefore ought to make Laws about Religion, which shall enjoin
such an evil use of such things.

42. To invent and command new public worship-ordinances (either as in Gods
name or their own) which are not the mere commanded modifying and ordering of
Gods own worship-ordinances, but as to the Nature, use and Reasons of them, are
coordinate or of the same kind, and which have no peculiar usefulness to our
age or people more than to another; nor any new reason for them but what was
extant at the making of Gods Laws; so that though the Imposition be not
universal, yet there is none but an universal reason for that imposition; this
seems to us to be an accusation of Christ's Laws of omission and
defectiveness, and an Usurpation of his Legislative power.

43. To add more doctrines or articles of faith, which God has not revealed in
nature or Scripture, and to require belief or profession of belief of them, as
to the pleasing of God, or any religious ends, does seem to us an Usurpation,
and an unjust accusation of Gods word as insufficient.

44. To forbid Religious Assemblies, or alter their ends and principal use, is
to usurp, and to contradict the Laws of Christ.

45. To alter the qualifications of Church members, and forbid those that
Christ requires us to receive, or receive such as Christ forbids us to
receive, is to contradict his laws, by usurpation, whether Magistrates or
Pastors do it.

46. To forbid Baptism, or to alter it, or make a new Sacrament of admission,
or a new consecrating, or dedicating Symbol for the solemnization of our
Covenant with God, as signifying his grace or the conveiance thereof, and a new
Symbol of the Christian Church, or visible badge of Christianity (as if the
Knights of the Garter should make a Symbol or badge of their order, besides
that which the King has made) this does seem to us an usurpation, and an
accusation of Gods Law as insufficient. Upon which account (not presuming
Pragmatically to judge of other men) we fear for our selves, lest we should sin
if we used the Cross in Baptism in the English manner. Because it is called a
Dedicating sign, and signifies the Passion of Christ and the grace procured by
it on his part, and also our solemn dedication to Christ, as Baptism does, and
so seems to us a kind of Sacrament, and a badge or Symbol of our Religion.
And has no reason for its Institution which concerns not all Christians as
well as us, and which was not extant in the Apostles time; so that if it had
been fit to be made a Law, it was as fit then as now, and as fit to be an
universal Law as a particular: and therefore we dare not so accuse Christ of
omission. And it is not a mere decent ordering of Baptism, but a new ordinance
of men, to most of the same uses. Yet we deny not but it is left to us, by what
sign we will profess our own consent to the Covenant of Grace (by word,
writing, or gesture,) which nature or Custom makes a sign of Consent; But not
on that pretense to institute a Symbol of our Religion for self-dedication
signifying the causes and Graces of the Covenant.

47. To forbid preaching, or Prayer or Praise, or the Lords Supper, or alter
them, and to ordain homogeneal means of our own, seems to us usurpation and
unlawful.

48. To alter the qualifications of Christ's Ministers, or the nature of their
Office, and to invent new Coordinate Officers, or Church polities, seems to
us to be usurpation. Though as actions circasacra, so Officers for those
actions, may be appointed.

49. How many Pastors one Church shall have, and how often and where they shall
assemble, and how far the Juniors or weaker shall be guided by the Abler and
Elder, is undetermined particularly.

50. Though on new occasions anniversary days may be appointed for holy
worship, and may meet for it any day of the week, yet to set apart another
weekly day for holy worship, wholly and statedly, seems to us usurpation and
an accusation of Gods Laws.

51. To overthrow, or prohibit Christ's Church Discipline, or to set up another
(that is not merely subordinate to it, modally to promote it,) seems to us an
usurpation.

52. So is it for Laymen to usurp the Power of the Keys given to the Pastors,
or for a New kind of humane Bishops or Pastors to usurp them. Much more to make
an Universal Pastor of Pastors, personal or Collective, Pope or General Council.

53. Gods Universal absolute Laws may not be nulled, abrogated, derogate,
relaxed or dispensed with by any Creature whatsoever.

54. It is a great Law of God, about the modes of holy Assemblies and worship,
that all be done, 1. to his Glory, 2. and to Edification: For they are the very
natural Law, which determines of the End of Instituted mediate Laws.

55. The Grand Law of LOVE is the first and last, the Summary and the final Law
of God; that is, to LOVE GOD first, in and for Himself, and then to love his
Image appearing in his works, especially on the Rational creature, according to
the measures of that Image on them; which is, to Love God as God with all our
heart and soul and might, and our neighbor as our selves.

56. This Love was man's great duty in Innocence; and in perfection shall be our
work in Glory.

57. This was that state of Holiness that man fell from, and which Christ came
to reconcile and to restore him to: And which is peculiarly called GODLINESS or
SANCTIFICATION in the New Testament, as distinct from Faith, in its narrower,
mediate, official notion.

58. As the work of Christ our Redeemer and Mediator is to bring man back to
God the Creator; so Faith in Christ, and all Evangelical positive Institutions,
are the Bellows and fuel of this Love; and means to it as the end.

59. The expressions of this Love are not of equal necessity with the Love it
self; but some of them more mutable.

60. Caeteris paribus the expressions of our Love of God, are to be preferred
before the expressions of our Love to men. But God has made some Great Acts of
Charity to men, to be Greater expressions of our Love to Himself, than some
smaller Immediate expressions of it to Him.

61. Our Love to the whole world is a greater duty than our Love to our
Country, and our Love to our Country is a greater duty than our Love to our
Parents, Magistrates, or our selves; As the Goodness of the Objects is
diversifyed.

62. In some cases God has laid some special charge on us by his own Law,
which way first to exercise our Love: But where he has not so done, the
Greatest Good in the exercises of Love is to be preferred to a lesser, and the
lesser is no duty but a sin, when it would exclude the greater, (Comparatively).

63. If a King or Parent command me to forbear a necessary Act of Love (or
expression of it) (as to save a man's life, or soul as far as I am able when
there is great hope of the success) unless finis gratia, a Greater Good oblige
me to forbear it, the Authority of the commander does not oblige me; as not
dissolving Gods obligations.

64. The command of Order and Decency in the celebration of public worship in
the Assemblies, is a general precept of Natural right: But it is only the
media, which (in some cases propter finem) do cease; that is, when necessity
imposes some disorder and undecency, as without which the end or thing ordered
must be forsaken; and so they cease to be a means. But out of such cases of
Necessity, they are of perpetual obligation.

65. Though Order and Decency be necessary, and some particular circumstances
by which it is expressed indefinitely; yet not always the very same
Circumstance and expression: But one may serve as well as another.

66. If one man will call these mutable Circumstances, (as genuflexion, putting
off the hat, etc.) by the name of Worship, and so say that man may command
new-external worship; And another will call them only Circumstances of worship,
and not worship, and then say that man may not command new acts of worship]
this is but lis de nomine: and they must agree first of the sense of the word
worship before they trouble the Church with strife.

67. I will instance in twenty particulars in which we called Puritans and
Non-conformists do grant that it belongs not to the Perfection of Gods word
particularly to determine, but only to give General Laws for determination.

1. What day and hour (besides the Lords day) the Church shall meet. 2. Of what
length Readings, Sermons, prayers and meetings shall be. 3. When and how often
public fasts and thanksgiving are to be celebrated. 4. In what place the
Church shall meet. 5. Of the convenient shape of the Temples, Ornaments, seats,
bells, Clocks, etc. 6. Of the place and shape of the Pulpit, reading place,
font, table, etc. 7. Of the subject of the present Sermon. 8. Of the Method of
the Sermon. 9. Of the words of Sermon and prayers and praises. 10. Of the using
or not using Sermon notes, or other helps for memory. 11. What translation of
the Scripture shall be used. 12. And what Version or Meter of the singing
Psalms. 13. And what tune they shall be sung in, and with what melody. 14. What
form or words of Catechism shall be used. 15. What comeliness shall be observed
in vesture or habit, in public worship. 16. By what signs we shall profess our
consent to the Common faith and Covenant; whether by standing up, or speaking,
or writing, or holding up the hand, etc. 17. By what Gestures in public
worship, decency and order shall be showed and kept. 18. Of abundance of Church
Utensils in Baptism, and the Lords Supper, fonts, vessels, Cups, clothes,
tables, etc. 19. Of circumstantial Officers and their offices, circa Sacra; as
Clarks, Churchwardens, door-keepers, etc. 20. When any of the people shall
speak in the Assembly* and who: and when they shall be silent.

But because the Concession of all these, and all of the same nature, will not
serve turn, how odious is our doctrine of Scripture perfection made? and we our
selves are judged unmeet (notwithstanding the necessities of many hundred
thousand souls) to preach the common doctrine of the Gospel.

CHAP. III.
Of the Power of Kings, and the peoples obedience.
1. KIngs and all other supreme Powers are the Officers of God the Creator, and
of Christ the Redeemer, to whom all power is given by the Father.

2. All their Power is derived from God, and subordinate to him.

3. Therefore they can have no more than he gives them.

4. He is the End as well as the Original of their power; and they have none
but for him and his ends, which is His Pleasure and Glory and the public good.

5. Their own Honor is included in both these; both as part of the splendour or
Glory of God in the Image of his soveraingty, and as part of the common good,
they themselves being a Constitutive part of the society.

6. Therefore it is lawful for Kings and all Magistrates to go much further
than private men in pres(...)rving their Honor; (Though even they are in very
great danger of excess, and pride.)

7. Therefore no Creature has an Absolute or unlimited power; because they are
all limited by God the universal Sovereign. They that with fiery indignation
have numbered this doctrine with our errors, should have considered, that how
small a matter soever it is, to say that all the lives and estates of the
subject, are unlimitedly at every Sovereigns will, yet it is not a small thing
for a Divine to hold, that a King may make Laws to command men to curse God or
deny him, or renounce Christ and the hope of salvation, or to kill father, or
mother without cause etc. which must follow if he be unlimited by God. Dr.
Sibthorpe never said so.

8. It is one of the tricks of the Enemies of Sovereignty, cunningly to
maintain that Kings have a Power to do all the mischief in the world, and want
nothing but a will; that so they may put the subjects in a fright when they
hear the description of one that is empowered to do so much evil, and may make
them still distrustful, as thinking that one man's will is insufficient security
for all their estates and lives and souls; and so may turn their Love and
trust, into hatred and distrust. Therefore such flatterers are hated by wise
Princes.

9. The people have not (as many Politicians ill affirm) the Majestas realis,
the supreme power, either to give or to exercise; no nor any Governing power at
all, qu(...) populus; but only where the Government being in part or in whole
Democratical, the constitution gives it them as Rulers.

10. It is not every man's natural power over himself conjoined by the voluntary
consent of many, that is the Original of Political power (or Sovereignty) they
being specifically distinct: nor is it left to the will of men whether there
shall be Government or not.

11. Nor does the Power of Kings arise naturally from Paternal Power; nor do
they need to prove themselves of the eldest house, to prove their right to
Government.

12. But God as the Universal Ruler has signified his will in the nature of
man and of things, than he will have the world live in Political order, and
have Government and obedience; so that it is Commanded by him in the Law of
Nature, antecedently to men's voluntary conjunction (though it may possibly fall
out that some incapable Individuals, (as those cast upon a foreign continent or
solitude) may be under no such obligation.)

13. The people therefore give not the King or any other Sovereigns their Power.

14. Their power resulteth from Gods Law which instituteth Government, under
him, and that Immediately, as to any mediate Donor, though not Immediately as
without any mediate condition sine qua non. For though Originally the peoples
consent was necessary to determine of the person, or in hereditary Government,
of the family, that should receive the power from God; yet that is no Donation
of the Power it self. Even as the Kings Charter immediately gives the power of
a Mayor or Bailiff to a Corporation, though by the same Charter the people
choose that person that shall receive it. Or as a woman chooses the man that
shall be her Husband, but gives him not the Government of her, for that is
given by Gods institution, to that person whom she contracteth with* and if she
should agree with him that he should not be her Governor, it were a nullity.

15. The chief use of Kings and Magistrates is, to rule according to Gods
Universal Laws, and to see them put in execution as far as the Ends of
Government require in this world.

16. To which end they are to make Laws of their own.

17. Their own Laws argue not the imperfection of Gods Laws, nor stand in
co-ordination with them as a supplement, but are merely like the Bylaws, or
Local Laws of Corporations, subordinate to the Universal Laws of the King, and
made only by a power given by him: Kings themselves being much more under God,
than Justices are under them.

18. The Sovereign Power is unlimited and absolute, to as any limitation of any
superior humane Power (else it were not Sovereign).

19. But besides that it is ever limited by God, it may be also limited by
Contract with the people, called by some Fundamental or Constitutive Laws, when
a people that have a right to their lives, limbs, liberties and estates, do in
the constitution of the Commonwealth, secure these from the absolute will of
the Sovereign* and reserve cases of innocence in which they shall not be taken
away: which are called the peoples Liberties.

20. Absolute slaves have no Liberties or security for their Lives, limbs or
estates.

21. A Domination over slaves is not finally for their good, but for the will
or benefit or ends of the Lord or proprietary.

22. A Commonwealth is not a society of slaves, but of free subjects and of
such a Sovereign as is to Rule for the public Good of the society.

24. He is the wisest and happiest King, that by his Government most promoteth
the public Good; which also is his chiefest Honor.

23. They are the wisest Counselors of Kings that most inseparably twist
their interest with the peoples, and so promote them: And they are their most
pernicious enemies, that would untwist and separate their interests, and set
them in jealousies of one another, and in a striving how to get all from one
another to themselves.

25. Humane Lawgivers may subordinately determine of those things in
particular, which God has only commanded in general; when the ends of
Government require a Legal determination of them.

26. As Gods Laws bind us by Primitive power to a conscientious obedience, so
the Kings Laws bind us by a Derived power to conscientious obedience, which
some ineptly call binding Conscience]: The meaning is, men's Laws bind the man,
and therefore primarily the soul (which they call the Conscience); And there is
no obligation at all of Laws, which is not primarily on the soul. And this
obligation we must be conscious of: Irons and Cords to bind the body
immediately. To deny therefore that men's Laws thus bind the Conscience is to
deny them to be Laws.

27. But as Conscience is taken Theologically, for the judgment of a man of
himself, as he is subject to the judgment of God, so it is all one to say, [
men rule our Consciences] and [men are God]. It is contradiction, and can be no
controversy. Therefore we verily believe that there is no difference among us
in this point, which confounded heads pretend so wide a difference in: For it
is scarce possible.

28. Though men may as aforesaid bind Consciences, that is, bind the soul to
conscionable obedience under God, yet can they not bind us against Conscience,
that is, against the Conscience of our duty to God, when we do not err; for
that is to bind us to sin against God when we know it to be sin.

29. Whoever disobyeth Gods known Law, because man commands him; prefers
man to God, and incurreth Gods displeasure and judgments.

30. Conscience is not a Lawgiver, Governor, or maker of duty, but a
discerner of duty made by Laws.

31. It is therefore their error that say Conscience makes it a man's duty to
sin, or makes it no sin to do what God forbids: An erring Conscience ligat
non obligat; ensnareth in a necessity of sinning till it be rectified, but does
not make sin to be none.

32. It is therefore the practice of the muddy-headed troublers of the world,
to pretend that the Controversy betwixt us is, whether the King or Conscience
be the supreme Governor; whenas we hold that Conscience is no Governor at all
unless as your eyes that read the Law, or your understanding which knows it
and your duty, may be equivocally called Governors. But the question (if they
will make any difference from us) must be this, [whether the Conscience or
apprehension of our duty to God, and of his Commands, or of the Kings Commands,
should be most prevalent with us for obedience?] Either dispute this, or go on
to rave against us in your dreams.

33. God does not change his Laws, because or when men err in their
understanding of them: But whatever antecedently is commanded, he still
commands though men think he forbids it. And whatever he forbids he still
forbids, when men think that he forbids it not or commands it.

34. The esse vel non esse is antecedent to the scire esse vel non esse: And
when ever men ask, [How shall we know? or, who shall judge?] every man of
brains will consider, that [either the thing really is, or it is not; which is
to be known and judged of.]

35. The common cheat of the ignorant in all these kind of disputes is, by
suppressing or overlooking the question do ess(...), and beginning with the
question de scire vel judicare: and asking first, [who shall be the judge?]

36. So some ask [what is our duty when one says this is the truth, and
another says nay but that is the the truth?] Answ. It is antecedently true,
that either this, or that, or neither is the truth] And (supposing it revealed
to you) God binds you to believe that which really is the truth, whatever men
say against it.

37. So some say, that if the King command one thing, and Conscience tell me,
that God does command another thing, which must I obey?] Answ. It is
antecedently true, that either God does command the contrary, or he does not:
If he does, you are bound to obey him, and not the King. If he do not, you are
bound to obey the King. For your knowledge or ignorance changes not Gods Laws.

38. So it is asked, what shall a man do whose (Conscience tells him that
this or that (commanded perhaps by man) is duty or sin, commanded or forbidden
by God, but yet is not absolutely certain?] Answ. Either (antecedently) it is a
duty, or sin, or it is not: If it be, he is bound to do it, or forbear it
accordingly; whatever he think of it himself: His doubts change not Gods Laws.

39. So the question is, what a man should do that has an erring Conscience?
Answ. 1. An erring Conscience is improperly called Conscience; because error is
not properly science: But let that pass. 2. He is under a double obligation:
The first is to obey Gods Laws, about which he erreth: The second is, to lay by
his error.

40. Quest. But must he in the mean time go against his Conscience? Answ. No;
nor against Gods Law: what God has conjoined, none of your questions must
tempt us to put asunder: He is still under the double obligation of rectifying
Conscience, and obeying God. And both must be done and not one alone.

41. Quest. But it is supposed that he cannot change his judgment. What then
must he do? Answ. Were it through a natural inculpable impotency and
impossibility, the Law would not oblige him, and so there would be no Law and
no transgression: But that which we speak of is a moral Impotenc(...), through
the vicious blindness of the mind, and corruption of the will; and God will not
change his Laws, because men are sinfully indisposed to obey them: When you
have questioned to the utmost, the double obligation still remains: And so
you must be answered.

42. But what order here must we observe; must we not change our judgment
before we can obey? Answ. The obligations to both are both at once; But because
an undiscerned command cannot be obeyed, the order of natural necessity, is,
that you first rectify your judgment, and then obey the other commands.

43. But how shall a man rectify his erring judgment? Answ. Gods means are
commonly known, though not commonly used. Hear, read, meditate, pray, forbear
the sin which grieveth your Guide; cast out corrupt affections, passions and
lusts, and lay by carnal interests that would pervert the judgment.

44. Quest. But what must we do till all this can be done? Answ. You must
hasten your cure with all diligence. For till it be done you will certainly
live in sin.

45. So also if the Magistrates commands be lawful (the esse still being
antecedent to the scire) and yet the subject think them unlawful, his error
will not justify his disobedience: but he is bound to judge better and to obey.

46. And if the Magistrates commands be against our duty to God, and the
subject think them to be lawful, his errors will not make them or his obedience
to them to be lawful.

47. Those persons who make it the principle of their obedience, that [we must
obey the Magistrate when we are uncertain, whether it be sin which he
commands or not; because we are certain that obedience is a duty, and the
certain part must be preferred before the uncertain] I hope do not err with the
flagitious aggravations (villainy, pious-wickedness, impudency etc.) which the
Non-conformists errors are charged with; But rather only the dust of worldly
business and contention may have confounded and sullied Natures tables, or the
heat of passion may have melted down its tender Characters.

48. Were this universally and formally true, it would follow, that a man's
blindness, error, ignorance, and so his doubtfulness, and uncertainty would
justify him in any villainy against God and nature, that man can command: For
instance, An Indian may be certain that it is his duty to obey his King, and
yet uncertain whether it be a sin to murder his parents, to eat his enemies, to
be adulterous, perjured, etc. A Turk may know that it is his duty to obey his
Prince, but be uncertain whether it be a sin to curse Jesus Christ and renounce
him, and to believe in Mahomet etc. A Papist may know that it is his duty to
obey his King, and yet not know whether it be a sin to worship the bread as
God, and to torment those that are called Heretics, or to worship Images, or
suppress the Scriptures, etc. And all this should be done according to this
rule, if Rulers be but bad enough to command it. Nay if the Popes own subjects
at Rome do but doubt whether it be a sin when he commands them, to go and
murder a foreign Prince; must they do this think you, because of their
uncertainty of the matter?

49. If the matter were unrevealed, and so men were uncertain, because God had
not made known his mind, then their Rule of precedence were to be regarded; But
if God have sufficiently revealed his will, no vicious uncertainty of it will
make it a duty or lawful, to obey the contrary command of man.

50. It is one thing to be sure that I must obey my Rulers in all things
lawful, another thing to be sure that I must obey them hic and nunc: The Rule
obtruded on us confounds these; And so is merely fallacious. For the former
is nothing at all to our business: And of the second, I can be no more certain,
than I am whether it be a lawful thing which is commanded by them: for as I am
sure in general that I must obey them in things lawful, I am as sure that I
must not obey them in things forbidden by God. Therefore so far as I am
uncertain whether the thing be sinful or not, I must be as uncertain whether I
must or may obey my Rulers in that thing.

51. And we called Puritans (being the more out of love with Confusion for the
effects of it in this age among Divines) do use also farther to distinguish, of
a greater evil and a lesser, (when neither of them is to be chosen because
neither is good.) And we say it is an aggravated Crime to choose a Greater sin
before a less, when a man has brought himself into a present moral impotency
of avoiding both: we distinguish also between the Matter, or Nature and weight
of the things doubted of.

And so we resolve, that if I be certain that I who am a poor low subject, am
bound to obey a Justice of Peace, in all things lawful (by Gods Laws and the
Kings); And a Justice commands me to do some little act, which I know not
whether the Law forbid or not, I will obey him: But if he bid me do that, which
I am in doubt whether it be Treason, and would endanger the life of the King,
or the safety of his Kingdoms, though I be uncertain, yet I will forbear.

And if a Ruler bid me read a Chapter in the old Testament to day, and I be
uncertain whether God would not have me read one in the New Testament, as
fitter to the Auditors, I will obey my Rulers in this case, not because I am
certain at all that hic and nunc it is my duty formally to obey them; but
because I take the disobeying them, in case it should now prove a sin, to be a
Greater sin than the mischoosing of the Chapter would be if that should prove
the sin; and to choose the greater sin, is a greater aggravation of that great
sin.

But on the other side, if man command me the doings, or the omissions, which
if they should prove unlawful would prove to be Perjury, yea the stigmatizing
of Cities and Corporations, Church and Kingdoms in the front with PER, or would
prove a murdering of men's souls; and if on the contrary, it should prove lawful
to do these things, yet the not doing them will have no other evil, than not
obeying the Law; (in such uncertainty) or my own personal suffering; here I
would rather not obey, being uncertain of the matter commanded. Not because I
am sure which is my duty at all in it self; but that I am sure that to prefer
the greater evil, when I know not the good, is an aggravation of that evil: And
so to sin, is a double and more dangerous sin.

52. Every Rational creature under Heaven has a judgment of Discerning, called
a Private judgment, by which all must try, know and guide their duties to God
and man: And to deny them this is to make them Bruits, and Kings to be but
Governors of Cattle; and to tell men, that they must not know when to obey or
whom: And it is to go against the judgment of all the sober world.

53. But no subject as such, or private man, has any Public decisive
judgment; nor must in cases Religious or Civil claim the least degree thereof.

54. Inferior Magistrates have all their Power from the King as supreme.

55. There is no external coactive or forcing power, no not about matters
Religious or Ecclesiastical, but in the King and Magistracy; and therefore
none in Churchmen or in any subjects, unless as Magistrates under the King.
That is, no other has the power of the sword, or to touch the Bodies or
Estates of men.

56. Power may be called [EXTERNAL] or Internal in several respects; 1. In
regard of the Agent: And so the Spirit of God has the Internal Power, and
Magistrates, Parents and Pastors have External.

2. In regard of the Actions commanded, Internal or external: And so the Power
of Magistrates is both Internal and External, that is, They may command inward
fidelity, honor, etc. to God to Parents and to themselves (though they cannot
see when it is performed alone;) And they may command outward actions; But the
later is their most common work. And Pastors have both Internal and External
power; And may in Gods name as his Ministers, command inward Love and
Repentance, and outward worshipping of God, Prayers, Sacraments, Assemblies,
Confessions, learning Catechisms, obeying the King and Parents, etc.

3. In regard of the Act or instrument of Government. And so God has the
Internal Power, because he only can by Internal spiritual agency rule the mind:
And Kings and Pastors have the external Power, that is, do Govern by Voice and
Writings, which are external signs and means.

4. In regard to the part of the subject Governed: And so the Power of
Magistrates is both Internal and external; for they Govern both mind and body:
For there is no Ruling of men's Bodies by Laws, unless they first rule the mind:
for Laws force not the Locomotive power immediately. And so Pastors have both
External and Internal Power, because by Gods word they Rule first the mind, and
by that the Body; as to forbear sin, to worship God, etc.

5. In regard of the Nearest Ruling Act. And so the King and Magistrate has
the Internal and External Power: Internal; because he may speak in his Precepts
to the Mind even in Gods name, as well as Ministers may: External, because he
may punish the body immediately. But Pastors so have none of the External
Power, because they touch not the outward man, that is, Body or Purse
immediately, nor Rule it but only mediately by persuading the Mind: so that if
you will ambiguously apply the name of External Power, only to Coercive or
Coactive Power by Outward force, no subject, no Pastors have any such, but only
the King and Magistrates.

57. O that Kings would once all agree to make the Church and world so happy,
as to keep all this External forcing power to themselves: and not to trust it
in the hands of Clergymen, nor lend their swords to angry Priests to revenge
their quarrels on one another; nor yet be themselves the mere Executioners of
the sentences of the Presbyters or Prelates; but if they will needs quarrel,
leave them to do it with their proper weapons, while the Magistrate himself
does repress their insolences, and keep the peace. The worst Magistrates
almost were like to use the sword more harmlesly, than the Secular Clergy has
hitherto done, through most of all the Christian world.

58. Though Kings have no Authority against God, they have a Power which it is
too possible to abuse to sin, against many of Gods Laws, and yet not forfeit
their office or true Authority thereby.

59. In case of some abuse of Power, the subject may be bound to obey him that
abuses it in that very act or thing. That is, when it is a thing that God
forbids the Magistrate to command, but does not forbid the subject to do, it
may become a duty on several accounts to do that thing.

60. The reason is, because it is Gods Law to subjects, and not Gods Law to
Kings, which subjects must be ruled by, and their actions judged by.

61. And modest subjects must rather study what Laws God has made for
themselves, than what Laws he has made for Kings: and what is their own duty
than what is the Kings: (Though of this they are not bound to be ignorant.)

62. When subjects may not obey, yet may they not by arms resist authority.

63. To pretend Religion for Rebellion or sedition (which is the greatest enemy
to it in the world) is to aggravate the sin, by intimated blasphemy against the
Author of Religion.

64. When subjects suffer from Kings for obeying God, they must not take
occasion by it to dishonor Kings by aggravating the injury: Because the Kings
honor is more necessary to the public peace and welfare, than the righting of
a subjects injured reputation is.

65. Therefore we must nor make too great a noise in complaining of such
sufferings, nor make them seem greater than they are; but rather (secretly
rejoicing in Gods justification of the innocent) openly take as much of the
blame to our selves as we can in truth, and mention the benefits which we have
by suffering, and the Commonwealth by Magistracy.

66. It is not lawful for any Pastors to publish excommunications against
Kings, (no nor against Parents, or any Magistrates, on whose Honor the public
good depends.) The reason is, because that the Natural Law (...) honoring
Rulers takes place of the positive instituti^^ of excommunication: the later
being but a means to (...) ends which are collateral with the former; are (...)
when contrary to such ends or greater duties: which made Christ send the
Pharisees to learn [what that meaeth, I will have mercy and not sacrifice] And
affirmatives bind not ad semper.

67. But if a Pope or Prelate or Presbytery, to whom Kings never committed the
care of their souls, shall by usurpation pretend to a power over Kings, which
they have not, and so excommunicate them to their public dishonor, this is a
more heinous crime; being treasonable in subjects, and hostility in foreigners.

68. Yet those Pastors whom Princes have chosen to that special trust, must be
very faithful in acquainting them with their sins and duty to God, and not for
fear or flattery betray their souls and the public good.

69. And so great is the sin of Tyranny and oppression and persecution, and so
grand an impediment to the Gospel and men's salvation among Turks, Tartarians,
Indians, Persians, and the far greatest part of all the world, that all wise
and good Princes will take those for their most pernicious enemies, that would
by flattery tempt them to so great a sin, (though on pretense of honoring them)

CHAP. IV.
The Judgment of the Author concerning the Power of Princes and the obedience
of subjects, more fully; with his Profession of Loyalty, and Renunciation of
Treasonable, Seditious and Rebellious Principles and Practices.
THat mistake, design or malice may not make a charge of disloyalty, or
seditious principles and minds, to pass for a pretense of our restraint from
the preaching of the Gospel, which we were devoted to in our Ordination, three
things seem needful for us to make known. I. What are the principles of
policy, which we hold. II. Our profession, resolution and promise as to our
practice. III. what disloyal, Traitorous and seditious opinions and practices
we renounce.

I. About the first our straight is great: If we make not known our principles,
we shall be suspected for concealing them; And any mistake which any one of us
was guilty of, even in our unexperienced youth, though corrected and rejected,
will be charged still on him, and on others that never owned it; And shameless
false accusers will defame us, as holding that which never came into our
thoughts. And if we publish our judgments, how easily and certainly will
ignorance and ill will take occasion to calumniate, and draw blood from the
truest soundest words? But we will do what we judge to be our duty, and leave
it to God to stop the mouth of all iniquity, and will stay till malice and
falsehood be silenced by the Father of lights.

1. We hold that though it be very useful to the Ministers of the Gospel to
study Politics, yet is to not necessary that they be able to decide political
controversies; much less that they equal Lawyers in the knowledge of the Laws;
and therefore that they should not without necessity, be forward to meddle in
such matters, much less to take on them to condemn the most of the Lawyers of
the world, as if we were wiser in the matters of their profession than they:
And least of all should we swear against their common sentiments, or that they
are all deceived, and that we are wiser than all they. Though yet we should
know so much, as is requisite to our due understanding of the matter of our
duty and our doctrine, which we must teach.

2. By [Authority] here we mean [A Right and Obligation to Govern particular
societies by Legislation (or precept) and Judgment, for the Common good, in
subordination to God, the only supreme universal Governor, and his universal
Laws and final judgment.]

3. GOD is the fountain or first efficient chief Ruler, and ultimate end, of
all true Authority (or Right of Government): For of him, and through him, and
to him are all things.

4. God has made no Universal Vicarious mere humane Governor under himself,
Civil or Ecclesiastical, Personal or Collective, (Pope or Council): nor
ordained any Universal Teacher or Apostle; Though he sent forth many into all
the world Indefinitely to Teach as many as they could. For no mortal man, or
Collective body is naturally capable of it.

5. Therefore he that claims such an Apostolic and Ecclesiastical Power as
Vicarious with Obligation to exercise it, condemns himself for betraying the
most of mankind, for he does not exercise it at the Antipodes, or to the fifth
part of the world.

Obj. No more does Christ who yet is the Universal Teacher. Answ. Christ is the
Light of the world, and all things are committed into his hand: And though he
send not preachers of the Gospel eventually to all, he sends them all that
commoner Light, means and mercies which call them to Repentance, and to seek to
a pardoning gracious God; so that his Teaching and Rule is universal, though
not equally.

6. The Pope claims an Universal Power of Government, over all Christian
Princes and States, yea over all the world: And the Papist Doctors assert it in
their writing; some in things spiritual; some in things spiritual and temporal,
and some in things spiritual and in temporals in order to spirituals.
Accordingly in their Councils they make Decrees which shall be obligatory to
Kings and Kingdoms, and have declared themselves empowered to set up Princes
and pull them down, to excommunicate and depose them, and force them to Oaths
and obedience, or else to give their Dominions to others that will obey: yea if
they will not burn or exterminate all as Heretics who hold the Christian
Doctrine which we call Protestant, yea that will not in the matter of
Transubstantiation, deny belief to all men's senses. By which claim of
Government over all Kings, and Laws for such execution, we suppose that the
Roman Pope declares himself to be Hostis publicus to all Christian Princes and
States who do not voluntarily make themselves his subjects, and allows them
to judge and use him accordingly.

7. God has given Power to none against himself, or his Laws.

8. God has given power to none to destroy the Common good; except such
Kingdoms as the Canaanites, etc. that by revelation were judged to destruction,
or such particular Countries as by unjust enmity to their neighbors may by the
Law of Nature and Nations be destroyed for the necessary preservation of the
rest.

9. Therefore all Laws and Mandates that are notoriously against God or his
Laws, or the common safety (that is, destructive to the Commonwealth and
welfare) are ipso facto null, or not obligatory, no more than a Justices
precepts against the King.

10. Submission yet may be a duty, and resistance a sin, where obedience is not
due; of which more anon in due place.

11. The people are not the fountain of power, nor the donors of it; nor, as
such, have they any right to Governing, either to use themselves or to give to
others; Though they or part of them may have some in Democracies by the species
of the Government, or in mixed Governments; but otherwise they have none by
Nature. The Government of Republics is not by an arbitrary Collation of each
man's personal power to some one: But God has prevented them, and made it
necessary by the Law of Nature and Scripture, that there be Governors as his
Officers under him, to whom the people shall submit, in all cases where such
can be had; and has given them universal Laws according to which they must
Rule.

12. But because Nature has given no one person or family a Right more than
others, to Rule Kingdoms antecedently to the peoples consent, therefore the
people had at the forming of such societies the choice of those persons or
families that should govern, and without their consent none were capable
recipients of that power: so that as the Kings Charter immediately gives the
power of a Mayor, or Bailiff to the person whom the Citizens shall choose,
which choice gives him no power but only makes him capable to receive it from
the Kings Charter; even so Gods Law and Charter obliges the people to choose
or consent to that family or person that shall Rule them, and gives Authority
(with obligation to use it) to those whom the said consent has made the
capable due recipients.

13. Therefore Mr. Hookers maxim is false as to Governing Power, that [the
King is singulis major, but universis minor:] and so is his assertion that all
power of Legislation is naturally in the whole body (what it may be by the
Constitution or species of the Government, is nothing to that question), and
his talk of the Sovereigns dependence on, yea and subjection to the body, and
his assertion that when the line is extinct [the power comes by escheate to
the people] and many such like; In all which he mistaketh Power of choosing
Governors, who shall receive power from God only, for the power it self of
Governing, which the people as such have not at all. The King is not Vniversis
melior indeed, but the Bonum publicum is the end of his Government, and the
good of all the Kingdom is better than his own, and more his end; but yet even
there his own Honor and welfare, is part of the Public Good and End. But
whoever has the whole supreme power in any Kingdom or other Republic, is
universis major.

14. Propriety is naturally antecedent to Government, which does not Give it,
but regulate it to the Common good: Every man is born with a propriety in his
own members, and nature gives him a propriety in his Children, and his food
and other just acquisitions of his industry. Therefore no Ruler can justly
deprive men of their propriety, unless it be by some Law of God (as in
execution of Justice on such as forfeit it) or by their own consent, by
themselves or their Delegates or Progenitors; And men's lives and Liberties are
the chief parts of their propriety. That is the peoples just reserved Property,
and Liberty, which neither God takes from them, by the power which his own
Laws give the Rulers, nor is given away by their (...) foresaid consent.

15. Usurpers have no true Power (or Jus regendi); nor do their commands
(whether they be Civil or Ecclesiastical Usurpers) bind any one in Conscience
to formal obedience; nor may they be set up and defended against the Lawful
Governor. But materially many good and lawful things may be done which they
command when the Common good and personal safety require it, without owning
their authority as true, which is none, and without formal obedience.

16. Those are Usurpers, Civil or Ecclesiastical, who have not authority given
them by God, immediately nor mediately: Inferior Magistrates have authority
from God, in that they have it from the King, or other supreme Rulers, whom God
empowereth to make inferior Magistrates, as their officers.

17. A Person utterly incapable receives no Authority from God.

18. Those are Usurpers (Civil or Ecclesiastical) who by force or fraud depose
the Lawful Governor and take his place: And those that sede vacant seize on
the place without any consent of the people; either on pretense of mere
conquest, or (as Mahomet) on false pretense of Divine revelation or Commission,
or on pretense of their greater worthiness: saving that the supreme Power may
impose on the people his inferior officers, and they are bound to obey them.

19. They that are made Rulers only of one kind or from of a Republic, and
shall without authority from God or the peoples consent change that kind or
form of Government into another, and assme that other, are Usurpers as to that
new usurped form, though not as to the former.

20. Government is the conjunct exercise of Power, wisdom and Love, for the
right ordering of the Commonwealth for the present and future happiness of the
people and the Governors.

21. God is Love and rules us as our Father; and his works of Love are his
most Lovely representation; And that is the best Governor who is likest unto
God: when Love is the predominant principle in Government, and Prince and
people dearly love each other; that Kingdom is likest unto heaven! Yet must
Rulers be a terror to the wicked.

22. Subjects are bound to take their Rulers, not as their own creatures, to
set up and take down as the Roman Soldiers did: (For then to obey a Ruler
would be but radically to obey themselves, or to obey their servants): But as
the Officers of God, who communicates authority to them, and so to honor and
obey God in them, as we do the King in his inferior Magistrates: And so to
obey for Conscience sake.

23. Subjects are bound not only to fear their Rulers, but to Love them: and to
shun that fear which tends to hatred.

24. God must be first obeyed, and no man against him, by breaking any of his
Laws, particular or general.

25. But if Governors command us to sin against God, though Subjects must not
obey them, yet must they patiently suffer wrong and not resist them by
rebellion: Much less may they use arms without their consent, to reform others,
or to bring in any novelty, yea or the true Religion by such unauthorized
violence.

26. The inferior Magistrates are the subjects of the King, as well as the
meanest men, and therefore have no power to depose him, or to take up arms
against him any more than other subjects.

27. Subjects must not only forbear all Treason, sedition or rebellion by arms,
but must prefer the Kings life before each of their own, and must hazard their
lives when called to it, to preserve him; and must resist all conspiracies
against him.

28. If we are wronged by unjust defamations or oppression or persecution, as
long as Rulers destroy not the Commonwealth, particular Subjects must not
vindicate their own right so much as by dishonouring their Sovereign; because
his honor is more necessary than our Rights to the common good.

29. The Union of the King and people is the life of the Kingdom; and dividing
is destroying: Therefore an Uniting of their Interests is a chief point in
policy; and setting their Interests as divided in opposition or supicion of
each other is pernicious.

30. Therefore it is against the Constitution of the Commonwealth, for the
King to raise war against his Kingdom as their enemy, or for the Kingdom to
raise war against the King: King James asserts the first, and the Reason of
Government proves both.

31. The command of a Prince, (whether sober or in drink, or passion) to any
subject, to destroy the Prince himself (as Saul did command one) or to destroy
the Commonwealth, or to break the Laws of God, or the fixed Laws of the Land,
will not justify the subject that obeys that command, nor does give him
right to impunity before God, or in the Courts of Justice, except in such cases
as the Law it self excepth.

32. The Time, Place and other circumstances of duty are not always to be the
same; And the Rulers command to alter such unfixed circumstances, when it
destroys not the substance, is to be obeyed; though the prohibition of the
duty it self (Praying, preaching, hearing, Sacraments, alms) is not to be
obeyed, because Gods authority is the highest.

33. Though no man's command can warrant us to sin against God, yet some things
which are antecedently sinful but by a smaller Accident (as that it offends
one of my neighbors) may become a duty by the Law of the King, that Law and
the consequents of the action, being more preponderating circumstances to
oblige us to do it, than the other is against it.

34. Though Princes are under the obligation of Gods Laws and their own
contracts, as well as others; yet as Laws are the Instruments of Government, no
one is under a Law as such that is not under Government. And therefore no
Sovereign is under his own Laws as Governing Laws; though he may by the bonds
of fidelity and justice and for the Common good be obliged to Govern the
subjects by them, and to be exemplary in what concerns himself, and be under
those contracts which are called Fundamental or Constitutive Laws, made by
common consent to secure the subjects rights: which I suppose is R. Hookers
meaning when he says that Lex facit Regem, and that the King has so much
power as the Law gives him.

35. Though Politics and Lawyers tell us that Legislative power is the first
part of the supreme power, and who ever has part in the Legislative power has
part in the supreme power, yet that is not meant of such a derived power as
Corporations may have by Charter, to make only Local Bylaws for themselves,
which bind not the Commonwealth.

36. As to the cases which Politics, Lawyers, and Divines, Papists and
Protestants, instance in (such as Barclay, Grotius, Bilson, etc.) in which
subjects may resist Kings by arms, we leave them to those that are sitter
Judges; concluding only that, 1. No humane power can abrogate the Law of
Nature; 2. that God has limited all humane power; 3. that their own contracts
limit them; 4. That subjects should not be tempted to odious thoughts of Kings,
by the savage description of them, as being authorized to burn, rob, kill the
innocent at their pleasure, if they will not renounce God, Christ or humanity,
and to destroy all the people. Such descriptions are made by the enemies of
Government. 5. That commissioned subjects or Soldiers are not Kings, but
subjects still, and under Law. 6. That if we should see a Commission under the
broad Seal, to seize on the Kings guards, forts, treasure, navy, or hurt the
King, or destroy Monarchy, or deliver the Kingdom to foreigners, or to destroy
the Kingdom, Laws, Property, Parliament, City causelessly, we are bound to judge
that the treachery of the keeper of the Seal or some other and not the King was
the author of such a Commission. 7. All men should love their Country and the
common good better than their lives.

THat it may appear that we refuse not the Corporation Oath and Declaration,
the Oxford Oath, or the subscription required by the Act of Uniformity, out of
any disloyalty or ill design, we offer to declare, subscribe, profess and
promise as follows.

I. I do unfeignedly Assent and Consent to every word of God in the sacred
Scripture, which describes the Power of Kings, or other Governors, and which
describes or commands the Subjects duty to their governors, and which
forbids rebellion, or any other sin against them.

II. Though I take not General Councils for the Rule of my faith or obedience,
This profession I drew up even by Dr. Stamans advice who was taken to be no
more compliant with the present Government than other Nonconformists.
yet having with some diligence perused the Decrees of those that are so
called, I find not in any of them any more Power ascribed to Kings or other
civil Governors, than I do willingly subscribe to and acknowledge; excepting
the powers which the Papal King of Rome does arrogate to himself, or pretend to
give to others, or place in them as his executiners.

III. I find not in the public Confessions of faith of any of the Protestant
Churches, or any of the Greek Churches, or of the Roman, any more power
ascribed to Kings or other Civil Governors, than I subscribe to and
acknowledge; except as before excepted of the Roman Papacy.

IV. I find not any commonly named Parties of Divines in their writings
(Greeks, Papists, Protestants, whether Lutherans, Reformed, Episcopal, or
Presbyterian,) who wrote before the year 1640. who do generally (as to the
stream or commonest doctrine) ascribe any more to Kings or other civil
Governor, than I willingly subscribe to and acknowledge, except as before
excepted of the Pope and Papists.

V. Of all the Greek, Roman and Arabian Philosophers, and Orators, of all the
Historians, the Authors of Politics, and Civil Lawyers that I have read, I
find many that are against Monarchy, but no party or sort of them that commonly
give more Power to Princes than I willingly subscribe to and acknowledge,
excepting as before excepted, the Papal Usurpation and the flatterers thereof.

VI. I do and shall acknowledge in the Kings Majesty all that Power whatsoever
is ascribed to him in the Laws of the land, or that shall hereafter by any Law
be ascribed to him, so be it, it be not contrary to the certain Law of God in
Nature or Scripture, nor against the essential Constitution of the Kingdom.

VII. I do willingly take the Oath of Allegiance, and take it to be the duty of
his Majesty's Subjects to take the same, and faithfully to keep it.

VIII. I do willingly take the Oath of supremacy, and think that it is their
error and sin who do refuse it; seeing there are so many public declarations
of the sense of it made, that his Majesty does not hereby claim any of the
Priestly Office, but only to have the power of the sword, so far as it is to be
exercised about Causes and persons called Ecclesiastical and Civil.

IX. I do hold that it is not Lawful for any of his own Subjects to raise war
or take arms against the King, either his Person, Authority, Dignity or Rights:
Nor against any Lawfully Commissioned by him in his execution of that
Commission; nor against any unlawfully Commissioned by him, except the King
himself by his Laws or by a cross Commission do allow such resistance, or the
notorious Law of Nature does require it.

X. Though I like not swearing obedience to any in a Kingdom but the King, yet
if the King will command me to swear due obedience to any Judge, Magistrate,
Bishop or Chancellor, in their exercise of any true power which they receive
from him, (which puts me upon no sinning against God) I will obey him in taking
such an Oath.

XI. Though I like not swearing obedience to Ecclesiastical persons, yet if the
King command me to swear just obedience to Lawful Pastors that are over me, and
that I will never endeavor the alteration of any Office or ordinance
instituted by Christ, or by the Holy Ghost in his Apostles, I will obey him in
so doing.

And though my judgment after 40 years diligent study be against many things
in the present Diocesane Government, especially Lay Chancellors use of the Keys
of Excommunication and Absolution, and the impossibility of the true and
ancient discipline by the largness of the Diocese and paucity of Bishops, and
the unchurching of all the Parishes of England, and the oppida or great Towns
except one in a Diocese, making them all (though many hundreds or above a
thousand) to be but particles of one Diocesane Church; (when Ignatius says,
that [To every Church there is one Altar, and one Bishop with his fellow
Presbyters and Deacons] as the common note of Individuation: And Cyprian says,
Vbi Episcopus ibi Ecclesia: And therefore one only Bishop in a Diocese shows
that they hold that there is but one Church in a Diocese) Yet notwithstanding
my dissent, I take it to be my duty to live submissively and peaceably; and if
the King command me I will promise or swear never to endeavor (...)ny
alteration or reformation by sedition, rebellion, or any other unlawful means.

XI. I do renounce all Doctrines and practices contrary to any of these
aforesaid professions: And I do hold that neither the Oath nor Vow called [the
solemn League and Covenant], nor any other Vow or Covenant, can disoblige me or
any other subject from any of the aforesaid, or any other duty to God, the
King, or my neighbor, or can oblige me to any sin against God or man; nor
justify my disobedience to the King in things which antecedent to his command
were indifferent. Otherwise a Subject might by Vowing prevent all obligations
in such cases to obey his Governors. And though I know not with what sense or
intention other men make Vows, I do declare that that Vow or Covenant binds
me to nothing, which I had not been bound to had I never taken it; because I
never intended it to make me a new religion or duty, but only to be a secondary
obligation to what God had obliged me to before.

III. The distoyal, Traiterous, seditious or* rebellious opinions and practices
which we reject.
WE mention not these opinions by way of accusation of others, but to vindicate
our own calumniated innocence.

I. We reject the inhumane opinion of Spinosa in Tract* Theol. Polit. and such
other Infidels, who hold that sensuality is man's chief interest, and that every
man has right to any thing that he desires if he can but get it, and that he
is bound to keep his Oaths and Covenants no longer than it is for his own
interest, and that he has as good title as the Governor or possessor had, if
he can but get his place or possessions, and may destroy any if he can, that
hinder his desires.

II. I do (with due reverence to the persons) reject the opinion of many
Authors of Politics, and great Lawyers, who say that the Majestas realis is in
the people, and the Majestas Personalis in the King, and that Governing Power
is but the Collation of each man's singular power over his own person and
estate, and the committing it to one for the Common safety. And that the people
give the power, and may question the Prince, and resume it when there is cause.
And so we reject the doctrine of Mr. Richard Hooker in his Eccl. Polit. lib. 1.
and 8. (with due respect to his judiciousness) and all other Episcopal Divines
of his mind, who says that [ By the natural Law whereto God has made all
subject, the lawful power of making Laws to command whole societies of men,
belongs so properly to the same entire societies, that for ANY Prince or
Potentate, of WHAT KINDSOEVER upon earth, to exercise the same of himself, and
not either by express Commission immediately and personally received from God,
or else by Authority derived at first from their consent upon whose persons
they impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny: Laws they are not which
public approbation has not made so.] He makes the peoples [giving Authority]
necessary, where their Consent to the family or person that shall receive it
from God is enough: And (...) makes a part in Legislation (the chief slower of
Sovereignty) which only some of the people in some Countries have merely by the
Constitution, to be a Common effect of the Law of Nature: Lib. 1.. 10. page 21.
so Lib. 8. 192, 193, 194, 220, 221, 218, 223, 224, 225. I reject what he says
[ Unto me it seems almost out of doubt and controversy that every
Independent multitude before any certain form of regiment established has
under God, supreme authority, full dominion over it self -- In Kingdoms of
this quality as this we live in, the highest Governor has indeed Universal
dominion; but with Dependencie on that whole entire body, over the several
parts whereof he has dominion: so that it stands for an axiom in this case,
The King is singulis major, but universis minor -- Neither can any man with
Reason think but that the first institution of Kings (a sufficient
consideration wherefore their power should always depend on that, from which it
did always flow) by original influence of power from the Body into the King, is
the cause of Kings dependency in power upon the body. By Dependency we mean
subordination and subjection: A manifest token of which dependency may be this;
As there is no more certain argument that lands are held under any as Lords,
than if we see that such lands in defect of heirs fall unto them by escheat; In
like manner it does follow rightly, that seeing Dominion when there is none to
inherit it, returns to the body, therefore they which before were inheritors
of it did hold it in dependence on the body; so by comparing the body with the
head, as touching power it seems always to reside in both, Fundamentally and
Radically in one; in the other derivatively: In one the Habit, in the other the
Act of Power (vid. caet. passim) -- When all which the wisdom of all sorts can
do, is done for devising of Laws in the Church, it is the general consent of
all that gives them the form and vigor of Laws; without which they would be no
more to us than the Counsels of Physicians to the sick: well might they seem as
wholesome admonitions and instructions; but Laws could they never be without
consent of the WHOLE CHURCH to be guided by them, whereunto both nature and the
practice of the Church of God set down in Scripture, is found every way so
fully consonant, that God himself would not impose his own Laws upon his people
by the hand of Moses, without their free and open consent. May a body Politic
then at all times withdraw in whole or in part, the influence of dominion which
passes from it, if Inconveniences do grow thereby? -- It must be presumed that
supreme Governors will not in such cases oppose themselves, and be stiff in
detaining that, the use whereof is with public detriment. -- And page 205. [
If Magistrates be Heads of the Church, they are of necessity Christians.]

I presume not to set my weak judgment in matter of policy in contest with
those very many Learned Lawyers or Divines who think all this, and much more
like it to be sound; But I must say that my judgment does reject it; Christ.
Directory.
The reasons whereof I have given in a particular Confutation of each of these
passages and more.

And against this doctrine of the Peoples giving the power by conjoyning all
their own in one, see D. Cawdry a Nonconformist's Review of Mr. Tho. Hookers
survey page 154. etc. And see Groti(...)s de Imperio, etc. page 270. both
concurring with me.

III. We reject their opinion who hold that the Law of Nature allows an
Innocent subject to save his own Life by taking away the Kings, or by raising
war against him.

IV. We reject (as is aforesaid) their opinion who hold that it is Lawful to
take up Arms against the King, his person, authority, dignity or right whether
it may be done against his will, see before.
, and to pretend his own authority, or Laws for so doing: Or that it is lawful
to take Arms against any lawfully commissioned by him; yea or unlawfully,
unless he himself by his Laws or cross Commission, or the sure Law of Nature do
authorize it.

V. We reject the Papal Usurpation of a Government over Princes, by claim of an
Universal Vicarship under Christ: And because the Decrees of their General
Councils approved by the Pope, are their very Religion, and e. g. the Lateran
Council sub Innoc. 3. decrees that those that hold not Transubstantiation be
exterminated as Heretics, and that the secular powers shall swear to
exterminate them; and if any Temporal Lords do it not, the Pope may
excommunicate them, and absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, and give
their dominions to others that will do it; we therefore are constrained to
reject such parts of the very Religion of the Papists as a Rebellious Religion,
and the Pope as a declared enemy to Christian Kings and Kingdoms, which are not
his Voluntary Subjects.

VI. Seeing that by the said Papal Religion or Laws, all Protestants and others
that are not Papists, are Dead men in Law where those Laws are received, and
must be burnt as Heretics or exterminated, and the Princes or other secular
Powers that will not swear it and execute it, are themselves to be
excommunicate and deposed; we do therefore detest as treacherous to Princes,
the practice of all such as would persuade any Prince or Ruler of a Protestant,
Greek or other Country not yet Papists, to become a Papist: and thereby to
expose himself to the Popes deposing of him, or to destroy his own kingdom, and
to cast before his subjects a temptation to dispute such questions, as [whether
any Prince have Power from God to burn or exterminate his Kingdom? and how far
they should own him which by his very Religion is obliged so to do on pains of
excommunication, deposition and damnation. But where the Kingdom are already
Papists, it is only the sin against God in the destruction of some innocents or
the Princes deposition, and not the Kingdoms destruction that is in the way.

VII. We reject the opinion whether of the Papists or of any Protestants (if
there be such) who hold that Kings or other Rulers on whom the Government and
welfare of the Kingdom or other Republic lies, may be excommunicated to their
public dishonor: Because Gods moral Law* which bids Honor our Father and
Mother and our King, does bind before Laws of mere Rites and order, And the
most public good is to be preferred: And the Honor of the King is necessary
to his successful Government, and so the public good and safety: Christ taught
us even in cases of such nature to remember, that God will have mercy and not
Sacrifice; And order is for the preservation and not for the destruction of the
society ordered: Therefore though Baptism and the Lords Supper and Absolution
may be denied to a King that is utterly incapable of them, yet is he not to be
dishonored by an open excommunication (which is purposely to shame offenders)
much less by any of his Subjects that never were called by him to be his
Guides; And least of all by a foreign Usurper.

VIII. We reject their doctrine who subject Christian Princes and States to the
Power of foreigners under the name of General Councils: As if Christ had given
a power of Universal Legislation and Judgment, though not to a Personal yet to
a Collective body; whose Laws all the Christian world is bound to obey: when
indeed there never was, will be, or can be any true General Council of all the
Churches in the world, nor did ever Christ institute such a thing. The first
controversy between us and the Papists is not, Who it is that is the Universal
Governor of the Christian world (or Church) under Christ, See the second part
of Baxters Key for Catholics where it is fully proved that General Councils
never were or can be or ought to be.
whether Pope or Council: But whether there be any such Universal Governor at
all? which we utterly deny; were there any at all, we would sooner yield that
it is the Pope (who is in being) than that it is a true General Council which
never was in being: And if any called Protestants would betray King and Kingdom
into Subjection to a foreign Power under the false name of a General Council,
we wash our hands from such disloyalty; as knowing well by the Map of the Roman
Empire, and the Notitiae Episcopatuum, and by the names of the subscribing
Bishops, and by the power of the Emperors that called them, and other notices
of history, that even the four first great approved Councils were but some part
of the Bishops of the Empire, (unless some borderer accidentally stepped in) and
not at all of the rest of the Christian world: And if England were sometime
subject to that Empire, yet is it not so now. The Clergy of one Prince have no
power of Government over all other Princes and their Clergy.

IX. We reject their doctrine who teach that the King or other Rulers are bound
to punish men by the sword, merely because being excommunicate they repent not
and reconcile not themselves to the Clergy; As if Princes were the Lictors or
executioners of the Clergy, or were bound to burn, banish, imprison or fine
their Subjects, because the Clergy (Pope, Prelates or Presbyteries) do
excommunicate them, and require it of them; be the sentence right or wrong: And
we much desire that Princes would not so nearly annex their punishments to the
Clergies censures, as may seem to countenance such injurious and dishonorable
expectations of the Clergy, or as may countenance them that scorn Church
discipline as a leaden sword or uneffectual, unless the sword of the
Magistrates enforce it.

X. We like not the dangerous Conclusion of [No Bishop No King], though we
judge not such a word when by a sound exposition the danger is avoided.

XI. We reject their doctrine who hold that the Clergy is exempt from the
Government of the King, The Papists.
as if they were not his Subjects, and he might not punish them for common
enemies, yea and for gross maladministration and unfaithfulness in the
Ministry, as he may punish Physicians, or Lawyers for the like in their
professions.

XII. We detest their doctrine who debase Kings and magistrates, Papists.
by saying that they are Governors only of the body, and not of the soul (when
it is only souls that are commanded by Laws, and immediately obey), or that it
is only the civil peace and bodily prosperity which is the end of the
Government of Kings, and not men's spiritual good and salvation: And so that the
King and Magistrates are to be valued as much less than the Clergy, as the
concerns of the body are less valuable than the concerns of the soul: As Pope
Innocent 3. said Vide Cosins Hist. Transub. page 147, 148.
[God made two great Lights in the sirmament of heaven and of the universal
Church, that is, he instituted two dignities, which are the Pontifical
authority and the Regal power; But that which rules the Day, that is, things
spiritual, is the greatest, and that which rules Carnal things is the less;
that it may be known that the difference between Popes and Kings, is such as is
the difference between the Sun and the Moon.] No wonder therefore if in his
Sermon. 2. he say [To me it is said I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to
pluck up and destroy and scatter. I am set up as a middle person between God
and man; On this side God, but beyond man, yea greater than man, who judge all,
and can be judged of none: I am the Bridegroom, etc.] And if Pope Gregory 7. in
his Roman Council declare, that he has power to set up and take down Emperors,
etc. Whenas in truth things spiritual and eternal are the end of the Kings
Government also; though by punishing sin and ruling Ministers and others by the
sword, and not by becoming a Priest himself, he seek that end.

XIII. We detest their doctrine who say that not Kings, but only the Clergy are
Judges in matters of faith, or Religion, or of Heresy: whenas every man is to
judge where he is to Govern and execute. And as every Subject has a Discerning
judgment to know what is his own Duty and what is sin; and the Pastors of the
Church have that public Eccesiastical Judgment, which is called, The use of
the Keys, to judge who is fit or unfit for the communion of the Church within
their charge, and so who is to be Baptized, excommunicated or absolved; so also
the King and Magistrates are Judges, who is by them to be punished by the
sword, as abusers of sacred doctrine or worship, as Heretical seducers, or
unfaithful Pastors.

XIV. Though there be some reverend persons that hold that Ministers only hold
their power from Christ as Redeemer, and Magistrates not so, but only from God
the Creator as ruling by common providence, and not by Christ, we greatly
dissent from this conceit, and believe that God who after the fall set up a Law
or Covenant of Grace to all mankind, in Adam and Noah, does govern none on
earth, either by such providence as he governs bruits without Law; nor yet by
the first Law of Innocence or perfection alone (making Innocence the condition
of Life, to them that are already guilty) but all are under a Law of grace: And
all persons and things are delivered to Christ, and put into his hands and
power, and he is made Head over all things to the Church, even the Lord of dead
and living, and the general administrator, even among them that hear not of his
name: All judgment is committed to him, (Joh. 5. 22. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. Romans 14.
9, 10, etc.) He is the Alpha and Omega; the Giver and the end of Power. And
they that say that the world has so good a thing as Magistracy without Christ's
procurement, may next feign many more mercies to be given to the miserable
without Christ, and so that God could pardon sin without him, and next that we
be saved and come to heaven without him, and his grace.

XV. We renounce the opinion of them that hold, that circa sacra, the King has
no power to command* us circumstances of worship. And that if the King by his
Law or Mandate impose on the several Churches, One Translation of the
Scripture, one Version of the Psalms, one Lecture day or hour, etc. and the
Bishop another, that we must obey our Diocesane rather than the King.

XVI. We renounce their opinion who hold that the Act of Uniformity, and such
other Laws as are made about Church matters, especially such as impose the 39
Articles of Religion, the Subscriptions, Declarations, Oaths and Practices, are
to be esteemed by our Consciences, but as Laws of the Church, or Clergy
confirmed by King and Parliament, and that the Church men are the proper
expositors of them; And that out of the sitting of the Convocation, it is the
Bishops that must give us the sense which our Consciences must follow: For we
believe that the Lawmakers are the only expositors of their own Law, by an
exposition commonly obligatory to the Subject, and the several Judges are the
expositors for the decision of such particular causes as belong to their
Courts; and that if Bishops, or Convocation should put a wrong sense on such
Oaths and subscriptions, Else Bishop might set up what Religion they would by
an expository power, and indeed be the only Lawmakers, the King and Parliament
making but the words, and the Bishops the sense.
we may not take them in their sense, and that if they should expound our 39
Articles as Franc(...)a Sancta Clara did, we may not take them in that sense,
nor may they so change the Protestant Religion, by changing the sense and
keeping the words.

XVII. We approve not of their judgment, who (when the bonds of mutual Oaths
between King and Subjects, according to the fundamental Constitution of the
Kingdom, declares the unchangeableness of our Monarchical Government) would
have also certain Inferior powers made as unchangeable by public Oaths; which
powers antecedently to those Oaths the King may change, as being not (at least
in their various Circumstances) settled by Christ; Thereby depriving the King
of his Power, and swearing the Subjects never to endeavor any alteration of
such inferior Government, not excepting [though the King and Parliament command
it;] And so making mutable Ministers as necessary and unchangable as the King.

XVIII. We detest the treachery of such as would divide the Interest of the
King and his Kingdom further than they are unavoidably differenced by Nature;
and that would persuade Kings that the Common Good is not the end of
Government, but that it is their Interest to take down the welfare of the
people, and get them as low as to liberties and wealth as they can: For the
Uniting of the Interests and Affections of King and Kingdom, is the sum of the
true Art of Governing, next to the pleasing of God.

XIX. Much more do we abhor their treachery against Kings, who would both
expose them to Gods Justice, and the peoples hard thoughts, by setting them
either above God or in competition with him, or building their Kingdoms in the
air and not on God; we mean specially such as deny all Monarchs to be Limited
by God, and to be subject to his Laws: And were they Absolute and not limited
by God, they might command all the Subjects to curse God, to renounce Christ
and their Salvation, to worship the Devil, and to violate all the Laws of
Nature; which would subvert their own foundation.

XX. Accordingly we reject their treachery, that would make it the peoples duty
to be of the Kings Religion, be it what it will be, and so among Turks, and
Papists and Pagans, to be Mahometans, Papists or Heathens; and to obey the King
against God; Nothing more dishonouring Kings than when they are set up as in
Gods place or as against him.

XXI. We also renounce their treachery, who would deny the subjects, a judicium
discretionis, a judgment discerning duty from no duty and from sin: For so they
deprive the King of his Subjects and make them no men, nor capable of obeying
him: And they deprive him of their aid, in case any Usurper claim the Crown, if
they must not judge, who has the true right.

XXII. We renounce the treachery of such as represent Monarchs odious to the
very nature of their Subjects, (who are ruled by interest), by terrible
descriptions of their Power, as absolute; and as such as may when they please
seize on all men's estates, destroy the Innocent, Commission their servants to
kill Parliaments, burn Cities, sell all as slaves to others, and the
instruments may not be resisted: when it is known that terrible descriptions
breed such fears as tend to hatred; And hatred is virtual rebellion: And when
all people see that their lives, liberties and estates have no security but the
will of one mutable man, it makes them like men among enemies, in continual
suspicion; when Love and Trust are the chief affections of true Subjects to
which fear must be but subservient: How can treacherous men more undermine a
Prince, than by such terrible descriptions, and by persuading him to rule by
Fear rather than Love, to render him hated by his Subjects that should love him
and defend him?

XXIII. We take it for a traitorous opinion that, It is not lawful to take Arms
against any that have a Commission with the Kings Name under his Great or
Little Seal, without exception: For then the keepers of his Majesty's Seals may
depose the King, by Sealing Commissions as in his name, to traitors, to seize
on his guards, forts, navies, Magazines, treasures, servants, etc. and no loyal
subjects might resist them, no not they who by Law or former Commission were
obliged to it.

XXIV. We renounce their treachery who would weaken the Kings Interest by
dividing his Subjects, and building up unnecessary walls of partition between
them* to keep them in such divisions, and would thereby cherish hatred,
contention and mutinies among them, seeing, a Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand: And it is unsafe and uncomfortable to a Prince to rule a divided
mutinous people, and sweet and safe to rule them that are united in mutual
Love: Therefore we detest their way that would lay the peoples Concord upon
incapable terms, and bring the Kings interest in his peoples Love and willing
obedience and ready defense of him, into too ^^rrow a bottom, making him the
King of some causelessly divided and espoused party which must be set up to the
oppression of all the rest, who are as wise and just and loyal as they.

XXV. It is treachery against Princes to tell them that they are not bound by
their Oaths, Vows, and Promises; that thereby their Subjects may be brought
into utter distrustfulness of them. And how can there be due obedience and
adhering to Rulers where there is no Trust?

XXVI. They are great enemies to Princes who tempt them to notorious
viciousness of life, against God's Laws: seeing all that believe a God will
honor him, and his Laws and interest, and will judge of men as they keep or
break them; and will think worse of the evil than the good: And God has said,
Those that honor me I will honor, etc. And even Princes must contemn a vile
person, and honor those that fear the Lord, Psalm. 15. Even among Heathens, how
great was the peoples Love and Honor to an Antonine (even to deisie him) to a
Titus, a Trajan, an Alexander Severus; etc. and what excellent names have they
left behind them! And how contrary was it with a Nero, a Caligula, a Commodus,
a Heliogabalus, etc. He is the great enemy of Princes that would render them
bad, most unlike to God, and the examples of iniquity, and enemies of the good.

XXVII. We detest their opinion who think that a strong and prosperous Usurper
may be desended against the King, or that the King is not to be defended
against him, to the hazard of our estates and lives.

XXVIII. We renounce their opinion who think that it is Lawful for the Kings
Subjects merely to propagate Religion or Reformation in the Kingdom, by entering
into Leagues, Covenants and Arms against him (of which before) and without his
consent and Laws.

XXIX. We disown their opinion that think that though the inferior Subjects may
not do this, yet the Inferior Magistrates may; and have power to question and
judge the King; (of which also before.)

XXX. We reject them that say, that The Person of the King is not inviolable,
which no Subjects may assault or invade, much less take away his life.

XXXI. We detest the doctrine of those Popish Doctors (at large cited in terms
by Henry Fowlis and the Bishop of Lincoln) who teach that when the Pope has
excommunicated and deposed a King, he is no King, and may be killed, at least
by the Popes command, and that to kill him is not to kill a King: And we detest
such Treasons as were executed on Henry 3. and H. 4. of France, and on our late
King.

XXXII. We detest that opinion, that none are bound to the King, nor bound to
forbear treason or to discover it, unless they have taken some Oath of fidelity
to him or made some promise; As if a Papist or any other that comes from
beyond Sea and has avoided such Oaths and promises might lawfully do that
which else were treason: As if our Ancestors Covenants, and our living under
the Laws and protection of a Sovereign did not oblige us.

XXXIII. We disclaim the treacherous opinion of such as would have Kings build
their titles on no better ground than an Usurper may plead, that so it may fall
by the sandiness of that foundation; that is, either on mere Conquest, (and
then a stronger may conquer them) or on pretense of their special fitness, by
wisdom and Goodness (and so if any were wiser or better, he would have more
right), or as Mahomet on pretended revelation from heaven (as aforesaid.)

XXXIV. We renounce their opinion who hold that they may break their Oaths of
Allegiance; or that the Pope or any other can dispense with such Oaths,
according to the aforesaid Laterane General Council.

XXXV. We disown their disloyalty, who would have such Oaths put upon Subjects,
whose matter is contrary to the common judgment of Philosophers Heathen and
Christian, and Politicians, and Lawyers, and Historians, and Divines of all
sides, of the Christian Religion; that so they may engage the Common judgment
of mankind against their Princes, under pretense of exalting them to more power
than all or any of these parties do allow of.

XXXVI. We are the more unwilling our selves to make Vows and Oaths rashly, or
to renounce any lawful part of such as were (though unlawfully) made: and that
Ministers of Christ should really or seemingly be branded with the mark of
PERJURY, or that any Cities or Corporations or Kingdoms in the world should be
so branded, lest it should weaken and loosen the public bonds of Oaths with
the Subjects, by which the lives of Princes are secured from Treasons and
Conspiracies; And we think that when Oaths are despised and made as a sport, it
is an act of treachery against Princes lives: Besides that the Guilty may
expect Gods judgments; And if Perjury be revenged with Plagues, and flames and
poverty, and a famine of the word, especially restrained from the guiltiest
places, it is no wonder; at least, till they as openly REPENT, as they have
sinned.

XXXVII. In General (because all particulars cannot be remembered) we renounce
all Principles and Practices of disloyalty, sedition, faction, Schism,
treasons, Conspiracies and rebellion, against Kings or any rightful Governors.

WE have thus faithfuly given the world an account of our judgments, of the
Power of Kings, the obedience of Subjects, and the mischiefs of disloyalty and
rebellion: If we live in such a time and place where all this is not enough to
excuse us from being suspected of poisoning men with seditious and rebellious
doctrines; Yea if this very profession, extorted from us by many published
accusations and reproaches, after so many years sufferings and silence, shall
be made the matter of our farther accusation, reproach or suffering, we appeal
to the final judgment of the most righteous God which we are near; and leave
this for the information of posterity and foreigners when we are dead. We know
no man that can write so as that no word might not be wiselier or better said,
or with which malice cannot pick a quarrel. If this be yet our lot, we must
bear it.

We add this caution, That though ex super abundanti we that concur in the
foregoing Profession, do to stop the mouth of calumny, mention our consent to
all that General Councils, the Confessions of the Churches, the writings of
Philosophers, Politicians, Lawyers and Divines do say for the Power of Kings
and the obedience of subjects, we do think it unreasonable and dangerous, that
such redundancies should be commonly imposed on others, as a test of their
fidelity.

CHAP. V.
The Conformity of our Doctrine of obedience to the Constitution of this
Kingdom, the Doctrine and Canons of the Church, and the judgment of the most
Learned and Loyal Prelates.
. 1. IF I own that political doctrine which is justified by these three: I. The
constitution of this Monarchy, II. The Articles of Religion and Canons of the
Church, III. And the judgment of those Prelates who have been accounted the
most Loyal and Learned of their order, and the most hot and strong defenders of
it, I suppose such doctrine will be vindicated from the charge of Nonconformity.

. 2. But I find that the first is a point not agreed on by all, viz. what the
constitution of the Kingdom is; while Parliaments have claimed that as their
Power and privilege which the King has denied to be theirs; and the King has
claimed that as his power and prerogative which Parliaments have denied to be
such. Therefore I (that am very unfit to judge between them) must take up with
that which is on both hands agreed on. And that I will take only as in the
Kings own words, in his answers to the Parliament 1641 in several of his
Declarations.

. 3. In his Majesty's answer to the 19. Propositions he thus describes the
Constitution.

There being three kinds of Government amongst men, Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracy and Democracy, and all these having their particular conveniences,
and inconveniences; the experience and wisdom of your ancestors has so molded
this out of a Mixture of these, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as humane
prudence can provide) the conveniences of all three without the
inconveniences of any one, as long as the balance hangs even between the
three Estates, and they run jointly on in their proper Channel (begetting
Verdure and fertility in the meadows on both sides) and the over(...)lowing of
either on either side raise no deluge or inundation. The ill of Absolute
Monarchy is Tyranny: The ill of Aristocracy is faction and division: The ills
of Democracy are tumults, violence and licentiousness. The good of Monarchy is
the Uniting of a Nation under one head to resist invasion from abroad, and
insurrection at home: The good of Aristocracy is the conjunction of Council of
the ablest persons of a State for the public benefit. The good of Democracy is
Liberty, and the Courage and Industry which Liberty begets.

In this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a house of Peers, and
by a house of Commons chosen by the people, all having free Votes and
particular privileges: The Government according to these Laws is trusted to
the King; power of Treaties of war and peace; of making Peers, of choosing
Officers and Counselors for State, Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and
Castles, giving Commissions for raising men to make war abroad, or to prevent
or provide against invasions or insurrections at home, benefit of
confiscations, power of pardoning, and some more of the like kind, are placed
in the King: And this kind of regulated Monarchy, having this power to preserve
that authority, without which it would be disabled to preserve the Laws in
their force, and the Subjects in their Liberties and proprieties, is intended
to draw to him such a respect and relation from the great ones, as may hinder
the ills of division and faction, and such a fear and reverence from the people
as may hinder tumults, violence and licentiousness.

Again, that the Prince may not make use of this high and perpetual Power to
the hurt of those for WHOSE GOOD HE HAS IT, and make use of the name of
Public necessity for the gain of his Private favorites and followers to the
detriment of his people, the house of Commons (an excellent conserver of
Liberty, but never intended for any share in Government, or the choosing of
them that should govern) is solely entrusted with the first Propositions
concerning the Levies of moneys (which is the sinews as well of peace as war)
and the impeaching of those who for their own ends though countenanced by any
SURREPTITIOUSLY GOTTEN COMMAND of the KING, have violated the Law which HE IS
BOUND (when he knows it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were
bound to advise him; at least not to serve him in the contrary.

And the Lords being trusted with a Judicatory power are an excellent Skreen
and bank between the Prince and people, to assist each against any
encroachments of the other, and by just judgments to preserve that Law, which
ought to be the Rule of every one of the three.

For the better enabling them in this, beyond the examples of any of our
ancestors, we were willingly contented to oblige our self, both to call a
Parliament every three years, and not to dissolve it in fifty days.]

We told you in our first Declaration printed by the advice of our Privy
Council, that for differences among our selves for matters indifferent in their
own nature concerning religion, we should in tenderness to any number of our
loving Subjects, very willingly comply with the advice of our Parliament, that
some Law might be made for the exemption of tender Consciences from punishment
or prosecution for such ceremonies, and in such cases which by the judgment of
most men are held to be matters indifferent, and of some to be absolutely
unlawful. Provided that this case shall be attempted and pursued with that
modesty, temper and submission, that in the mean time, the peace and quiet of
the Kingdom be not disturbed, the decency and comeliness of Gods service
discountenanced, nor the pious, sober, devout actions of those reverend persons
who were the first Laborers in the blessed reformation of that time, be
scandalized and defamed]. And because his Majesty observes great and different
troubles to arise in the hearts of his people concerning the Government and
Liturgy of the Church, His Majesty is willing to declare that he will refer the
whole consideration to the wisdom of his Parliament.] See the rest in the
Declaration.

. 4. In his Declaration of Jun. 3. 1642. [For the Law, it being the Common
inheritance of our people, we shall never enforce any prerogative of ours
beyond it; but submit our selves to it; and give you and all our Subjects the
fullest latitude of it, both for the liberty of your persons, and the propriety
of your estates. And for an inviolable confidence and assurance hereof, as we
take God the searcher of all hearts to witness our real intention herein, so we
shall no longer, desire you to stand for the defense of our person, honor, and
just prerogatives, than we s(...)all maintain the Laws of the land, the liberty
of your persons, and the propriety of your goods.

. 5. In his Declaration of Jun. 13. 1642. to the Lords [We do declare that we
will not require nor expect any obedience from you, but what shall be warranted
by the known Laws of the land: as we do expect that you shall not yield to any
commands, NOT LEGALLY GROUNDED, or imposed by any other. We will defend the
true Protestant Religion established by the Law of the Land; the lawful
liberties of the Subjects of England, and just privileges of all the three
Estates of Parliament; and shall require no further obedience from you than as
accordingly we shall perform the same.

. 6. Aug. 12. 1642. Declaration [The High Commission Court had proceeded with
too much strictness in many cases; where the tender Consciences of many of our
weak Subjects were concerned; and had so far outgrown the power of the Law,
that it would not be limited and guided by it, but censured, fined and
imprisoned our people, for matters not punishable by the Law.

. 7. In this great and full Declaration Aug. 12. 1642. [What our opinion and
resolution is concerning Parliaments, we have fully expressed in our
Declarations: We have said and will still say, They are so ESSENTIAL A PART OF
THE CONSTITUTION of this Kingdom, that we can attain to no happiness without
them, nor will we ever make the least attempt (in our own thought) against
them. We well know that OUR SELF and our two Houses make up the Parliament, and
that we are like Hippocrates Twins, we must laugh and cry, live and die
together; That no man can be a friend to one and an enemy to the other].

. 8. The Kings Protestation Sept. 19. 1642. between Stafford and Wellington. [I
do promise in the presence of Almighty God, and as I hope for his blessing and
protection, that I will to the utmost of my power defend and maintain the true
Reformed Protestant Religion established in the Church of England, and by the
grace of God in the same will live and die.

I desire to Govern by the known Laws of the land, and that the Liberty and
Property of the Subject may be by them preserved, with the same care as my own
just rights: And if it please God by his blessing upon this Army raised for my
necessary defense, to preserve me from this rebellion, I do solemnly and
faithfully promise in the sight of God to maintain the just privileges and
freedom of Parliament, and to govern by the known Laws of the land to my utmost
power; and particularly to observe inviolably the Laws consented to by me this
Parliament.]

. 9. How far our present King has declared himself for the same principles, it
is needless to recite, while his frequent Professions of them, and his
Declarations for just Liberty of Conscience, and his Gracious Declaration about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, and his professed resolution to draw the Bishops to
meet us and make necessary abatements for concord, etc. are in our remembrance
or before our eyes.

And we disclaim their censures, who say All this was done but for a time to
draw us into what has followed: And when others say, It was by a -- Parliament
that it was frustrated, and that all was long of the Bishops and Clergy whose
Reverence prevailed with them to do all against us which they did, though we
cannot confute them, we leave all to the approaching judgment of the
all-knowing God.

. 10. II. The Article of Religion for the power of Kings and obedience of
Subjects we need not transcribe, but do consent to it: so do we to the Canons
which require the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and answerable obedience,
and to all the Homilies against Rebellion and for obedience, and all that ever
we found to be for this the public doctrine of the Church.

. 11. III. The judgment of Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Mr. Richard Hooker I
have elsewhere cited, and confuted some of Mr. Hookers mistakes, who puts
the peoples power to give Authority, instead of their power to choose the
family or person that shall receive it immediately from the Law of God.

The words of Barclay and Grotius the two most eminent defenders of Monarchy
(as I said before) I will not recite in their words (how far and when Kings may
be resisted, specially by those that have part in the Legislative power which
is part in the supremacy) lest I be mistaken as approving all that they say: It
may be seen at large in Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis li. 1. c. 4. page 86, 87,
88, 89, 90, 91. And de Imperio sum. Potest. cap. 1. page 7, 8. much less will I
cite the common writers of Politics, who are more for popular power a great
deal than I am (of which after).

. 12. At this time I will take up with the words of Bishop Jer. Tailor, in his
notable Ductor Dubitantium about both Civil and Church Power, because he is a
very ingenious writer, and of great authority even with those of the Clergy who
follow Archbishop Laud, whom Abbots followers accused.

. 13. Lib. 3. c. 3. p. 130. Rul. 1. That in every Commonwealth there is a
supreme power, is without all question -- It matters not whether this supreme
power be subjected in one or many, that is as to the Goodness or badness -- not
the absoluteness of it. -- He that has the supreme power is only under God --
suppose a King that has Power of the Militi, and his Senate of making Laws,
and his people by their Committees of raising money, This power of making war,
and Laws and Levies is the supreme Power, and is that which can do all things:
And though one be accountable for moneys, and the other subject to Laws, and
two of them under the power of the Sword, yet this is but the Majesty or
supremacy parted, and whether well or ill I dispute not, but when it is parted
and when it is united, it is all. --

P. 133. But then it must be considered that the absolute power of the Prince,
is but an absolute power of Government, not of Possession. It is a power of
doing right; but not a power of doing wrong; And at the worst, it is but the
power of doing private violences for the security of the public. He is
Princeps Regni, but not Dominus; a Prince, not a Lord; and the distinction is
very material. For to be Lord signifies more than the supreme power of
Government; It means an Absolute power to dispose of all lives and all
possessions; which is beyond the power of the King or Prince: He that is a
King, rules over a free people, but a Lord rules over Slaves, Tacitus,
according to the popular humor of the Romans, supposed the power of a King to
be too great a Violation of Liberty: but Domination was intolerable -- The
supreme power of Government is at no hand a supreme power or an arbitrary
disposer of life and fortunes; but according to Law, or according to extreme
necessity which is the greatest Law of all. In the sense of Honor and moderate
power the King is a Lord: but not in this sense of law: By a Lord is meant He
that has power to dispose of the goods of the Vassals, but that a King or
Prince has not. This is not the supreme power of Government: A King is not the
Lord of his Kingdom; of the Territories of his Subjects. --

P. 134. The supreme Power must defend every man's right, but must usurp no man's
-- A King is to Govern all things; but to possess nothing but what is his own.
Only of the necessity, if the question be Who shall be judge; it is certain
that it ought to be so notorious that every man might judge -- if ever there be
a dispute who shall be judge of the necessity, it is certain the necessity is
not extreme. -- p. 137. The plenitude of power of all things ought the least to
be feared, because it never is to be used but for the greatest good -- p. 142.
All that he has been pleased to promise, the forms and Laws of Government, and
to whatsoever himself has consented, by all those Laws he is bound -- when he
has bound himself, there is the same necessity upon him as on his Subjects. --

P. 144. The custom of supreme Princes swearing to govern by Laws was very
ancient -- And indeed abstracting from the Oath and promise, Kings are bound by
natural justice and equity to do so: For they are not Kings unless they govern;
and they cannot expect obedience unless they tell the mesaures by which they
will be obeyed; and these measures cannot be any thing but Laws; -- Now this is
the natural way of all good government. There is no other: And to govern
otherwise is as unnatural as to give children meat at their ears, and hold
looking-glasses at their elbows that they may see their faces. If Kings be not
bound to govern their people by their Laws, why are they made? by what else can
they be governed? By the will of the Prince? -- The Laws are so: Only he has
declared his will and made it regular and certain, and such as wise men can
walk by, that the Prince may not Govern as fools Govern.]

Of Church Government and Ceremonies and Subscriptions, the same Author, ibid.

. 14. Lib. 3. c. 4. p. 217. [The use of the Keys differs from proper
jurisdiction in this great thing, that if the Keys be rightly used, they do
bind or loose respectively; but if they err they do nothing on the subject;
they neither bind nor loose. In proper jurisdiction it is otherwise: for right
or wrong if a man be condemned he shall die for it; and if he be hanged he is
hanged: But the Church gives nothing but the sentence of God, and tells upon
what terms God will or will not pardon. If the Priest minister rightly, and
judge according to the will and Laws of God, the subject shall find that
sentence made good in heaven by the real events of the other world: -- But if
the priest be deceived, he is deceived for himself and no body else -- He
alters nothing of the state of the Soul by his quick absolution or unreasonable
binding. The power of remitting sins given to the Church is nothing but an
authority to minister that pardon which God gives by Jesus Christ --
Ecclesiastical authority is a power of Jurisdiction, just as Excommunication is
a Sword. But so is the word of God sharper than a two-edged sword, and so is a
severe reproof -- But how little there is of proper jurisdiction in
excommunication we can demonstrate but by too good an argument (citing many
instances of its uneffectualness) -- Only the obstinate and incorrigible are to
be proceeded against by that extreme remedy: And to them who need that extreme
it is no remedy: for they that need it care not for it, and what compulsion
then can this be? -- It must work only by opinion, and can affright them only
who are taught to be afraid of it. It can only do effort on them who are
willing to be good in the way of the Church; for it is a spiritual punishment,
and operates only on the spirit, that is, on the will and understanding which
can have no coercion -- ] That which Ecclesiastics can do, is a suspension of
their own act; not any power over the actions of other men: and therefore is
but an use of their own liberty, not an exercise of jurisdiction. He does the
same thing in Sacraments which he does in preaching: In both he declares the
guilty person to be out of the way to heaven, to be obnoxious to the Divine
anger, to be a debtor of repentance; and refusing to baptize an ill Catechumen,
or to Communicate an ill living Christian, does but say the same thing. He
speaks in one by signs, and in the other he signifies by words. -- The other
effects are the caution and duty of the Church to abstain from the society of
the Criminal.

. 15. Rule 2. p. 220. etc. The Church has power to make Laws etc. By the
Church I must first mean the Church Catholic, or all the Governors of the
Christian assemblies in the world -- But because all did never meet since the
Apostles days, who being few and united and absolute and supreme could then do
what never could be done since, it is necessary that the Legislation be
subjected in some more particular subject, and therefore I shall instance in
the least. By the Church I mean every particular Church joined to the Head of
Union; and by the particular Church I mean the Angel of that Church the Bp. --
A Diocese is the least circuit of Government, but it is an entire body subject
to distinct commands -- whether the Diocese be little or great, allowed or
disallowed, in City or Country, divided into Parishes or not divided, under
Metropolitans or not under, of many Churches or but of one, it matters not:
where there is a Bishop and a Congregation, there is a Diocese -- As for
Parishes in the late sense of the word, that is, the charge of a single
Presbyter, it is no body politic of Apostolical or Divine appointment. For the
Presbyters were called in part in solicitudinis into the help of the Ministry,
but they had NO CURE OF SOULS save only by delegation and special temporary
appointment for some whole ages in the Church. And therefore the Governing and
Commanding authority cannot be extended to Parishes and their Curats, which are
of late date 1. Note that elsewhere he says, A man cannot be answerable for
the souls that he cannot know. 2. Note that he makes a Bishop essential to a
Church (in the proper political sense) And so our Parishes are all unchurched
by the Bishops way. 3. One Congregation with a Bishop is a Diocesane Church. 4.
Parish Curats have no Government. 5. All this fully proves that Diocesses in
those ages that he speaks of were no bigger than one man could govern, that is,
than our Parishes. 6. Quer. By what right were the changes in specie made.
] p. 222. If we go higher (than a Bishop) we can never come to a society of
Apostolical or Divine institution in the Church, because between the whole
Catholic Church either in diffusion or representation, and a single Diocese,
all the intermedial unions, as of Metropolitans, Primates, Patriarchs, Councils
Provincial or ECUMENICAL are by consent and positive and humane institution,
but they directly establish no Divine Government: This only is properly such --
A Bishop and his charge more or less is an entire society or Commonwealth,
that is, an entire Government, and Prelate and people make the parts of the
integral constitution This with Dr. Hammonds denying that there were any
subject Presbyters in Scripture times, make up pure Independency.
. (What Laws he means see him after.)

. 16. But this (Commanding power) is not to be extended to such Decencies as
are only Ornament, but is to be limited to such as only rescue from Confusion:
The reason is, because the Prelates and spiritual Guides cannot do their duty,
unless things be so orderly that there be no confusion, much less can they do
it with joy: and so far their power does extend. -- But if it can go beyond
this limit, then it can have no natural limit; but may extend to sumptuousness,
to Ornaments of Churches, to rich utensils to splendor, to Majesty -- But
because this is too subject to abuse, and gives a secular power into the hands
of Bishops, and an authority over men's fortunes and estates, and is not
necessary for souls, and no part of the spiritual government, it is more than
Christ gave to his Ministers.

. 17. This is to be added, that because this power is -- such -- it is only
left to the people to do it or not, under the pain of sin, but they are not to
incur spiritual censures upon the stock of non compliance in things not simply
necessary or of essential duty. Nonconformity.


. 18. P. 233. Beyond this, the Bishops can directly give no Laws that properly
and immediately bind the transgressors under sin: my Reasons are, 1. Because
we never find the Apostles using their Coercion on any man but the express
breakers of a Divine commandment, or the public disturbers of the peace of the
Church, and the established necessary order. 2. Because even in those things
which were so convenient that they had a power to make injunctions, yet the
Apostles were very backward to use their authority of commanding, much less
severity, but entreating. 3. In things where God had interposed no command,
though the rule they gave contained in it that which was fit and decent, yet if
men would resist, they gently admonisht or reproved them, and let them alone.
4. If the Bishops power were extended further, it might extend to Tyranny, and
there could be no limits beyond this prescribed to keep him within the measures
of sweetness of the Government Evangelical -- yet the power of spiritual Rulers
may extend further by fame, consent, reputation, opinion of his wisdom,
voluntary submission, avoiding scandal.

. 19. P. 258. [It is certainly unlawful to excommunicate any man for not paying
the fees of Courts: For contumacy there is an offense against the Civil power,
and he has a sword of his own to avenge that. But excommunication is a sword
to avenge the contumacy of them who stubbornly offend against the discipline of
the Church in that wherein Christ has given her authority; and that is in the
matters of Salvation and damnation immediate; in such things where there is no
secular interest; where there can be no dispute; where the offender does not
sin by consequence and interpretation, but directly and without excuse.

. 20. I add one thing of great use and consideration, and that is, That when a
Law is made that whoever shall commit such a fact shall be ipso facto
excommunicate, it must never be understood of the Greater and proper
excommunication: for if it be, it is unlawful, and it is ridiculous: for the
abscission from the Church is not to be used but after all other remedies; when
the Crime is delated and notorious, and when he has been admonished and
reproved and called to repentance, if after all he refuses and rebels, then he
is to be cut off, else not: And therefore no man is cut off ipso facto -- If it
be enquired whether all such sentences in Law which declare a man in certain
cases ipso facto excommunicate, be unlawful, the Archbishop of Spalato (Lib.
5. de Rep. Eccles. c. 9. n. 23, 24.) who is fierce against them, Honest Dr. you
made not our Canons which ipso facto excommunicate the professed
Nonconformists: Yet I will venture to give one exception: viz. He that openly
and deliberately renounceth God or Christ or any essential part of his
Baptismal Covenant, or Christianity, thereby ipso facto cuts off himself; And
therefore the Law may justly say that he is ipso facto excommunicate, and
declare him so. Doubtless our Canon means the proper excommunication, when it
adds, let him not be restored but by the Archbishop, and till he publicly
repent and renounce his wicked error.
answers affirmatively and confidently, and disputes well against them.

. 20. Page 262. The Church intends not to forbid any such intercourse or
Communion to which we stand preobliged by the Law of Nature or any Law of God
-- Even the King cannot command a wife not to pay her duty to her husband, nor
a child to his mother: To these they are bound by God though they die for it.
So a Minister to his office.
When (an action of) piety is necessary, and not under choice and Counsel, but
under a commandment, the King and the Bishop singly or conjunctly have no power
to forbid it. p. 264. In this there is no other Rule of Conscience, but that we
first attend to the Laws of God concerning our other duties, and then to the
Laws of the King in this.

. 21. p. 275. The Lent fast is not a Tradition or Canon Apostolical, proved at
large and unanswerably, to page 285. and again after.

. 22. P. 285. The Authority of a General Council in matters of Government and
Discipline, is no greater, no more obligatory, than the authority of a
provincial Council to those that are under it. -- It is an Union of Government;
a consent of Princes and Bishops -- the consent of opinions adds moment to the
Laws; Those Princes which are there, and Bishops which consent are bound by
their own act, -- till reason alters -- but the Prince can as much alter that
Law when the case alters -- as he can abrogate any other. But those Princes who
were not there, whatever the cause of their absence be, are not obliged by that
General Council; and that Council can have no authority but what is given them
by consent; And therefore they who have not consented are free as ever.

I mention this that those religious and well meaning persons who are concluded
by the Canon of an ancient Council, and think that whatever was there commanded
it lays some obligation on the Consciences of us at this day, and by this
means enter into infinite scruples, and a restless unsatisfied condition, may
consider that the ancient Doctors of the Church had no jurisdiction over us who
were born so many ages after them -- Interests and manners are infinitely
altered since that time -- Their authority could not be longer than their
lives; It Is certainly not greater than that of Kings, which must die with their
persons, that their successors may be Kings as well as they and not subjects of
the dead -- If the thing be good we may use it -- and we may choose -- That the
fathers met at Liodicei, Antioch, Nice, etc. 1000, 1100 or 1300 years ago,
should have authority over us in England so many ages after, is so infinitely
unreasonable, that none but the fearful and unbelievers, the scrupulous and
those which are (...) of a slavish nature, and are in bondage by their fear,
and know not how to stand in that liberty by which Christ has made them free,
will account themselves in subjection to them. The Canon for being in the old
Codes of the Church, binds us no more than the Laws of Constantine.

. 23. P. 290. [An Ecclesiastical custom must be reasonable or useful, or it
cannot oblige the Conscience, except to avoid scandal (for that is in all
things carefully to be observed, right or wrong, so it be not sin) for no man
is bound to be a fool, or to do a foolish action. Now a Custom in the Canon
Law is concluded to be reasonable, if it tend to the good of the soul.

. 24. P. 301. etc. [Ecclesiastical Laws must be imposed so as to leave our
liberty unharmed; that is, that the Law be not Universal; not with an intent to
oblige all Christendom; except they will be obliged, that is, consent. -- The
Catholic Church never met since the Apostles days in any Assembly to make a
Law that shall bind all Christians whether they consent or no: And because one
Church has not by any word of Christ's, authority over another Church, and one
King is not superior to another King -- therefore no Ecclesiastical Law can be
made with a power of passing necessary obligation on all Christians: -- When
Christ had made us free from the Law of ceremonies which God appointed -- it
would be intolerable that the Churches should submit themselves to a Yoke of
ordinances, which men should make. --

. 25. P. 303. [Ecclesiastical Laws are made relative to time and place, to
persons and occasions, subject to all changes, fitted for use and the advantage
of the Churches, ministering to edification, and complying with Charity:
Whatsoever Ecclesiastical Law has not these conditions, the Churches ought not
to receive, because they are impediments, not advantages to the service of God:
If they be thus qualified, no good man will refuse them: If they be not, they
are the Laws of Tyrants, not of spiritual Fathers. -- 1. Whatever had its
foundation in the opinion of men, and not somewhat certainly derived from God,
if brought into Religion, etc. 2. If what is deduced only by probable
interpretation be obtruded as matter of faith, 3. If what is piously counseled
be turned into a perpetual and absolute Law, 4. If that which was left to the
choice and conduct of the Governors, be handled not as matter of Liberty, but
of necessity; in all these cases the commandments of men are taught for
doctrines. P. 305. Under this they are involved who persecute for opinions and
doubtful disputations. And They are guilty of the 4th. kind who persecute the
breakers of an Ecclesiastical Law with a severity greater than the Violators of
a Divine Commandment. -- For they that do such things must needs at least say
that such humane injunctions are as necessary as the Divine commandments: for
else why are they more severely punished? Not only they that expressly teach
that what they have invented is a commandment of God -- but all they that --
press indifferent things up to the height and necessity of Religion and a
Divine commandment, are guilty of this Phariseisme, -- and bind themselves but
not the Consciences of their subjects -- An Ecclesiastical Law which does in
any degree break this Law of our Savior (Teaching for doctrines the commands
of men) is therefore void and become intolerable -- As the Roman Law of keeping
Lent -- Bellarmine prevaricateth one of the most glorious propositions of
Christianity, placing the Kingdom of God in meat and drink, not in
righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. --

If a Law were made that every man at a certain time of the year use a certain
discipline to mortify his lust, it were a foolish Law.

. 26. p. 310. Laws of burden are always against Charity. --

P. 312. If there be a just cause to omit the observation, the omission is not
disobedience. --

Rule 18. p. 313. Ecclesiastical Laws of Ceremonies and Circumstances do not
bind the Conscience beyond the case of contempt and scandal -- P. 314. Nothing
can be religion but that service which God has chosen of himself, etc.
Ceremonies oblige no longer than they minister to the end of their designation.
P. 315. The Canons of the Church oblige only for their Reason and Religion, for
Edification and for Charity, when the thing is useful to others, or good in it
self: But the Authority it self being wholly a Ministry for these purposes, is
a Ministry of Religion, but has in it nothing of Empire, and therefore does
not oblige for it self or by it self, but for the doing good and avoiding evil.

. 27. Ecclesiastical Laws must be charitable and easy, and when they are not,
they oblige not. P. 316. When the Ecclesiastical Law is indicted by the
spiritual power, the Civil power only consenting and establishing the Canon,
that Corroboration adds no other band to the Canon, than that it be obeyed
according to the intention of the spiritual power; only so it becomes a Law
indeed; but it is a Law only as the Church can intend a Law, or desire it to be
imposed; that is, what the Church might reasonably persuade, and fitly enjoin,
so much and no more, in that manner and no other, the Civil power does
corroborate it -- It must be such as is fit to be persuaded: such which men can
be WILLING to, and easy under, and of which they shall have no cause to
complain: For the Church in these things has no Power but to exhort and
persuade, and therefore can enjoin nothing, but what can be reasonably
persuaded; she must not by the aid of the temporal power enjoin those things
which are cruel and vexatious, and such to which no argument but FEAR can make
the subject willing The sum is, The Church governs only Volunteers by
consent procured by Reason and Love.
-- When she makes judgments, she meddles not with blood -- and when she is
admitted to a Legislative, she enjoins an easy and gentle yoke, And when she
does not, the Subject is concerned to avoid the temporal evil threatened by the
Civil power, but not to give obedience to the intolerable Law of the Church as
in that capacity. For unless the Law of the Church be such that good men may
willingly obey it, it cannot be enjoined by the Church; and the Church ought
not to desire the Civil power to do it for her. For since she has no power to
command in such things where the Divine authority does not intervene, all the
rest is but PERSUASION; and he that has power ONLY TO PERSUADE cannot be
supposed to persuade against our wills: and therefore matters of intolerable
burden are not the matter of Ecclesiastical Laws, because they are certainly
against the will of all men, who can serve God and go to heaven without them.

. 28. Rule 20. p. 323. Ecclesiastical Laws must ever promote the service of God
and the good of souls, but must never put a Snare or Stumbling Block to
Consciences -- The authority which the Lord has given is for edification and
not for destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8. and 13. 10. And this is not only so to be
understood, that if the Church makes Laws which are not for edification, she
does amiss; but that she OBLIGES NOT, HER LAWS ARE NULL, and do not bind in
Conscience -- When the Church does any thing beyond her Commission, she does no
way oblige in Conscience, neither actively nor passively -- All this is greatly
to be observed in all cases of Conscience about Ecclesiastical Laws. If we can
understand where the spiritual power can command, and where she can exhort and
ought to prevail, we have found out all the measures of our obedience: But if
she goes beyond her Commission, she hurts none but her self: for she has
nothing to do with our bodies, and our souls are in safe hands. And the case is
much alike if the spiritual Law be bound by the Civil power: For the King when
he makes Laws of Religion, is tied up to the Evangelical measures; and if he
prevaritates, he does indeed tie us to a passive obedience, but the Conscience
is no otherwise bound: and he is to govern Christ's Church by the same measures
with which the Apostles did, and the Bishops their successors did and ought to
do before the Civil power was Christian: For he has no more power over
Consciences than they had, and ought not by the afflictions of the body to
invade the soul. But if he does, (...), he has only power over bodies, but no
authority over the Conscience.]

. 29. P. 325. I instance in the institution of significant Ceremonies, that is,
such which are not matters of order and decency, but merely for signification
and the representment of some truth or mystery -- (as pictures in the Greek and
Lutheran Churches) -- Because these can and do often degenerate into abuse and
invade religion, to make a Law of these is not safe; and when that Law does
prevail to any evil that is not easily by other means cured, it does not
prevail upon the Conscience: And indeed to make a Law for the use of them, is
not directly within the Commission of the Ecclesiastical power.]

But there is more in it than thus. For though significant Ceremonies can be
for edification to the Church in some degree, and in some persons, yet it is to
be considered whether the introducing of such things does not DESTROY THE
CHURCH, not only in her Christian Liberty, but in the simplicity and purity and
spirituality of her religion, by insensible changing it into a Ceremonial and
external service. To the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, nothing was to be added.
-- And in Christianity we have less reason to add any thing of Ceremony, except
the circumstances and advantages of the very Ministry, as time and place, and
Vessels and Ornaments and necessary appendages. When we speak of Rituals or
Ceremonies, that is, exterior actions or things besides the institutions and
commands of Christ, either we intend them as part of the Divine service, and
then they are unlawful and intolerable; or if only for signification, that is
so little a thing, and of so inconsiderable use in the fullness and clarity of
the revelation Evangelical, that besides that it keeps Christians still in the
state of infancies and minority, -- it ought not to stand against any danger or
offense that can by them be brought to ANY WISE and GOOD CHRISTIANS.

In some ages -- and Churchs they gave persons to be baptized, milk and honey,
to signify, etc. As this was not usual to give Hieroglyphics where they had
plain precepts -- it was of so very little use, that all Churches that I know
of have laid it aside -- And indeed if the Church might add things or rituals
of signification, then the walls might be covered with the figures of Doves,
Lambs, Serpents, Birds, and the Communion Table with Bread, Wine, Herbs,
Tapers, Pigeons, Honey, milk or whatever the wit of man -- might invent.

To prepare the figure of the Crucifix and to buy an Image to describe the
Sacrifice of the Cross -- are things to no purpose, not only for the levity and
theatrical gaieties and representments unbefitting the gravity and purity and
spirituality of the Christian religion, but also the manner of teaching these
truths by symbolical things and actions, is too low, too suspicious, too
dangerous to be mingled with the Divine Liturgies -- A Symbolical rite of
humane invention to signify what it does not effect, and then introduced into
the solemn worship of God, is so like those vains imaginations and
representments forbidden in the second Commandment, that the very suspicion is
more against edification, than their use can pretend to. --

. 30. p. 353. Nothing can oblige to a Divine faith but Divine authority, to
which Councils can no more pretend for being General, than for being
Provincial, and to which great Assemblies have no other title or pretense of
promise than the private Congregations of the faithful, who though but two or
three, shall be assisted by the Divine presence. But General Councils are so
wholly of humane institution, that though by the dictate of right reason and
natural wisdom they are to be convened, That is, such as are called General, as
many as can well meet.
yet to make them a formal Judicatory, and to give them a Legislative power or
a dominion and Magistracy in faith, there are so many conditions required both
to their indiction and convention, to their constitution and integity, to their
conduct and proceeding, to their conclusion and determination, that men are not
to this day agreed about any one of them; and therefore they cannot be a legal
Judicatory obliging any but them that do consent, and so oblige themselves.

. 31. P. 356. etc. Rule 23. Subscription to Articles and forms of Confession in
any particular Church, is wholly of Political consideration. -- Subscription
ought to be so intended, that he who has subscribed may not perceive himself
taken in a snare: but yet he that subscribes must do it to those purposes, and
in that sense and signification of things, which the supreme power intends in
commanding it; that is, at least, that he that subscribes do actually approve
the Articles overwritten: that he does at that time believe them to be such as
it is said they are; i. e. true, if they only say they are true; useful, if they
pretend to usefulness; necessary, if it be affirmed that they are necessary.
For if the subscriber believes not this, he by hypocrisy serves the ends of
public peace and his own preferment.

When Articles are established without necessity, subscription must be required
without Tyranny and imperiousness. That is, it must be left to the liberty of
the subject to profess or not profess that doctrine -- To bring evil on men
that do not believe the Article and dare not profess to believe what they do
not, is injustice and oppression; it is a law of iniquity, and therefore it is
not obligatory to Conscience, and no humane authority is sufficient for the
Sanction and imposition. --

Quest. Can it be lawful for any man to subscribe what he does not believe to
be true, giving his hand to public peace, and keeping his Conscience for God?

Answ. No, if subscription signify approbation; for in that case it is
hypocrisy, etc. But if subscription were no more than the office of a Clerk of
the Sig(...)e or Council, who in form of Law is to sign all the Acts of the
Council, it were different, For it is not as an account of his own opinion, but
as a formality of the Court: all the world looks on it as none of his personal
Act -- * But in subscription to Articles of Confession every Ecclesiastic that
subscribes, does it for himself -- (...)ubens and ex animo subscripsi, is our
form in the Church of England -- If the intention of our Superior be to require
our Assent -- he that subscribes does profess his assent; and whatever he
thinks himself, it is the intention of the Imposer that qualifieth the
subscription. -- No particular Church ought with rigor to require
subscriptions to Articles not evidently true, and necessary to be professed:
because in the division of hearts that is in the world, it is certain that some
good men may dissent, and then either they shall be afflicted or tempted to
hypocrisy: of either of which if Ecclesiastic Laws be guilty, they are not
for edification, they are neither just nor pious; and therefore oblige not.]

. 32. P. 358, 359. At least let the Articles be made with as great latitude of
sense as they can, and so that subscriptions be made to the form of words, let
the subscribers understand them in what sense they please, which the truth of
God will suffer and the words can be capable of. This is the last remedy; but
it is the worst: It has in it something of Craft, but very little of
ingenuity; and if it can serve the ends of peace, or of external Charity, or of
Fantastic concord, yet it cannot serve the ends of truth and holiness, and
Christian simplicity.

LEt it be noted that yet this Doctor largely pleads for the Lawfulness of
Lying, when it is not injurious but profitable: And if such a man condemn the
hypocrisy of such subscriptions, who can justify them? when that medium of
Lawful profitable Lying seems the likeliest to do it in the world.

Note also that I profess not Assent to every word in the foregoing Citations;
But how far they justify me and such others, I leave the Reader to judge,
desiring him to read all fullyer in the book, lest he think I wrong the sense
by my omitting any thing, which lest I be tedious I am forced to pass by.

CHAP. VI.
The Political Alphabet of The sicenre Christian Loyallist.
1. GOD is the most powerful, wise and loving Universal Ruler of the world, by
Laws and judgment. 2. He has authorized no Universal humane Governor under
him on earth, for Laws or Judgment. 3. By his Law of Nature and Scripture he
obliges man to live in humane policies, or Governed order. 4. All true
Governing Right and obligation, is from him as universal absolute Supreme;
resulting immediately from his Commission in Nature or Scripture; and Rulers
are his officers. 5. They have no Power or right against him or any of his
Laws. 6. The common Good being the essential end of Government, no Ruler has
power to destroy it. 7. All humane power is limited by Gods Laws, and by their
own fundamental contracts; and by the peoples natural interest and propriety.
8. Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy and mixed government are all lawful species.
9. What shall be the species or who the person (or family) that shall rule is
not of Natural or Scripture determination, but by Providence preparatorily, and
consent or contract obligingly. 10. Mere conquest without consent is no just
title. 11. The chief work of Rulers is to promote the keeping of Gods Laws, and
the everlasting good of men, and the temporal good in order thereunto. 12.
Sub-Legislation, judgment and execution by force, are their governing acts. 13.
The supreme Power in these, is the giver of power to inferior Rulers; and has
no superior Ruler but God. 14. No power can disoblige us from any act of piety
and Charity, for our souls, bodies, or neighbors, specially for the common
good, which the Law of God in Nature binds us to do. 15. All Subjects must
submit their private interest to the public good. 16. We must suffer any
private personal wrong rather than do any thing by resistance or dishonouring,
which may disable Rulers to preserve the common good. 17. We must obey for
conscience sake; knowing that rebellion, yea and disobeying lawful commands, is
sin against God. 18. It is the best Government, 1. which most prefers Gods
Law, 2. and the spiritual good, 3. and the common good of all, 4. and best
discerns good men from bad, 5. when Love is the predominant and fear
subservient. 19. Division of Prince and people is Ruin; Union is virtue,
strength, pleasure and glory. 20. Love and twisted interest are the uniting
bonds. And a mistaken interest, of carnal self, contrary to God and the common
good, producing suspicious distrust, fear, hared and mutual opposition, are the
dissolving maladies. 21. It is not enough not to rebel or dishonor Kings, but
we must Love, honor, maintain and defend them to our power. As to the
question, in what cases is it lawful for the people to defend themselves. 1. I
had rather be employed in telling them when it is unlawful: 2. We are not the
Interpretres of the Law of the Land: 3. And mankind will be the interpreters of
the Law of Nature, whether we will or no(...) and the world is agreed that
salus p(...)p(...)li suprema (...) ex est, next to the declared will of God:
Pre^^s and ^^cryme are our allowed arms, and we pray for Kings and all in,
authority that we may live a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and
honesty, and shame be to him that desires more.
The Political Alphabet of The selfish Treacherous Royallist.
1. GOds authority is to be pretended to warrant Rulers to rebel against him;
and rule as above or without his Laws. 2. Gods Laws are for private souls to
study, but not for Princes to regulate their Laws and lives by. 3. Serious
Religion is an enemy to Monarchy, because it sets up Gods Laws above the Kings,
and makes all Subjects the discerners of their duty to God and the King, and
so every scruple of duty or sin toward God, suspendeth their obedience to the
King. 4. Monarchs are absolute and unlimited by any Laws of God. 5. None of
their own contracts called fundamental Laws bind them. 6. The lives and
possessions of all the Subjects are absolutely at their will. 7. Monarchy is so
of Gods institution that no other form of Government is lawful. 8. It is the
interest of Kings to have all things and persons at their wills: and to take
all for enemies that are against their wills. 9. All sorts of sensual pleasure,
riches and absolute command of all, being the things which nature loves, these
are the interest and ends of Princes. 10. It is the interest and wisdom of a
Subject to subserve these ends, that he may have as great a share in them as he
can attain by pleasing his Prince therein. 11. Every man is born for himself,
and his self is more to him than all the world. And he may serve his own
interest though it be against the common good or right. 12. The interest and
wills of the people are contrary to the interest and will of Ki(...)gs: It is
therefore the wisdom of Kings to suppose them his adversaries, and to weaken*
them and disable them from crossing his will. 13. He that will be next the King
in greatness, must be next him in enmity to the peoples wealth, and strength
and in disabling them. 14. Re(...)oboams young Counselors mist it only in
advising him openly to declare his purpose, which he should have dissembled and
hid. 15. A wise Prince rules in the dark, and must not scruple necessary lying
or perfidiousness. 16. It is nobler to be Great, than to be Good; wherein the
poor may be equal to the Prince: For he that is Great is Good to himself, which
is the only or chief goodness. 17. Fear though it breed enmity, is a better
part of Government than Love. Fear is to be caused by deeds, and Love by words.
18. Though it breed fear and hatred to hear a King described, as one that may
destroy them all when he will, yet this is necessary, that fear may procure
full subjection. 19. Kings should rule the people as slaves, and yet expect
that they obey them filially as their fathers. 20. To preach the absolute power
of Kings and the absolute obedience of subjects to them, and to such Bishops as
he will choose for them, is all the Religion that is safe for a Kingdom. 21. It
is the chief point of policy, to hate and suppress all other serious religious
persons, that are for an explicit faith, and free religion, and prefer God and
Heaven and the common Good, before the Kings command and will. For these are
ungovernable and his enemies, that set up all these so far above him. 22. Those
that believe not another world, and look for no better than Kings can give
them, and fear not sin, or God displeasure, but yet for the awing of the
people, keep up the easy formalities of religion, are the fittest persons to
be the favorites, Counselors and instruments of a Prince, and will be most
fully obedient to his will.
The Political Alphabet of The understanding real Papist.
1. GOd has made the Pope the Monarch or Governor of all the earth, or at
least of all Christians: And all Kings are bound to be his obedient Subjects.
2. He has Temporal Dominion over all, say some; or* Temporal in ordine ad
spiritualia say others, or spiritual at least say all. 3. Says Card. (...) in
Bibl. Patr. Our Lord had not been discreet if he had not lest one Vicar to be
Lord of every humane creature, to pass sentence on them of deposition,
damnation or any other. 4. The civil power is but for the body or outward good,
and the Church power is for the soul and the life to come. 5. The Church power
excels the Civil as the soul does the body and the Sun the Stars. 6. The
true fifth Monarchy is Christ's Reign over all the earth by his Vicar General
the Pope: vid. Campanel. de Reg. Dei. 7. Baptism implicitly obliges us to the
Pope. 8. He is no true Christian or member of Christ's Church who is not a
Subject of the Pope's, though he have other virtues. 9. The Catholic Church
and the Roman are all one. 10. Temporal Lords are all bound on pain of
excommunication, Deposition and Damnation, to exterminate all their protestant
Subjects, if they can. (...). 4. yea all that will not renounce their senses in
the belief of Transubstantiation. 11. All Princes and Christians are bound to
obey the Laws of General Councils, at least such as the Pope approves, though
Subjects of other Princes. 12. The Pope has the right of calling those
Councils, and presiding in them, and appr(...)ving or reprobating them. 13. The
Disciple is not above his Master; and all Christian Kings are Disciples of the
Pope and Bishops. 14. The great Doctors of the Church may be allowed to teach,
that an excommunicate King is no King, and may be killed, though others say,
not till the Pope condemn him. 15. Kings are Henrician simoniacal Heretics
that claim a power of Investing Bishops, though the people choose them, and
they be lawfully ordained. 16. The Pope and his Bishops may depose Kings pro
meritis. 17. Heretics are to be burnt or at least banished. 18. All Christians
must be forbidden communion with excommunicate Kings. 19. Living Bishops may be
deposed, and Dead Bishops dig'd up and burnt, who were for the Princes power of
Investitures and that the Pope may not depose them. 20. The Pope may forbid
Christian Communion and Gods public worship to whole Kingdoms, and command all
Bishops and Priests to shut up the Churches, and this if only the King provoke
him. 21. A Papists King must be deprived of all those Subjects, whom the Pope
adjudgeth to extermination. 22. The Pope may disoblige all subjects from their
Oaths of fidelity to excommunicated Princes. 23. And he may give their Kingdoms
to others, and authorize them to invade them, 24. Though the people take a
Papist King of a Protestant Kingdom to be their declared public enemy, by
consenting to destroy or exterminate them if he can, under the foresaid penalty
of excommunication, damnation and deposition, Yet he is bound to declare
himself a Papist (or as they call it, a Roman Catholic), and is under such
obligations. Since King John gave up his Kingdom to the Pope, Popes laid claim
to it. And Inno(...). 4. said, The King of England is our slave and Vassal, who
with a nod can imprison him and enslave him to reproach. Mat. Paris The History
of these I undertake to prove, here being not room for Citations.
.
The Political Alphabet of The unruly seditious Rebel.
1. THe common pravity of corrupted nature makes every man predominantly
selfish, and wise in his own conceit; so that his selfish interest is his end,
and his unhumbled understanding and fleshly desires are his guide. 2. He only
seems a good Ruler who serves all these interests and desires. 3. They are
so various and contrary, that no man can serve them all; Though God and the
true Common good may be served. 4. The Love of s(...)n and sensuality makes
the Law and justice seem grievous, which to would suppress them. 5. Just and
(...) and examples, are grievous to bad men: and so are such Rulers as maintain
true piety and justice. 6. Pride the first born of the Devil, makes men desire
to be all as Kings* yea as Gods, to have all fulfill their wills. 7. Pride
makes men think themselves the worthiest persons for all preferments, offices
or honors, and envy such as are preferred before them. 8. It makes them think
all too little that is done for them; and all too much that is laid upon them;
and that they are wronged when their wills are crossed. 9. It makes them think
that they are always in the right* and are fittest to Teach and Rule, and
others to hear and to obey them. 10. The Love of the world makes them impatient
of all taxes and burdens that pinch the flesh. 11. Landlords and other great
men that are (...)ear them, have more power over such than the King, because
they think that their welfare more depends on them. 12. When ambitious Great
men that miss Court preferments are cast into discontents, they easily lead the
vulgar into seditious courses. 13. Where the true fear of God is absent, such
temptations have small restraint. 14. The flatteries of an aspiring Clergy that
themselves live scandalously, applauding Tyranny as just government, tempts
many in dislike, to the contrary exterme. 15. Because Tyranny is the grand
enemy of Christ and mankind, which keepth out the Gospel and persecuteth piety,
and oppresses the just in most of the world, the hatred of it turns many
into the contrary extreme, and makes them forget the excellency of order and
Government. 16. Where the Principles of Atheism and Brutisme prevail, Kings
are regarded but as a dog regards his master for feeding him. 17. When proud
self-conceitedness corrupts men's Religion, and makes every erring person
confident that his way is right, especially if Popery or other false doctrine
corrupt him against the true principles of government, his zeal will become
seditious. 18. Such false (...)eachers are the trumpets of rebellion. 19.
Oppression makes the people mad. 20. God often in justice against wicked Rulers
lets loose the popular fury, as the sea that breaks the banks in an inundation.
The marrow of Spinosa's Opera posthuma which I read not till after the writing
of what is before. To which Hobbes much agrees.
1. One substance cannot be produced by another substance. p. 4. Therefore
substance cannot be produced by any.

2. All substance is necessarily Infinite. p. 5.

3. This infinite substance is indivisible. p. 11.

4. Besides God there is no substance, nor can any be conceived, so that God is
but one; for he is All substance, and its affections or mode: He is res extensa
and res cogitans. p. 12.

5. The University of being is God, and there is nothing but God; who has no
divisible part (for non datur vacuum) but all things are imaginable parts of
God; substances part of his substance, and souls which are Ideas of his
infinite Idea as he is res cogitans.

6. As God is of necessity of nature, so all that is substance or mode (or
action) is of necessity of Divine nature, essence and perfection.

7. God is the Immanent (that is, essential constitutive) cause of all things;
but not a Transient cause.

8. Every thing and act is necessarily determined of God, and nothing can
suspend that determination, nor is any thing Contingent; every Volition of man
is necessitated by the Divine nature, as all other things are; and no will is
free.

9. It is not, nor ever was possible that any thing should be otherwise than it
comes to pass.

10. No Intellect should know any thing but God and his Affections; for there
is nothing else.

11. God, Nature, substance, are all one; and Power and b(...)ing is
perfection: and ends and final causes are false imaginations, and so are the
Notions of good and evil, merit and sin, praise and blame, order and confusion,
fairness and deformity, thence arising: Reality is perfection.

12. The soul of man is nothing else but the act of conceiving of some singular
existent thing, called an Idea.

13. This soul (or mind) is part of the Infinite Intellect, which is God: And
to say [man knoweth] is all one as to say, God, not as Infinite, but as he
constituteth the essence of man's mind, has this Idea.

14. The object of this Idea constituting man's mind, is nothing but Body (that
is, substance thought of limitedly.)

15. The Idea which is the Mind is compounded of a multitude of Idea's.

16. Man's mind has necessarily an adequate knowledge of the eternal and
infinite essence of God.

17. Good is that only which I know is profitable to me; and evil that only
which hinders it.

18. He is most virtuous that most seeks his own profit or conservation, (and
contrarily he worst that most neglects it).

19. To do any thing virtuously is nothing else but to seek ones own profit
rationally.

20. No man seeks his own preservation for the sake of any thing else.

21. To understand is man's profit, and to know God (that is, Infinite substance
or All Entity) is the chief Virtue.

22. What ever agrees to my nature is necessarily Good.

23. Mirth can have no excess, nor sorrow ever be good.

24. Humility is no Virtue, nor comes from reason.

25. Repentance is no Virtue, nor of reason, but a double misery.

26. He that is in fear, and does good to escape evil, is not led by reason.

27. A free mind thinks not of death, nor of good or evil.

28. No ill can come to a man but from external causes.

29. Whatever we account hurtful to us, we may remove any way that we can
safely: And whatever we account profitable we may take and use if we can, by
any means: And it is absolutely lawful to every man by the law of nature to do
any thing which he judges is for his profit.

30. All things are good which make us merry: and the merryer any man is, the
more of the Divine nature and perfection he has.

31. No man can hate God, nor choose but Love him.

32. To desire that God Love us, is to desire that he should not be God.

33. Man's mind remembers not out of the body; but is not absolutely destroyed
with the body (because it is part of God).

34. God loves man by Loving himself, and so Gods Love to man, and man's Love
to God is one and the same thing; and man's felicity.

35. There is nothing in nature which is contrary to this Intellectual Love, or
that can destroy it.

36. Because Gods right is only his Power, therefore the right of man is only
his power to exist and act; For the natural power of every thing, by which it
existeth and operateth, is nothing but Gods own power (which is God.)

37. By the Law of nature then I mean the very Laws of nature, or Rules
according to which all things are done, that is, Natures power. Right extends
as far as Power: and whatever any man does by his nature, he does by the
highest Right of Nature.

38. And because man is not only rational, but men are more led by blind lust
than by reason; therefore their natural right is to be defined, not by reason,
but by any appetite which determines them to act. p. 271. No difference is to
be made though some appetites be unreasonable; For both are the effects of
nature. Whatever a man is, he is a part of nature; (or God) and natures power
determines him to all that he does.

39. A sound mind is no more in our power than a sound body: And Divines remove
not this difficulty by taking of the corruption of nature and original sin; or
the deception of the Devil.

40. The Right and Law of Nature is against nothing but that which no man
desires, and no man can do; it forbids not contentions, hatred, wrath,
deceits, nor absolutely any thing which the appetite desires. p. 273.

41. For whatever we call Ridiculous, absurd, evil, is because we see but part,
and would have all ordered after our Reason; But it is not evil as to the order
and Law of universal nature.

42. One is under another Law, while he is under his Power: and is free or sui
juris so far as he has power to resist force, and lives as he list. p. 274.

43. We are no longer under another Law, than fear or hope persuade us to it.

44. Fidelity promised to another, is so long only in force (rata) till the
promiser change his will: when he sees that keeping his word will hurt him,
the Law of nature disobligeth him. p. 274.

45. Men are by nature enemies, in danger of each other: and each one being not
sufficient to defend himself, hence comes Polities.

46. There is no sin in a state of nature (unless against our selves.) He that
follows ignorance and lust does keep natures order, and do what nature binds
him to, as well as he that follows reason. p. 276.

47. There is no sin therefore but against common consent in Empire, where
every one has given up his private right to the public: So Justice and
injustice are only as they respect humane Empire.

48. Every Citizen must obey all the Cities commands, and has no right to
discern what is just or unjust, pious or impious; but because the will of the
City is to be every ones will, whatever the City judges just and good, the
Citizen that judges it evil, must nevertheless do.

49. Our knowledge and Love of God and man, are out of Rulers power: And
outward acts of worship do nothing help or hinder our knowledge and Love of
God; and therefore are not to be so far regarded, as to break for them the
public peace and concord: every man may any where worship God inwardly. p.
282. etc.

50. Two Cities are naturally enemies, as are two men: And it is lawful for one
to try by war to subdue the other. It is enough to make a war lawful, to have a
will to it: But to peace, both must accord. p. 284.

51. Covenants bind as long as the cause continues, fear of damage or hope of
gain, and no longer: nor ought the breach to be called deceit or
perfidiousness, p. 284.

52. The contracts or Laws by which the Multitude give up their Right to one
Council, or one man, undoubtedly may be violated as soon as it is the interest
of common safety to violate them. p. 288.

53. They that think it possible for one only to have the (...) Civitatis
j(...)s, do much err: For Right is determined only by Power; But one man's power
is very unable for such a burden p. 202. When the people choose a King, he must
choose Commanders, Counselors, friends, to whom he commits both his own and
the common safety, so that the Government which is taken to be Absolute
Monarchy, is really in practice Aristocracy; not indeed manifest, but latent,
and therefore the worst.

Besides that a King, that is a child, sick, heavy with age, is a precarious
King: But they have indeed the chief power, who do the chief buness of the
Government, or are next the King: to pass by, that a King liable to last, does
often manage all by the lust of one, or another Whore or Pandor. p. 293.

54. Hence it follows that a King is so much the less sui juris, and the
Subjects condition is so much the more miserable, by how much the more
absolutely the Civitatis jus, (the public power) is transferred on him. -- A
Monarch is most sui juris, when he most consults the safety (or good) of the
multitude. p. 293.

55. As to religion, no Temples should be built at the public charge; nor laws
be made about opinions, unless they be seditious, and overthrow the foundations
of the City: But let them that are allowed public exercise of religion, build
their own Temples, and the King have his Chapel. p. 301.

His discourse for Aristocacy I pretermit; so much of Spinosa.

THe truth is (as Mr. Peter Ster(...) unhappily sound) it is hard avoiding this
frame of Doctrine, for the Predeterminants who hold that the Volitions and
actions of all men are predetermined by Gods necessitating unresistible
promotion as the first cause of nature and motion, and that in all their modes
and circumstances; and that the will can have no power to do any thing, more or
less, than it is thus predetermined to do, and that moral good and evil are
caused as necessarily by God as Light and Darkness are: Were these men's
Physical conceits as certain, as all the principles of Religion, natural and
revealed, which they totally overthrow, they might stagger many: But not when
sick and proud men's dreams are set against man's common Light, right and
interest.

IN all this the Reader must still remember, 1. that I recite other men's
Political-principles, only that the accusers of my own and such others may
compare them together, and see which they judge more rational and loyal; and
what parties they can find in all the world, whose principles of Government
they will rest in, when ours are condemned.

2. And yet I make not my self an arrogant censor of all that differ from me;
but confess that singularity, especially in matters of other men's profession,
excuses suspicion in the Reader; and where he finds me differ from the most
of Protestants and Papists, he owes no more regard to my judgment, than
cogent evidence should command.

I confess though they word it variously, and also differ about the case of
some particular Kingdoms, most of the forementioned sorts of Lawyers, Politic
writers, Divines, etc. seem to differ from some of my principles; But many
differ more in notion than in meaning. Most of them all make the multitude the
prime subject and cause of sovereign power, from whom all sorts of chief Rulers
do receive it: and that they do this for their necessary peace, safety and
prosperity, which they may defend against perfidious betrayers of it, etc. But
if you mark it, withal you shall find that, 1. they say that the Law of nature
binds them to gather into Cities, and to choose governors; 2. and that they
call the peoples Sovereignty or power, but as Mr. Hooker the Habit, and say the
Act belongs to the Ruler so chosen: and as others say, It is Majestas realis
which yet may not actually Rule, but convey the Majestatem personalem to him or
them that only must rule. By all which they plainly confess, 1. That God has
not left it to their choice whether they be a Governed society (Civitas) or
not; For the Law of nature which is Gods Law, obliges them to it. 2. That it
is not actual Governing that he thus obliges the multitude to, but to choose
the species and persons that shall be Recipients. 3. And when they can name no
more power but choosing the Recipients (one or more) and Limiting his power in
matters of Propriety and other things to which God has not by his Law extended
it without their consent, it is plain that this is not to be the Givers of the
Ruling power. Most changes in the world Physical and Moral are made by
Diversification of the Dispositio Receptiva (most or many think Generation does
no more as to the soul.) This is not nothing. God says [To men so qualified,
and so chosen or lawfully receptive I will give such and such power as my
Officers;] And He qualifieth them, and the People choose or consent to the
Persons in some places, and the successive families in others: so that
Receptivity is of man, with some exceptions or Limitations; but the authority
is immediately from God.

Gregory Sayrus is justly accounted one of the best and moderatest Popish
Casuists that ever wrote, and in his excellent Clav. Regia he says, Lib. 3. c.
1. p. 109, 110, etc. not only de fine (which most agree to) [Hanc particulam
quod Lex ordinari debet ad bonum commune, Barth. Medina 1. 2. q. 90. a. 2.
veram and intelligendam esse docet non solum de jure, sed etiam de facto, ut
Lex illa quae in privatum commodum instituitur, ita ut nullo modo in utilitatem
publicam referatur, lex non sit, sed iniquitas. Deinde ita intelligitur, ut si
cesset ratio boni communis and ejus utilitas, statim lex cessat, and vim
obligandi non habet: so Alph. a Castrol. 1. de potest. legis poenal. c. 5. doc.
3. And he adds p. 111. himself [Where a Law cease to be profitable to the
Commonwealth, then it altogether cease to be a Law, and is not obligatory
(But this I have elsewhere fullier opened) And as to the question in hand [Haec
cura populi and potestas super illum licet omnis a Deo sit, illam tamen homines
diversimode a Deo habent, non semper a Deo immediate, sed saepe per populi
consensum, a quo primum Deo annuente aut permittente illam accepit; nec majorem
quam illi populus ob initio concessit: tam aperta and manifesta est haec populi
potestas, etc.] And so he goes on to prove out of Zenophon, Julian, Jurisc.
the Canon Law, etc. that the community is quoddam totum liberum habens jus
naturaliter regendi seipsum; ita hoc jus potest transfer in alium, and vices
suas alteri delegare; and that Kings have been made by the people from the
beginning, and from their consent the Governing power still comes. And that [a
Law not necessary by Gods making, made by a Lay Prince, the whole people
contradicting, is of no sore, (...) the people have given their whole power to
the (...), which is to be known by th(...) ancient Custom of (...) among them.]

Yet more that the same Author adds, p. 112. that as to (...) power, though
he that has it be (...) the Power immediately from God]. And how will he ever
prove that Church Power is any more from God than the necessary part of Civil
(...)? Is not the ratio derivand(...) the same so far, that in both, the people
do but choose the Receivers (and limit in the unnecessary parts) and God
immediately give the power? The case is the same in both.

As to the rest of the Papists doctrine, he knows nothing of them that
knows not that commonly they make the King, not only dependant on the Pope,
but more also on the Efficient Power and will of the people than most
Protestants do; where there is in this any difference, the Papists are the more
popular.

And for Protestants I will not meddle with Divines but Lawyers, School Doctors
and Politic writers; who commonly go further for the peoples power than ever I
or any Nonconfor^^^s of my familiarity did approve (Pardon our singularity) I
would desire no more of such as the (...) and other accusers of our principles,
but to read over (...), and such others, yea the most powerful defenders of
Monarchy, (...), And then read the Protestant Lawyers and Doctors of
Philosophy, and compare our principles here with the (...).

I will pass by such as Learned (...), and now instance only in (...) a Lawyer.
In his Politics (I will not English it) he says in (...) (most like Mr.
H(...)oker) [A(...)sero haec jura Majestatis, quae dicuntur, regno adeo esse
propria, ut soli haec competant, ejusque spiritus vitalis, anima, cor and vita
sint, quibus salvis Resp. vivit; and quibus sublatis interit and perit illa,
nomineque hoc indigna judicanda. Concedo horum jurium Principem seu summum
Magistratum esse dispensatorem, administratorem vel procuratorem: Proprietatem
vero illorum and usumfructum adeo jure ad regnum seu populum universum
pertinere contendo, ut hunc etiamsi velit se abdicare, eaque in alium
transfer and alienare, nequaquam possit, non minus quam vitam quam quisque
habet, alii communicare potest. Jura haec a populo seu membris Regni and Reip.
constituta sunt; ab illis inceperunt, atque non nisi in illis consistere
possunt, and ab illis conservari. Horum quoque administratio quae principi est
precario seu expacto concessa, illo mortuo ad populum, qui ob perpetuam
successionem immortalis dicitur, revertitur, and alii ab eodem demandatur,
cujus unus vel plures capaces esse possint.

Et Cap. 14. de Ephoris he copiously asserteth that these Ephori or Patriciu,
seniores, principes, status, primores regni, are the peoples trustees, above
the chief Magistrate, as All conjunct representing the people, but singly his
inferiors (p. 142.) and what they do, the people does, p. 139. Chosen to make
the chief Magistrate, and to keep him within his limits, p. 141. To be his
Council in greatest matters, yea to judge whether the chief Magistrate perform
his office, and to resist and hinder his Tyranny. p. 146, 147. He lays down
eight reasons as to prove the right of these Optimates to resist Tyrants (I
will not recite them) and by Scriptures and examples to confirm it; And then
proceeds to answer, 1. Who may and ought to resist the Magistrate, 2. What
Magistrate may be resisted, 3. When, 4. How, 5. How far and how long. He
applies it, 1. To Tyrants absque titulo, 2. To Tyrants exercitio, (not all
that are faulty but) by these notes described by him, Revera ille Tyrannus
dicendus est qui malitiose and hostiliter and consulto data opera Remp. and
Ecclesiam vastat, pervertit, turbat, cultum dei abolet vel profanat, vel quae
dei sunt affectans sibi vendicat and usurpat.

Qui res regni in privatum usum convertit, quique in perniciem publicam bona
regni profundit, dissipat, alienat, minuit, and dilapidat.

Qui Leges regni fundamentales violat, mutat, tollit, praesertim illas quae
religionem veram concernunt, Deuteronomy. 13. 14. 15.

Qui opes subditorum exhaurit, omina in fiscum convertens, and sanguinem populi
usque ad deliquium eliciens, opera, labor, sudore, bonis and sanguine
subditorum abutitur.

Qui divisiones seu schismata inter subditos sovet, ut altera pars factionis
alteram metuat, and neutra in illum rebellet aut insurgat.

Qui in paupertate vult vivere subditos, ut interim intenti labori ad vitam
sustentandam, in eum non insurgant.

Qui nititur bella nutrire, ut illis enervet vires subditorum.

Qui factione existente inter subditos, uni parti plus quam alteri favet, cum
posset suo imperio utrique parti jubere convenire.

Qui hostis est suorum subditorum.

Qui primores regni dolo, fraud vel vi opprimit, aliosque viros graves,
justos, innocents affligit, odio prosequitur.

Qui ad populi mores corrumpendos, ganeas, popinas, lupanaria, ludosve alios
inhonestos instituit.

Qui factiones and dissidia inter subditos serit, alit, fovet.

Qui seminaria virtutum and officinas pietatis, gymnasia, ludos literarios
abolet, negligit.

Qui abutitur Majestatis juribus and potestate sua a populo accepta.

Qui prohibet Congregationes honestas and licitas metu conjurationis, aut
rebellionis, sine alia tamen praecedente suspicione.

Qui submittit ubique auscultatores clancularios and delatores, seu
speculatores ad colligendum quae de se dicuntur.

Et in summa, qui totis viribus ad statum Reip. and Leges regni sundamentales
mutandas vel evertendas, quantum in ipso est, enititur.

Page 160. [5. Tamdiu resistendum est, quamdiu durat tyrannus, quousque verbis,
facto, dolo, vel art oppugnat Remp. and pacto inito contraria facit, loquitur,
vel agit: adeo ut ejusmodi tyrannum ab officio removere, administratione
demandata privare, immo etiam si aliter contra vim se defendere non possunt,
interficere, and alium in ejus locum substituere possint. See also Balt.
Willius Politics page 591, 592. more plainly to that purpose. If such as this
and Grotius his doctrine of resistance de jure belli, and Mr. George Lawsons a
Conformist in his Ecclesiastical Polit. be compared with the Principles which
only are asserted in this Account, and held by us Nonconformists, me thinks the
accusers of our principles should repent.

I wonder that Hobbs de cive should be magnified by such Frenchmen as
Gassendus, Sorberius and Mersennus: But it seems some French Philosophers (and
Prelates too) are looser in their principles of policy and Loyalty than we are.

His principles are, 1. That Nature gives a man Right to all things: that is,
Before men bind themselves by Covenants to one another, it it lawful for every
one to do whatever they list and to whomsoever, and to possess, use and enjoy
whatever they will and can. page 12.

2. For it is the first foundation of natural right that every man may defend
his life and members as much as he is able: And having right to that as the
end, it were in vain unless he had right to the means, that is, to use all
means, and do any action without which he cannot preserve himself. p. 11.

3. The natural state of men before mutual Covenants, is a state of War,
because what every man has right to, another has right to, and may resist his
desires, whence arise perpetual suspicions, enmities, etc. so that all men are
at war with all men. p. 14, 15.

4. Nature teaches us to desire peace for our interest, and when we cannot
have it, to get the greatest helps for war. p. 15. 22.

5. Therefore the Law of nature teaches us to give up our right by contracts
for this peace and security from one another. p. 24.

6. No man is bound by any Covenants whatsoever not to resist him that would
kill him, wound him, or do him any other bodily hurt: every man's natural fear
resists hurt; by slight or fighting: And no man is bound to impossibility:
Only fidelity binds Covenanters; Therefore we bind malefactors that go to
punishment with Cords, because they may resist if they can: To Covenant [If I
do this, kill me] is one thing: But to say [If you kill me I will not resist]
is another. Laws bind not the punished from resisting, but others from
defending them. p. 31, 32, 33.

7. No Covenant or Law binds one to accuse himself, or to accuse any other
whose suffering will be the bitterness of his life. p. 33.

8. The concord of many is the only security for our peace. p. 79, 80.

9. This must be by a Civil Union, which is by putting all our Rights into the
hand of one Civil person, that is, Monarch or Councils absolutely (except as
before excepted) p. 84.

10. This Union makes a City, or Civil society, all men's wills being now one,
that is, the Cities.

11. The man or the Council to whose will all have given up their wills, have
the supreme Power, and all are their subjects, that is, All have given up their
right of resisting them. p. 87.

12. But no man is supposed to have bound himself to any thing further than he
is secured from fear of danger while he wrongs not others; nor to have parted
with his right of arbitrary self defense, when the City defends him not. p. 93.

13. Subjection cease, 1. when the Sovereign deserteth or abdicateth his
government, 2. when the City falls into the hands of enemies, 3. if no
successor appear. p. 136, 137.

14. It is seditious to say that any Subject may discern and judge what is good
or evil: For the rule of Good and evil, just and unjust, honest and dishonest,
is only the Cities Laws, and whatever the Lawmaker commands is good, and
whatever he forbids is evil. It Is seditious to say that we must not obey Kings
when they command things evil and unjust; for antecedent to man's Empire nothing
is just or unjust, but all actions are indifferent: This was Gods oldest Law,
Thou shall not eat of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil, that is, not make
thy self a discerning judge of it: and the oldest temptation was, you shall be
as Gods knowing good and evil. page 191.

15. It is seditious to say that it is lawful to kill a Tyrant (that is not an
Usurper,) for then every murderer were master of a Monarchs life: And yet All
the old Sophists, Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, Plutarch, and the rest of
the fautors of the Greek and Roman Anarchy thought it not only Lawful, but
worthy of the greatest praise. p. 193.

16. It is seditious to say that the highest Power may be divided. What more
pernicions to the City than that men should be affrighted with the fear of
everlasting torment from obeying Princes, that is, Laws, that is, from being
just? p. 197.

17. It is seditious to say, that faith and Holiness are not acquired by study
and natural reason, but are always supernaturally infused or inspired. p. 197.

He thought that Christ's Kingdom was to begin only at the Resurrection (which I
suppose not believing any, he speaks in contempt): He was a ware that the
Bishop of Rom had his power only in one Empire; and that Atheists are not of
the Kingdom of God. But I pass by the rest, it being mostly the same with
Spinosa's. And briefly, contrary to his mass of Brutism, Atheism, Infidelity
and self-contradiction, I oppose, besides what is aforesaid:

1. Man's natural state is a state of due subjection to God as universal King:

2. Our thoughts, words and actions are not indifferent, but are duty or sin as
they are conform or disconform to his Law.

3. Man's Laws could make no duty or sin but as empowered by Gods Law.

4. The world being Gods Kingdom, all are his Subjects as to obligation,
hypocrites by mere profession, and the faithful by true consent.

5. God binding all men to Love him above all and our neighbors as our selves,
we are so far from being born to a Common war, that nature incorrupt and
repaired is a state of Love, and nature corrupt reprived and under Common
grace, is sociable, and has some natural Love to others, yea to mankind; and
as beasts love the company of their like, so do men; and all good men love the
good. And all are obliged by the Laws of Love, to love others, and do all the
good they can.

6. It Is true that corruption making bad men like brutes by sensuality and
selfishness, sets them in a state of war; which common and special grace heal
in their several measures.

7. God binds all as his Subjects to obey, first their parents, and then to
choose officers whom he shall empower under him to rule according to his
universal Laws, and officiate as his Ministers; and all that can must live in
such order.

8. The ends of this order are first the fulfilling of the will of God as
universal King, and next the common good, and next our own of soul and body,
and not only our own corporal peace and pleasure.

9. No man has naturally a right to another man's, nor to any more than God
gives him by nature or just acquisition; and to rob, kill, slander, fornicate,
etc. is a sin, whether we are under contracts or men's Laws or not.

10. Societies are for Common good, more than for my own.

11. They are not made by arbitrary giving up our power; for God first
instituted them, and described the parts universally necessary, and our power
to govern or dispose of our own lives was none, but as under him; and public
power is quite of another species. We have power to obey God and such as he
shall by due consent of man set over us and authorize.

12. Life must not be defended when justice sentenceth us to death.

13. It Is Gods will and power in Rulers that we must obey, and not only the
peoples united in them.

14. All must discern Good and evil, as it is Duty and sin; not in their own
conceits and wills first, but as in Gods Laws determined.

15. It is wickedness to obey man against Gods Law, more than to obey a Justice
against the King.

16. If Kings only make duty and sin, Kings only must protect, reward and
punish men.

17. To make the power of Kings independent on Gods Laws, is to subvert their
foundation.

18. It Is not seditious but necessary to tell men of Gods future judgment,
against those that obey men against God.

But the rest is before confuted, which perhaps I have already too often repeated.

I once thought to have added several other Columns, that other men's
judgments, and the Nonconformists might be compared by such as would judge in
the light, and not in darkness, viz. I. The judgment of Aristole, Plato,
Zenophon, Isocrates, Cicero, Livy, Tacitus, and others of the famousest of the
old Philosophers and Historians and Orators.

II. The judgment of the most applauded writers of Politics: both Papists,
such as Bes^^dus, Armseus, Lipsius, Contzen, Tholosanus, Sayrus, Fragoso,
Azorius, and such moderate ones as Bodin, Commin(...)us, Thuanus, etc. and
Protestants, such as Danaeus, Willim, Burgersdicius, Alstedius, and many such.

III. And the judgment of the most famous Lawyers; especially such as were the
most strenuous defenders of Monarchy; of whom Goldastus notifieth diverse that
defended the German Emperors: But Barclay and Grotius are of all the most
eminent.

IV. And in another Column the judgment of many English Bishops, Doctors and
Historians.

But the plain truth is, that I fear should I recite their words they would be
misinterpreted and do hurt: He that would see what the first sort of old Greek
and Latin Authors say, may find much in their sentences collected by Alstedius
in his Encyclop. Horileg. Polit. where you have enough to make a Volume out of
Herodotus, Thucydides, Zenophon, Polybius, Sallustius, Livy, Tacitus,
Comminaeus, etc. of Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Isocrates, Agapetus, Cicero,
Pliny: And indeed so many of the (...)amousest Greek and Latin Philosophers,
Historians and Orators, were so much for Liberty and spoke so dangerously of
Tyrants, and praised the Killing of them, and had so mean or bad thoughts of
Kings that were not eminently good, that it is enough that their books are in
the hands of Scholars.

II. And the Authors of Politics and Laws, (especially Suarez de Legibus and
Azorius) I find are commonly read by Lawyers: And indeed I cannot see how any
man can understand his Countries Laws, who does not understand the doctrine of
Government and Laws in genere, which is the doctrine of Politics. III. And
Historians usually write as their interest and the state of their proper
Country leads them, some flattering Princes, some wisely describing them, and
some speaking hardly of them, (as Math. Paris yet accounted credible, did of
Henry 3. and Gild(...)s of the British Princes,) And some (as Hollingsh(...)ad
that speaks of the power of Parliaments to depose or take down mighty Kings,
being a Clergyman and out of his callings way) do not well understand the
Governments which they describe.

IV. And the Lawyers I leave to Lawyers that are best acquainted with them.

But I must add, 1. That if in any point I differ from men in the matters of
their own Profession, modesty requires me not to be too peremptory, but to
suspect my own understanding. 2. And that I blame not Historians for describing
Tyrants and bad Rulers as they were, when they are dead: For our duty of
obeying them, and much of honoring them, is then at an end. God will have the
name of the wicked to rot: And truth is the daughter of time: True History is
necessary to the living, both Princes and people. If Doctor H(...)ylin give so
ill a note of good King Edward 6th. no wonder if he take more liberty in
describing King Henry 8th. And if he take liberty to characterize so
disgracefully Archbishop Grindal, Abbot, Usher, etc. no wonder if others speak
worse of worse Archbishops and Bishops.

I will add here honest Erasmus his Image of a Good and of a Bad King, as
recited by Alstedius, Encyclop. de Polit.

I. If you will paint a good Prince, you shall deline some celestial wight,
liker to a God than to a man; absolute in all the numbers of virtues; given for
the good of all, yea given from them above to support the affairs of mortals;
who being most discerning observes all, and looks to all; to whom nothing is
more regarded, nothing sweeter than the Commonweal; who has more than a
Fatherly mind to all; to whom every ones life is dearer than his own; who day
and night does and endeavors nothing else but that it may be very well with
all; who has rewards ready for all good men; and pardon to the bad, sobeit
they will amend; who desires so freely to deserve well of his subjects, that
if it be needful, he will not stick to look to their safety by his own danger;
who takes the profit of his country for his gain; who always waketh that
others may sleep; who leaves himself no quiet (otium) that his country may
live in quietness; who disquieteth himself with successive cares, that his
Citizens may enjoy tranquillity; lastly, on whose virtue depends the public
felicity.

II. His Image of a bad Prince.

If you would represent to the eye a bad Prince, paint some wild and cruel
beast, made up of a Dragon, a Wolf, a Lion, a Viper, a Bear, and such strange
things, armed every way with six hundred eyes; on every side toothed; on every
side to be feared, with crooked fangs, an insatiable belly; fatted with man's
bowels; drunk with man's blood; which sleeps not, that he may prey upon the
fortunes and lives of all; hurtful to all, but especially to the good; a
certain fatal mischief of the whole world; whom all men curse and hate, who
wish well to the Commonwealth; who for his cruelty cannot be endured, and yet
cannot be taken away without great ruin of the world, because his malice is
armed with guards and wealth].

Or as Tacitus (de Tiberio) describes him (cited by Alsted. p. 253.)

The signs of one that will be a Tyrant and cruel Prince are; If when he has
got the Empire, he accuse men's countenances as criminal; and require
unmeasurable flatteries; and catch at the words of his public Counselors; and
open his ears to accusing delators; and take men's judgment of him whatever,
and their free speeches of the Commonwealth for a crime; and lastly, if good
men are suspected by him.

Et de Germanico formidoloso Tiberio: To Tyrants, good men, and such as are
acceptable to the people, and love the peoples liberty, are always formidable.

And Tyrannidis obscurae and pedetentim serpentis haec sunt initia, cum qui
Princeps electus est majorum negotiorum cognitionem sibi unireservans, and ex
suo unius arbitratuea statuens, leviorum and quae Reipublicae incolumitatem non
attingunt, disceptationem ad Ordines remittit: (But it must be remembered that
this was spoken in the Roman Empire).

And his Tiberii vera sententia was [Quanto plus gliscit imperantis potestas,
tanto jura minuuntur: itaque non permittendum ut is ut atur imperio, ubi
Legibus agipotest.]

And his saying of Germanicus has its use: [A Prince may better know what is
the judgment of his army and people of him, by men's private discourse and
tabletalk, than by Sermons and public conventions, especially such as are
appointed by himself.]

And of Courtiers (de S(...)jano) he says [A(...)lici, in quorum potestate est
Rex, and ex quorum voluntate gerit omnia, quamdiu tyranni non sunt, aut
tyrannidem non assectant, vel ultores metuunt, bonis consiliis and salutaribus
reipublicae fere innot(...)scere volunt.

I conclude with this warning, that [Corrupted nature is so backward to just
obedience, and yet Tyranny is so great a plague to mankind, by hindering the
preaching of the Gospel to Heathens and infidels through the world, that all
Christians should detest both Tyranny and Rebellion, and take heed of
encouraging the principles of either, and specially that on pretense of obeying
right reason and the Law of nature in self defense, they do not with Hobbs and
Spin(...)s(...), take the Corruption of nature and reason for nature and Reason
it self, and think that sensuality or fancy should rule the man and be the
Rule of his obedience, and that all is Lawful that we think is necessary to the
preservation of our personal interest, And therefore that we take not all for
current which is agreed on by the most of all mankind, even in the politics of
the old Greeks and Romans, of Infidels, of Papists and of Protestants, however
we must be modest in our dissent.

CHAP. VII.
Our Doctrine about the Church, Church Government, worship and Communion.
WE know nothing else that suspicions do call us more to give the world an
account of our Doctrine of, than the nature, Government and Communion of the
Church and the manner of Gods worship in it: which yet having some of us
already published more largely, and also in 1660. when allowed by his Majesty,
given in our desires thereabout (in offering Archbishop Vshers from of
Primitive Government and a specimen of a Reformed Liturgy) we suppose no more
than these following Propositions will be needful to be here added.

1. The CHURCH is a word of many significations, of which the principal is The
UNIVERSALITY OF CHRISTIANS HEADED BY CHRIST.

2. In a narrower sense it signifies these Christians as Christ's Body or
Kingdom contradistinct from Christ the Head; As the word [Kingdom] sometimes
includes the King, and sometimes signifies the people as contradistinct from
him.

3. The bond of Union between Christ the Head and his Subjects or members is,
1. Faith and the Holy Spirit internally, 2. The Covenant of Baptism externally;
or Heart Covenanting and Outward Covenanting.

4. Accordingly those that Covenant sincerely with the Heart and are true
Believers, are Justified and Adopted heirs of Heaven: and as they Covenant with
the mouth or the Outward reception of Baptism, they are outwardly or by
Sacramental Profession, members or Christians. With respect to each, the Church
is usually called invisible, and visible, or the sincere Regenerate Church, and
the Professing Church. But Heart consent and Outward Profession conjoined make
one Church, as Soul and Body make one man: And the Hypocrites that Covenant
with the Lips alone are but members secundum quid, and only of the Outward
Society. 5. It is by the Outward Covenanting and Profession, that we must judge
of the Heart covenanting and Sincerity: and all are to be taken for visible
Christians or members of the Universal Church, who are Baptized professors of
Christianity, and have not by contrary Profession or practice Apostatized.

6. The Universal Church as Believing or as Professing (mystical or visible)
has no universal Head but Christ: who is an Invisible Head as he is unseen to
us in Heaven, but Visible as he is there now seen (as the King by his
Courtiers) and as he was seen on earth, and will be shortly seen of all the
world. But as for the Pope or any other pretended head, 1. No man gives us any
proof that ever Christ appointed and authorized any such Head: and it is Treason
against him to usurp such a power.

2. No mortal man has Natural capacity of such an office. An Universal Head
must relate to the Church in all parts of the world, not only as it is now
extended, but as it shall be at any time: and no man is able to do the work of
a real Governor and Guide at the Antipodes, and in all Nations of the earth,
even in the Kingdoms where Princes by wars or Infidelity deny access to
foreigners, and subjects of their enemies: and where cases that require a
speedy decision may wait half an age till the parties are dead, before it can
be dispatched at Rome, and witnesses cannot go so far: And when Church
Government extends no farther, than to judge who shall be in the Ministry and
in Church Communion, and to decide particular cases of faith and Life in order
to this end, Princes and People are unhappy men, if they must be without
Teachers or Sacraments, or without a certain Faith in Abassia, Armenia, at the
Antipodes and in all the world, till they receive a just determination from
Rome.

And if his universal Government be but to commit the Government of several
Kingdoms of the world to several Generals under him, Princes and People that
are at hand do better know how to choose meet men to Teach themselves, of those
that are of their own language, and acquainted with the place, than a stranger
at Rome can do, to whom at the death of every General some Countries may be
many years in sending and receiving back a General, who it is two to one will
not come alive to them, or it is three to one, will be one unfit for them: and
in some Kingdoms cannot come at all, because of the interjacent countries of
enemies: no nor messages pass, about the business. What work the Prelates of
England (which is near) have formerly made by running to Rome, and waiting for
decisions, is known by current history. None on earth will pretend to a
sufficiency to govern all the world in things spiritual, any more than in
Temporals, except it be a Proud Fool or a Proud deceiver, both which are the
most unfit to be rulers of all the world.

3. Rome never pretended to a Government of all the world, but only to a
Primacy in one Empire, for many hundred years after Christ, Proved, 1. Because
only the Prince of one Empire did frequently choose and ever rule them, who had
no power over any other Kingdom.

2. Because the four other Patriarchs, whom he pretended to have a Primacy
among, had no power out of the Empire, at least not over all the world: and the
Pope never then pretended to a Primacy of any further extent than the four
Patriarchats.

3. Because the General Councils where he presided, or pretended to preside
were General at the utmost but as to one Empire: as the Church History, and the
names of the subscribers show to every impartial searcher. None out of the
Empire came thither, unless now and then an odd person of some neighbor
country that was glad to be strengthened by the Roman Vicinity, or some that
had been before of the Empire, and were conquered by Infidels or Heretics and
kept their former Custom. And those Councils that were most General were
summoned by Emperors, who had nothing to do in the rest of the world.

4. No History mentions that the Pope then pretended to or exercised any
government in the Empire of Abassia (of which see Godignus) nor in Persia,
India, or Britain till Austines times: but when the Romans persuaded any poor
neighbors Country to the says of Christ, those Countries were willing after
to be directed by the Romans, especially being ambitious of the honor and
protection of the Imperial savor. Reinrius says [Armeniorum Ecclesiae and
Ethiopian and Indorum and caeterae quas Apostoli converterunt, non subsunt
Ecclesiae Romanae] Biblioth. Patr. To. 4. p. 773. [The Armenian Churches and
the Ethiopian and (...), and the rest which the Apostles did covert, are not
under the Church of Rom.]

4. Rome's pretended Primacy in that one Empire was not of Divine authority but
of Human(...). For, 1. No Divine Authority is proved.

2. The Popes Authority and the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch had the
same foundation, as is evident to any knowing man in Councils and Church
History: but the Authority of the Patriarchs is confessedly of humane
Institution, and therefore Jerusalem and Constantinople were after added by
men. The Council of Nice, of Chalcedon, etc. testify this. See Comment. in
Epist. Synodal. Basil. p. 31. and 40. Impress. Colen. 1613.

3. The whole Greek Church from the first comp^^^ition of Constantinople to
this day has taken the Roman Prima(...)y to be of humane institution; which is
infallibly proved because they set up that seat against it, which they all
confess to have its dignity by humane institution. And no Christian can set up
humane institution against that which he acknowledges Divine: Therefore by
their competition they show, that they never took Rome to have any other
foundation, than Constantinople, which was humane: and so their Councils
profess, and consequently all the Greek Church even in its Glory did believe
that there was no such head over all the world; (for the Emperor had no such
power) nor any of Divine institution over the Empire: nor did John of
Constantinople when he claimed that universality which Gregory condemned,
extend his claim any further than the Empire, or at least not to all the world.
It is therefore most evident that Rome was in one Empire, but as Canterbury in
this one Kingdom, the prime Patriarch in a National or Imperial Church, of man's
appointment.

4. The Papists (even those that have Ruled in England) confess that [it is no
point of faith, that it is of Divine Right, and not only of Humane, that the
Bishop of Rome is St. Peter successor] So says their Bishop of Calced. Rich.
Smith Surv(...)y cap. 5. And their Davenport or (...) a S. Clara first. sid.
cap. 48. page 531. tells us of Erardus Billius a Jesuit who 1644. Publicly
and confidently taught that Rome may have two Popes at once dividing the
Popedom (as Peter and Paul are by Irenaeus, Epipha(...)i(...)s and many
Ancients there placed at once) and this in order to prove that the Papacy was
ex jure humano of humane Right. And he himself says, ibid. c. 47. p. 507. of
the Question An Papatus, etc. whether the Papacy which and as it rests in the
Roman Pope be of Divine Right, [Inter Doctores solennis ed de re controversia
est, alii huc, al i illuc, illibata fide ferunter] that is [Among the Doctors
this is solemnly controverted; some go one way and some the other, without any
blemish of faith: mentioning as against the Divine Right, Sotus 4. d. 24. q. 2.
a. 5. q. 2. Corduba Quaestionario li. 4. q. 1. prop. 8. dub. 1. and many other
grave Doctors, etc. (of whom Cardin. Cusanus de concord. is one).

5. Indeed had they not first falsely described the Priestly or Pastoral power,
they could never have persuaded men to receive an Universal Priest or Pastor:
For the truth is, the office of the Ministry is like a Schoolmasters or like a
Physicians, a work of personal attendency and skill, and it is essentially
constituted of a threefold subordination to Christ the Head, viz. to his
Prophetical office as Teachers, to his Priestly as worshippers, and to his
Kingly as Church Guides or Governors: And to set up one to teach all the world,
and to worship with all the world, and to call each sinner in the world by name
to Repentance, and try his case and absolve or excommunicate him, would be no
wiser, than to set up an universal Schoolmaster, Physician or Judge to all the
world. But d(...)mentation follows judicial desertion, and precedeth the
Perdi(...)ion of the deserted. So much of the Papacy.

6. As for General Councils I have elsewhere proved at large, 1. That there
never was such a thing in the world (unless the Apostles may be called such):
but that those called General Councils, were but General Councils of one
Empire, and now and then two or three neighbors, or such as were lately cut
off from the Empire as aforesaid. 2. That a true General Council is morally
impossible, 3. And so unlawful, as to be a pernicious form of Headship to the
Church: because some Bishops must be many years coming, and will likely die
before they come and return, and have not a language which the rest understand;
nor can there be any equality of members, while those of Mexico, Abassia,
Armenia and the Antipodes send but few, and the nearer parts a multitude; and
so (as at Trent) it will be but an Italian Council: And it will be sinful to
rob the Churches of them, and to cast away the lives of old weak worthy men in
such Voyages and Travels of many years. And interposing enemies will not let
them pass through their countries, with many such reasons. So that a General
Council is a non Ens, and a name made for a Papal cheat. 3. And should it be
the constitutive head of the whole Church, how little a while has there been
any Church on earth since Christ? For when a constitutive essential part
cease, the essence cease; and so Christ has had no Church on earth since
the mockery of Trent; where in the beginning there were 42 Bishops with
counterfeits and all, and 4 Archbishops, if you will take the counterfeits
Wancop of Armagh and Olaus Magnus for two; but indeed by the seventh Session
there were 52 Bishops counterfeits and all, and in Session 8. 29 besides 6
Archbishops, such as they were, whenas the Provincial Synods in Africa were
wont to have many hundred Bishops; but how many thousand must a Synod of the
whole world have in proportion to the Italian number at Trent?

7. God has provided much better means than a Pope for the concord of
Christians in the world (which is the only considerable pretense for the
Papacy) that is, 1. On(...) sacred word to Rule them (which Papists themselves
confess to be Divine) 2. One Spirit within to guide and actuate them, 3. One
Sacred Ministry of the same species and Divine description in each assembly to
instruct and guide them (even to Guide a single Congregation, which is a work
more suitable to humane frailty than to Rule Provinces and the world). 4. One
prescribed sort of public worship (in word, Prayer and Sacraments). 5. The
same (...)d, even God and Heaven for all to seek. 6. Synods and Consultations
for advice and concord. 7. M(...)gistrates to Rule them all by the sword (as
they do Physicians, Schoolmasters, Philosophers) and to keep peace among them,
and restrain intolerable abuses. And they that will have (...), will have none;
but by overdoing will undo all, and be the greatest dividers and plagues to the
Church on pretense of its Union and preservation.

8. Every Church must have its proper Pastor (one or more) who must know the
people of their flock and be known by them.

9. But whether a Church shall have One only or many, is left to be determined
according to the number and necessities of the people, and the store of worthy
men.

10. The Essence of the Holy Ministerial office consists in (...) and
Authority to call the unbelievers and imp^^^it(...)nt to Faith and Repentance,
and to Baptize persons into the Church, and to guide the Church(...)s by
Teaching, worship and Discipline, as under Christ its chief Prophet, Priest and
King. And though the exercise of each be not essential to the Office, the Power
and general obligation is.

11. A particular Church (part of the Universal) is (...) by the same Pastors
and the same (...) for Personal holy Communion (as distinct from distant
Communion by Letters or Delegates).

12. Where one Church has many Pastors, their Pastoral Office is the same: but
how far any one either for his age, grace or gifts, or for order sake shall be
submitted to by the rest, we think God has left to be determined prudently, as
the Churches edification shall require: but if any think otherwise, it shall
not turn us from Love and Communion with them.

13. About Ruling Elders we are not all of a mind among our selves: some of us
think that the Eldership or ministry is but one and the same Office, and that
all of them should be ordained and have power of word, Sacraments and
Discipline; but that one in a Church (or two) being usually the ablest
speakers, the rest quoad exercitium may be usually employed in private
Vigilance and Discipline, and some assistance in other parts of worship, except
when necessity calls them to Preach. Others think that Elders without power of
word and Sacraments, is an Office of Divine Institution: but this makes no
division between us, because we force not each other to subscribe to the same
opinions, but can unite in one practice upon different principles.

14. It is the Pastors office to hold Church Assemblies for the aforesaid
worship: Especially on the Lords Days, which the spirit of God has separated
to such holy exercises.

15. Gods worship must be performed rationally, holily, according to Gods word
in all things there determined, and decently, orderly, and to edification in
all the undetermined circumstances.

16. Whether Sermons and Prayers shall be by prepared Forms of words, or from
the Habits of understanding and affection presently uttered; whether read out
of Notes or Books, or spoken without, is left to the prudent determination of
the Pastor, whose Office it is to word his own conceptions, according to men's
various qualifications: in which none should contemn or judge another, nor
avoid the Communion of those that do not as they do.

17. We must not give Divine worship or Honor to any Creature.

18. When Pastors do usurp Power over one another to command all about them to
speak to men from God or to God for men, in no other words but what the
usurpers shall write them down, and so make Ministers but Cryers to read their
prescripts or Proclamations, and also do prescribe to others the necessary use
of unnecessary things, according to the Usurpers will, this is and has been
the Grand Engine of Church Divisions, by which the Churches have been torn in
pieces for above a thousand years. And because every age does bring forth men
Proud enough to usurp, and few wise enough to learn by the Churches many
hundred years experience, thereby the mischief proceeds unremedied.

19. But if any find it best to use the same words, or many Churches, to avoid
inconveniences, shall see cause to agree to use the same words in Confessions,
in Psalms, in Prayers or Sacraments without usurpation over others, we are no
opposers of such agreements. And if our lawful Governors do prescribe, e. g.
One translation of the Scripture to be read, One Version of the Psalms to be
Sung, we do obey: and if mistakingly they should take any part of the Pastors
work out of his hands by their impositions, though we may not neglect our
necessary duty, we shall behave our selves as true peaceableness and the honor
of our Rulers with the Churches edification does require.

20. The Office of the Sacred Ministry being Instituted by Christ, 1. from Gods
gifts (of nature and grace) we have our Dispositive Aptitude, without which the
Person is not receptive of the Power. 2. From the said word of institution,
sloweth our power and obligation it self. 3. From the peoples and ordainers
election or consent is the designation of the Individual person that shall
receive it, 4. to which also his own consent is a cause sine qua non. 5. And
the Ministerial investiture is by Ordination; 6. And Liberty and defense and
encouragement are from the Magistrate; 7. And Opportunity is from Gods
Providence, the peoples present willingness, and usually from the Magistrates
leave. Thus do these severals severally concur to the Ministeral Office, and to
its exercise respectively.

21. Two causes fill the Churches with bad Pastors: The one is when the Honors
and Riches of the Office are so great as to be a strong bait to Pride and
Covetousness (under the name of encouragements to Learning) for then most
certainly the most Proud and Covetous (that is the worst) will be the eagerest
seekers, and most probably they that seek shall find. The other is when bad
Rulers, Patrons or people are the choosers.

22. Wicked, Covetous, carnal, proud men admitted into Bishoprics and Ministry
have been the woeful plague of the Church, especially for thirteen hundred
years: For bad men will so teach and so live, that the Best of the flock will
most dislike them, and then they will turn enemies to the Best for disliking
them, and will Preach against them and make them as odious as they can: and
this will rejoice the profane part of the flock which naturally hate holiness:
and so the wicked Pastor, and wicked People will become a Party against the
Best, and keep them under reproach and persecution: Whereupon the sufferers
will be tempted not only to greater dislike, but to undue passions and
separations; and if the Magistrates take part with the wicked party, they also
will partake of the dislike; and so wicked Pastors are the floodgates of
confusion, and happy are those Rulers that curb them, and help the Churches to
faithful men.

It grieveth some of us to read so much undeniable truth in the foresaid
Infidel's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, as the reason of the wicked lives of
Christians, Praesat. p. 4. [ Hujus mali causam quaerens, etc. Seeking the cause
of this mischief, I doubted not but hence it sprang, that Vulgarly it was a
piece of Religion to esteem the Ministeries of the Church as Dignities, and its
Offices as Benefices, and to gave the Pastors the highest honor: and as soon
as this abuse cr(...)pt in, presently all the worst men were invaded with a
greater desire of sacred administrations, and the Love of propagating divine
Religion, degenerated into sordid Avarice; and so the Temple it self into a
Theater, where were heard, not Church Teachers, but Orators; of whom none
thirsted to teach the people, but to draw them into admiration of themselves,
and publicly to carp at dissenters, and to teach things (...) and unusual, and
such as the vulgar most admire: whence great contentions, envy and hatred,
which no antiquity could appease, must needs arise. No wonder therefore that of
the old Religion nothing does remain but the outward worship (by which God is
rather flattered than adored) and that faith is become nothing but credulity
and prejudice, etc.] As to the greatest part of the Churches, pu^^et haec
opprobria nobis, etc.

23. We fear this evil will never be cured, till Church Dignities and Riches be
so far taken down that they may be no strong temptation to the Proud and
Covetous, and so may not entail the Ministry for ever on the worst of men: but
only by a competent s^^pend prevent the temptations of Poverty and worldly
cares to those that seek the holy office for holy ends: Lest one part of the
Ministry being Great and worldly, and the other through Poverty left base and
unlearned, both should subserve the enemy of souls.

24. No Bishops or Pastors have any secular coactive Power (unless the King
make them his Officers): and therefore of themselves can Rule none but
Volunteers.

25. Whether the Apostles or Evangelists have any successors in the ordinary
work of taking care of many Churches, without being fixed to any one, and
whether Magistrates may appoint any Pastors to be General Visitors of the
Churches in their Dominions, are questions which we would not be too bold in
determining, nor will we about them be troublers of the Church. But we believe
that God has not made such an inequality of Churches whether Rome, Alexandria,
or any as Metropoles, as to make one Church a Governor of other neighbor
Churches. And we wonder at them that know that Civil Rulers did set up the
Patriarchs and Metropolitans in the Roman Empire, in conformity to their Civil
Policy, and know that this Empire is now dissolved, and the reason of the thing
(had it been lawful) ceased; and yet talk of forming General Councils by the
five Imperial Patriarchs, and of subjecting themselves to the Pope as to one of
the five.

26. Councils or Synods and that stated as to time and place are very useful
among good Pastors, for concord, Counsel and correspondence: but the major part
are not the Governors of the minor, nor of their absent brethren: nor are
stated Synods absolutely necessary; nor convenient when, 1. they are
degenerating into the Church Tyranny of a major Vote, 2. or are displeasing to
Rulers and inconsistent with liberty or peace.

27. Therefore we take not a National Church to be a Body Politic of Divine
Institution, either headed by one Bishop, or by a National Assembly, as a
proper constitutive Governing part. But we hold that the King is the Governor
of all the Churches in his Kingdoms, as far as they must be governed by the
Sword: and that National Synods and others inferior to them are fit means for
the said Council and concord among the several Pastors.

28. Whether one in each Synod shall be Moderator, and that pro tempore or
durante vita as often as there are Synods? and whether one shall be trusted to
summon such Synods, and how he shall preside to preserve peace and order, are
matters prudently to be determined, as the edification of the Church requires,
so that Church Tyranny be not introduced.

29. As Pastors of several Churches have not a Governing power over other
Bishops and Pastors, but only by Synods are to give counsel and keep concord;
so none of them in the world can excommunicate other Bishops or Pastors, as
Governors of them: but only disclaim Communion with such public Heretics and
Incendiaries as deserve it, and counsel others to do the li(...)e: but when
they have done, they have done their part. But if moreover they will do as the
Pope does, and excommunicate people and Pastors of other Churches and
countries, and Kings themselves as if they were their Governors, and also stir
up others to draw the Sword against them, and seek to force Kings to kill or
banish or punish those that they have excommunicated, merely as such, we take
such to be professed Incendiaries in the world.

30. No proper part of the Pastoral Office, whether it be by Teaching,
Administering Sacraments, or the power and use of the Ecclesiastical keys,
belong to any Laymen, whether Chancellors or others.

31. All coactive Church Government belongs to the King and Magistrates who
are the Keepers of the Churches peace, and need not a Church-Office of Prelates
to do their work, and take the honor of it to themselves.

32. The foresaid Usurpations of Proud Pastors over the Consciences of others,
out of their own Churches, with their turning the ancient practical
Christianity into contentions for speculations and notions of their own,
proceeding at last to a Tyranny over Kings and Magistrates themselves, yea even
to impose Oaths on men to obey them, and never to reform them, or endeavor any
alteration of these evils, has been the corruption, confusion and calamity of
the Christian world, which too many Princes of the world have endured, and some
in blind devotion and some for selfish ends promoted.

33. The weakness of the people, even the zealous sort, sometimes taking up
some little unjustifiable conceits and singularities, and sometimes too
passionately renouncing bad Pastors, and sometimes falling into scandalous
actions or shameful divisions among themselves, has been the increase of the
Papal Kingdom, and the great and prevailings pretense for Church Tyranny: And
some otherwise sober men have been tempted to think that the peoples giddiness
and unruliness is such, that there is no other way to peace.

34. And the very fountain and foundation of almost all this calamity has been
the forsaking of the Primitive, necessary, sure and simple Test and Symbol of
the Christian Profession and Terms of Church Union and Communion; and
substituting a multitude of unnecessary, uncertain, late Inventions, which
Proud men that think themselves the most Orthodox have introduced and imposed:
And when we return to the Primitive simplicity and to Vinc. Lerinensis his
[Quae semper, ubique and ab omnibus] as conscious of the darkness of man's
understanding, and loving Holiness more than speculations and domination, and
Loving our Brethren as our selves, we shall then have blessed Peace and
concord: And while we drive it away and will rather be at the greatest cost and
danger to expel it by our Inventions, than entertain it on Gods cheap, sweet,
easy terms, no wonder if we be without it; and if the harmless neighbors
suffer, when a mad man sets his own house on fire. But Blessed are the
Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God, though now men call
them, what Pride, malignity, or carnal worldly interest list.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the true and only terms of Church Concord in General; and of the Causes of
Schism: and of Toleration.
1. EVery man's own welfare and peace is his own interest.

2. Therefore every man is for his own peace.

3. The Common peace of the State and of the universal Church, is the interest
of all that intend not as Rebels and Heretics to set up themselves against
them both, or either of them.

4. Peace therefore has the good word of almost all, because few dare own
their Rebellious or Heretical inclinations.

5. Unity and peace are betrayed as Christ, with the Judas kiss of Covetous
hirelings: And none do more to kill it, than some that have most cried it up.

6. As every Hypocrite will be very Religious, but only by subjecting the true
Common Religion to his own interest and lusts; so every enemy of Peace would
have nothing else but Peace; But it is only by making his Own Peace the rule of
the Common Peace, and bringing all men to Center in his interests, and to take
their Peace upon his terms, from him.

7. The greatest pretenders to unity and Peace in the world, have been the
Roman Clergy; and next them those of Constantinople: And none in the world have
been greater Church dividers, by making impossible Terms of unity and peace.

8. The chiefest impediments to unity and Peace in the world are, 1. A wicked
selfish heart, and 2. Impossible Terms; and under both the Church still
bleedeth.

9. As the Terms of Gods first sentence did put an everlasting enmity between
the Woman's and the Serpents seed, so it was showed in the two first Brothers
that ever were born into the world; who had the same Parents and education, and
were of the same Religion, and yet the elder slew the younger for offering to
God a more faithful and acceptable Sacrifice, and for a better manner of
serving God in the same religion: Even because his own works were bad, and his
brothers good. Genesis 4. 4, 8. Heb. 11. 4. 1 John 3. 12. Jud. 11.

10. And it is not inconsiderable that Christ himself calls the Devil the
father of malignant enemies of the truth and of liars, and says, they do their
fathers work, Joh. 8. 44. And that, 1 John 3. 8, 10. it is said that he that
commits sin is of the Devil; And that there the difference between the faithful
and the wicked, is called, The difference between the Children of God and of
the Devil: And that the Devil is said to lead Captive the adversaries of the
truth, 2 Timothy 2. 26. and to steal the word out of men's hearts, Luke 8. 12. And
that envious wisdom is called Devilish, Jam. 3. 15. And that the Devil is said
to enter into Judas, Joh. 13. 2. Yea Christ says, that he was a Devil, Joh. 6.
70. And finally the wicked must go into the everlasting fire which is prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. All which shows that it is no
wonder if such are partly meant by the Serpents seed.

11. And the Holy Ghost tells us also from the instance of Ishmael and Isaak,
that as he that was born of the flesh, did persecute him that was born after
the spirit, even so it is now, Gal. 4. 29.

12. And the universal history and experience of all the world, from Cain till
now, does so fully confirm this truth, as tends much to confirm our belief of
the prediction.

13. This enmity proceeds from the Carnal vicious inclination and interest of
wicked men, and the unchangeable enmity of the word and way of God to such
inclinations and interest, and the devoted resolution of all true Christians,
to stick to Christ and take his part, and to fight against the flesh, the world
and the Devil to the death.

14. The Godly must not, dare not, will not forsake their master and rule, and
come over for peace to the way of the ungodly; because it will be too dear a
peace, that is bought with the loss of God and heaven.

15. The wicked may change and come over to the Godly (and must, or be undone
for ever) The enmity therefore is long of them.

16. It is not mere Learning, or civility, or a pastoral office, or knowledge
and utterance for the Ministerial work, which will remove this enmity, from a
Cainites heart; but it must be done by the true sanctification of the spirit,
Joh: 3. 5, 6. Romans 8, 6, 7, 8, 9.

17. Abundance of particular occasions and differences may lie in sight, but
underground this is the radical difference, which causes most of the
calamities of the Churches.

18. Especially if Cainites get into the Pastoral Chair, they have great
advantage to fight against Christ in his own name, and scatter his flocks, and
make Merchandise of souls as by his own authority, and lay the blame of all on
others; Till Christ shall come and gather his scattered ones and plead his own
cause (which Rome is like to see with sorrow.)

19. Yet even among the best the Principles and causes of divisions are
proportionable to the remnant of their sins, and the family of Christ has ever
been troubled with the peevish quarrellings of his children.

20. The best way then for universal peace, is to make all men Holy, and the
best more holy: And then they will have all, one Center, one end, one Rule, one
interest, one Nature, and one spirit and fervent Love to one another, as to
themselves; with all the peaceable graces, humility, lowliness, meekness,
patience, etc. But this is a way rather to be desired and hoped for in heaven,
than hoped for among such a world of sinners here.

21. The next way therefore, that must do our work, if ever it be done, is
while we are endeavoring to make men better, to find out and use the fittest
terms of their peace and concord as they are. It is JUST TERMS that must heal
the Church on earth; and which all the sons of peace must seek after.

22. These terms must be such as oppose not Holiness, but subserve it and
promote it. The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable, etc. Jam. 3.
11. And peace and holiness must not be separated, Heb. 12. 14. Though if
possible, as much as in us lies, we must live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.
18.

23. These terms must be such as take in all that Christ takes in, and would
have us take in: that is, All that are fit for Church Communion.

24. They should be such terms as all true Christians fit for such Church
Communion if imposed would have united in, in all ages and places of the Church
since the days of Christ till now. For those terms that would have divided the
Church, are not the fit means to unite it.

25. And they should be such terms as the Church has been at least in some
age, if not in all, united actually in. For why should we think that the Church
should now unite upon such terms, as it never united in before?

26. Christ himself who is the Center of the Churches Union, and the great
Lawgiver, and Master of our faith, has certainly in his Laws, prescribed to
his Church, the necessary and best terms of Universal concord in particulars;
and of the Concord of particular Churches, at least in general Laws. If he have
left out the necessary terms of Union, what are his Laws for? how is he our
Head? How shall his Church be one, and what shall cement and unite the members?
sure this is none of the things indifferent.

27. The terms that Christ has appointed for Church Union is the Baptismal
Covenant, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. [Whoever believes in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, as his reconciled God and father, his savior and sanctifier, and gives
up himself faithfully to him in Covenant accordingly, shall be saved and taken
into heaven, if he so continues:] And whosoever does this Sacramentally, by the
open Vow and profession of baptism, was by Christ's appointment to be taken into
the Church. Therefore he then wanted nothing necessary to admittance and Church
Communion.

28. Since the proud Diotrephes's on one side, as Lords of Gods heritage (1
Pet. 5. 3.) have violated this fundamental sacred rule; and self-conceited
strictness and superstitious rigor has violated it on the other hand (by
calling for other kind of Titles, and discoveries of men's sincerity, and by
imposing new Laws (as various as men's strictnesses and opinions) on the Church,
the Christian world has had little concord, or quiet peace.

29. Because men must do what they do understandingly, in matters of such
moment, the Churches in the Apostles times and by their consent, did explain
these three Articles of the Baptismal Covenant to the baptized, and required an
understanding profession of their Belief and Consent to it, as thus expained:
which explication is now called the Apostles Creed; Because though the Churches
might not tie themselves to every one of the same words as now they stand (as
the Formula's in Irenaeus, Tertullian and others show, and those collected by
Usher and Vossius) yet as it cannot be imagined that they took the three words
of the Covenant without any explication, so neither can it seem credible that
they allowed any such variation of terms, as might hazard a variation or
corruption of the sense: Besides what Church History tells us of the
antiquity of the Creed.

30. As the Apostles in their times used no stricter or larger tests or terms
of Church admittance, so neither did the Churches after them for a long time:
But the Catechists expounded the Creed to the Catechumens, and used it as a
sufficient test. Nay Synesius was made a Bishop before he well believed the
article of the Resurrection.

31. Christ who made the Covenant of Baptism the test and standing terms of
entrance, did yet set up Pastors over his Churches, to be the Guides of the
flock, and preservers of its unity: not to make new and stricter terms and
Laws; but to preserve concord on the terms that he had founded it; and to see
that men lived in Unity and piety according to the terms of the Covenant which
they had entered. This therefore is the Pastors work.

32. Though the Keys be put into the Pastors hands yet so is not the
Legislation to make new terms of Christian Unity; but to make such particular
determinations of the circumstances of order and decency as are agree able to
Christ's general Laws; And when they have as Ministers not Lords, received men
on Christ's own terms, they are not to excommunicate and turn them out again,
for want of more, but for violating these; nor arbitrarily to rule the
Churches, but to teach them all things that Christ commanded, Matthew. 28. 20.
And to cast out only the impenitent violators of his Covenant.

33. If therefore the Pastors shall contrary to the decree of the Holy Ghost by
the Apostles, Act. 15. impose unnecessary things on the Church, not only under
the obligation of duty, but as a necessary condition of Church communion; they
will tyrannize over Gods heritage, and usurp a power never given them, and
contradict one end of Christ's own Sacraments, and the ancient Creed.

34. The long and sad, experience of all the Christian Churches, which have
been divided by necessary humane impositions, and the voice of all wise
peacemakers in all times (who have still called for [Vnity in things
necessary, Liberty in things unnecessary, and Charity in both] do leave those
that yet will not be persuaded to these terms, as unexcuseable persons, as
almost any in all the world; worse than Physicians that would use all those
things as the only remedies, which have killed all that ever used them for 1500
years.

35. A Pastor should love his own flock as well as the people of a foreign
land: Therefore they that confess that for the communion of all the Churches,
there are no terms like these which we now mention, should not be more cruel to
their own at home, nor turn them out of their fathers house for every
ceremonial difference, nor make them any work which should prove their snare.

36. Yet we know that every Pastor is to guide his own Church in needful
circumstances, as the time and place of worship, the method, the versions, the
tunes, the utensils and other things formentioned: And no Christian should be
peevishly froward, and disobedient against such determinations. But as none
that are needless should be imposed (for the determination one way or other
must be necessary, though this or that way be not comparatively necessary), so
they are not to be made more necessary by men's wills than they are in their
use; At least not made the matter of excommunication. But if the Pastor
necessarily appoint one time, one place, one tune, one translation, etc. and
any of the people therefore fly away and causlesly a void the Church, it is
they then that cast out themselves by departing: But if he needlessly say, You
shall say this, or subscribe, or conform to many needless burdens, or else have
no communion here, the act of exclusion then is his.

37. True Love would end our greatest difference: Let men Love their neighbors
without dissembling as themselves, and do but as they would be done by, and we
will not fear them.

38. Yea if many of the children of the Church were injudiciously scrupulous,
when fear of sin and hell was the cause, a tender Pastor would abate them a
Ceremony in such a case, when his abating it has no such danger.

39. Unmerciful Pastors cause the people to question whether they be sent of
God, because they are made the fathers of the flock to rule them only by Light
and Love; and have no power of the sword: And their rod it self and
excommunication, is only by application of Christ's law. And what they cannot do
by Reason, Scripture and Love, they cannot do at all as Pastors: Hurt they may
do otherwise, but no good. And the people judge of Pastors as Solomon of the
true mother of the child; that the merciful and Loving is the true Pastor, and
the hurtful is the usurper.

40. And the main Controversy that troubles the Christian Churches is but,
when the nurses offer such morsels to the children which they cannot swallow,
whether the bits shall be cut less (which will hurt no body) or the childrens
throats shall be cut wider.

41. We are so far from thinking that Pastors should not guide the people by
Love and by their own consent, and from thinking with Doctor Heylin, (speaking
of Archbishop Abbot in the Life of Archbishop Laud) that it is doubtful
whether the Church have a greater plague than a popular Prelate], that on the
contrary we think that all Pastoral power and Government is only instructive,
Persuasive and Directive, or such precept as works only upon the
Conscientious and Consenters, and can work on no man any further than he
consents, or as it operateth on his judgment, will or affection. For they
have no instrument but Gods word to govern by. Yet are they (as a father)
Perswaders Authorized and in Office, and not only such as persuade men merely
out of Charity and occasionally as private men.

42. The Universal Church has long had Unity upon the terms of Baptism and the
Creed and Scriptures, without any other subscriptions, Oaths or other
Professions made necessary to communion. But it never had Union upon such
additional terms, of new professions, subscriptions and Oaths, as most Churches
now impose and require. When they departed from the ancient simplicity, and the
primitive terms, they departed from Unity and concord, and so continue divided
to this day.

43. As for the indifferent modes and circumstances of worship, some most of
the Churches voluntarily agreed in; some they differed in; some the particular
Bishops made to be the Order of their own particuar Churches, (which were for
200 or 300 years no more populous than our Parishes), and this not against the
peoples will; But none of them were imposed by any Bishops upon other Churches,
nor made necessary to Communion against the wills and consciences of the
Presbyters and people, nor Ministers silenced nor people excommunicated for
refusing them; But they were used as things Indifferent with mutual charity,
till the decay of Charity and the entrance of Pride and Church Tyranny turned
things indifferent into those engines of divisions, which have wracked, and
dismembered and torn in pieces the Churches through the world unto this day.

44. A diversity of such circumstances and indifferent modes in diverse Churches
or Parishes, and sometimes in the same Church, is no such dreadful mischief as
some frightful Pastors would make themselves or others believe: much less to be
compared with the consequents of unnecessary impositions. What harm is it if
one Parish or Pastor use one Liturgick form or ceremony, and another use
another, (so that neither of them be evil) any more than that now one Minister
in the Pulpit uses one prayer, one Sermon, one method, and another uses
another: Our Cathedrals and our Parish Churches have great difference of such
modes, without any such mischiefs: And now one Parish Minister prays in the
Pulpit, and another only bids Prayer (and pleads for it as the principal
way): And one that prays in the Pulpit uses his own words, and another does
it in the words of the Liturgy: One uses a form (the same ordinarily) and
another varieth according to the matter of his Sermon and the occasion: One
Minister preaches Arminianism, (in the points of free will, effectual grace
predestination, Redemption, and perseverance); And another preaches zealously
against it, as a dangerous sort of error: One is for the morality of the fourth
commandment, and another against it. One thinks that the Lords day is of
Ecclesiastical institution (and perhaps mutable) and another that it is of
Divine institution. Bishop Tailor writes against Original sin, and Bishop
Warner, for it. Doctor Gunning writes for the Religious observation of Lent,
and Doctor More for the Civil only. One sits at the singing of a Psalm, and
another stands and another kneeleth (and so at Sermon): One boweth only at
the name of Jesus; another boweth also at the name [Christ] and [God] etc. One
stands up at the Reading of the Psalms, and not at the singing of the same
Psalms; another sits at both, and a third stands up at both: One thinks
Episcopacy to be of Divine institution; and another thinks that it is but of
humane, and God has instituted no form of Church Government (as Doctor
Stillingfleet, Bishop Reignolds and others think). The Canons of 1640. which
set up Altars and Rails, and bowing toward the Altar, leave it indifferent,
advising dissenters not to despise or censure one another: One receives the
Lord supper (the elements) kneeling, and then stands or sits to eat or
drink it (supposing that the obligation to receive it kneeling, extends not
to the eating or drinking of it kneeling): Another does both receive and eat
and drink it kneeling. One uses the names of Altar, Sacrifice, Priest, etc.
and another is afraid lest they will introduce the Mass. One that Declares his
assent and consent to all things contained in and prescribed by three books,
does tell us, that he means only that it is lawful to use so much of them as
concerns himself to use, and indeed no further to assent or consent to the
things or words: Another means plainly as he speaks. One that takes the
Oxford Oath or that subscribeth not to resist any Commissioned by the King,
etc. means it only of a Lawful Commission, and says, No other is a
Commission: Another means it of any Commission. One that swears or
subscribeth never to endeavor any alteration of Church Government means, by
Alteration properly qualitative Alteration; Another means only a change of
Episcopacy in genere into another kind: One by Government means the external
Government of the Church as it is in the King, according to the Oath of
supremacy (which none of us scruple) Another means the spiritual Internal
Government by the Keys, that is, the Authoritative management of Gods words.
One by [endeavour] means only [unlawful endeavour] Another means as
universally as he speaks Any kind of endeavor, in his place and calling, or
out of it. And as to practice we come not into two Churches of ten, where just
all the same prayers and parts of the Liturgy are daily read; but one reads
more, and another less; one this part and another that: Nay I have my self
communicated in a conformable Parish Church in London, where one half kneel at
the receiving of the Sacrament, and the other sit; And all this without any
violation of Love or concord; without any grudging or mischievous effects: so
that experience shameth the dreaming fears of imposing men.

And in Doctrines Doctor Heylin tells you in the end of his Preface to the Life
of A. B. Laud, what liberty of judgment the Church has left, for how good
reasons.

45. One of the greatest dividers and troubles of the Church through the world
is the Lordly, proud, impatient spirit of the Pastors; who when they should be
as Nurses to the children of God, and should bear with their cryings and
frowardness and foulness while they are breeding them up to a more mature and
solid and peaceable temper, do treat with infants as with equals, and snuff at
all the quarrels and complaints which they undergo, and look that before and
without their education, they all be as wise and stayed as themselves, and are
ready to bring their actionat Law against every child that cries or
complains, and to turn them out of the family of God: And are so quite
contrary to that tender and gracious spirit and example of Christ, that when
they themselves should be as little children, and the servants of all, they are
so proud and Lordly, that they cannot bear any contradiction, dissent or
disobedience to their Laws and dictates; But set up a cry, as if the Church
were all on a fire, and the enemy were at the gates, and all were undone, as
soon as their imperious and imposing wills are neglected in a ceremony or an
indifferent thing. God give his children tender Nurses.

46. I my self have found by experience, that Christians may be kept in Unity
and peace, without any heresies, factions or divisions, by means of Scripture,
Reason and Love, by their own consent, without compulsion.

47. many of us have found, that in case of the peevish self-conceitedness of
any of our people, that fall into heretical dispositions, noise and violence
are the bellows of their zeal, and the chief increasers of their folly and
fury: And neglect extinguisheth it: so be it that they be but solidly confuted
to the more judicious, and the rest kept in Unity and peace; The very
neighborhood of the Orthodox that are unanimous and concordant, does quickly
drain the heretical conventicles, and make the erroneous ashamed of themselves,
and a weary of their impetuousness.

48. They that can bear with such in their constant congregations and
Communion, who understand not the essentials of Christianity, or whose
understanding they are utterly unacquainted with; and also with drunkards,
tiplers, swearers, cursers, railers, prayerless families, fornicators,
gluttons, sensual riotous persons, etc. and yet will rather cast Kingdoms into
confusion than they will bear with an honest godly Christian, that differs
from their way of worship in no greater matter than a Ceremony, have something
more amiss within than a Ceremony.

49. We suppose that errors and faults of subjects must be distinguished of by
Magistrates and Pastors; some are Tolerable, and those must be Tolerated: some
are intolerable, and must not be tolerated: we are not therefore for an
universal unlimited toleration. And we think that those, who cry out [One and
All, why not one as well as another] have much themselves of design or
necessity to be tolerated, or else very little of understanding: And they may
as well say, [If an idle talker may be endured in the Commonwealth, why not a
Traitor? If there be no Law against Lying, why should there be any against
murder or Rebellion? If a foot must be cut off for a Gangren, why not for a
Corn?] Woe to the world when it is ruled by such wits.

50. Nay we suppose that no fault even in public matters of Religion is
therefore to be left incorrigible, because the Magistrate wants power to
meddle with it (though Heart-sins and unproved sins are out of his cognizance):
we doubt not but the Magistrate may punish evil doers where God or nature make
no exception, or disable him not, Romans 13. 4, 5, 6. He must take more care of
Gods interest than his own; and of our souls than of our bodies, and of
Religion than of Commerce: But the question is only what he can do effectually
and what not: and what means prudence requires him to use.

51. We would not have the Magistrate forbear to cure the smallest fault or
error, of what kind soever which he can really cure: But what he cannot cure
must be tolerated: He cannot make his Subjects perfect. And we would not have
him kill under pretense of curing, nor set the house on fire to kill the rats
and mice, nor cure a lousy headed child by cutting off his head, nor cure his
crying by cutting his throat; Nor to divide and destroy the Church by ordering
it, nor for a needless subscription or a ceremony, to forbid the preaching of
the Gospel of Christ, when it is necessary to the saving of souls.

52. He that knows not himself to be a man and a sinner, is not sit to be a
Pastor: And he that does, and is penitently conscious, what abundance of
greater sins he has than the Conscientious forbearance of a Ceremony or
needless Oath or subscription, will be very tender in his usage of others.

53. A fear of sinning is necessary in all that will be obedient to God, and
will be saved: It is that fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom: It is
therefore to be loved and cherished, even when scrupulousness mistaketh the
matter; And not to be reproached, discouraged, or persecuted out of the world.

54. By a tender Conscience we mean the same that God in his promise does by a
heart of flesh in opposition to a stony heart: We suppose Holiness to consist
in the sanctity of the three natural faculties, Active power, understanding and
will; and (...)o consist in Life, Light and Love; As a state of unholiness
consists, in Deadness, Darkness and Disaffection. It is therefore a
Conscience that has Spiritual life and feeling that we mean, and that
perceives more the evil of the least sin, than a fornicator or a drunkard, or
a proud oppressor does perceive the greatest. Therefore as for them that take a
tender Conscience to be but a tender (that is, a soft or foolish) head, we envy
them not the honor of a s(...)ared Conscience, or a hardened heart, that is
p(...)st feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19.

55. The imposing of unnecessary subscriptions, professions or Oaths, is the
way to fill the Church with men that are not troubled with tender Consciences,
and that have no fear of God or sin: For if there be a thousand Atheists,
Infidels or impious debauched persons, that either believe not, or regard not
the life to come, and make no Conscience of any sin at all, what should hinder
all or any of these, from saying, subscribing or swearing any thing, that their
profit or honor or ease or safety does require? And seeing undoubtedly it is
so, Quaere, whether he that believes that ever he shall be judged by the great
Pastor of the flock, should not be as much at least afraid, of letting in such
Presbyters as these into the Churches of his Diocese, as of enduring holy
faithful men, that fear a lie or Oath or superstition.

56. All are for Toleration (usually) that need it: And so would they be that
now deny it.

57. He that knows the frailties of all mankind and the weakness of most
Christians yea and Ministers, does know that all mankind, all Christians, and
all Prelates and Pastors have great need of some (yea of much) toleration, not
to cherish their sin, but to endure the smell and trouble of their Ulcers, till
they can be cured. And as Seneca thinks that he speaks against mankind,
that reproacheth a man with faults that are common to mankind; so we do more
soundly judge, that he that makes a Canon to silence or excommuniate or cast
out men, for a fault common to all preachers, Christians and men, does make a
Canon to silence or cast out all Preachers, Pastors or men.

58. If we deserve to be cast out of Church and Kingdom, in this case of
nonconformity to the present Impositions, it is because we are either weak or
Ignorant or wicked (for nature has no other fault.) And on condition that the
Diocesans will effectually provide, that none more weak, more ignorant, or more
wicked shall be tolerated in Church and Kingdom when we are gone, and no
detriment befall his Majesty's dominions by the diminution of his Subjects, we
here profess to the world, our joyful consent to be silenced and banished. And
I am so far from speaking this in overvaluing of my self, that I profess that
it is my brethren that I now intend: (Though he is a fool that takes himself
to be no wiser than a stark fool; And it is like they that deride our
self-abasing consessions, will not expect that we should belie ourselves, or
equal the up right with the hypocrite). And I tell posterity, if this age will
not hear, that though I am accounted one of the greatest bewailers and
reprovers of the sins of the Nonconformists, Ministers and people, and no
flatterer of either of them, that I do verily believe [that under all the
Heavens of God, there is no one party, of Ministers and people, more able,
holy, wise and faithful, than those that are now silenced and reproached as
Puritans in his Majesty's Dominions; And that they are the glory of the
Churches, and of the King and his Kingdoms; and such as no other Prince in all
the world is equally blessed with.] Let malice and ignorance and interest say its
worst, I have nothing that I know of to make me partial to them, but have born
as many contradictions from them as most men living; yet this is my unfeigned
testimony upon my long acquaintance with them, which I leave to posterity as a
dying man.

59. Yea moreover, If the Diocesans will but (not talk, but really) fill up the
vacancies in the Kings Dominions with persons who for Quality, diligence and
numbers, may sufficiently supply the peoples wants, so that in the eye of any
knowing experienced person, that cares for souls, and believes the Gospel,
our Ministry shall not be palpabl(...) and notoriously needful, to the
instructing, edifying and saving of many thousand (or hundred thousand) souls,
we do solemnly as before God and man profess, that we will not only cease our
Ministration, but quietly live in private communion with the Churches, and take
it for the joyfullest day, that ever did shine upon us since we were born. But
alas, what frivolous talk is this!

60. Though we ought not to be void of compassion to those faithful and pious
Ministers, and private Christians, who have suffered long imprisonments; nor of
their case who want their daily bread, for themselves and families, who might
have lived as plentifully as their neighbors, if they had not been consecrated
to the sacred Ministry, but betaken themselves to a secular life; yet so small
a matter is the hunger, or imprisonment of Ministers, in comparison of the
miseries of the souls of men, that for my part I would never mention it, nor
meddle in an apology or such displeasing writings for them, if their own
greatest corporal sufferings were the worst; and the punishing the souls of the
ignorant and ungodly, called not louder for pity and relief.

61. And those of us that (through Gods mercy) want not necessaries, find small
temptation from the world and flesh, to desire ever to exercise our Ministry
more. For my own part, if I had not other ways had more than ever I received
any way for my ministerial work and office, I must have lived in it (to others,
though not to my self) at far lower rates than I did: And we are few of us such
dullards I think, but by Law, Physic, trading or other secular means, we might
live in more plenty and less obloquy than we do. When I gave men Medicines for
their bodies, they thankt me for it, and none rose up against me for it with
displeasure, as many have done for ministerial sidelity: we have flesh and
blood as well as others, and know what belongs to our ease and fleshly
interest: How glad would our fleshly part be to be eased of this unthankful
work, which brings the revilings and threats of men (and more) about our ears?
He that has such list to talk, that he is contented to suffer all this, that
he may but hear himself speak, or be heard and applauded by such as do applaud
us, verily he has a poor reward, and I account him worthy of all his
sufferings.

62. They that by thrusting out the Orthodox and sober Ministers and private
Christians equally with the heretical and intolerable, will tell them when they
desire to be restored, that it is they that would bring in an Universal
Toleration of all the intolerable, do play so naked a game, that it is easily
understood, though it must be silently and patiently endured: And if the
Diocesans cannot tolerate our Preaching, we will quietly tolerate their Per --

63. We thought that Bishop Tailor went too far in his Book for Liberty of
Prophesying, but tempor a mutantur, and Conformists can change: we think it fit
that the Magistrate go further in Restraining than in Constraining: And that he
should hinder heretics and blasphemers from reproaching the truth, and
seducing souls; Yea hinder any sin in the world; as far as he can do it without
greater hurt than the good will compensate. And as the Church must not suffer
the doctrine of the Nicolaitans which Christ hates, nor the woman Jesabel to
teach and seduce the people to filthiness, Idolatry, etc. and as Pastors must
stop such mouths with sacred argument, and shame them by the convincing light
of truth; so Magistrates in their places must hinder them so far, as that by
pulling up the Tares, they be sure that they pull not up the wheat also.

64. Leaving the Civil peace to the care of Magistrates, we must say of Church
Unity and peace, that it will hardly long be kept up by bad Pastors; (till they
can make the people bad enough to be willing of them, Isa 5. last) And then it
is a conspiracy against Christ, and not true peace.

65. For Good people will never be well contented with bad Ministers, nor bad
Ministers ever well like or comply with the desires and ways of pious people.

66. Great Temptations cause bad interests, and bad interests make bad
Ministers worse.

67. Great Preferments, power, wealth and fullness are Great Temptations.

68. They that Love these best, are the worst men, and unfittest for the
Ministry, as having least the Love of God and holiness and heaven and souls. 1
John 2. 15, 16. Phil. 3. 18.

69. They that Love these best, are likeliest to get them because they will use
all their wit and industry to get them: And he that seeks is likest to find.

70. Therefore whilst the Ministry is in a state of great worldly wealth and
honor and power and fullness, and so of Temptation, the worst men are likest to
be the Pastors of the Church, except where Princes of rare piety do prevent it.

71. Such Carnal minds are enmity to God, and neither are nor can be subject to
his Law, because they savor not the things of the spirit, but of the flesh:
Romans 8. 6, 7, 8. And how Christ's enemies are like to guide his flock, and
preserve the parity or Unity of them, I leave to all to judge.

72. They wrong us that say, we would reduce the Church to the primitive
persec(...)tion and poverty, when we call them to the Primitive terms of Unity
(Though we should be glad that our worse corrupting prosperity were changed
into their holy suffering and poverty, rather than go on to be the Churches
ruin) we bless God that we live under a Christian Protestant King, and we
commend our Rulers pious zeal, for the saving of the Clergy from poverty and
contempt; And we are of their mind that think that excellent Godly painful
Pastors or Bishops may do much good with a great deal of wealth and power: But
we doubt that they talk but by the book, or of some rare wonders, and never
think how such excellent persons are ever like to have those advantages, nor
what hurt others will do with them. He that said, If the Pope were a good man,
what a deal of good might he do, to all the Christian world; did never live to
see that good done.

73. The Apostles and first Churches were as wise as our Diocesans or any now,
to know the fittest terms of Church concord, toleration and Communion.

74. If Act 15. it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and such a Council of
Apostles, to lay nothing but a few Necessary things on the Churches, lest they
should burden them: we supose that determination of the Holy Ghost and the
Apostles is obligatory to all Rulers and Churches upon earth, even to this day:
And all that think not themselves wiser, should confess that at least it is
safe to follow it.

75. The Apostle having so clearly and fully decided the case before us, in
Romans 14. and 15. against either censuring or despising one another for things
indifferent, we cannot wonder that they, who will neither understand nor stand
to this decision, will neither understand nor be satisfied with our most cogent
arguments.

76. They that say that the Apostle does not speak there of things indifferent
after they are imposed by authority, say very true; Because he there takes
away that very subject, and preventeth all such cases, while he determines
that such things should not be so imposed, but so far left free, that none may
be rejected out of Church Communion for them, nor any censured or despised for
them.

77. They that say the Apostle does not forbid such Impositions there, cannot
see day for light.

1. If he forbid censuring, despising and not receiving one another, and
command dissenters to receive one another, then he forbids such imposition
as is inconsistent herewith. But the antecedent is plain in the text, Ergo. --

2. If he direct this command to all the Church of Rome, even the Authorized
Pastors as well as the people, then he extends it to the Authorized Rulers of
the Church. But the Antecedent is evident in the first and last Chapters of the
Epistle -- Ergo. --

3. If he himself being a Pastor or Ruler of that Church, as fully authorized
as any that should succeed, do declare his resolution even on moral reasons, to
use that Church with the described toleration himself, then he thereby
declares that he would have other Rulers to do the like. But the antecedent is
undeniable. Ergo so is the consequent.

4. If this Scripture (as others) be written for a standing Rule, for future
ages as well as for that in which Paul lived, then it is obligatory to future
Rulers -- But -- Ergo --.

78. They that say it speaks not of rejecting from and receiving to Church
Communion, neither directly nor consequentially, do deny to understand or
believe plain words, and are contradicted not only by their own Annotator Dr.
Hammond, but by so many more Expositors as should make them more modest in
their conceits.

79. Yet we our selves confess (which many late Expositors note) that this does
not decide the case of the peoples Church Communion when Authority shall impose
indifferent things, nor does it allow any private Christian to take liberty to
use or not to use them, when Authority takes away that liberty: For though the
Apostle does both forbid such impositions to the Rulers, as shall take away the
liberty there expressed, and does also forbid all private Christians, to
censure, despise, or to deny to receive each other on any such accounts; yet if
the Rulers shall break this Law of the spirit of God, and shall make such
imposition of things indifferent as are here forbidden them, 1. Subjects must
obey them, and take them as no longer indifferent to them, but a necessary
duty, because their governors have taken away their liberty; 2. And if the
Pastors unjustly cast out men on such small accounts, from the public
Communion of the Church, it is not in the power of the people to restore them,
as being not entrusted with the Keys of Government.

Object. But how can any man take away the liberty that God has given us?

Answ. Though he cannot do it without sin, he may do it so far as that you
shall be obliged to obedience: A judge cannot against right adjudge any part of
your possessions to another, without sin: But if he do it, though sinfully, you
must not break order, nor reassume your own.

And it is to be noted that your Gift of Liberty is the consequent of the
Rulers duty, who is here required to use you with this tenderness: And if he
performs not that duty, there wants the hand that should reach out this
gift unto you, so that you had a distant jus ad rem, but no jus in re.

Obj. But is not a Rulers act null, which is done against the command of God:
and consequently without authority?

Answ. He has a General Authority in his Office it self to Rule you; though
this text forbid him this particular act: And his sinning against this one
command of God, does not nullify the authority of his office: And as a subject
you are bound to obey him in all lawful things, belonging to his general
office: So that if it be lawful for you antecedently, it is your duty
consequently to obey, though he sin in commanding: And every mistake of a Ruler
will not disoblige the Subject from obeying.

But remember that all this is spoken only of things indifferent, and not of
things forbidden by God.

80. The present full conformity now required will never be the terms of the
full desirable unity and concord of the Christian Protestants in his Majesty's
dominion: They are Impossible means of such an end, and therefore will make
such a Unity and concord to be impossible, Proved.

If it be both impossible to bring all good Christians judgments to hold all
this conformity to be lawful, and impossible to bring them all to conform to
that which they judge unlawful; Then is it impossible to agree or unite them on
these terms -- But the antecedent is true -- Ergo so is the consequent.

Remember that by Impossible, we mean not that which God cannot do, to whose
omnipotency all things are possible; But that which is Morally impossible, and
never to be done, or expected by man.

1. That it is Morally impossible so far to alter their judgments, is evident,
1. In the numbers that must be changed, 2. In the natural operation of the
intellect, which is not free, nor subject to the Laws or the will of man, nor
fully or directly to the will of the person himself; but receives things as
they are represented by evidence, necessarily and per modum naturae, further
than as the will in part overruleth the Cogitations. 3. In the great variety of
natural temperatures, and degrees of docibility and apprehensiveness and
ingenuity. 4. In the great diversity of Parents minds and their education of
their children. 5. In the different converse of persons, with men that have
several judgments, and all of them advantage to instill their principles into
others. 6. In the mavelous variety of circumstances that men stand in, and
consequently the diversity of light, representations and appearances of things,
as men and their affairs and interests stand in different postures. 7. In the
difficulty of the controversies which must be so generally decided: were they
not difficult, so many, so wise, so learned, so godly and impartial men would
not have disagreed so long about them. 8. In the reverence which they have
received and will retain, of the worth and judgments of such persons as
Amesius, Hildersham, etc. Calvin, Beza and multitudes more that have gone
before them, whose honor no power on earth is able to destroy. 9. In the
paucity, and distance of those conformable Ministers from most of the people,
who must change their judgments; And the unaptness of most of them for such a
work; especially when they come to plead against such as Blondel, Salmasius,
Chamier, etc. 10. In the mavelous suspicion and scrupulousness that most
tender conscienced Christians have against seeming additions, detractions and
corruptions of Gods instit^^d worship: And their fear of sinning in what they
do, especially deliberately. 11. From the frightfulness and horridness of the
evil which they fear in conformity; which is no less than deliberate lying and
perjury, yea the justifying of perjury in thousands, and the public renouncing
their duty of endeavoring reformation, and many other grievous sins. I am not
saying, that all these or any of them are such as they fear them to be (that is
to be spoken to by it self) but only that they fear them to be such. And men
will never be all bold among such dangers as these seem. 12. From the nature of
man's understanding, and of God Grace, and of his promise, which will never
suffer all his children to agree in such things as we think some of these in
controversy to be. 13. And expereince of the continuance of these differences
shows, what may be expected for the time to come. One that has not commenced
Doctor of Divinity, nor is eminent for Reason, may easily know, 1. that All the
Kings Subjects in three Kingdoms and America, are not like to attain to more
Learning, wisdom or honesty for the just decision of such controversies, than
Doctor Ames, Doctor Reignolds, Doctor Humphrey, etc. or than at present Doctor
Tuckney, Doctor Seaman, and many other such men have. 2. And (unless they prove
much wiser and more learned than they have done of late) it is almost as easy
to prognosticate, that conformity will not be better justified by them that
must change the judgments of so many, than it has been already by Downame,
Morton, Burges, Covel, Bridge, Bilson, Hooker, and the most judicious Doctor
Field: Much less that our Diocesans are like to exceed them so exceeding far in
ability and success, as the maintaining of the present conformity exceeds in
difficulty the maintaining of the old. (For I do verily think that if Doctor
Burges, Doctor Field, Bishop Downame, etc. were now alive, they would all be
Nonconformists; And their own writings put us past doubt, that Hooker and
Bilson would be Nonconformists, unless they would forsake their published
judgment: yea and more than Nonconformists.)

2. And now I come to the second branch of my Antecedent; As it is not morally
possible, for to change the judgments of so many in this point, and to keep
them in that mind from age to age; so it is as impossible to bring them all to
conform against their judgments by any force that can be offered. I need not
prove this to any that believes that there is a God and a life to come, and
believes that any others do believe it: And those that believe neither of
these, should be no Bishops if I could help it. 1. From the Nature of faith and
holiness: Every one that unfeignedly believes that there is a God and a life
to come (with a true practical belief) will rather die than deliberately and
continuedly do that which he believes does displease God, and forfeit
everlasting happiness. 2. Gods promise is to strengthen his servants against
such wilful impenitent sinning, and to keep them by his power through faith
unto salvation: If Christ should suffer all his members to be deliberately and
impenitently guilty of that, which they verily think is aggravated Perjury,
Ministerial Lying, renouncing reformation, justifying the sins of thousands,
etc. then should the gates of hell prevail, and his Church be no Church
(because not holy), and consequently Christ be no Head of a true Church, that
is, no Christ. He that has commanded, Fear not them that can kill the body,
and after that have no more that they can do; but fear him, etc. Luke 12. 4.
will give grace to his servants to obey his commands; for he has promised to
write his Laws in their hearts, etc. 3. And the Martyrdom undergone in so many
ages does assure us, that men will rather die, than deliberately do that which
they judge to be so great a sin. 4. And the sufferings of these times do tell
you what men will further undergo, if you follow it on to the utmost: Some have
died in prison already; And some have died of the diseases there taken; And
many families live in very great necessities, that in the days of Usurpation
had food and raiment. Lately I saw a credible letter craving relief for a godly
Minister in Kent, who (when his infirmities lately contracted will permit him)
does spin at the wheel to get some bread for his family: And many others have
suffered more. It is therefore evident that Violence will never make them
forsake that which they judge of so great truth and necessity to their own and
others men's Salvation.

81. He that thinks that all other men will do that which they think is sin
against God, and will damn their souls, to escape any penalties of humane Laws,
does thereby tell the world, either that he thinks himself more honest than
all such others, or else that he would do the same himself, which he expects
from them, if it were his own case; And so, that he would sell his soul to save
his flesh. A Bishop therefore should especially be against such violence lest
he disgrace himself, and tell the world what he is, and what he would do, by
telling them what he thinks others will do.

82. My own acquaintance in England persuades me confidently to believe, that
(however very many would venture their souls to save their bodies, yet) if the
Bishops could get Laws to hang all Nonconformists, or burn them as the
Protestants in Queen Marys days, there would many hundred Ministers, and many
thousand of private Christians, rather be burnt than do the things now
questioned against their Consciences.

83. He that trusts to punishments to procure Church concord, must in reason
look to the end of such punishments, and not delude himself and his superiors,
by thinking that they will do what he would have them do. When lesser
punishments are tried, either he will proceed to greater, or not. If not, he
has but confirmed those whom he thought to change, and made the matter worse
than before: If yea; then he must resolve how far to go. If he come short of
banishment or death, the persons are still left alive, uncured and more
stiffned. If he would have our Rulers proceed to banishment or death, either it
must be of some, or of all Nonconformists. If but some, the rest will survive
to be a differing party, and will increase their company by the advantage of
their brethrens sufferings. Would any man have thought that when Queen Marys
flames had consumed so many, the remnant should change Religion so soon? Or
when the French Massacre had murdered forty thousand (as D'avila computeth, or
thirty thousand as credible Th(...)anus) that the remnant (even when the
Leaders were cut off) should be thereby so increased, exasperated and
strengthened, as to do that which was shortly after done, till their Head was
King? Or when the Irish had so quickly murdered two hundred thousand, that the
survivers should so quickly use them more severely than ever they had been used
before?

But if you would have All cut o(...) or banished, 1. It will be a greater loss
to the King and to the Conformists left behind, than ten more Oaths or
Ceremonies will countervail. 2. It will but send many beyond Sea to defame you
by their sufferings. 3. All foreign nations that favor their cause, will the
more abhor you. 4. As Tertullian faith, dum solitudinem faciunt, pacem vocant;
you will but make desolation and solitude, though you may call it Unity and
peace: you cannot indeed do what you think to do: For thousands that will
stretch their Consciences to conform, will hate you and your ways the more, and
will be but such as were formerly called Conformable Puritans; and will have
the more advantage to supplant you, by standing so much nearer to you. You know
what a Conformable Episcopal Parliament did; and you know what an Assembly of
Conformable Divines did, not long ago. 5. And if you could cut them all off,
you cannot prevent the resurrection of them in their posterity. If ever blood
would have extirpated dissenters, the Waldenses and Albigenses had been rooted
out; when Historians tell us of so many hundred thousand killed, as is almost
incredible. 6. The histories of cruelties are one of the greatest encreasers of
the party for the time to come, in other lands and Generations. 7. And lastly,
it is such kind of fame that it leaves upon the agents, that few men that care
for their surviving names, if they know it, can be willing of. It is no honor
to Pilate to have his name in the Creed; nor to Herod to have his name in the
Gospel; nor to Nero to have killed Peter and Paul, etc. No nor to those great
Princes who killed such persons of their own Religion as Seneca, Lucan, Cicero,
Demosthenes, Cato, etc. or that banished Juvenal, and many such more: Nor to
the state or people that killed Socrates, etc. nor to the Athenian Tyrant from
whom Solon and such others fled; no nor to the Roman Clergy that killed
Sovonarola, and tortuced Campanella, and imprisoned Galilaeus and many the
like: seeing, as Sir Walter Raleigh notes (though not to his own escape) that
Learning it self (and if joined with great piety, much more) does leave so
great veneration on the minds of men, that though the owners of them prove to
be faulty, yet posterity use to have dishonouring thoughts of those by whom
they suffer.

It remains therefore that we must either despair of ever having Unity and
Church concord, or else we must have it on other terms, than the masters of
Prelacy contrive and endeavor it. One of the two must needs be chosen.

84. To have no Church concord, will bring as many evils as they themselves
foretell when they write against Toleration. The more to be blamed is that man
whoever he be that will cut out men's tongues, and then write for the great
necessity of speech, or that will put Colloquintida into the pottage, and then
write of the danger of purging and looseness! If offense, and division must
needs come; yet woe to the Church because of offenses, and woe to the Pastors by
whom they come.

85. The greatest plague of our continued Divisions, will be (and is) the
destruction of Christian Love, which is the essential mark of Christ's
disciples, and of absolute necessity to Salvation. If it were possible for such
fiery and bloody books to be written against brethen as by some now are, or
such scornful books as Martyn Marprelate and Martyn Marpriest wrote, without
any abatement of Love in themselves, can they believe that they will do nothing
to destroy it in others: can all of their own side read words that are written
to make men odious, and not hate them: Or all of the other side, hear
themselves reviled without the least temptation to uncharitableness? Is it more
natural to water to quench fire, than for such books, and other effects of
discord, to quench brotherly love? (Allowing the difference between a natural
agent and a Voluntary). Nay the authors themselves do plainly profess that they
do it to draw men to hate those that they write and speak against: and will
scarce call them Brethren themselves, unless in a fit of special humility.

And if really they can possibly believe themselves, that they have lost none
of their charity (if they ever had it) I suppose they scarce look that any one
else should believe them; whilst, as Persius faith, Scintillant oculi, dicisque
sacisque quod ipse
Non sani esse hominis, non sanus juret Orestes.


86. And it is no small mischief, that the King (and his Magistrates) should be
so greatly wronged in his Subjects; to be put to Govern a divided people, when
they might easily have an united people to govern. Besides the comfort, ease
and honor of Ruling an United people, and the sadness, difficulty and
reflections on the contrary, Who can be sure, or imagine that we shall never
have a foreign enemy, or that the King will never have any use for the Union
and concord of his Subjects, for their readier and surer defense of him and of
themselves? And who knows not how usually divided Cities and Kingdoms have
been a prey to common enemies?

87. And if Bishops above all men, who think that Unity is the very reason of
their order and Office, should have less wit for, or care of the Kingdom of
Christ, than the Devil himself has of his own, who knows that if it be
divided it cannot stand, Mat. 12. what friends to Unity can such men be?

88. All the arguments for Unity and Peace which are made use of against
Toleration by the Prelatists, and all the mischiefs of Division which they
aggravate, if it prove that they are the greatest causes of Division, and
hinderers of Church concord, do principally fall upon themselves. It is an
easy song for any man to sing [O the manifold mischiefs of Division]; And a
ready staff to strike any dissenter with, for him that can but get the handle.
The Romanists use it with as much vehemence and Spleen against the Protestants.
But all the question is, who is the true cause? and what is the true cure?

89. Either these writers and talkers think something or nothing to be sin*
themselves: and either the imposition of what they think unlawful would make
them Nonconformists, or it would not: If it would not, they are fitter
Ministers for Machiavel, or Vaninus (nay Vaninus dyed for his Atheism) than for
Christ. But if it would (as I will believe) were it not as easy then when they
conformed not themselves, to write Volumes of the mischiefs of division and
Schism, and disobedience to Laws, and of judging when we should obey, and of
sects and toleration, as it is for them to do it against us?

90. Seeing then all wise men and good men are for Unity, and I have proved
even to the purblind, that it is Impossible on the present terms (though I
justifice not all that makes it impossible), It must needs be a plain resolved
case that other possible terms must be found out; which is not difficult to do.
O that it were as easy to make men willing of them.

91. Unity may be had either with Uniformity or without it.

92. Unity with Uniformity is never to be had (universally, really and durably)
save only by placing Uniformity in the Scripture or primitive simplicity, even
in a few things so needful, or so lawful, that no sober, judicious Christians
can question them; yea such as the weak may be generally and easily satisfied
in.

93. Unity without Uniformity (of several Churches) must be by Toleration in
the points of Uniformity about things indifferent, leaving each Church to its
proper liberty; but making those things necessary to all, which are necessary
indeed to the Unity of all; which is the Essentials, or plain great points of
Christianity, in which we are all one in Christ, the center of our Unity.

94. The best way is, 1. to Unite in things necessary to all, by necessary
imposition (on such as are capable,) and 2 in things of unquestionable
convenience, by a prudent reduction of them to the primitive simplicity, and
this not by necessitating Laws, which urge by great severity, but by such
gentle corrections, as conveniences, order and decency should be urged with:
And, 3. if any will go further (as to Organs, Ornaments, Crossing etc.) to let
them do it as a matter of liberty, (as the Cathedrals and Parish Churches now
differ, and many Parish Churches each from other) without repining or breach of
Charity; thus joining all together according to the nature of the things.

95. He that will Unite all mankind must Unite them in somewhat that all men
are really agreed in: And he that would Unite all Christians, must do it in
something that all Christians are agreed in. And he that will Unite all
Protestants (or English Protestants) must do it in somewhat which all
Protestants (or English Protestants) are agreed in. For that which they agree
not in, cannot be the (...)erms of their agreement, unless you could undertake
to change their judgments.

96. All men are agreed in Reason, and in the Love of Nature (for so far as men
have put off Nature, they have put off humanity): Therefore the Laws of Nature
and Rules of equity which Reason dictates, are the true Jus gentium, which is
the ground of Commerce in the world, without which men live as strangers or as
foes.

97. That which all Christians are agreed in, is Christianity and Godliness;
that is, in their one Baptismal Covenant, and in that one faith or Creed which
is there professed, and in the Lords Prayer and Decalogue as the summaries of
things to be Willed and to be Done; In these I say, explicitly or
particularly, and in the holy Scriptures generally, as far as they can
understand them. Greeks, Papists and Protestants are agreed in all this; that
is, 1. In the Sacramental Covenant, 2. In the three summaries of the Credenda,
Appetenda, Agenda, 3. And in the Canon of the holy Scriptures in General, that
is, in so many books as they are convinced are the true Canon, and in so much
of the sense as they can understand. And who can Unite them upon other and
narrower terms than these?

98. All (English) Protestants are agreed, 1. In all the three forementioned
formula's of Christianity (the Sacramental Covenant, the three summaries and
the Scripture) 2. And in the sufficiency of this Scripture, as containing all
things necessary to salvation (though some may question some particular books)
3. And that Magistrates and Pastors are appointed to Govern the Church, one by
the sword and the other by the word and Keys, according to this holy Scripture.

99. He that will make a Law that all mankind shall Unite in Uniformity of
language, habit, temperament, diet, etc. would set them more together by the
ears. And he that would make a Law (as the Council of Trent has done) that all
Christian Churches shall Unite in an Oath of obedience to the Church of Rome,
or in any of their superadded doctrines or Traditions, would but set the
Churches in a greater slame: Before such dividing Councils as the Lateran,
Roman, Florentine, Tridentine, etc. there was some hope of a restored concord;
But now till the renunciation of their pretended Infallibility shall make way
for their Repentance, it will be impossible to the end of the world; any
otherwise than to confess that they grant the truth (though not the
sufficiency) of our Religion, and that we approve of so much of theirs; and
therefore resolve to live together without the exercises of uncharitableness
and cruelties. And this much, no question should be done.

100. Accordingly those Pastors who will make Canons, that all English
Protestants shall agree in subscriptions, professions, Oaths, forms, and
Ceremonies which they are not agreed in, nor ever will be, do but say, we will
break them more into pieces, and set them farther from each other than before.

101. If Socinians, Fanatics or any Heretics or Schismatics, will subscribe
the said summaries of Religion and the Scriptures, equivocally, while they
falsely interpret them, the way is not presently to devise a new form of
Articles for them to subscribe to; but maintaining the Scriptures sufficiency,
for the Rulers Civil and spiritual, to call them to account whenever they prove
that they utter or teach a doctrine contrary to the Scriptures which they
subscribe, and to punish them according to the offense, or judge them to be
o(...)fenders, when it is proved against them that they have offended. For, 1.
Else (as Hilary complains of Creeds) there will be no end of new Articles and
forms of subscription, if we must have new ones as often as deceivers will juggle
and equivocate with the Old. 2. And it will do no good, for they will
equivocate still. If Scripture be not large and plain enough, neither will your
Articles be so. 3. Offenses require not new Laws, but new judgment and
punishment.

CHAP. IX.
The true and easy terms of Unity and concord slated more particularly.
1. I Et every one subscribe his Assent and consent to the sacramental
Covenant, and to the Creed, Lords prayer and Decalogue, verbatim; and that he
believes all the Canonical Scriptures which the Christian Churches
concordantly receive to be the word of God, of infallible truth, and that he
will faithfully endeavor to understand and practice them. (Read Chilling
(...)orths Reasons at large for this cause).

2. Let every Church have its proper faithful Pastors; related to them and set
over the(...) by the joint consent of the Ordainers and of the flock; (and all
this under the Magistrates oversight and rule.)

3. Let the Magistrate be the only Governor by the sword, and Bishops and flock
be subject to him: and let him be the keeper of the Peace in all the Churches,
And take all prudent care that both Pastors and people do their duties; As he
rules Physicians, Philosophers, and all other professions in his dominions.

4. Let there be Articles, or a Catalogue written of such great and clear and
considerable points in Religion, which are not sit to be contradicted; and
because Pastors must know more, necessarily, than the people, and must not
corrupt the sacred doctrine under pretense of preaching it, Let every Pastor
before his Ordination be examined of his understanding of those articles; and
let there be a Law that no one shall preach against any of them. But be sure
that they contain no uncertain or unnecessary things. We can conscionably
forbear preaching against many points, which we cannot conscionably subscribe
Assent or consent to in themselves.

5. Let men be punished according to the quality of their offense, who preach
against the Government Civil or spiritual, and against the Laws and established
order of the Churches; or that rail and revile their brethern, and turn the
preaching of the Gospel into the preaching down of mutual Love. After the first
and second admonition, let the heretical and turbulent be avoided by the
Church; and let the Magistrate restrain them at his discretion as is meet.

6. Let Homilies or forms of preaching and Liturgies or forms of Prayer, etc.
be imposed (at least ordinarily) on none but the less sufficient that need
them; and let able Pastors have liberty, sometime to use more, and sometime
less according to the time, occasion and auditory. And let such forms have
nothing in them doubtful or needless; But for matter, method and phrase, be as
much fitted to the peoples case and to the Scripture as may be done.

7. Let all other circumstances, which are variable according to variety of
occasions, and belong to the office of the Pastor, be left to his discretion
(as what Chapter, Psalm, tune, subject of preaching, method, etc.) so he be
responsible for gross abuses and mal administration.

8. Let it be the work of every Pastor, to baptize, to preach and pray and
administer the Lords supper; refusing the grossly ignorant, Infidel, Heretic,
and proved scandalous by gross sin, till such time as they Repent; so be it
that for his abuse of his power he be responsible to the Magistrate, or
Ecclesiastics after mentioned: Also let him Catechize, visit the sick, and
personally instruct the ignorant, exhort the obstinate, and comfort the weak.

9. Let neighbor Churches keep such correspondence, as is necessary to their
concord, that he that is cast out of one Church, or that communicates with it,
may not be causelessly used contrarily by others. And those Pastors and Churches
that shall prove heretical or impious, are to be admonished by the rest, and
disowned if they continue impenitent.

10. If it be thought meet by Christian Rulers that these neighbor Pastors
have often meetings or Synods, they are to be improved only for concord and
unity and corroboration of all, and for the edification of the younger and
weaker sort of Ministers.

11. If it seem good to the Magistrate, that any one Pastor in every Church
have the chief oversight of that Church, or any one be the constant moderator
in the Synods, or any one in a Diocese or Province have a General inspection
over all the Ministers and Churches; Let none be forced to swear him obedience,
nor to profess or subscribe to the Lawfulness of his place; but only Actually
to obey him, upon such moderate penalties that hinder not the Gospel. And if
this Prelate claim only the Spiritual power, let him not exercise it as a
Prince without the Counsel of the Pastors; and let him go no further than the
spiritual power goes, which reaches but to Conscience and consenters; And let
not the Magistrate be his executioner with the sword; nor put any forcing power
of the sword into the Clergies hands. But if the King will needs make Clergymen
Magistrates, let it be declared so, that they and their Courts do use Civil
power in Ecclesiastical matters, only as the Kings officers, and then we shall
readily obey them. And let no lay Chancellors or others exercise any of the
spiritual power of the Keys.

12. Let all Ministers and people swear or promise Allegiance, Loyalty and
fidelity to the King, and take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to that
end; and be punished according to Law if they offend, either against the person
or honor of the King, or against any inferior Magistrates, or fellow subjects,
or against the quiet, peace or safety of the Kingdom.

CHAP. XI.
Of Puritans as vulgarly called, or of scorning them, or the quality and faults
of those called our followers, mentioned by the Politician and the Debate-maker
and others, and of the Ministers themselves.
1. OUr judgment is, that the ba(...)e name of a Christian, and outward forms
and words and ceremonies, without true faith, and Love and Obedience, a
spiritual and heavenly Heart and life, will save no man, (that has the use of
reason): But that wicked nominal Christians are in that more miserable than the
Infidel Indians, that they are greater abusers of mercy, and greater Hypocrites.

2. Spiritual knowledge is not born with the children of Christians, but it
must cost as much labor in us to teach, and in them to learn, the doctrine of
the Gospel, and the nature and work and hopes of Christianity, perhaps as if
they were the children of some heathens. Their birth privilege without our
labor will not make them wise and faithful and obedient Christians.

3. The most among us are so dull of understanding, and so averse to spiritual
and heavenly things, and so drowned in sin, and taken up with the flesh and the
world, that the cure of their souls is a very great and difficult work, and
must by us and them be carried on at leisure, by great diligence and usually by
slow degrees.

4. True Grace and virtue will not (usually) supply the want of learning or
Urbanity, and of an Academick or ingenuous education; nor will make men of
Rustic wits and breeding, to have count, polite and elegant speech: Though yet
it may suffice to save their souls.

5. Those that have such Academical education, and polite wits, and expression,
and can congruously discourse of Civil and Religious things, and have not the
foresaid lively faith, Love and obedience to God, nor a heavenly mind and lise
are miserable persons, and cannot be saved in that condition, however they be
esteemed in the world.

6. Where both inward holiness and learning and utterance concur, it makes men
most serviceable to God and the Church, and an honor to their Religion.

7. For want of clear parts and good expression, many Christians excellent in
Grace, (that is, in faith, Love and obedience) do dishonor the holy things
which they discourse of, and to captious proud Wits do make themselves often
ridiculous and contemptible.

8. He that has spent ten or twenty or thirty years in studies, and among
books and learned men, and is pufft up because he can speak more congruously
than an honest plowman, that never learnt more than to write and read, nor
perhaps so much, or because he can talk more pertinently and composedly, than
ordinary good women, that could never speak or write true English, may next be
proud that he is not an infant. And he that on such accounts despises the
honest vulgar Christians, that perhaps have much more faith, Love and obedience
than himself, is more foolish than the East-Indians that made a laughing stock
of the most learned Jesuits, that had but begun to learn their language,
because they spoke it brokenly in their preaching to them.

9. We encourage none in the least of their weaknesses; but do our best to
increase their understanding and expressive faculty: But we labor first and
much more about the greatest needfullest things; to make them holy, and save
their souls.

10. He that ever made conscience of laboring faithfully for souls, cannot
choose but know, how very hard a work it is to bring the vulgar to a true
understanding of their Baptism, the Creed, the Lords Prayer and the Decalogue,
(yea the very servants of our own families). And as Archbishop Usher told King
James in his Sermon on Ephesians. 4. 3. Let the best and learned of them try it
when they will, they shall find what skill (and industry) is necessary to teach
the people these principles that we all agree in: And to reproach them and us,
for incongruities of speech, long before these necessary things can be learned,
is to reproach the boys of the lowest form, and the Master with them, because
they are not accurate Graecians.

11. It is in most places but the far smaller part of the people, that we can
ever bring to so much as aforesaid; And the greater part in most places are
still ignorant and unwilling to learn, or mere worldlings and servants to the
flesh, and great neglecters of all that is higher than their belly and their
eyesight.

12. If the Great and Rich be bred up to better utterance, they are very happy
persons among them, that are not more worldly, sensual and profane; yea and
more ignorant too of the matters of salvation, how knowing soever as to words.

13. That Pastor who prefers this ungodly sort before the faithful now
described, and that gathers together all the weak expressions of the later,
to make them ridiculous to the former; or (if with no such intent) does
proclaim them persons of a foolish Religion, because they cannot talk so wisely
as they ought about religion, and this at a time and in a manner, as is likest
to harden the sensual in the opinion that their case is the better, and that
learning and laboring to be seriously religious, is but a foolish fanciful
thing; I say, that Pastor is -- Let his conscience hereafter tell him what.

14. When there is no known way, (but by the Schools, or by a Miracle) for the
world of the vulgar to come to the higher form of wisdom but by the lover; nor
to come to Heaven but by such weak beginnings; And when Grace as well as Nature
begins with infant unutterable desires and groans, Romans 8. 26. and with an
Abba father, Gal. 4. 6. (which our heart-searching father understands, Romans
8. 27.) And when all Christ's Disciples must enter first as little children into
the lowest form (Matthew. 18. 3. and 28. 19, 20.) And when the Apostles own
followers were dull of hearing, and after long teaching (which should have made
them fit to be Teachers) had need still to learn the principles, and to be fed
with childrens milk, Heb. 5. 11, 12, etc. And few ever get above the lower
rank, which all first enter; I say whenas all this is so, and certainly so, to
make these lower Christians a scorn, as being of a foolish religion, and to
discourage them, and disgrace their rank unnecessarily, is to endeavor to
drive all serious Religion out of the world, and to keep men from salvation,
and to brandish their flaming swords at the entrance of Paradise, to keep men
from the tree of life -- But for the Schoolmaster himself to deride the lower
form which with patience and condescension he is obliged by office and salary
to teach; This is beyond a strangers crime.

15. We tell them of their weaknesses and faults as truly and plainly as
Reproachers do, though we do it in way of Love and not of wrath and
discouraging words; which even fathers are forbidden to use to their children,
Ephesians. 6. 4. See Baxters Directions to weak Christians, and his Character of a
sound Christian: and his Life of Faith.

16. If any of them grow Proud with their Ignorance, we deal more sharply and
severely with them, as knowing the odious nature and tendency of that sin.

17. We take not men to be good because they are not conformable; nor do we
disown any of the people for their conformity to your worship, Ceremonies and
discipline, as if they were not the members of Christ; or were to be despised
or censured by others. But instead of speaking perverse things to draw away
disciples after us (as seducers do, Act. 20. 30.) we labor to speak the words
of truth and soberness, and keep to the form of sound and ancient doctrine,
(even that which semper, ubique and ab omnibus recepta est, as Lirinensis
Characterizeth Catholic verity) and to avoid novelties and vain janglings and
inflaming the hearers against Bishops, Liturgy or Ceremonies, or against each
other; But rebuke those that for such differences censure or despise each
other, Romans 14. 1, 2, 3. And exhort them to reverence and obedience to
Governors, especially Loyalty to the King, to Love to all men, and to Unity
with the whole Catholic Church, and to peace among themselves.

18. Our Doctrine is published to the world so fully that no sober man can
question us as a Party for it; but if any individual err, he must be named, and
proved faulty. For our very Religion is nothing but the Law of Nature and the
holy scriptures (which we profess to the Papists that would have more, and to
all the world:) And we subscribe the Doctrine of the Church of England in the
Articles, as our Explication of the sense of Scripture in those points: Though
Gods word only be our Religion in the Rule, and we profess to disclam all
additions or diminutions, yet not all explications of our understanding the
meaning of it; And therefore are still ready to give such explicatory
Professions to any that suspect or accuse us of error. And so the Westminster
Assembly did in their Confession, as all the Resormed Churches have done. But
our Religion in the Divine Rule we take for infallible; but our explications we
take for the corrigible words of fallible men; and as we will take no other
men's for infallible, so we are ready to retract and correct whatever shall be
proved faulty in our own.

19. Much less can we boast that no Minister among us does ever speak or write
incongruously, or has any imperfection or misapprehension of any point or
method in Theology: we rather wish than hope for such perfection here. But
besides the foresaid Confessions, our Professed Doctrine is known by many
printed Catechisms and Treatises, such as Mr. Balls Cat. and Mr. Gouges, etc.
Amesii Medulla and Conscientiae Cas. Dudl. Fen^^ri Theolog. Sohmius, Baxters
Reasons of the Christian Religion: And our notions of Godliness and
Christianity, in his Character of a sound Christian, and his life of faith,
which show whom we take for the best Christians. And our Popular way of
preaching which we like, you may see in old Mr. H^ld^rshams Lectures, and in
Mr. R. Allens Victory of faith, and other writings, and in Mr. Anthony
Burgess's Lectures, and many other such; And our exposition of the Scriptures,
in Mr. Gatakers Annotat. on Isaiah and Jeremiah, and some other parts of those
Annot. and in Dr. Ma^^on on Ja^s, and in Calvin and B^za, and other such
Nonconformists: And our management of Controversies, in Amesii Belharm.
enervat. Cartwright against the Rhemis^s, Chamier, S^de^^, Rivet, Dr. John
Reignolds, etc. Of such as these we are not ashamed, though none of them were
(as we suppose) Prelatical.

20. We are so far from believing our selves, that the soundness of a man's
judgment or excellency of his parts in other matters, has any necessary
connection to his Conformity or Nonconformity, that we can hardly believe that
any of the most fiery of our Reproachers that is sober, does himself believe
it, when the world has so large a proof in the effects, of very great
Learning, judiciousness and worth in many of both parts.

21. And so far are we from thinking that no Ministers that conform not are
defective, weak or imprudent in expressions, or injudicious in some
Controversies of Religion, that we are past all doubt, that the far greatest
part of the Clergy in the world are so; and alas, much worse than so! And that
it is the great numbers of ignorant, weak, injudicious, or proud, self-seeking,
Carnal, Covetous Pastors, that is the great plague and calamity of the
Christian Church through all the earth: The great cause of the ignorance and
ungodliness and unprofitableness of the people, and the dominion of sensuality,
and the increase of Atheism, Infidelity and Heresy, and of the great divisions
and confusions among Christians in East and West, is a Clergy that is either so
ignorant as to be unable, or so ungodly as to be unwilling, or sloathful about
their masters work; or so proud and worldly and malignant, as to set up their
own Domination, wealth and will, as the Rule of order and unity, and to account
their sleshly interest to be the interest of Christ, and to hate and persecute
all those as schismatics and disobedient, that will not serve such sinful ends.

22. Therefore in the midst of such a Clergy that is the worlds Calamity, as we
bless God for the worth both of the Conformable and Nonconformable in these
three Kingdoms, and in many other of the Reformed Churches; so we think it to
be the wisdom, duty and interest of the worthy of each opinion (in these
points) to unite and strengthen one another, and on both sides to disown the
insufficient and ungodly ones, rather than to seek to strengthen themselves by
numbers of the vile and intolerable (that will be their shame and weakening at
last), or to weaken their brethren as Adversaries, either by censuring,
reproaching, silencing or suppressing them.

23. And in such a world, we take it for a great honor that is done to the
Nonconformists in this land, when we read such accusations, as of an
incongruous expression, and an invalid argument about a Ceremony, or such like;
And that such as by their writings tell the world, that they want not will to
open the worst, do charge them with no worse crimes than they do; And also that
they are not silenced at this time, for Treason, or rebellion, or drunkenness,
or swearing, or incontinency, or railing, or for insufficiency or idleness, or
for seldom preaching, or for plurality of benefices, or nonresidency, or any
such immoralities as these; but because they dare not deliberately give it
under their hands, that no person in three Kingdoms is obliged to endeavor the
alteration of the present Prelatical Diocesan Government, that vowed to God, in
his place and calling to endeavor it, by a certain Oath illegally imposed on
the people, And because they dare not Ministerially in the Congregation declare
that they Assent and Consent to all things contained in and prescribed by three
books; and because some dare not be reordained in words, that make them first
Deacons that were ordained Presbyters, and such like.

24. The most credible way to show which party is the foolisher and the
ungodlier, is to make strict Laws against an Ignorant, insufficient, vicious,
sensual, scandalous and negligent Ministry; and whoever is proved guilty, of
which side soever, let them be cast out: This we refuse not; this we would
earnestly beg upon our knees.

25. We are so far from desiring the disgrace even of vicious or worldly
Pastors, that have laudable parts, that we thank God that the learning even of
such hypocrites, is made any way serviceable to the Church; And we would
promote and not cloud their due reputation. But we had far rather have
experienced, truly Godly Pastors, to watch over the peoples souls, as in many
and great respects to be preferred.

26. And he that writes this professes for himself, that when the people cry
out [We cannot in Conscience hear an ignorant man, a silly empty sayer of a
Sermon, nor a Ministry that openly justifies Perjury, or renounceth a
necessary reformation, etc.] if he had not a far larger charity to stop such
persons mouths with, and to hide or excuse greater faults, than such as some
now aggravate, he must be oftener silent, and a greater Separatist, than now he
is. I confess I would have them to use some little Charity, who have need of
much; And til they have better washed off the accusation of a leprosy, I would
not have them too loud in the defamation of him that has a boil. I justify
not the Accusers clamor, but still rebuke them: but I as little justify the
ingenuity of such, as have skill to aggravate a weakness, and not to avoid a
crime.

27. And he further sincerely professes, that (being almost a constant hearer
of their Ministers,) This was written when I lived out of London.
if of many and many that he has heard and been under in certain years or
months past, he could have had the happiness to have lived under one that were
but near as judicious, and able to manage holy things, for matter, method and
expression, as many of those plowmen and poor shopkeepers be, that are now
called, Our Nonconformable followers, he should have greatly rejoiced in the
peoples felicity and his own. And for the homely style so much complained of I
never heard one Presbyterian use such homely words and similies as good Bishop
Latimer in his Sermons uses.

28. Yet we are so far still from thinking that the better sort of Christians
have not many faults, that it is one of the greatest and most continual sorrows
of our hearts, to think how too little they excel the better part of
unbelievers, and how great and common failings are amongst them, and how much
their faults do dishonor their blessed Master and holy profession: and what a
hinderance this is to the conversion of the Infidel and Heathen world: and what
a malignant influence it has upon the Church by corrupting, troubling and
dividing it; and upon the peace of Kingdoms many times, and always on their own
peace and true felicity: Especially through the common sin of being
overconfident of their own opinions.

29. But we perceive that their faults are but the relicts of that which is
common to the world, and predominant in the unsanctified: If any of them err
about Church Communion or discipline or infant baptism, we would gladly heal
their error; but we account it not so mortal, as the common practical error of
the ungodly, who think a sensual worldly life to be better for them than a holy
life, and value earth above heaven, and the body above the soul, and the
creature above the Creator, and the pleasures of time, before those of
eternity. And the very sin of self-conceitedness we find so natural and common
to mankind, that in all Civil or worldly matters, it is hard to meet with those
that in their mistakes are not still confident of the rightness of their own
apprehensions: And in matters of Religion even old ignorant sinner, that know
not the Creed, do usually think themselves too wise to be taught, and are as
stiff and obstinate in their most erroneous conceits as the grossest sectaries.

30. Therefore as the very Papists difference mortal sin from Venial, and we
approve of the distinction as it signifies the sin which is inconsistent with
spiritual life and Love, and so an evidence of a state of death, and that which
is consistent, and therefore pardoned] And as God himself who more hates sin
than any of us, does yet love and pardon and save those who have no other sin,
but what consists with a predominance of faith, Love and obedience, and does
not equal such with the fleshly worldly and ungodly; even so must we his
Ministers in imitation of our heavenly father.

31. And we the less wonder that there are more differences among the zealouser
sort in matters of Religion, than among the ungodly who really have no
Religion, but are indifferent to all, which lets them quietly enjoy their
sin: For men that highliest value any thing, are likest to be tempted to strive
about it. If you cast gold and jewels in the street, men are liker to fight and
quarrel for them, than dogs or swine. We are glad they seriously value truth,
though we are sorry that they cannot more clearly and concordantly understand
it.

32. If we thought that mere Civil good neighborhood, and the common state and
life of men in their unrenewed naturals, were better, or as good as the state
and life of imperfect believers, with all their troublesome mistakes and (...),
we would next become humble Petitioners to Authority, that they would put down
both Prelates and Presbyters, and take their lands and Tithes into their own
lands, and employ them to some better use; and that they would shut up the
Church doors, and banish the Clergy as the plague and troublers of the land,
that do but vex the world with fables, and will not let men live in peace. For
experience assures us that Perfection is not the state of Christans in this
life.

33. Nor can we think that it is any real disgrace to Christianity,
Religiousness or the Scriptures, that men are so faulty and of so many minds,
any more than it is a disgrace to Health that men are sick, or to food that
some are weak, or to wisdom that most have little of it; or to a Schoolmaster,
that his Scholars have defects, and various degrees of knowledge and
apprehension. And if we would concur with them that hence argue against the
common use of Scripture and Religion, because men abuse them, or imperfectly
receive them, we must much more condemn humane Reason it self, and wish that
all the world were beasts; because there is nothing so troubles the peace of
Church and State, nothing so much causes rebellions, treasons, contentions,
injustice, and all the villainy of the world, as imperfect and abused Reason.
But we know that nothing in all the world is so contrary to Rebellion, Pride,
Contention, and all sin, as Christ and Religion and the holy Scriptures: and
that if men be bad, it is not because they have too much Religion or holiness,
but because they have name, or else too little; And that it is more and not
less that must cure them, if ever they be cured.

34. We take it therefore to be the duty of all Christians, freely to confess
their sins, and to take their faults to themselves; and for Ministers to lay
them plainly on the persons that are guilty, lest they should be thought to be
the product of the Christian Religion: And that the partiality of those that
justify all or any of the crimes or faults of Christians, does intimate
blasphemy against Christ, as if he taught, or justified such things. And
therefore the holy Scriptures do so plainly open the sins even of good men, to
teach us to take our shame unto our selves, and not to cast it on Christ and
Religion, which most condemn all sorts of sin.

35. And sin is so far from being ever the better, for being found in a Noah, a
David, or a Peter, that it has manifold aggravations in such, which it has
not in other sorts of men. And it is no less abhorred of God, who is not
reconcilable to the sins of any: However we still know that the failings of a
froward and careless child or friend, are not so mortal as the contempt of a
despiser, or the malignity of an enemy.

36. We do also with lamentation confess, that besides the multitude of common
hypocrites which are in all the Christian Churches, who by open sensuality and
profaneness do show that they dissemble in professing Christianity, there are
also many Hypocrites who profess a greater zeal and forwardness in Religion,
who at the heart are Lovers of this present world, and slaves to the flesh, and
use Religious shows and forms, but to quiet their Consciences with a deceitful
hope, that they may have heaven for a reserve, when they can keep the world no
longer. And these are the men that most dishonor religion by pride and
Rebellions and scandals and heresies, who indeed are numbered by the searcher of
hearts amongst the enemies of religion.

37. Accordingly we do believe there are many among the Conformists and
Nonconformists, of both the fore-described sorts, (faulty true Christians and
hypocrites): And that many of the real faults and (...)ollies, mentioned by the
Books which are too imprudently and unjustly written as to the (...), are to be
found among such persons: And that it is the duty of such faulty persons, to
learn and take reproof, even from the faultiest reprover; and to take heed of
that snare of Satan, who by the reprovers faultiness would tempt them to excuse
or justify themselves, and to reflect on others as the greater sinners.

38. As Christ was crucified between two thieves, so has the Church from the
beginning suffered between Malignant worldly proud (...), and Factious Fanatic
self-conceited dividing Zealous: We shall not wonder therefore, if it be so
still: Neither of them is a new thing in the world.

39. These two sorts of enemies have still used by their extremes, to increase
their several sins by their fierce opposition to each other: The Sectary
justifies all his divisions and (...) by saying [light has no communion with
darkness; nor sincere believers with proud, profane, ignorant and malignant
persecuting usurpers, that obtrude themselves on the stock of Christ against
their wills]: And the other extreme has been used to justify their idleness,
ungodliness and cruelties, by saying [These rebellious, factious, disobedient
people, are enemies to peace and order, and commit all insolent villainies
against their Pastors, while they account themselves the only Saints.] And so
while neither side observes that which is good in the other, but both sides
aggravate the evil (with which they are both too much corrupted) they keep up
wars and contentions in the Church, and make one another mad and miserable, the
one sort censuring, and the other despising, as they in Romans 14. 1, 2, 3. And
in their rage the sober standers by are reviled and falsely accused by both, as
the interest of each party dictates to their spleen; And must patiently suffer
the reproaches of their fury.

40. It is needful that the King be the Peace-keeper impartially between them
both, and that he restrain the insolences and furies of both; For both are
troublers of the common peace. And though neither side be so bad as the other
makes them, yet neither of them are fit for unlimited liberty; Much less to be
armed with the sword, to exercise their fury on dissenters.

41. And when discontents grow among the Secular subjects, and Civil distempers
in the State, each of these parties are fit for the Great ones that head the
several Factions to make use of: And by their railing at one another, they
become Bellows of the common flames.

42. And it is one of the Devils policies to urge Statesmen to draw the Clergy
into their Factions, that which side soever gets the better, one part of the
Ministry may not only be silenced and useless, but be made a reproach to their
Profession, as the Incendariies and seditious troublers of the State.

43. It is a great injury to Christanity and the souls of men, when disagreeing
States men will not suffer the Clergy to live quietly by them, but will
constrain or tempt them to interess themselves in any of their Factions,
(except in the necessary discharge of their Allegiance and Fidelity to their
King and Country) And will force them that are unstudied in humane Laws, to
decide those State controversies, even by assertive Oaths, which Lawyers and
Parliaments cannot agree about: And it is a (...) heinous cruelty and
injustice, when after all this, they will pretend that their political
differences are controversies in Religion, when it is not so, and will thence
denominate parties in the Church.

44. The difference between the aforesaid Extremes (the formal and malignant
persecutors, and the censorious Fanatic Sectaries) is more in the manner and
way of Exercise, than in their Principles themselves. For they are both agreed
in the main, against the true nature and principles of Christian Love and
Concord. They both think others more odious and less amiable than they are: And
they both are possessed with an envious zeal (which S. James says is earthly,
sensual, and Devilish, James 3. 15. introducing confusion and every evil work);
a zeal, I say, to make each other seem odious also to all others: And though
they understood not the sense or transcript of their own dungeon hearts, yet
the children of light can easily understand that the Epitome or Contents of the
Doctrine of their learned writings and discourse is but this [My adversaries
are not amiable, but odious] And the sum of the application is [Therefore we
exhort you not to love them, but to hate them]. But here now they part, and the
side that is uppermost uses, as the more particular application [Ergo, we pray
you, silence, imprison, banish, hang or burn them, and curse and excommunicate,
and depose those temporal Lords that will not do it, as Council. Later. sub
Innoc. 3. Can. 2, 3.] The other side say [Avoid all Church Communion with them
as wicked persecutors; and hold no communion with any of their side or way]. So
that the difference between these Love-killers and peace-haters is but in the
top branches [Hate and destroy them] says the one side, [Hate and avoid them]
says the other side.

45. The true servants of Christ do differ from them both, not in approving
either of their furies, nor in falling in as parties with either of the
factions; but in living in Love as the servants of the God of Love, and making
Love their end and work, and addicting themselves to promote it in the world;
by observing all that is good in all others, and not searching needlessly after
their faults, nor censoriously enviously or malignantly aggravating them, but
hoping the best till the worst be proved, and bearing with the infirmities of
the weak, remembering that we also may be tempted, Gal. 6. 1, 2. And if possible
as much as in them lies, living peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18.

46. If one side (that are all for the dead image of Christianity, and are not
able to endure the serious practice of their own profession) would cease their
Hypocrisy, and either be what they profess, or profess to be what they are,
and would value the soul as well as the adorned Corpse; And if the other side
would lay by their pride and ignorance, and know how little indeed they know,
and remember that in this Corporeal world, Religion must have a Body as well as
a soul, the Church would the better escape them both.

47. Serious heartiness in prayer is more acceptable to God, than formal
babbling in the most decent words; And God will bear with the rude expressions
of his children, that have sincere desires. But yet before others our words
also must be well ordered, that we be not a hindrance to them, and a shame to
the work which we have in hand.

48. And in preaching, as affected jangling, and starched words, that savor
not of reverent seriousness, are loathsome, and usually lost labor; so
careless, ignorant, slovenly, and over familiar and rustic expressions, must
be avoided, which show that we are too bold with holy things.

49. The frothy empty wits are aptest to nauseate and scorn an incongruous
expression, in the most serious useful Sermon which they hear; And their
temptation must not be cherished by our negligence of speech. But yet God
usually blesses the labors of plain and hearty serious preachers, though they
speak not every word in Print. And godly serious humble Auditors have not such
queasie stomachs as to make a great matter of a word or syllable or sound and
tone, when they perceive that the matter is sound and wholesome, and the manner
plain and close.

50. That pride and emptiness of solid matter, which makes men loath such
wholesome teaching, for want of a neatness in phrase and style, does often lead
them at last to quarrel with the style and phrase of Scripture, and to be
Infidels in heart, while for profit and honor they seem to keep up a trade of
Clergy-Christianity.

51. When great secular and personal interests stand up in any Nation against
serious Christianity, or against the most devoted serious preachers of it,
Arguments and Innocence then signify nothing: Interest has neither eyes nor
ears; The faithful must patiently wait in suffering, till the righteous God
shall plead their cause, Psalm. 12.

FINIS.
THe true and only Terms of the Concord of all Christian Churches fully proved,
and the false Term which have caused Long Persecutions and Schism plainly
confuted, with a Con(...)utation of Mr. D^^^^s book which denies the Being
Ministry, Sacrament and Covenant (...) of Salvation, to all the Churches in the
world which have not a succession of Episcopal Ordination, uninterrupted from
the Apostles, with an Epistle to Bishop M(...)ly and Bishop (...). A book
therefore valued as suited to the true Interest of all Parties and the Healing
of the Christian world. By Richard Baxtor.


