A NARRATIVE OF THE TROUBLES With the Indians in NEW ENGLAND, From Pascataqua
to Pemmaquid.
THe Occasion, Rise and Progress of the War with the Indians in the Southern
and Western parts of New England, together with the Issue, and Success thereof,
has in the former part of this Narrative, been already declared. Before an
Entrance be made into a Relation of those Troubles that befell the Eastern and
Northern parts of the said Country from the Indians inhabiting those parts; it
will be requisite to give some general Description of the place, as being less
frequented, and so more unknown then the other, like Heralds that use to
Blazon the Field before they meddle with the Charge, as an Historian once said,
That so the Reader may not miss the Truth in Story, by being unacquainted with
the places whereon the discourse proceeds; Briefly therefore, that more cost
and pains be not spent in the surveying a barren, and Rocky Country, then will
quit cost; The List or Border here being known to be more worth then the whole
Cloth; That whole Tract of Land, being of little worth, unless it were for the
Borders thereof upon the Seacoast, and some Spots and Skirts of more
desirable Land upon the Banks of some Rivers, how much soever it be valued by
them that know nothing thereof, but by the uncertain and fallible Reports of
such as have only Sailed by the Country, or viewed some of the Rivers and
Havens, but never passed through the heart of the Continent. The whole being
scarce worth half those men's lives, that have been lost these two last years,
in hope to save it.

This North part of New England, did first like Zarah put forth its hand,
thereby inviting the Adventurers to twist the Scarlet Thread of their hopes
about the same, by that Auspicious beginning they were ready to promise
themselves great prosperity in having that Advantage before others, to plant
and people that part of the Country.

But that fair opportunity was almost quite lost, by some Fatal, and
mischievous Accidents, happening soon after that noble Enterprise was first set
a foot, as has been already in part, and may hereafter more fully be declared.

The first place that ever was possessed by the English, in hope of making a
Plantation in those parts was a Tract of Land, on the Westside of the River of
Kennibeck, then called Sagatawocke, since Saga-de-hocke: other places adjoining
were soon after seized, and improved for Trading and fishing. The more remote,
and furthest Northward at this time belonging to the English (Penobsot forty
years since being surprised by the French, and by them held to this day) is
called Pemmaquid, distant seven or eight Leagues from Kennibeck, and is the
utmost Boundary of New England, being about forty Leagues distant from the
mouth of Pascataqua River. That Pemmaquid is a very Commodious Haven for Ships,
and has been found very Advantageous to such as use to come upon these Coasts
to make fishing Voyages; South West, or South East, from whence about six or
seven Leagues lies an Island called Monhiggon, of much use on the same account
for fishing, it lying three or four Leagues into the Sea from Damarils Cove, (a
place of like Advantage for the Stages of Fishermen in former times) There have
been for a long time seven or eight considerable dwellings about Pemmaquid,
which is well accommodated with Pasture Land about the Haven for feeding
Cattle, and some Fields also for Tillage; All the Land improvable for such uses
being already taken up, by such a number of Inhabitants as is already mentioned.

In the mouth of the River of Kennibeck lies a considerable Island cal^ed
Aro^ck, some years since purchased by Major Clarke and Capt. Lake two Merchanes
of Boston; on which they built several large dwelings with a Warehouse, and
many other Edifices near the water side, (...) being intended by the Owners for
a place of Trading, as well as Planting; there being many of late seated there,
fit to carry on each design, where also was built a fort, which if it had been
carefully defended, might have proved the defense, and Security of all that
side of the Country, as it used to be their Magazine, up higher beyond the
River of Kennibeck, four Leagues Eastward toward Pemmaquid, in another
considerable River called Ships-Coat, upon the Banks of which were many
scattered Planters, who lately flying from their dwellings for fear of the
Indians, left as was judged, a thousand head of neat Cattle for the use of the
Indians, that made the late Insurrection against the Inhabitants of those
parts, besides their Fields and Barns full of Corn

There is another River that issues into Kennibeck, a little higher up into the
Country called Pegypscot, that comes down from behind Casco Bay. This Pegypscot
is the seat of the Amoscogging Indians, who have had a great, if not the
principal hand in the late mischiefs.

Some few Leagues to the South of Kennibeck lies that famous and spacious Haven
called Casco Bay, The North East Cape of which is made by an Island called
Saguin; The Southern or opposite point of Land is called Cape Elizabeth, which
is in the Bosom of this Bay, being about eight or nine Leagues over at the
mouth of it, and abundance of small Islands, many of them being inhabited by
Fishermen, and others; one of the principal of that sort, is called Jewels
Island. There are many places about this Bay fit to make commodious
habitations; and on the South side of it is a small Village called Falmouth;
All, or most of it, lately destroyed by the Indians.

Not far from Casco to the Southward, or South-west, still is a River called
Spurnuik, over against which lies Richmond Island, not far from the main Land,
being divided therefrom by a small Channel foordable at Low water; It has for
a long time been the Seat of Mr. Jordan, in right of Mr. Winter, the former, if
not the first promoter thereof whose daughter he married.

The next Plantation Southward is called Scarborough, a small Village seated
upon black point, over against which is another point, for distinction from the
former called blue point: This black point was lately the Seat of M. Josselin,
being a parcel of the Province of maine, or falling within the Precincts
thereof, and was formerly by Patent granted to the said Josselin or his
Predecessors, since purchased by Mr. Scotto of Boston.

Saco River lies next in order to Pascataqua, a Navigable River; where Major
Philips had a commodious Situation ^ately; at the mouth of which River lies
winter Harbor, encompassed on one side by a Neck of Land, formerly the
Propriety of one Mr. Winter whose Name it still retains, but lately purchased
by Major Pendleton, where he enjoyed a very comfortable Seat and habitation.

There is another Harbor lying a little Southward of Saco made by that which
is called Cape Porpuise; a convenient Seat for Fishermen, as are most of the
other places above named. Between Cape Porpuise and Pascataqua there are but
two small Towns more, (though ambitious of great Names) the one called Wells,
the other York, Wells is seated upon a small River or Creek affording a small
Harbor fit only for Barks and smalle^ Vissels; on each side of which Town
lies a small River, the first called Kennibunk, the second Maguncuck the other
Town is called York, formerly known by the Name of Agamenticus, from an high
Hill of that Name not far off therefrom. The point of Land which lies between
the said Towns, is called Cape Nidduck, making a small Harbor likewise, into
which issues another pretty River, on the Banks of which is Situate the Town
of York. All or most of the forementioned Towns and Plantations are seated
upon and near, some River greater or lesser, whose streams are principally
improved for driving of Sa^-Mills; Those late Inventions, so useful for
destruction of Wood and Timber, specially of Fur Trees, which do so abound in
those Coasts; that there is scarce a River or Creek in those parts that has
not some of those Engine^ erected upon them.

The upper Branches of the famous River of Pascat^qua, being also employed all
of them that way, namely, Stu^geon Creek, Salmon Falls, Newechewannick,
Quechecho, Oyster River, Swamscot, Greenland, Lamprey-Eele River, together with
the Towns of Exeter, and Dover, seated upon, or near some of the main Branches
thereof, whose principal Trade is in Deal Board^, cut by those Saw-Mills,
since their Rift Timber is near all consumed. On each side of that brave
Navigable River of Pascataqua down toward the mouth of it, are seated on the
North side the Town of Kittary (a long scattering Plantation made up of several
Hamlets.) on the South side the Town of Portsmouth, to which belongs the great
Island, lying in the mouth of the said River, a place of considerable Trade,
these late years, the which together with Strawberry Bank the upper part of the
said Town of Portsmouth, are the Magazine, and chief, or only place of Commerce
and Trade for all the Plantations, betwixt it, and Casco Bay; All the said
Plantations have in these last two years, viz. 1675. 1676. felt more or less of
the Rage and Cruelty of the Barbarous and perfidious Indians belonging to that
side of the Country, As shall more particularly be declared in what follows,
after a short discourse of the first planting that side of the Country which
may serve as a kind of Prologue to the following Tragedy.

This part of New England began first to be planted about the same time with
Virginia, viz. in the year 1606. There the first Letters Patents granted by the
King for the Limitation of Virginia, did extend from 34 to 44 Degrees of North
Latitude, and was divided into two parts, namely the first, and the second
Colony; The former was appropriated to the City of London, The other, to the
Cities of Bristol, Exeter, and Town of Plymouth, each of which had Laws,
Privileges, and Authority for the Government, and advancing their several
Plantations alike, As says, Capt. Smith in his general History of Virginia,
and New England. This second Colony of New England promising but little
Advantage to the Undertakers, by reason of its Mountainous and Rocky
Situation, found but few Adventurers forward to promote the planting thereof,
after the death of Sir John Popham, who was the first that ever procured men,
or means to possess it; for when the main Pillars are removed, what can be
expected but that the whole building should fall to the ground. Yet,
notwithstanding the discouragements the first Planters met withal in their
first Winter seasoning, in that cold and rocky desert (which made them all
return home in the year 1608) did Sir Francis Popham his Son, having the Ships
and Provision which remained of the Company, and supplying what was necessary
for his purpose, send diverse times to the Coasts for Trade and Fishing, of
whose loss or gain, as says my Author, himself was best able to give account.
And some of the Ships sent by him, and the Earl of Southhampton, with other
Noble Adventurers, did bring home some of the Natives of the place in one of
the next following years, by whose Informations, some of the first Undertakers
were encouraged once more to try the verity of their hopes, and see if possibly
they might find something that could enduce a fresh Resolution to prosecute so
pious and Honorable a work.

But in the mean time before there was yet any Speech, or endeavor to settle
any other Plantation in those parts, That about Saga de hook being thus
abandoned for the present by the first Undertakers, The Frenchmen immediately
took the opportunity to settle themselves within our Limits, which being
understood by those of Virginia, they discreetly taking into their
consideration the inconveniences that might arise by suffering them to harbor
there, Sir Samuel Argal was sent with Commission to displace them, which he
with great discretion, de^terity and Judgment performed about the year 1613.
The which made way for the Plantation at Nova Scotia, granted afterward by
King James to Sir William Alexander one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Council of Scotland. The said Argal seized the Forts which the Frenchmen had
built at Mount Mansel, St. Croix, and Port Rual, and carried away their
Ordnance, with other Provisions to the Colony of Virginia, to their great
Benefit. The said places were held by the English diverse years after, till
about the year 1635. by Commission from the Scotch Lord aforesaid, but how his
right came afterward to be alienated to any of the French Nation, does not
concern us with Reference to the business in hand, further to enquire.

Things remaining in this posture for the space of near seven years, some of
the first Adventurers apprehensive of better hopes of good that might ensue by
a fresh Attempt, Resolved to set the design a foot a second time, to which End
several Ships were sent on that account in the year 1615. but with as bad
Success as the former; for in the year before, viz. 1614. Capt. Smith desirous
to promote the Colony of New England, as well as that of Virginia came thither
with two Vessels, and returned back to England in the lesser of them, with
intent to be there again that next year, to promote the said Plantation; But
after he was gone, one Thomas Hunt master of the Ship, he left behind, like a
wicked Varlot, to prevent the carrying on the Plantation, that he and a few
Merchants might wholly enjoy the benefit of the Trade of the Country, after he
had made his Voyage, seized upon four and twenty of the poor Innocent Natives,
that in confidence of his honesty, had put themselves into his hands, then
clapping them under Hatches, carried them away to Malego, whither he was bound
with the fish he had made upon the Coast, for that Market: But this vile act,
although it kept him for ever after from any more employment in those parts,
yet that was the least part of the mischief that attended his wicked practice;
for upon the Arrival of the Adventurers Ships the next year; Two Natives of
the place that had been some years in England, and coming back unto the said
Ships, as soon as they understood the injury so Treacherously done to their
Country men, they contracted such an hatred against our whole Nation, that
although one of the said Natives dyed soon after, yet the other called Epenow,
studied how to be Revenged, which he so far found means to Effect, that he
frustrated this second Attempt of settling a Plantation in these parts.

Yet did not the Adventurers cast off all hope of carrying on their design,
wherein Providence within a few years after so favored them, that one or more
of the Salvages called Tisquamtum and Samoset, carried away by Hunt, was
brought back to Newfound Land, from whence he was soon after conveyed by the
prudent endeavor of Capt. Mason (then Governor of the Plantation begun upon
Newfound Land) into the hands of some of the Adventurers by whose means they
hoped to work a peace betwixt the said Natives on that Coast where the fire had
been kindled before; for the Adventurers employed Capt. Thomas Darmer, a
prudent and industrious Gentleman to settle the affairs of the Plantation, now
a third time revived again about Kennibeck, in the year 1619, or thereabouts.
By his prudence and care a lasting peace was made betwixt the Natives of the
place, and the English, who were but a little before so abhorred by them, for
the wrong formerly received, so as the Plantation began at last to prosper, and
continue in good liking, and Assurance of the Friendship of their Neighbors,
that had been lately so exasperated against them. This Tisquantum
forementioned, was not a little Instrumental, and helpful to the Plantation
begun at New Plymouth about the following year, viz. 1620. in their weak
beginnings, there being frequent mention of his Name, as also of one Samoset, a
Native of the same place, by the like Providence brought back to Kennibeck, and
from thence with Tisquantum came to the New-planters at Patuxet, or Plymouth,
and brought them into acquaintance with Massasoit, the great Sachem about those
parts; without whose Friendship that new Plantation would hardly have subsisted
long.

This Story premised is the more to be minded in this place, because the
Friendship upon the means and occasions aforesaid, confirmed betwixt the
Indians in these Eastern parts, and the English, had continued steadfast and
Constant to this year, when it was broken by another Treacherous and wicked
practice, of a like nature, and parrallel to that of the foresaid Hunt. As may
more fully be declared afterward.

Possibly the like sacisfaction may prove the more probable means to procure a
settled peace. But to return, whence this Digression has been made. Some years
were spent to bring things to this Issue: The Adventurers were put to much care
and pains before they could get their Patent confirmed, and Renewed again; many
Obstructions they met withal from some Interlopers that began to look into the
Trade of this Country, and would irregularly have had a share therein, or made
it common to all Traders, to which End they petitioned to a Parliament then
called, to bring about their Ends, but at the last it was settled firmly in the
hands of sundry Noble and worthy Patentees, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Merchants, commonly known by the Name of the Council of Plymouth, who had the
absolute power under the King, for making all Grants, and disposing of all
Lands from the 40th. to the 48th. Degrees of North Latitude; All which was
accomplished about the year 1621. Some printed Relations that speak of these
Transactions, write much of the flourishing state, and hopeful prosperity of
this Plantation, published about forty or fifty years since, yet did it never
appear by what followed, that any considerable Advantage did ever accrue to the
first Undertakers from this their New-Plantation of the Eastern parts, unless
by the Trade of Fish, and Furrs, which latter continued not long; As for the
former, The chief benefit redounded only to them that managed it by their own
particular Stocks, and personal Endeavors: And if without offense it may be
spoken, the multitude of Patents soon after granted to several Gentlemen of
Broken Fortunes, have provided but places of an Honorable Exile or
Confinement, whither many deserving persons of better Education then Fortune,
were sent to shift for themselves in a Foreign Land, without being further
Troublesome to those nearer home, on whom they had their hopes and Dependence;
yet it must not be denied but that some of the Undertakers were at vast
Expenses, casting their Bread upon these waters, where none of their Friends
and Relations have as yet had opportunity to find it. The Reason of which is
not hard to give, in Reference to all those Lands and Territories that lie to
the Eastward of Pascataqua River. One main Cause has been the multiplicity of
Grants and Patents for the dividing of the said Tract of Land, for beside the
strife that has been occasioned by the Intricacy and indistinctness of their
Liberties and Bounds, (enough to have maintained a greater number of Lawyers,
then ever were the Inhabitants) If the Grantees had been supplied with monyes
proportionable to their writts and Controversies about their bounds and
Jurisdictions, which sometimes they have been ready to decide with their
Swords, witness those fatal Names imposed on such Accounts upon some places
belonging to those parts, as Bloody point, Black and Blew point, and every
considerable Parcel of Land being by Patent granted to several particular
persons, hindered the erecting of Town-ships and Villages, which if it had been
otherwise disposed of, might have been full of Towns, and well peopled, and
thereby the Inhabitants had been able to have stood upon their Guard, and
defended themselves against the common Enemy, whereas now they were but like
scopae dissolutae, or like his Arrows that being bound up in one bundle could
not be broken by an ordinary Force, but being loose, were easily snapt asunder,
by any single hand. Another Reason might be, the employing of such Agents and
Instruments as either wanted Skill or Fidelity to manage what they were
betrusted with, which made many of the Adventurers long ago complain, that (in
stead of Bills of Exchange and other Returns which they expected) they received
nothng but large Inventoryes of the wants of their several Plantations, and the
Servants sent over to improve them, which were all the Returns that many of
them ever received for the large Sums of money many disbursed for the carrying
on their affairs A third Reason may be the several Changes of Government the
Inhabitants have passed under, which have occasioned not only much vexation,
and Expenses to such as were upon the place; but much discouragement to several
others, who by the commodiousness of the Soil, would willingly have chosen
Station in those parts, had they seen any hope of a settled Government, ever
like to have been obtained; which is not hard to demonstrate, by giving a
little touch as we pass along, on the several changes of Government, the places
forementioned have been molded into, and the several Proprietours of, have
claimed Interest in the Land. In the year 1624. A Patent was granted by the
Council of Plymouth, the grand Proprietours, to Captain Mason for a large Tract
of Land about Pascataqua, but it not being distinctly bounded, himself, with
Sir Ferdinando Gorges obtained a joint Patent in the year 1629. for the Land
betwixt Saga de-Hock East, and Naum Keag West, but that also interferring with
the Bounds ganted before that time to sundry Gentlemen and Merchants that had
obtained a Patent from the South of Charles River to the Northward of
Merrimack; Capt. Masons bounds were afterward by Consent, (as is said) of his
Agent or Agents, reduced to some Branches about Pascataqua River (who yet could
not agree with those that acted in the Name of Shrewsbury men) but being wholly
neglected by the pretended Proprietour or his Successors, (till of late days)
was by the desire of the Inhabitants yielded up to the Massachusetts Government,
near twenty years since.

In the year 1630. A Patent was granted by the said Council of Plymouth (signed
by the Earl of Warwick, and Sir Ferdinando Gorgeri, and sealed with the common
Seal of the Council aforesaid) to John Die, Thomas Impe, Grace Harding, and John
Roach of London, for a large Tract of Land on the South of Saga-de Hock forty
mile square by the Sea side, and so up into the Country: John Die before said,
and his Partners took in another as Partner, and Associate with them, Mr.
Richard Dummer of Newbury in New England, in the year 1638. to whom they
delivered the Oreginal Patent, with an order from them and in their Name, to
take up the Land described in the Patent, but, he being denied opportunity to
Effect it, as also a Ship formerly sent by the Patentees for that End, not
accomplishing their desire, they not long after sold all their Interest in the
said Patent, to one Mr. Rigby a Lancashire Gentleman, who made Mr. Cleaves his
Agent to manage the business of his purchased Interest in the said Patent; To
whom Mr. Dummer was ordered to deliver the Original Patent, which accordingly
he did: what trouble was occasioned soon after between the said Mr. Cleaves and
Mr. Vines Agent for Sir Ferdinando Gorges, is well known to the Inhabitants of
the place, and need not be here mentioned; nor yet how the said Mr. Rigby came
afterward to loose his Interest (at least with the Inhabitants) in the Patent.

In the year 1632. Sir Ferdinando Gorges not resting in the joint Patent
obtained for himself, and Capt. Mason, obtained a distinct Patent for himself,
and got it confirmed by King Charles the first of blessed and famous memory,
for all that large Tract of Land from Saga-de-hock to Pascataqua River, and so
about an hundred miles up into the Country, by the Name of the Province of
Maine. What benefit and Improvement was ever made thereof by his Agents, or
Successors, is best known to themselves; But for the Inhabitants, who upon one
account or another had been induced, either by any precedaneous grant or
liberty from himself, or his Agents, to take up any Land within the Bounds of
the said Province; They finding much inconvenience and trouble for want of an
orderly and settled Government, did at the last petition the general Court of
the Massachusetts to be taken under their Jurisdiction and Government (reserving
the Liberties and Privileges of their former purchases and Grants, as to
Title, possession and propriety to themselves) which was granted them, though
not only, and altogether upon the grounds on which it was desired by the
Petitioners. Yet notwithstanding all this, were not things settled either to the
comfort or content of the Inhabitants: for sometimes some demanded Right of
Jurisdiction over them by virtue of Sir Ferdinando's Patent, sometimes
Commissioners employed by his Highness the Duke of York, attempted to settle a
Government amongst the people, sometimes they tried what might be done by
Agreement amongst themselves, but after their Return for England, by one means
or other, the Government relapsed again into the hands of the Massachusetts,
although a Supersedeas thereunto seems to have been put by an order from his
Majesty this last year.

By these several Vic^ssitudes and changes of Government, the flourishing of
the said Province has been much obstructed, which else might have been much
advanced, and the Inhabitants been put into a Capacity to have secured
themselves against the late Barbarous Incursions of the Indians; and possibly
those Exorbitancies that many of the present Proprietours have run into, to the
just provocation of the Indians, might thereby have been prevented, and so the
mischief also which has ensued, might thereby have been averted: For a well
ordered Government would never have suffered those things that now were
connived at, which if they had been timely looked into by such as had absolute
or positive and unquestioned power of Rule in their hands, would have been
otherwise ordered, the present mischief that is come upon those places, might
thereby have been, if not prevented, yet more easily redressed, then now is
like to be.

As for the Tract of Land that lies Eastward beyond Kennibeck, betwixt that and
Pemmaquid, it is said to have belonged to one Mr. Aldworth, and his
Successors; who was Alderman of Bristol, and one that had a Patent thereof,
and employed some as his Agents, that did sometimes reside upon the place; And
was lately settled in some order of Government by his Highness the Duke of Yorks
Commissioners, by whom also was an Agreement made betwixt the Sagamores of the
Indians in those parts, and the English, at a Court kept by their Appointment
in Kennibeck, which if it had been observed, might in all probability have
prevented in great measure the quarrel which is now fallen out betwixt the
English and the said Indians: For upon some Jealousies of the Rising of those
Indians about twelve or thirteen years since, it was agreed, that if any
mischief should happen to be done by the English or Indians, one against
another, though it were to the killing any person, neither side should right
themselves, but complaint should be made to the Sagamores if the Indians did
the wrong, and to the Court, if it were done by the English, Both which did
promise satisfaction should be made, for the preventing any quarrel: The Names
of the Sachems, as likewise of them that were in power at the Court, do still
remain upon public Record. But matters of Government in those parts being
since collapsed; no Authority more then what was merely voluntary and
persuasive being owned. Things are now brought to that miserable state, which
follows next to be declared.

Ever since the first settling of any English Plantation in those parts about
Kennibeck for the space of above fifty years the Indians always carried it
fair, and held good Correspondence with the English, until the News came of
Philips Rebellion, and Rising against the Inhabitants of Plymouth Colony in the
End of June 1675. After which time, it was apprehended by such as had the
Examination of the Indians about Kennibeck, That there was a general surmise
amongst them, that they should be required to assist the said Philip, although
they would not own, that they were at all engaged in the Quarrel. The like
Jealousy did appear in all the Indians that inhabited to the Eastward of
Pascat^qua, which plainly shows that there was a design of a general Rising of
the Indians against the English, all over the Country, (possibly as far as
Virginia, the Indians there making Insurrection the same year,) and that many
if not most of them were willing it should succeed, although the Elder and
wiser of them liked it not, fearing the Issue, as they had cause: But many of
the young men about Casco Bay, and Amonoscoggan were certainly known to flock
thither the last year, and did, sundry of them, come short home. Forherein they
acted but like Salvages, as those in Virginia did, fifty year before, showing
themselves friendly and Courteous to their new neighbors, till they had an
opportunity to do them mischief. So that notwithstanding many of the
Inhabitants in the Eastern, as well as in the Western parts of the Country,
that were wont to Trade with the Indians, were not willing to believe any such
purpose amongst them, but were ready to think, some of the Ruder sort of the
Engglish, by their imprudent and irregular actings, had driven them into this
Rebellion; yet is it too to evident, that the said Indians (who naturally
delight in bloody and deceitful actions (did lay hold of any opportunity that
might serve for a pretense to be put upon their barbarous practices. The
Indians about Wammeset and Pascataqua, that had joined with their Country men
in their rising against the English the last winter, when they were pinched
with hunger in the cold Winter following returned back to the English, and
desired to make peace, and firmly engaged to continue their wonted Friendship;
yea, some of them, as if they were really sorry for their murders, and
Cruelty, of their own voluntary motion came with the Prisoners they had taken,
and resigned them up to the English; yet when their own Ends were Answered, and
another opportunity was offered of doing further mischief of like nature: they
presently returned to their former practice, as is well known of Simond and
Andrew, that had killed some, and led others Captive in the last spring from
Bradford and Haverhill, who came in the End of June to Major Walderns, bringing
home English Prisoners with them, yet did the very same Indians within less
then two Months after join with the Amonoscoggan and Kennibeck Indians, in a
committing the sad tragedies that were list acted in those parts; Yet was he
and the other his Partner suffered to escape, for want of sufficient guarding
the Prison, where they were put, in order to further Trial. But sero sapiunt
Phryges; It is hoped that we shall after some few more Experiences of this
nature, learn to beware of this subtle Brood, and Generation of Vipers, ever
since Enmity was put between the Seed of the woman and the Seed of the Serpent;
It has been the portion of her Seed in every Generation, and in every Nation
to meet with the sad Effects of that Enmity; Nor can they ever expect to find
better dealing from any of the other sort, further then either fear of their
power, or hope of benefit by their favor, may induce them to another
disposition, as we the Inhabitants of New England have found by this late, and
sad Experience in Reference to these Pagans in the West amongst whom our Lot is
cast, they proving, as one says of the Mahometans in the East, like a nest of
Hornets, that if any one of them chance to be provoked, they will be all about
his Ears that comes near them. But it is now time to begin with the particulars
of the Tragedy it self, that the Reader account not the Prologue too long. It
was on the 24th. of June 1675. when the first mischief was done by the Indians
about Mount-Hope, before twenty days were over, the fire began to kindle in
these the most remote and most Northerly bounds of the said Country, or two
hundred and fifty miles distance, and upon this occasion; July the 11th. 1675.
A Letter was brought to Kennibeck from one Henry Sawyer an Inhabitant of York,
signifying the news of the Indians rising about Plymouth, and that a course was
taken to disarm the indians along the shore. This rumor did so far awaken the
Inhabitants of those parts that the very next day at a general meeting of the
English at one Capt. Pattisbals bouse, several offered themselves as
Volunteers, to go up the said River of Kennibeck, to make discovery of the
Indians Fidelity, or else to fight them, if occasion were. The third day after,
marching up the River to Quegeseck, they met with the Inhabitants of Ships Cot
River, which is a River lying about twelve or fourteen miles to the North East
of Kennibeck. Diverse of the Indians thereabouts, by the persuasions of one Mr.
Walker, that used to trade with them, brought down an inconsiderable part of
their Ammunition, as a few Guns, a little Powder and Shot, with a few knives:
About seven of the Kennibeck Indians, and five of those called Ammoscogging
Indians, about Pegypscot, (a river more Southward toward Casco) made this show
of bringing in their Arms Capt. Lake, Capt. Partishal, with Mr. Wiswal, in
whose hands was settled a kind of military power for those parts, were sent for
to examine the said Indians further, of whom upon Examination they saw Reason
to suspect some, if not all, whereupon they sent Messengers the second time to
the Ammoscogging Indians; and also a Letter to Mr. Walker, to send down their
Arms and Ammunition to them for their greater Security. After Mr. Wiswal was
returned home, the five Ammoscogging Indians aforesaid brought in their Guns,
but with no good intent probably; for an Indian called Sown, having an Axe in
his hand, struck at one Hosea Malier a French man, but was prevented from doing
him mischief, however the said Indian was presently bound and put into a
Cellar. Some of the English that used to Trade with those Indians were ready to
excuse the Indian, saying he was drunk, or that he was a distracted Fellow,
but Mr. Wiswall with the other two examinants, looked upon those as mere
Excuses, and altogether groundless, for one of them to this day affirms, that
he was as Rational and sensible as any of the rest.

The ancient Indians being asked what they thought was meet to be done in the
said Case, said, he was worthy to dye for such an affront, yet they would be
glad if his life might be spared, offering to be jointly bound in his behalf,
to pay forty Beaver Skins at the next Fall-Voyage, giving their hands in token
of their Fidelity, and also leaving their Arms in the hands of the English as a
Pledge of their faithful keeping those Articles of Peace concluded on betwixt
them. If they proved themselves honest men, they were to have their Arms
delivered them again, which was accordingly performed the last June, 1676. They
having in the mean time carried themselves peaceably toward the English. The
day after, viz. July 19. 1675. An Indian of great note amongst them, called
Robin hood with great Applause of the rest, made a dance, and sung a Song to
declare their content in what was transacted. And so they parted, setting the
Indians at liberty, that had engaged thus for their friend Sown, the Indian;
but yet to this day one Skin of Beaver was never paid to the English, as was
promised; The Indians all this time were well provided for of victuals by Capt.
Lake, with other supplies of Rhum and Tobacco, even to the disgusting of some
English then present.

But the Indians left as Hostages upon Sowens account, how Civilly soever they
were treated, ran all away at the last, trusting more to the Celerity of their
own feet, then to the Civility of their English Friends; who after they were
escaped, joined with a parcel of their Fellows soon after about twenty in all,
in robbing the house of one Mr. Purchase an ancient Planter about Pegypscot
River, and a known Trader with the Indians, what ever wrong may be pretended by
the said Indians, as done them in their Trading, (of which more may be spoken
afterward) that will no whit excuse their perfidious Treachery, and falsehood
in breaking Covenant with the English, dissembling, and seeking all Advantages
of Cruelty against their English Neighbors, of which in the following Winter
and Summer, 1676. there will be a more full and undeniable discovery. This was
done in the beginning of September, 1675. Those Indians that first assaulted
Mr. Purchase his house, did no other mischief, save plundering it of strong
Liquor, and Ammunition, also killing a Calf or two, with a few Sheep, but no
more then what they eat, and spoiling a Feather bed by ripping it open, to turn
out the Feathers, contenting themselves with the Case, which they might more
easily carry away. They offered no incivility to the Mistress of the house,
(her husband, and her Sons, being at that time from home) yet one of her Sons
approaching near the house, and finding it possessed of those new Inhabitants,
he rode away with all speed, and yet no faster then there was need; for an
Indian followed him with a Gun under his Coat, to have shot at him, if he could
by his flattery, and dissembling, have got him within the reach of his Piece.

It is said, that at the first they used fair words, and spoke of Trading, but
as they went away, told those of the house, that there were others coming after
that would deal far worse with them, which within a short time after came to
pass, for these were but the messengers of Death, which was soon after
inflicted, and that in a most Barbarous manner upon sundry Inhabitants of the
Neighboring Plantations.

The English in those parts being much incensed hereat, Twenty five of them
soon after going up Cas^o Bay in a Sloop and two Boats to gather Indian Corn,
and to look to what they had upon the said Bay near Amocoscoggen River; when
they came near the houses, they heard a knocking, and a noise about the houses,
and presently espied two or three Indians, who did not yet see them: The
English being come a good way from their Vessel, endeavored to get between the
Indians, and the woods, which when they perceived, they ran toward the water
side, but the English in pursuit killed one of them, and wounded another, who
yet escaped away in a Canow cross the River, a third running back toward the
woods, fled to the other Indians, and acquainted them with what was done, who
presently came down, and lay in wait to intercept the English, that thought of
no danger, but scattered themselves all about the place to gather their Corn,
and lade the Boats therewith, but before they were ready to go away, The
Indians coming down, fi^ed upon them, and forced them all into the Sloop; had
not some of them been better prepared then the rest, they might all have been
cut off, for some little resistance being made by them that were ready with
their Guns, it gave the rest an opportunity to get all into the Sloop; yet not
without many wounds: So with much ado, they all escaped with their lives,
leaving the two Boats almost laden with Corn for a prey to the Indians, who
presently burned one, and plundered the other of all that was therein; some are
ready to think that the English did imprudently to begin the Quarrel, and not
first enquire into what the Indians were about in the house, and seek Redress
according to the forementioned Agreement, made at the Court in Kennibeck. But
if this happened after what follows next to be related viz. that which was done
to Old Waterly, and his Family; (the English can be blamed for nothing, but
their negligence and Security, in that having alarmed their enemies, they stood
not better upon their guard), which is not very certain. For it is thought that
within a few days after, or the next week more horrible outrage was committed
upon the Family of an ancient man, whose Name was Waterly, an Inhabitant of
Casco Bay, who had some years before removed from Gloucester, or Cape Anne out
of some discontent, which afterward he often bewailed, resolving either to
have returned back, or else to have removed to some securer place, but he was
arrested by the Sons of violence, before he could Effect his purpose. This old
man with his wife, his Son, and his daughter in Law (at that time great with
Child) with three grand Children were cruelly murdered by those barbarous
Salvages, at one time: another of his grand Children was taken alive, and led
into Captivity, a daughter of his was said to be carried to Narhagauset, which
shows they joined with the Southern Indians in the Rebellion; when once these
Indians had embrued their hands in English blood, they were emboldened to the
like bloody Attempts in the Adjacent places.

This Waterly lived so far from Neighbors, or else was encompassed with Creeks
or Rivers, that no Relief could presently be sent to him, however Lieut.
Ingerson of Casco the next day with a File of men, repaired to the place where
his house-stood, to see what was the Reason of the Fire they discerned the day
before, there they found the house burned to ashes, the bodies of the old man
and his wife half consumed with the fire, the young woman killed, and three of
the grand Children, having their brains dashed out, and their bodies were laid
under some Oaken Planks, not far from the house; one girl of about eleven
years old, was carried Captive by them, and having been carried up and down the
Country some hundreds of miles, as far as Narhaganset Fort, was this last June
returned back to Major Walderns, by one Squando the Sagamore of Saco; A strange
mixture of mercy and Cruelty.

Soon after Capt. Bonithon's and Major Philips Dwellings were assaulted, one on
the East, the other on the West side of Saco River. It is said, they had
seasonable notice of what was intended against them, by their Barbarous
Enemies, Those Amonoscoggan Indians; viz. by an Indian of Saco, their
Neighbor, better minded then the rest of his Country men: who observing a
strange Indian coming to his Wigwam in Company with some of his acquaintance,
one of whom informed him, after the rest, (with the stranger) were gone; That
the said stranger came from the Westward, and that his business was to persuade
the Eastern Indians to fall upon the English in their dwellings here, as the
rest had done to the Westward. Captain Bonithon, either upon this Information,
or upon the knowledge of what was done a little before at Casco, had left his
house, and was retired over the River with his Family to Major Philips his
Garrison. Thus two are better then one: for otherwise, both might have been
destroyed: For upon the 18th. of September following, being the 7th. day of the
week, about eleven a Clock, they at Major Philips his Garrison saw Capt.
Bonithon's house on fire on the East side of Saco River, which by the good
Providence of God was to them as the firing of a Beacon, giving them notice to
look to themselves, their Enemies being now come; for otherwise, they might to
their great disadvantage have been too suddenly surprised, for within half an
hour after, they were upon them, when a Sentinel placed in the Chamber gave
notice that he saw an Indian by the Fence side, near a Corn Field, Major
Philips not willing to believe till he might see with his own Eyes, ran hastily
up; another of his men, coming after, cried Mr. what mean you? do you intend to
be killed, at which words, he turned suddenly back from the window, out of
which he was looking, when presently a Bullet struck him on the shoulder,
grazing only, upon it without breaking the bone. The Indians upon the shot,
thinking he had been slain thereby, (as they heard afterward) gave a great
shout, upon which they discerned that they were surrounded by them, whereupon
they presently fired on the Enemy from all Quarters, and from the Flankers of
the Fortification, so as they wounded the Captain of the Indians, who presently
leaving the Assault retired three or four miles from the place, where be soon
after dyed, as they were informed: He counseled them to leave the siege, but
they were resolved not so to quit the place; nor were those within less
resolute to defend it: one of the best men was soon after disabled from any
further Service, by a wound which he received in one of the Volleys made upon
them by the Assaylants; But that no whit daunted the rest of the Defendants,
who continuing still firing amain upon the Enemy: This Dispute lasted about an
hour, after which the Enemy despa^ring to take the house by Assault, thought
upon a device how to burn it.

First, firing the house of one of his Tenants, then his Saw-Mill, after that
his Corn Mill, hoping by that means to draw them out of the Garrison to put out
the fire, but missing of their purpose in that, they called out, you English
Cowardly Dogs, come out and quench the Fire: They continued this sport all the
afternoon, continually almost without any Intermission firing upon them: The
besieged hoped for Relief from the Town, but none came, The Major still
encouraging his men to stand it out, which they manfully did all that night,
when they were alarmd almost every half hour: and betwixt whiles they could
hear their Axes and other Instruments, knocking about the Mills till the next
day: They within the house conceived they were preparing some Engine wherewith
to burn the house, which proved accordingly, for about 4 or 5 a Clock in the
morning at the setting of the Moon, the Major was called by his men to look
out, when he saw a Cart with four Wheels, having a Barricado built in the fore
part, to keep off Shot, and filled with combustible matter, birch rindes,
straw, powder, and Poles twenty Foot long, apt to fire the house: he bid them
let them drive it within Pistol shot, before they made any shot against them;
His men were a little discouraged at the sight of this Engine: but he bid them,
be of good Courage, and use the means, putting their trust in God, who, he was
confident would deliver them: The Cart, when brought a little nearer, became
unweildy by Reason of the Barricado planted in it, and being to pass through a
small gutter, one Wheel stuck fast in the Slough, which brought the Cart
suddenly to the Left, whereby the Drivers lay all open to their right Flanker,
when presently they fired upon them out of the said Flanker, and having so fair
a shot upon them, and not being above Pistol shot from the place, they killed
six of the Enemy, and wounded fifteen, as they found afterward, which no doubt
made them too late to repent of their Resolution, not to follow their Captains
Counsel and Example in leaving the Siege; for now they presently departed: So
as at Sun rise, they within the house espied forty of them marching away, but
how many more were in the Company they could not tell.

The Indians it seemed went toward Blue point, where it is said they killed
several persons: but those in the house feared they went for more help, and
expected their Return, but it seems their Courage failed them, as to another
Attempt, upon an house so well garrisoned, and manfully defended. Major Philips
sent to the Town for help, acquainting them with what had passed, but none was
sent them, either that day, or the next, so as having spent almost all their
Ammunition, the people that were with him, would not be persuaded to tarry
longer, then the Monday morning: which constrained him and his Family to remove
to the Town; about a Fortnight after, the Indians hearing thereof, came and
burnt down the empty house. There were fifty persons in the said house during
the time of the Siege, and but ten able hands; they had five more that could do
something, but through Age, or minority, not able to make any notable
Resistance; yet so it pleased God, in whose hands are all men's lives and limbs,
and who is never wont to fail them, who in time of danger are ready so to
confide in his power, and goodness, as not to neglect the use of due means for
their own Preservation, so to order things, that not one person of all those
fifty, was either killed, or mortally wounded. Major Philips himself was
wounded, but not dangerously at the beginning of the Assault, his M^l's with
other Edifices were the first day burned by the Enemy, and so were all the
houses at Saco, or most of them soon after, that were above the Fisher-mens
stages. One Mrs. Hitcock being carried Captive by the Enemy from the same
place, dyed in the Winter following, by eating some poisonous Root, in stead of
a ground nut, as was reported by the Indians afterward.

Much about the same time, five persons going up to the River of Saco, were all
killed by the same Indians.

These Tragedies being thus acted at Casco Bay, and Saco, those Barbarous
Enemies dispersed themselves in parties, intending to do all the mischief they
could to all the English, inhabiting about that side of the Country; In the
same Month of September they came down toward Pascataqua, doing the like
Spoil upon the Inhabitants of the several Branches of that River, which they
had been doing elsewhere; In the first place they burned the two Cheslyes
houses about Oyster River, and killed two men that were passing along the River
in a Canoo; and carried away an old Irishman, with a young man taken from
about Exceter, who yet both of them soon after made an escape to a Garrison at
Salmon-Falls in Kittary by the help of an Indian better minded then the rest,
the first after seven weeks, the other after a Months Captivity.

Much about that time, one Goodman Robinson of Exceter with his Son were
traveling toward Hampton, where, as they passed along, they were waylaid by
three Indians, viz. John Samson, Cromwell, and John Linde, who shot down the old
man, whom they left dead upon the place; his Son, hearing the Guns escaped
their hands, by running into a Sw^mp, whither the Indians pursued him, but
could not overtake him, so as he got safe into Hampton about midnight, where he
declared what befell him by the way, and how narrowly he avoided the danger,
intimating likewise, that he feared his Father was killed, which was found too
true, by Lieut. Swet, who the next day with a dozen Soldiers of the Town, went
to search those woods, where they found the poor old man, shot through at his
back, the bullet having pierced through his body, and was stopped by the skin
on the other side: Another of Exceter, called Foulsam, was at the same time
driving a pair of Oxen in the same Road, where, soon after he heard the Report
of the Guns when Robinson was killed, he espied the three Indians creeping upon
their bellies toward him, to do as much for him as they had done for Robinson,
but leaving his Oxen, he put on his horse with all speed, and so was delivered
from the danger that the other fell into, it is reported that one of the
Indians made a shot at him; but he was either gotten out of their reach, or
else they m^ssed their aim at that time. The same Indians had a little before
met with another English man in those woods, one Charles Randlet, whom they
carried Captive, although he soon after escaped out of their hands, by the help
of another Indian called James. It is said there were four Indians of that
Company, and that the fourth was sent away with Randlet, so that there were but
three seen together at the killing, and pursuing the other forementioned. One
of the said Indians, viz. John Samson was killed by some of Capt. Hathorns
Soldiers at Casco Bay in September following 1676. when the Scouts of our
forces came upon the Indians on the sudden, and had a small brush with them;
but all the rest made a shift to get away: As for the other two, viz Cromwell,
and John Linde; one of them, it is said, is since killed, or taken and sold
away, the other is at Kennibeck, whom vengeance may also in due time overtake,
as it has done the other.

Within a few days after that barbarous Fact at Oyster River, two Indians, viz
one named Andrew, and the other Hope-hood, the Son of him called Robin Hood,
assaulted the house of one Tozer at Newechewannick, wherein were fifteen
persons, yet all women and Children, who without all doubt had all of them
fallen into the merciless hands of the two cruel and barbarous Caytiffes, had
not a young maid of about Eighteen years of Age first espied them, who being
endued with more Courage then ordinarily the rest of her Sex use to be, (the
blessing of Jael light upon her) first shut to the door, whereby they were
denied Entrance, till the rest within escaped to the next house, that was
better Fortified; That young Virago kept the door fast against them so long
till the Indians had chopped it in pieces with their Hatchets, when entering the
house, they knocked the poor maid down with their Hatchets, and gave her many
other wounds, leaving her for dead upon the place; after which, they passed on
toward the next dwelling, in their way meeting with two Children, that had
escaped the house first broken open by them, they killed one of them, of three
years old, which could not follow fast enough, or else they that carried it,
could not convey it over a Fence soon enough to save themselves and it; And
carried away the other of seven year old, which yet was returned safe within
half a year after: The poor Maid that had ventured her own Life so far, to save
many others, was by a strange Providence enabled to recover so much strength
after they were gone, as to repair to the next Garrison, where she was soon
after healed of her wounds, and restored to perfect health again.

The next day toward night more of the Barbarous Enemies being gathdred
together they made another Assault upon the neighboring dwellings.

The English, as many as could be spared out of the Garrison, (not above eight
in number) pursued after them about half a mile, but night coming on, it was
judged best to retreat, lest otherwise they might have been Intercepted in
their return home, by any of them lying in Ambush, which is their usual way of
doing mischief. After diverse shot made on both sides, but five of the Enemies
appeared: who yet took the Advantage of Captain Wincals absence, (whose
dwelling was not far off) to burn his house and Barn, with another house, and
two Barns more, wherein was much English Corn; above an hundred Bushels was
supposed to be in one of them. After they had done this mischief they fled away.

The next day after, the same Indians, or others of their Fellows, came upon
the other side of the River, from whence they shot over several times, to some
that were grinding in the Mill, but after the exchanging of many shot on both
sides of the River, betwixt them, six of the Enemy showed themselves in the
Twilight, uttering several Insolent and barbarous Speeches calling our men
English dogs, etc. yet all this while out of reach of their shot, and then they
ran all away like dogs after they had done barking.

After this, those very Indians, as was supposed, burned five or six houses
about Oyster River, and killed two men, viz. one William Roberts and his Son in
Law. The Inhabitants of Do^er, with some other Resolute young men, being much
provoked by these many Insolences, and injuries done by the Enemies, obtained
liberty from the Major of the Regiment, to try whether they could not meet with
some of the Indians, by secret Ambushes, and sculking amongst the Bushes and
Trees, as the Indians used to do with them, to which End about twenty divided
themselves into several small parties: soon after as they were looking after
the Enemy, a party of ours espied five of the Indians, some gathering Corn in
the Field while the rest of them were busied in beating of an Oven to bake some
of the fruit which they gathered also in the same Field.

The English were at such a distance that they could not make any sign to their
Fellows, without being discovered by the Indians in the Field; wherefore two of
them crept as near as they could to the house, at one end of the Field, where
they suddenly rushed upon two of the wretches, and knocked them down with the
Butt end of their Muskets, which was not done so silently, but the other three
in the Field took the Alarm, and fled away, who else might as easily have been
surprised as the other two.

These Outrages thus daily committed, filled all the Plantations about
Pascataqua with fear and confusion; scarce any place, where there was not
either Reason for some to complain of the loss of their Friends, or burning of
their houses; which caused most of them that lived scatteringly, at any
distance from Neighbors, either to garrison their houses, or else to desert
their own dwellings, and to repair to their next Neighbors that were better
fortified then themselves; But all the Inhabitants in those parts in general,
were Alarmed to stand upon their Guard.

On the seventh of October following, being a day of public Humiliation, a man
was shot down as he was riding between two garrison houses about
Newechewannick, and dyed of his wounds within two hours after; About the same
instant of time two young men were shot dead about a mile from that place;
These two had their Arms or Guns with them, which were carried away by them
that killed them, together with their upper garments; It is not said that these
three last, (though killed upon a day of Humiliation) were surprised in their
repairing to, or returning from the place of public worship, which would in a
great measure have abated the sorrow of their sad Funerals, if when they were
suddenly arrested by the Harbingers of Death, they had been found so doing.

Soon after this, they Assaulted another house at Oyster River, the which,
although it was garrisoned, yet meeting with a good old man, whose Name was
Beard without the Garrison, they killed him upon the place, and in a barbarons
manner cut off his head, and set it upon a Pole in derision, not far off about
the same time they burned another house and Barn.

Upon the sixteenth of October being Saturday, about an hundred of the Indiaas
were gathered together, to Assault Newechewannick; They began with one named
Tozer, half a mile from the upper Garrison, at Salmon Falls. The said Tozer was
presently killed his Son taken Captive, (but returned after some Months
Restraint) several Guns being shot at this Assault, Alarmed Lieut. Plaisted at
the next Garrison, who like a man of a public Spirit immediately sent out
seven men from the Garrison under his Command, to see what the matter was, but
being met by an Ambush laid in the way as they went, lost two or three of their
Company, the rest hardly escaping back to the place whence they came,
whereupon, the said Lieut. Plaisted immediately dispatched away a Messenger to
Major Waldern at Quechecho, which because it seems to be the last time that
ever that good and useful man set pen to paper, shall here be Inserted.

Salmon Falls October 16. 1675.
Mr. Richard Waldern and Lieut. Coffin, these are to inform you, that just now
the Indians are engaging us with at least one hundred men, And have slain four
of our men already, Richard Tozer, James Barny, Isaac Bottes, and Tozer Son,
and burnt Benoni Hodsdans house; Sir, if ever you have any love for us, and the
Country, now show your self with men to help us, or else we are all in great
danger to be slain, unless our God wonderfully appear for our Deliverance. They
that cannot fight, let them pray; Not else, but I Rest,

Yours to serve you Roger Plaisted, George Broughton.



What Answer was returned to this importunate and pathetical Letter is not
fully known at present; most probably he that was most concerned in the
Contents of it was either absent from home, or in no Capacity to send the
Relief desired; which if it could have been had, might have prevented the sad
mischief that fell out the next day; when Lieut. Plaisted being more earnestly
bent to perform that last office of love to his deceased Friends, whom he could
not by all his Endeavors save from the danger of death, while they were in the
Land of the living would needs venture himself with twenty Soldiers out of his
Garrison, to fetch off the dead bodies.

To that end he ordered a pair of Oxen to be yoked to bring them to his
Garrison, in order to their Christian buryal, not considering that the Indians
lay sculking thereabouts, waiting for such opportunityes. They went first to
the furthest place, where they found To. Tozers body, and put it into their
Cart, but coming back to take up the other two bodies, which were fallen in a
little Swampe nearer to the Garrison, they were set upon by an hundred and
fifty of the Enemy, that had hid themselves in the bushes, and under a stone
wall, and Loggs in the way as they were to pass; By the sudden noise of the
guns, the Cattle being frighted ran away to the garrison with such of the dead,
as were first laid up thereon, (and possibly with one of them wounded at that
instant) leaving their Owners to fight it out with their Enemies. Lieut.
Plaisted being thus desperately Assaulted, he with his twenty men, was forced
to retreat to a place of better Advantage; but being there so hotly pursued,
they were not able to abide it long; Although they killed and mortally wounded
several of the Indians, as themselves have fince confessed: but they most of
them being so much overmatched, took the opportunity of a fair Retreat, and so
got safe to their Garrison, while Lieut. Plaisted out of the height of his
Courage, disdaining either to fly from, or yield himself (for it is said) the
Indians were loath to kill him, but desirous rather to take him Prisoner) into
the hands of such cursed Caytiffes, did fight it out disperately, till he was
slain upon the place, his Eldest Son and another man were slain in their too
late Retreat, and his other Son was sorely wounded, so that he dyed within a
few weeks after.

The Indians were contented with this mischief for the present (and indeed if
all the English they had to deal with, had showed the like Resolution with this
Plaisted they would not have done half the mischeef, that since has been done
by them) and slunke away into the woods before the next day, when Captain Frost
came up from Sturgeon Creek, (a few miles below the River) with a party of his
friends, and buried the dead: During these onsets, the Enemy also took their
Advantage to burn three houses, and two barns before they left the place.

The latter End of the same Month they burned a Mill near the same place
belonging to Mr. H^tchinson a Merchant of Boston; from whence they came down
lower toward Sturgeon Creek, where they burned one house, and killed two men,
not far from Captain Frost's dwelling, he escaping himself very narrowly, being
shot at by the Enemy, about Ten in Number, who might easily have burned his
house, and taken all that were in it, being but three boys besides himself,
had he not used this policy, to call out to some to march this, and the other
way, to look after the Indians, as if he had had many at hand to Command, which
under God was the means of his escape; for his house was neither Fortified, nor
well manned, yet was far from Neighbors.

The next day the said Indians passed down the River on Kittary side, killed
one man, whose house they first plundered, and then set it on fire; All this
was done just over against Portsmouth, from whence out of a small Battery was
discharged a piece of Ordnance, which by a good Providence was directed so to
fling its shot as it fell very near a party of the Indians, for they were so
affrighted therewith, (if none of them were killed) that they left a good part
of their plunder near the place: They were pursued by some of the English,
before they could recover their home, and by the help of the Snow that fell
about that time, were traced till they were overtaken, but being near a Swamp,
themselves escaped, for have leaving two of their Packs behind them.

Soon after they went up the River again to Quechecho, where they burned an
house, and two or three Barns. Another Party of them got over or beyond the
other branches of Pascataqua River, toward Exceter, and Lampny Eyle River,
where they killed one man: sundry of them were seen in the woods about Exceter;
and between Hampton and Exceter, where they killed one or two men in the woods
as they were traveling homewards, occasioning the people of those Towns to
stand continually upon their guard, which proved a great annoyance to the
Inhabitants.

But to look a little back to the Plantations more Eastward from Pascataqua
River, where these outrages of the Indians first began.

At Casco Bay Lieut. Ingersons Son, with another man going out a fowling about
this time, were both killed before they returned home, his Fathers houses being
burned, with wany others also thereabouts.

At Black point, Lieut. Augur with two more were assaulted by the Indian^,
where after many shot exchanged betwixt them, himself was so wounded, that he
dyed soon after, and his brother also was killed within a few days afterward,
not far from the same place.

When the rising of the Indians first began in those Eastern parts, (with us
called the County of Yorkshire) Captain Wincol of Newechewannick, with some
others, having a Sympathy for the sufferings of the Neighbors, marched up that
way with a small party of men; In his first Skirmish with the Enemy he chanced
to loose two or three of his Company; the rest being not above eleven in all,
as they were marching along by the Sea side were assaulted by a great number of
the Indians, judged to be an hundred and fifty: he being hard beset with so
great a number retreated to an heap of Bolts that lay near the water side, by
the shelter of which they lay safe from the Indians Guns, and so well plied
their few Guns, that they slew many of their Enemies, and put them all to a
kind of Route at the last: After which by the help of an old Canoo, they
recovered safe to the other side of the Bank. But nine Saco men had worse
success, who yet came with a very good Intention to help their friends, upon
the hearing of their Guns; but as they came to Rescue Captain Wincol with his
small party, they themselves fell into an Ambush of the Indians, and so were
all cut off, with two other men also, near the place where the first Skirmish
was, for the Indians from the shore side could discern any that were coming
toward them, when they were a great way off, and so might easily way-lay them,
before they could come up to them. Near upon seven houses were burned about
this time, and some persons killed at Black point.

Two persons likewise were killed at Wells in the beginning of the winter, one
of them were servant to Mr. William Simonds (one of the principal men in the
Town aforesaid) the Gentleman himself with his Family were removed to a
Garrison house in the middle of the Town, his servant going early in the
morning to look after some business there; tarryed longer then was needful to
provide something for himself, the Indians i^^ited themselves to breakfast with
him, making the poor Fellow pay the shot, when they had done, with the loss of
his life.

A week after one Cross was slain at Wells likewise, who was a kind of a
distracted Fellow. Also one Isaac Cousins was there killed in the beginning of
Winter, after there had been some Overtures of peace betwixt Major Waldern and
the Indians.

With such kind of mutual Encounters was the latter part of the year spent
betwixt the Indians and the English from Pascataqua River to Kennibeck, from
the beginning of August to the End of November, wherein many were slain on both
sides: In one place, and in another; of the English in those parts were slain
upward of fifty. The Enemy lost as appeared afterward by their own Confession,
above ninety, partly in the foresaid Skirmishes, and partly in their joining
with the Indians to the Westward, whither it is said, many of them were invited
to repair, to help destroy the English, in hope to enjoy their possessions
afterward; But God had otherwise determined, who did arise at last to save the
meek ones of the Earth, and plead the Cause of his People.

The Governor and Counsel of Massachusetts, had, at this time, their hands full
with the like Attempts of Philip and his Accomplices to the Westward, yet were
not unmindful of the deplorable Condition of these Eastern Plantations; having
committed the care thereof to the Majors of the Respective Regiments of the
several Countyes on that side of the Country, but more especially to the care
and prudence of the Honored Major D. Denison, the Major General of the whole
Colony, a Gentleman, who by his great insight in, and long Experience of all
Martial Affairs, was every way accomplished for the managing that whole Affair;
He had, to ease the other side of the Country, drawn out a sufficient number of
Soldiers from the next Countyes, to have reduced all the Indians Eastward to
their obedience; but just as they were intended to march up to the head
Quarters of the Indians, to fall upon them there, viz. to Ossapy, and
Pigwauchet, about an hundred miles up into the Country Northward.

The Winter setting in so sharp and severe in the beginning of December, and
latter end of November, It was not possible to have marched a days Journey into
the woods, without hazarding all their lives that should venture up; The Snow
being found generally in those woods, four foot thick on the 10th. of December,
so as it was not possible for any to have traveled that way, unless they
carried Rackets under their feet, wherewith to walk upon the top of the Snow:
This alone Consideration forced them to lay aside their design for the
present, but soon after it was done to their hands; for the depth of the Snow,
and sharpness of the cold were so extreme, that the Indians in those parts were
so pinched therewith, that being hunger sta^ved, they began to sue for peace,
making their Address first to Major Waldern on that account, by whose
mediations that whole body of Indians Eastward were brought to an hopeful
Conclusion of peace, which was mutually agreed upon, and possibly might have
remained firm enough to this day had there not been too just an occasion given,
for the breaking of the same by the wicked practice of some lewd persons, which
opened the door, and made way for the bringing in all those sad Calamities, and
mischiefs that have since fallen upon those parts of the Country; As shall
hereafter be declared.

In the latter end of June, 1676 The Indians that had made a general Conspiracy
against the English were strangely dispersed, and dispirited, so as they from
that time began to separate one from another, and every Nation of them to shift
for themselves, as has been already mentioned in the former part of this
Narrative. Canonicus the great Sachem of the Narrhagansets distrusting the
proffers of the English, was slain in the woods by the Mohawks, his Squaw
surrendering her self, by this means her Life was spared.

Many of those about Lancaster, and the places adjoining thereunto, did
cunningly endeavor to hide themselves amongst those Indians about Pascataqua,
that had newly made their submission to the English, by Major Walderns means
and concluded a peace, yet could neither dissemble their nature and disposition
past before from suspicion of mischief, nor yet so artificially conceal their
persons, but they were easily discerned by such as in former times had any
acquaintance with the Eastern Indians by way of Trade, or other Converse:
Whereupon the forces newly raised in the Massachusetts, under the Command of
Captain William Hathorne, and Captain Joseph Syll, designed for the subduing of
those Indians about the River of Merrimack, and Pascataqua, that still stood
out in Hostility against the English, meeting with those under the Command of
Major Waldern aforesaid, and Capt. Frost of Kittary; It was mutually agreed
detwixt those several Commanders to seize upon all those Indians that at that
time were met together about Major Walderns dwelling at Quechecho; The
Contrivement succeeded according to expectation, and all the said Indians were
handsomely surprised, September 6th. 1676. without the loss of any persons
life, either Indian or English; to the number of near four hundred: by which
device, after our Forces had them all in their hands, they separated the
peaceable from the perfidious, that had been our Eeemies, during the late
Troubles; finding above two hundred involved in the former Rebellion, more or
less, accordingly they were sent down to the Governor and Council at Boston;
who adjudged seven or eight of them Immediately to dye; such as were known to
have had their hand in the blood of the English, or that had been shed by their
means, the rest, that were found only Accessaries to the late mischiefs, had
their lives spared, but were sent into other parts of the world, to try the
difference between the Friendship of their Neighbors here, and their Service
with other Masters elsewhere.

Those who had been always either peaceable and true to the English, never
intermedling in the quarrel, as Wannalancet the Sagamore of Pennicook and some
others were quietly dismissed to their own places.

Besides these that were surprised at the time aforesaid; there were several
others, who had been the chief Actors, that were taken up and down in those
woods beyond Merrimack, and so were delivered up to Justice; As John Monoco,
Sagamore Sam, old Jethro, with some others, as has been already mentioned, yet
young Jethro brought in forty at one time. It was a special favor from God, so
to order it, that the Indians aforesaid, were so surprised; for had they
continued in their former Rebellion, and had taken the opportunity to have
joined with the Eastern Indians, as some of them did a few Months before, they
would in all likelihood have utterly destroyed all the Plantations of the
English beyond Pascataqua River; As manifestly appears by the mischief which
was lately done by the means of a few, that by too much Connivence of some in
those parts, that entertained a better opinion of them then it seems they
deserved. For whereas mention formerly was made of a small party of Indians
that on the third of May in this present year, had murdered one Thomas Kembel
of Bradford, and carried away his wife and five Children Captive, yet two or
three of the Actors did, upon what Consideration is not known, retu^n the woman
and Children again within six weeks, and because of their voluntary returning
of them, were dealt more favorably withal; being only put into prison at Dover
for a time, yet possibly conceiving that a prison was but a preparation for a
worse evil, they took an opportunity ( two of the chief Actors in the foresaid
mischief, called the one Simond, the other Andrew) to convey themselves out of
the place of Restraint, and afterward going amongst the Amo^oscoggan and
Kennibeck Indians, have joined with them in those bloody and cruel depredations
lately made in those parts, which follow in order next to be related.

Some little Color or pretense of injury was alleged before those Eastern
Indians began their outrage both in the former, as well as in the present year,
the chief Actor or rather the beginner of all the foresaid mischiefs Eastward,
is one Squando, the Sagamore of Saco Indians, whose Squaw as is said was abused
by a rude and indiscreet act of some English Seamen in the last Summer, 1675.
who either overset the Canoo wherein the said Squaw with her Child were
swimming in a River thereabouts, or else to try whether the Children of the
Indians as they had heard, could Swim as naturally as any other Creatures,
wittingly cast her Child into the water; but the Squaw immediately diving into
the water after it, fetched it up from the bottom of the River, yet it so
falling out that within a while after the said Child dyed, (which it might have
done if no such Affront had been offered) The said Squando Father of the Child
has been so provoked thereat, that he has ever since set himself to do all
the mischief he can to the English in those parts, and was never as yet since
that time truly willing to be Reconciled. Although he is said to have sent home
some that were taken Captive the last year. Surely if their hearts had not been
secretly filled with malice and Revenge before, they might have obtained
satisfaction for the wrong done, at an easier Rate More probable it is, that
this was only an occasion to vent the mischief they formerly had conceived in
their hearts.

There is an injury of an higher nature, mentioned as the ground of their
quarrel with us, who live about Pemmaquid, and Kennibeck, which happened the last
Spring, viz. one Laughton with another person or more who having obtained under
the hand of Major Waldern a warrant to seize any Indians Eastward, that had
been guilty of any Murder or spoil done to the English in those parts; did
most perfidiously and wickedly entice some of the Indians about Cape Sables,
who never had been in the least manner guilty of any injury done to the
English, aboard their Vessel, or else some other way, and then carried them
away to sell them for slaves; which the Indians in those parts look upon as an
injury done to themselves, and have alleged it to the Inhabitants of
Pemmaquid, as one of the principal grounds of their present quarrel: The thing
alleged is too true as to matter of Fact, and the persons that did it were
lately committed to prison in order to their further trial. Yet all those
Indians do, or may know full well that they who did them that wrong, were
liable to due punishment, (or else their quarrel might be accounted just, and
they considered as Indians, must have the more allowance) if they could be
found, nor ever were any countenanced amongst us, that had done them any kind
of injury, nor did those that take upon them the revenging of the injury, know
that they were Inhabitants of this Country that did the wrong; nor was then
ever any orderly Complaint made thereof, but this cannot excuse their
perfidiousness and Cruelty, some other pretenses were alleged by the said
Indians that yet do bear no proportion to the mention of a wrong or injury,
viz. because our Traders were forbidden to sell any Ammunition to any Indians
whatsoever; which those Indians say they cannot live without; yet seeing
themselves, as well as the Westward Indians have so ill improved, that which
they had before, there was little Reason why they should quarrel with us, for
selling no more:

Further also it is affirmed by some persons worthy of Credit, that for diverse
years past have lived in those parts, that the Indians thereabouts, need not
have wanted powder or shot, only they wanted something wherewith to cloak their
malicious and barbarous practices of late committed against us; but there being
different opinions about this point, we shall leave it at the present.

But this being premised in Reference to the pretended ground, or occasion of
the quarrel; It remains that the Effects thereof, be now related.

Before the War with Philip was well ended to the Southward, there was a
fresh Alarm sounded again to the Eastward, for on the eleventh of August, 1676.
The very day before Philips heart (that had harbored so many mischievous and
Treacherovs devices against the English was by one of his own Company shot
through) did a party of Indians begin their Outrages at Casco in a most
perfidious and treacherous manner, killing and carrying away Captive to the
number of thirty persons, and burning their houses, amongst whom was the Family
of one Antony Bracket Inhabitant of Casco, who was thought to have been killed,
but he himself with his wife and one of his five Children carried away Captive
with a Negro, did happily make an escape from their bloody and deceitful hands,
In November next ensuing

The manner how Antony Bracket and his wife made their escape was very
remarkable, and therefore judged worthy to be inserted here although out of due
place, the Indians that led them Captive, having brought them to the North side
of Casco Bay: News was brought to the said Indians of the surprizal of Arowsick
house in Kennibeck, withal the store therein, which did so rejoice them, that
they made all haste to share in the good things there to be had. Thus eager to
be gone they promised Bracket and his wife that they should have also a share
therein if they would make haste after them, bringing along a burden allotted
to each of them: The woman having a little before observed an old Burchin Canoo
lying by the water side, hoped it was an opportunity Providence offered for
their escape; whereupon she first prudently asked of the Indians to let the
Negro their own servant (at the same time carried Captive by them) help them to
carry their burdens, which was granted: then she begged of them a piece or two
of meat, which was not denied them. Thus being furnished with help and
provision, the Indians leaving them thus behind to come after with their
several burdens and a young Child; They could not but look upon it as a nutus
Divinus, to bid them, shift for themselves: the woman also found a needle and
thread in the house, where they stayed on that side of the Bay, with which having
mended the Canoo, they ventured to get away; which prosperously succeeded: for
in that old Canoo they crossed a water eight or nine miles broad, and when they
came on the South side of the Bay, they might have been in as much danger of
other indians, that had lately been about Black point, and had taken it; but
they were newly gone: So things on all sides thus concurring to help forward
their Deliverance, they came safely to the Fat at Black point, where also by
special Providence they met with a Vessel bound for Pascataqua, that came in to
that Harbor, but a few hours before they came thither, by which means they
Arrived safe in Pascataqua River, soon after, all which Circumstances are very
worthy to be noted.

Amongst those Indians that seized this Brackets Family, the chief was one
Simond, that newly or a little before had escaped out of Dover Prison, where he
was not over carefully looked to, he had had his hand in the murder of sundry
English, as himself confessed; not missing save one in the which he had
discharged his gun upon, but because he came in voluntarily, bringing in a
woman and five Children of the English, who had been carried Captive a little
before, it was questioned, whether his last act of submission might not
balance his former transgression, and therefore was he committed to that, not
so secure a Prison, till his Case might be further considered of,. It is said
that coming to that Brackets house over night he pulled forth a counterfieted
pass, under the hands of some public Officers, or men entrusted with that
Service, making show of all Friendship, but in the morning or soon after, he
pulled off his Vizour of a friend, and discovered what he was, yet granting
Life to this person and his Family, that did not, or could not resist, which he
denied to some of the Neighbors not far off, who were many of them killed by
this bloody Villainy, and his Partners.

There are some Circumstances in the Assault of Anthony Brackets house very
considerable, which, because it was the first Outrage committed by the Indians
in this their second Insurrection, 1676. are worthy of a more particular
remembering.

This Indian forementioned called Simond, after he had escaped out of Prison at
Dover, came up to Gasco, and either in the end of July, or beginning of August,
acquainted himself with this Antony Bracket, and often frequented his house: Upon
the ninth of August, some of the Indians having killed a Cow of his, the Indian
Simond coming to his house promised to bring the Indians to him that had killed
his Cow. In the mean time they of the place sent two men to Major Walderns at
Dover, to complain of this injury done by the Indians; but before their return,
very early in the morning on the eleventh of August, Simond with a party of
Indians came to Antony Brackets house, and told him there were the Indians that
had killed his Cow; but as soon as they had said that, the Indians went further
into his house and took hold of all the Guns they could see, Antony Bracket
asked what was the meaning of that, Simond presently replied, that so it must
be, asking him withal, whether he had rather serve the Indians, or be slain by
them, Antony Bracket Answered, that if the Case were so, he would rather choose
to serve them, then be killed by them: Simond replied, that then they must be
bound, which presently was done. The said Bracket, his wife, and a Negro were
all bound by the Indians, his wife had a Brother, who offering to resist was
killed forthwith, the rest with five Children were led away Prisoners.

Two hours after one Pike that lived not far off, but knowing nothing of all
this, went up in a Canoo toward one Robert Corbins house, where he found one
Humphry Durham, and Benjamin Atwel at work about their Hay, after a little
stay, he left them intending to go up higher with his Canoo, but as soon as he
was a little past, he heard Guns shot off, which made him with another man he
had with him, presently return back; before he came beyond Corbins house he saw
an English boy running with all haste, which made him fear some mischief was in
hand, and presently a Volley of shot came against them, but the Bullets flying
over their heads, did them no hurt: presently Simond Indian appeared, and
called them to come a shore; but they liked not his Courtesy, but presently
turning their Canoo into the stream got out of the reach of their Guns, hasting
down to his own house with all speed; when he came near to his house, he called
to the People to make have away, toward the Garrison house, and bid the rest
look to themselves, and fire upon the Indians, that were coming against them:
In the mean while, the Indians passing from Anthony Brackets to Corbins, killed
Corbin himself, with Humphry Durham, and Benjamin Atwel forementioned: Then
passing on to other houses, carried away some of them Captive, and killed
others. At one of the next houses, the women and Children got off into the
water by a Canoo; but one James Ross, his wife and Children were carried away:
Corbins wife with one of the other men's wives; and the Children of another of
them, they likewise carried away.

In another side of the Town, three were as they were going to reap at Antony
Brackets, passing from an house where they left their Canoo, met with John
Mount-joy and one Wakely, to whom they told what had happened, soon after they
heard two Guns shot of, whereby it seems two men were killed, wherefore coming
back toward Thomas Brackets where they had left their Canoo, they saw him shot
down by the Indians; one of the three not so well able to run hid himself in
the bushes in hope to make his escape more conveniently afterward, which
accordingly he did; but in the mean time he saw the Indians carry away Thomas
Brackets wife and Children; Soon after the three men aforesaid got safe to My.
Mount joys Garrison, but not trusting to the Security of that Garrison, they
soon after repaired to an Island in the Bay, called James Andrew, Island.

One George Jews and his wife tarryed all this time in their house fill the
next day, when they had opportunity to get safe to the Island aforesaid,
together with the two men that were now returned from Major Waldern; whither
they had been sent, but too late, to make complaint of the Indians that had
counterfieted his pass to travail into those parts, and had done this mischief.

The day after one George Felt suspecting the worst by reason of a smoke, he
saw on the opposite side of the Town, took his wife and Children into a Canoo
to see what the matter was, but when he came near a point of Land not far off,
he found several of his Neighbors goods which made him conclude their Owners
were killed, which was a sufficient warning to him likewise to fly for his
Life, which he did to the same Island. After they had sundry of them escaped
thither, some of them remembered that they had left powder behind them in one or
two places; whereupon they resolved to venture a party of them in the night,
partly to prvent the Indians from having any Advantage thereof, and partly for
their own defense if occasion should be; Their Attempt succeeded well, for they
brought away a barrel of powder from one Wills his house, and likewise a
considerable quantity out of a Chest in a Store house, where the Indians had
been ransacking, and had taken things out of the other end of the Chest, yet
overlooked the Powder: In this surprizal of the Plantation in Casco Bay, called
Falmouth, there were thirty four persons killed and carried Captive.

That this was not a casual Attempt, but a designed plot, it will appear, in
that just about the very same time, the Indians at Kennibeck, made the like
Insurrection, whereby it is concluded, either that the Indians which escaped
from Dover, stirred them up thereunto, or else that the said Indians finding
them in a disposition tending that way, by reason of some injuries done them
that dwell farther Northward, they offered their Service to help forward the
design.

It is to be noted here, that the Indians about Kennibeck were persuaded to
continue their former amity with the English notwithstanding the report of
Philips rising that year before, and the Outrages committed the last Autumn,
and winter following, yet which is more, they had lately renewed their League
with the English in those parts, although they had often complained to those of
Pemmaquid, of the injury they suffered, in the withholding from them the Trade
of Powder, and shot, without which they said they cannot subsist, and for want
of which it is alleged by themselves, that some of them perished the last
Winter.

But the Quarrel of late fallen out betwixt the English, and the Indians about
Kennibeck, and Eastward thereof, being a matter of great Consequence; For the
farther satisfaction of the Reader, it shall in what follows, be more
particularly described; It being the duty of every one that publishes thing's
of this nature, to to do the right of an Historian to all sorts of persons, any
way concerned in what is made public; The Information was received from a
prudent person, an Eye and Ear witness of all that happened amongst the said
Indians, both the former and present year, and one that was of more public
Concernment in those Transactions then some others, therefore may the more heed
be given thereto. Mention is already made of what happened in September, 1675. to
the Company belonging to a Sloop, and two other Boats, that went up Casco Bay
to gather Indian Corn; Upon that Accident it is said, diverse Indians on the
East side of Kennibeck River repaired to their Fort at Totonnock (a place up
higher into the Country beyond Kennibeck and Shipscot River) where was an
English trading house. And the Indians Eastward of the said River, had as yet
done no harm to any of the English, yet did Captain Sylvanus Davis Agent for
Major Clarke and Captain Lake of Boston, upon these Overtures think it fit to
fetch down the Powder and Shot with other goods from the said Trading house,
telling the Indians, by the Messenger sent up, he would have them come down and
live below in that River, to take off Jealousies, and that he would then supply
rhem with what was needful.

But the Messenger told them, in Case they would not come down, and deliver up
their Arms, the English would kill them. He that sends a Message by the hand
of a Fool says Solomon, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage; This
Message was delivered by him that went, as was confessed by himself, who put it
into his mouth, or whether it was devized in his own heart, it concerns not us
now to enquire, but the damage that side of the Country has been made to
drink thereby, is not easy to recount; for upon this Threatening Message the
Indians forsook their Fort presently, and went Eastward, and sent abroad to
John's River and to the Sea side to get all the Indians they could together to
come up Penobscot River.

A Gentleman who at that time lived at Pemmaquid, a kind of Superintendent over
the Affairs of that place, considering the sad state things were running into,
labored to obtain a Parley with the said Indians, or some of them, which after
much trouble and cost, he did accomplish. But in the mean time, such was the
violence used by some refractory English in those parts, that they could scarce
be restrained from offering violence to the persons he sent up as Messengers,
or others that lived quietly amongst them, and did also as violently set
themselves to oppose himself, or any others that acted with more moderation,
then the rest; protesting against them, as those who for gain supplied the
Indians with Powder and Shot, and said they would kill any Indian they met;
others at Monhiggan offered five pound for every Indian that should be brought,
yet would not these persons that were so violent against the Indians in their
discourse, be persuaded upon any Terms, then, or afterward, to go out to fight
against the Indians in an orderly way; as appeared both by their Security in
not standing better upon their guard, and by their sudden flight afterward,
running away like a Flock of Sheep, at the barking of any little dog: Things
being in this posture, what could be expected but a present war with the
Indians, although as it seems, there were few or none like to be found, willing
to undertake it, or fit to manage it in those parts. How ever, the person
aforesaid, understanding, the General Court at Boston had appointed a Counsel
of War at Kennibeck, applied himself to them, laying before them the desperate
state things were falling into; whereupon they issued out warrants to restrain
all manner of persons from meddling with the Indians without farther order,
which within few days should be had. In the mean time the Sachems of the
Indians meet at Pemmaquid; where, after many complaints made of the hard
dealing of the English in Kennibeck River, they came to Terms of Peace,
promising to keep true Friendship with the English; and to hinder the
Amonoscoggan Indians from meddling with the English, if by any means they could,
and also to return peaceably in the Spring of the year. This Gentleman
aforesaid, having a long time waited to go to Boston; was willing to take the
opportunity of the present Winter, hoping things were now pretty well settled in
those parts betwixt the Indians and the English; found soon after, that he was
cited thither to Answer some Complaints (though made without ground) for
selling Powder and Shot to the Indians contrary to Order.

But those false opinions being easily blown away by his own appearance at
Boston, and so having dispatched his occasions there, he returned before the
winter was over to Pemmaquid, where hearing of a Vessel that intended to take
Indians in those parts, and carry them away to a market, the which he had many
strong Reasons to believe, (it being no hard matter to surprise many such, that
suspecting by fraud, would easily be enticed aboard a Vessel to trade, or may
be to drink Liquor) sent both the Master and Company, if they had any such
intent to forbear, seeing those Indians were at peace with us, and likewise to
the Indians, to inform them of such a Vessel, and to beware thereof, but yet it
seems the Master and Company took several Indians Eastward, who were also at
peace with us, and to our geeat sorrow shipped them aboard for a market.

The winter being now over, the forenamed Agent of Pemmaquid, went to a meeting
of the Indians Eastward, to persuade them, of the Countr^es willingness to
continue a peace with them. They seemed very joyful thereat, and in the Spring
brought some Presents to confirm the Peace, and to that end also delivered up
an English Captive Boy to those of Kennibeck. But when the Summer came on, that
the said Indians had liberty to travail up and down the Country to visit their
Friends as they used to do; they missed those their Friends who had in the
winter perfidiously been carried away, and as is related, they fell into a Rage
against the English, making Complaint thereof to the said Agent, Mr. Earthy,
Mr. Richard Oliver, and others: They were told means should be used for
bringing them back again, which had been so Transported, those to whom the
Complaint was made, did scarce believe it to be true, as not having heard
thereof from any other hand, and probably hoping none, especially after solemn
warning, would deal so perfidiously with Heathens, to lay such a stumbling
block before them.

The Indians being certain of the thing done, could not be easily pacified,
being likewise incensed against the English, for withholding the Trade of
Powder and Shot the last winter, saying, they were frighted from their Corn the
last year by the People about Kennibeck, so as many of them dyed in the
following winter for want of Powder and Shot, wherewith to ^ll Venison and
Foul; Adding withal, that if the English were their Friends as they pretended,
they would not suffer them to dye, for want thereof: However, the said Agent
making the best he could of a bad Cause, used all means to pacify the
Complaynents, and to that end promised them, that if they could meet with any
of the Amonoscoggan Indians (who it seems all along had the bitterest Enmity
against the English) he would give them a meeting to treat in order to a Peace,
Major Waldern having already concluded a Peace with the Pascataqua and Casco
Indians, and by that means, if they could conclude the like peace with the
Amonoscoggan men, (that could not yet be found) there would be a general Peace
with all the Indians Eastward of Pascataqua, which the Indians that were
present at this discourse, seemed very joyful at: yet still by one fatal
Accident or other, jealousies still seemed to increase in their minds, or else
the former injuries began to boil a fresh in their Spirits, as not being
easily digested, what ever had been said, or done to allay the offensiveness
thereof. Soon after comes a Post from Totonnock, to desire him to repair
thither according to his promise, where they told him be should meet with
Squando, and diverse Amonoscoggan Sachems, and that Mug was sent Post to fetch
the said Squando: This Gentleman mindful of his promise, went with the Post to
Kennibeck, and finding Captain Lake at his house in Aro^sick; It was judged
meet, that Captain Sylvester Davis should go along with him, with instructions
from the Counsel then sitting in Kennibeck, how to carry on their Treaty. After
they had gone part of their way toward Totonnock, they came to an English
house, where they were told, what great jealousies of deceit in the Indians
were upon their Spirits, from what they had heard of Muggs and Tarumkin, an
Amonoscoggan Sachem: going farther to a place called Kedonu-Cook, they met with
Indians, who were very shye of telling them any thing, which added to the
former Intimation, greatly increased their fears: but being resolved of their
voyage, they went onward still in their way, yet falling short of the place on
purpose, that they might finish their business with them the next day: when
they came to their Fort, they were first saluted with a Volley of Shot, then
brought into a Wigwam where their Sachems were: Madockawando sat as chief, who
now styles himself their Minister: Being set in Council, they made Assiminasqua
their speaker; whose Adopted Son was the said Madochewando: He told them it was
not their Custom, if any came as Messengers to treat with them, to seize upon
their persons, as sometimes the Mohawks did with such as had been sent to them:
Captain Davis and the other Gentleman told them, therein they dealt like men:
Answer was presently made them; you did otherwise by our men, when fourteen
came to treat with you; And set a Guard over them, and took away their Guns:
And not only so, but a second time you required our Guns, and demanded us to
come down unto you, or else you would kill us, which was the Cause of our
leaving both our Fort, and our Corn to our great loss.

It was without doubt no small trouble to their minds, in a Treaty with these
Pagans, Haec diei potuisse, and non potuisse refelli: Yet to put the best
Construction might be, on such Irregular actions, which could not well be
justified. They told them, the persons who had so done, were not within the
Limits of their Government, and therefore though they could not call them to an
account for so acting, yet they did utterly disallow thereof: Adding farther,
as soon as we understood thereof, we sent for you to Pemmaquid, and Treated you
kindly, and kept you, as you know, from the violence of the English; The
Indians Replied, we do but inform you, and will Treat further in the Afternoon.
But when the Afternoon came, our Two Messengers told them, their business was
to Treat with the Amonoscoggan Sachems, and that they were sorry, Squando was
not there: Then having confirmed their Peace with those Eastward Indians, they
entreated the Amonoscoggan men to speak, who likewise urged Tarumkin, the chief
Amonoscoggan Sachem to speak, who after some pauze, said he had been to the
Westward, where he had found many Indians unwilling for Peace: but says he, I
found three Sachems (whom he named, though those he spoke to knew them not)
willing to have peace; And for my own part, I am willing for peace, and gave
them his hand with Protestation of his continuing in Friendship, so did seven
or eight more of the Amonoscoggan men; whose Names they took, of whom Mug and
Robin Hoods Son were two After this Madochewando asked them what they should do
for Powder and Shot, when they had eaten up their Indian Corn, what they should
do for the Winter, for their hunting Voyages? asking withal, whether they would
have them die, or leave their Country, and go all over to the French. Our
Messengers told him, they would do what they could with the Governor, some
might be allowed them for Necessity: He said they had waited long already, and
therefore would have them now say yea, or nay, whether they should have powder
as formerly, or not? Our Messengers then Replied, you your selves say, many of
the Western Indians would not have Peace, And therefore if we sell you powder,
and you give it to the Western men, what do we but out our own Throats? Adding
further, It is not in our power without leave, if you should wait ten year
more, to let you have powder, at which words they seemed much to be offended.

But yet the next day they resolved to go down with them, and to speak with the
Western men, thereby, if it might be, to stop their farther proceeding.

So going down with them the next day, they met with some Indians who had got
strong Liquor, with whom they fell a drinking: Our Messengers stayed at two
places for them, and finding that still they tarryed behind, not knowing what
farther to do, they went home, it being the sixth day of the week. But the next
night save one, news came to Kennibeck, that the Indians had killed diverse
English in Casco, although it was not yet known at Pemmaquid. Upon this News
Capt. Davis set out one Sentinel the next night. The rest, (such was their
Security) went all else to bed. And in the morning, were all like Laish
surprised, thus might it be said, Invadunt Aedem somno (si non) vinoque
sepultam. The particulars of the surprising of Kennibeck, and Arowsick house
are thus related by such as were acquainted therewith.

Upon the thirteenth of August, 1676. several Indians repaired in the Evening
to the house of one Mr. Hammond, an ancient Inhabitant, and Trader with the
Indians up Kennibeck River, His daughter or a maid that was servant in the
house, either naturally afraid of the Natives, or else upon something she
observed in their Countenance, or Carriage, manifested so much fear, as made
her run out of the house to hide her self in some place abroad; The Indians
perceiving it, the more to dissemble their Treachery, ran after her, and
brought her into the house, telling her (although they could not persuade her
so to believe) that there was no Reason to be afraid of them: presently after
more of the Barbarous Villains coming into the house, she grew more afraid then
before, being now more strongly persuaded that they came on purpose to kill or
surprise those in the Family, whereupon she suddenly made an escape out of the
house, and presently passed into a Field of Indian Corn, whereby she might the
better avoid the danger of any pursuer, and so ran cross over the land that
night ten or twelve miles, to give them notice that lived at Shipscot River, It
is said that after she got out, she heard a noyze in the house, as if they were
fighting or scuffling within doors; but she did not count it wisdom to go back
to see what the matter was, knowing enough before of their Villanyes, how well
soever her Mrs. (that was more versed in the Trade of the Indians) might think
of them. Those of Shipscot taking this warning escaped away as soon as they
could leaving their Cattle and their dwellings as a Prey to the Indians. What
befell Master Hammond and his Family is not yet certainly known: Reports pass up
and down, that some who came down the River afterward, saw some of the dead
stripped upon the Bank of the River, which makes us fear the worst, concerning
all the rest; for certainly the whole Family sixteen in Number, were all at
that time either killed, or carried away Captive, none save the maid aforesaid,
being known to make any other escape, to inform their Friends like Jobs
Messengers, what befell the rest of the Family.

The Indians having in this manner surprised Mr. Hammonds house, they passed
down the River the same night; but going by another house, meddled not with the
people, only turned their Canoos a drift, that they might not find means
afterward to escape themselves, or help others so to do: possibly their chief
aim being at Arowsick house, they would not, for fear of being discovered, make
any Attempt upon any place near by: wherefore August the fourteenth very early
in the morning, having in the night, or before break of day passed over on to
the Island called Arowsick, several of them undiscovered lay hid under the
Walls of the Fort, and behind a great Rock near adjoining, till the Sentinel
was gone off from his place, (who went off it seems sooner than was Reason,
considering the danger) when presently some Indians followed him in, at the
Fort gate, (as some report) while others of them immediately seized the Port
holes thereof, and shot down all they saw passing up and down within the Walls,
and so in a little time became Masters of the Fort, and all that was within it:
Captain Lake (joint Owner with Major Clarke of the whole Island) hearing the
bussle that was below, betwixt the Indians and those that belonged to the
place, was strangely surprised, yet himself with Captain Sylvanus Davis and two
more, understanding that the Indians had seized the Fort, and killed diverse of
the English, apprehending it bootless, or rather heartless to stay, as not
being able to stand upon their guard, or make any resistance, made a shift to
find some passage out at a back door, whereby they escaped to the waterside,
where they found a Canoo, into which they all entered and made away toward
another Island near by: This was not done so secretly but the Indians discerned
them before they were gone far; four of them therefore hasted after those that
had escaped; in another Canoo, and coming within shot, discharged their Guns
upon them, whereby Sylvanus Davis was sorely wounded; yet making have, as
generally they use to do, that fly for their lives, timor addidit alas, they
got a shore before the Indians overtook them. It is said they were strangely
dispirited, or else they might easily have defended themselves against their
pursuers: But when once men's hearts are sunk with fear, and discouragement
upon a sudden surprizal, it is hard to buoy them up, to make any competent
resistance: Capt. Davis being sadly wounded, could neither trust to his legs to
fly, nor yet make use of his hands to fight; yet was strangly preserved;
Providence directing him to go into the Cleft of a Rock hard by the place,
where he first landed; The Indians by the glittering of the Sun beams in their
Eyes as they came a shore, did not discern him; so as lying hid under the
Covert of the band of Providence, for two days, he at last crawled a little
about the water side, till he found a Canoo, whereby he escaped away with his
Life, much a do. The other two men, were better foot men, and parting from
Captain Lake, made their escape ten or a dozen mile, to the further end of the
Island, and so escaped from the Indians, till they found means to get off: Poor
Captain Lake, that a few hours before, slept quietly in his Mansion house,
surrounded with a strong Fortification, defended with many Soldiers, is now
forced to fly away with none to attend him. And as the Awful hand of Divine
Providence ordered things, was as some say, pursued by such Indians as were
mere strangers to the place, that knew not the Master from the man, by one of
whom he was shot down, as is supposed, soon after his coming ashore; Lieut.
Davis heard two Guns, by which 'twas thought, and soon after was known so to be
by an Indian which since has confessed to Captain Davis that he shot him that
day Arowsick was taken, which he intended not to have done, but that he held up
his Pistol against him, whereas if he had but asked qua^ter, he should have had
his Life. Captain Lake was slain at that time, although many hopes were for
some time maintained, that he was taken alive, and kept with other Captives,
amongst the Indians; And it is said the Indians of those parts did not intend to
kill him, if they could have helped it: But it was known, that his hat was seen
upon an Indians head not long after, which made his Friends conclude what had
be fallen the Owner that good man, who might Emphatically be so termed in
distinction from them that may truly be called Just men, and no more: For it
seems according to the just Agreement betwixt himself and his part owner of
Arowsick Island, it was not his turn this year to have been upon the place, but
such was his goodness, that he yielded to the desire of his Friend and Partner,
as in his room and stead to take upon himself that Service in this time of
danger, it is hoped his goodness in future time will not be forgotten by such
as were any way concerned therein, or had Advantage thereby.

This Island (called Arowsick from an Indian so named, that formerly possessed
it, and of whom it was purchased by one Mr. Richards who sold it to Captain
Lake and Major Clarke) lies up ten miles within the mouth of Kennibeck River;
it is some miles in length, and contains many thousand Acres of very good
Land; where meadow and arable ground are in a good proportion well suited
together; within the Fort aforesaid were many convenient buildings for several
Offices, as well for wares and Trading, as habitation: six several Edifices are
said to have been there erected. The Warehouse at that time was well furnished
with all sorts of goods; besides a Mill and other Accommodations, and dwellings
within a mile of the Fort and Mansion house; some of whose Inhabitants hardly
made their escape, upon the first surp^izal of the Fort.

All which considered, the loss that befell the Proprietours at the surprizal of
this Island seems to be very great, valued at many thousands: but those that
were the Owners with others of late times, have found in their own Experience,
what Solomon said of old, There is a Time to get, and a Time to loose, a Time
to keep, and a Time to cast away; A Time to break down, as well as a Time to
build up. The persons killed and taken at Kennibeck, both at Mr. Hammonds, and
at Arowsick, are said to be fifty three.

Upon the Report of this sad disaster, all the Plantations of the English in
those parts were soon after left, and forsaken by degrees. All the rest of the
Inhabitants of Kennibeck River, Shipscot River, Saga-de-hock, Damanicottee,
fearing to be served in the same kind, fled to the Islands of Cape-bonawagan
and Damorils Cove.

On the second day at night a Post was sent to Pemmaquid to inform them of what
had happened, who being but eight or ten men, were minded to go to the Island
called Monhiggon, having secured the best of their goods, but the wind taking
them short, they were forced to turn into Damarils Cove, where they found Mr.
Wiswal, and Mr. Colicot, there they labored two days to settle a Garrison;
But partly by the mutinousness of the People, and partly by the want of
Provision nothing could be done to secure the Island, so that it was presently
deserted: From thence they went to Monhiggon, resolving there to tarry till
they heard from Boston, from whence Mr. Colicot, and Mr. Wiswel promised to do
their utmost endeavor to send help. There they settled three Guards, and
appointed five and twenty to watch every night, not knowing but that the
Indians might come every hour. But continuing these a Fortnight, and finding no
Relief like to come; and seeing all the Country burned round about. (For after
they had gotten all that could be saved from Pemmaquid, they saw all the other
Island, Windgins, Corbins sound, New-Harbour, Pemmaquid all on fire in two
hours time) then considering what was best to be done, they found no Boats
could be sent to sea for fear of weakening the Island, and that most of those
that were upon the Island, were Strangers, Coasters, and such as came from the
Main, and were ready to be gone upon every occasion, they laid an Imbargoe for
one weeks time, after which a Letter was received from Major Clarke, defiring
their Assistance for enquiring after Capt. Lake if alive, saving, what could be
had at Kennibeck etc. but intimating nothing of any help like to come, besides
those that brought the Letter told them, it was in vain to expect any help from
Boston. It being questioned there, what they had to do with those parts, upon
which the Inhabitants considered, that if they should tarry there, and spend
all their Provision, and neither be able to go to Sea, nor yet to live, or be
safe a shore for want of help, it were better for them to remove, while they
had something left to live upon, and seek employment else where; so by Consent
they resolved forthwith to Transport themselves, and what they had saved of
their goods to some place of Security, so they took the first opportunity to
set sail, some for Pascataqua, some for Boston, and some for Salem, at one of
which three places they all safely arrived.

Having thus escaped at first as Lot out of Sodom, but not counting themselves
safe in that Zoar, where for a little while they made shift to hide their
heads, till they might escape to some surer place, there waiting for better
times, when they may with peace and quietness return to their former
habitations, or seek some other else where.

When the foresaid Exploits were done by the Indians in and about Casco Bay,
several of the English removed to Jewels Island, where they hoped to be more
secure from the Indians, but their barbarous Enemy finding so little Resistance
made against them on the main Land, a considerable party of them came with
their Canoos to destroy that Island also, about three weeks after the
forementioned mischiefs.

There was a fortifyed house upon the said Island, where the English that
either kept upon the Island, or repaired thither, hoped to have secured
themselves. But at that time when the Indians assaulted the place, many of the
English were absent, few left in the Garrison, but women and Children: some
were gone to other places to fetch Indian Corn, others were in a Boat employed
about Fish, amongst whom was one Richard Pots with two more; The wife of the
said Pots was washing by the water side, where she was surprised with her
Children, and carried away in fight of her husband, who was not a little
distressed with that sad Spectacle, but was not able to afford any Relief
either to wife or Children; although one of the Children espying his Father in
his boat, ran into the water, calling out for help, but an Indian ran after him
to catch him up; the poor man in a great Agony being within half shot, was
about to have fired upon the Indian, but then fearing he might wound his Child
which the Villain had laid hold of, he forbore, rather suffering him to be
carried away alive, then be exposed to so manifest danger of his Life, or
Limbs, by shooting at the Indian.

It is said that some of the Indians were killed by them in the Garrison: They
speak of a Lad that at one shot killed two or three of them, some Guns were
found afterward under the Fort, which were supposed to have belonged to some
of the Indians that were killed. Some that were abroad when the Fort was
assaulted, desperately broke in through the Indians, whereby at the last, many
of the People were preserved: some flying away from Jewels Island in a Canoo
toward Richmonds Island, met with a K^tch, to which they made known the
distress the People were in, who thereupon went to the place, and took in all
the People they found there, and carried them off to a place of more safety.
Yet were there several persons said to be killed and carried away at that time
viz. three men, who were known to be killed, two women and two Children, that
are supposed to be yet alive, though in the Enemies power.

From thence they went to Spurwinks, where they assaulted one place or more,
and killed one man, wounded another, and carried another away Captive: Amongst
them that were in danger of surprizal, one that could not run, hid himself in a
garden of Cabbages so as he was not found, yet was very near them, for he over
heard several questions, they asked him they took; by which means he was the
better enabled afterward to prevent the danger two more were coming into, for
the poor Fellow that they had taken, told them, that one Shendal with another
man were to come that way by and by; whereupon this man that had hid himself,
meeting that Shendal and the other man gave them notice of the danger, whereby
they were delivered out of the snare, for that time; not long after one of
them, viz Mr. Shendal fell into their hands as shall be declared afterward.
Within a while after, or much about that same time, another sad Accident befell
six or seven of them that belonged to Casco. For upon the twenty third of
September some persons that belonged to a Sloop, and a Shallop, that were
pressed into the Service (one Reason of which was to prevent their straggling
they being persons that belonged to those parts about Casco) were over desirous
to save some of their Provision, to which end they first made their Address to
Captain Hathorne, (under whom they were ordered to serve) desiring they might
be released; the Captain told them he could not do it, but desired them to have
patience for a while, they told him, that they must and would go, else their
Families must starve at home: The Captain told them further of the danger, and
bid them not stir at their peril: However they would go, and soon after went to
Mount-joyes Island to fetch sheep, where they landed seven men; but the Indians
presently set upon them, they presently betook themselves to the Ruins of a
stone house, where they defended themselves as long as they could; but at last
they were all destroyed either with stones cast in upon them, or else with the
Enemies shot, except one, who, though at the first it was hoped his wounds were
not mortal, yet soon after dy^d thereof; Amongst these was one George Felt much
lamented, who had been more active then any man in those parts against the
Indians, but at the last he lost his own Life amongst them, in this too
desperate an Adventure.

The Indians growing more bold by these Attempts in those remote places, drew
down nearer toward Pascataqua, for not long after a party of them came upon
Cape Nidduck, where they killed and carried away all the Inhabitants of a few
scattering houses, to the number of seven in all, and such was their Salvage
Cruelty exercised in this place, as is not usually heard of, for having dashed
out the brains of a poor woman that gave suck, they nailed the young Child to
the dead body of its mother, which was found sucking in that rueful manner,
when the People came to the place. The day before a man and his wife were
killed by them at Wells, and two men more soon after. On the twelfth of October
following near an hundred of the Indians made an Assault upon Black point, all
the Inhabitants being gathered into one fortifyed place upon that point, which
a few hands might have defended against all the Indians on that side of the
Country. But as it seems, one called Mugg was the Leader of the Indians; one
that had from a Child been well acquainted with the English, and had lived some
years in English Families, who though a cunning Fellow, and had prevailed much
in his Attempts, yet at this time showed more Courtesy to the English, then
according to former Outrages could be expected from any of those barbarous
miscreants; and was willing to make offer of a Treaty to Mr. Josselin, chief of
the Garrison, to whom the said Mugg promised liberty for all that were there,
to depart with their goods upon the surrender of the place: The said Josselin
reports, that when he came back from his treating with Mugg, that all the
People were fled away out of the Garrison, having carried away their goods by
water before his return, in so much that having none but his Household Servants
to stand by him, he was capable to make no Resistance, and so surrendered.

When People have once been frighted with Reports and Sense of danger, they are
ready to fly away like a Heart before the Hunter or his Hounds, one of the
Inhabitants of the place affirmed he saw an hundred and fifty Indians, which
was more by an hundred than any body else ever saw near the Fort. But when a
place is designed to Ruin, every thing they take in hand shall tend that way.

The loss of Black point was accompanied with another sad Accident, that fell
out about the same time at Richmonds Island. For young Mr. Friar with some
others at Pascataqua, to whom it seemed grievous that the Indians should make
all that Spoil in every place in those farther Plantations, ventured upon the
great Importunity of Mr. Shendal, with a Ketch to try what they could save of
such things that the Indians had left. But things were so ordered, that before
they had laden their Ketch, coming too near the Stage head, they presently
found themselves in danger of a surprizal, for part of their Company being a
shore, were seized by the Indians, or in danger thereof, whom they were not
willing to leave behind; and besides the wind blowing in hard upon them, they
could not get out of the Harbor, but were forced to abide the danger of an
Assault. The Indians getting many of them into the stage head annoyed them so
fast with their shot, that not a man of them was able to look above deck, but
he was in danger of being shot down, amongst the rest Mr. James Friar venturing
too much in view of the Enemy received a wound in his knee, which appeared not
dangerous at the first, but for want of better looking to, then could be found
amongst that black Regiment, into whose hands he soon after fell; It proved
Mortal unto him, within a few days after: he being by a strange Accident
brought home to his Fathers house at the great Island in Pascataqua. Mr. Friar
being thus wounded, the rest of the Company defended themselves for a while
with much Courage and Resolution, till they were brought to the sad choice of
falling into the hands of one of these three bad Masters, the Fire, the water,
or the Barbarous Heathen, to whom at last they thought it best to yield, in
hope of liberty afterward, at least of lengthning out their lives a little
longer, for the Indians had manned out a Canoo with several hands to cut their
Cable, and others stood ready within the defense of the stage head to fire upon
any one that stirred in the Ketch, by which means the Vessel after the Cable
was cut soon drove a shore; and then was it threatened to be presently burned,
if they did not all yield, to which they all at last consented.

The Indians how barbarous soever in their own nature, yet civilly entreated
their Prisoners, and upon farther discourse sent one or two of them to
Pascataqua, to give them there an opportunity to Ransom their Friends. The
persons sent home to procure a Ransom, were to return with such a quantity of
goods as the Indians had desired; by such a precise time: but they that brought
the things for their Ransom, coming a day or two before the time, when those
that sent them were gone up the River at Black point, and not returned: Some
other Indians waiting for such an opportunity seized the goods, at least that
part which they most desired, and through mistake, killing one of the three men
hat brought them, dismissed the other two, without return of the Prisoners as
was expected.

As to what happened afterward, we are yet much in the dark, and for the present
can write but by guess: for within a few days after the return of Mr. Shendal,
and the other man that went to carry the Ransom, before November 1. Mugg
himself came to Pascataqua, bringing Mr. James Friar, who soon after dyed of
his wound, one of the Prisoners along with him complaining that without his
knowledge some of the Indians had seized what was sent for the Ransom of the
rest, promising upon his Faith, that he would make good his word for the
sending home all the Prisoners, and offered also in the Name of the other
Indians, to confirm a new Peace with the English for the future: The Major
General of the Massachusetts Colony was then at Pascataqua, but not willing to
Transact a matter of that nature and moment by his sole Authority, ordered the
said Mugg (supposed to be the chief Leader of the Indians) to be carried down
to Boston to the Governor and Council there, to conclude the business, with
whom he soon after agreed upon a firm Peace with the English of the
Massachusetts in the Name of Madockawando, the chief of all the Indians in the
Eastern parts about Penobscot, engaging also to remain himself, as hostage
aboard the Vessel (in which he was sent home from Boston November the 21st.
following) until the Prisoners (which are said to be fifty or sixty that they
have still in their hands) be sent home, and the rest of the Articles
performed. The Issue of which we as yet wait to hear in Gods good time, this
12th. of December following, 1676. when they there have made an end of the
reckoning, it is hoped we may have our right again.

There are two principal Actors amongst the Indians that have all along
promoted these designs amongst them, one named Squando, Sagamore of Saco, and
the forementioned Madockawando, the chief Commander of the Indians Eastward
about Penobscot, who are said to be, by them that know them, a strange kind of
moralized Salvages. Grave and Serious in their Speech and Carriage, and not
without some show of a kind of Religion, which no doubt but they have learned
from the Prince of darkness, (by the help of some papist in those parts) that
can Transform himself into an Angel of Light; under that shape, the better to
carry on the designs of his Kingdom. It is said also, they pretend to have
received some Visions and Revelations, by which they have been commanded to
worship the great God, and not to work on the Lords day. We know where that
Fountain has its Rise, that sends forth at the same place sweet and bitter
waters. And from whence their hearts are inspired, that join blessing of God,
with cursing and killing his Servants.

It is reported by some that came lately from those parts, that the Indians
there do as yet refuse to have any peace with the English, and will not as yet
return any of our Captive Friends, till God speak to the foresaid Enthusiasts,
that are their Leaders, that they should no longer make war with us, and the
like.

But not to trouble our selves farther with those Ministers of Satan, or those
that are acted by the Angel of the bottomless pit, (who possibly since their
delusions are but two fold more the Children of Hell then they were before.) We
know better how to understand the mind of the great Lord of Heaven and Earth
then to depend on such lying Oracles.

That God who has at present turned their hearts to hate his People, and deal
subtly with his Servants; we hope in his time, will either turn the stream,
and cause them to deal friendly and sincerely with his People, as heretofore,
or give us an opportunity to destroy them.

In the next place it remains, that some account be given of our Forces under
Captain Hathorne, and of their several Expeditions into the Eastern parts,
since the middle of September last; first up toward Casco, by the Seaside,
then afterward through the woods directly Northward, toward Ossapy, and
Pigwauchet, in hope to have found the Enemy there at their head Quarters.

Upon the first Report of those Devastations and Spoils that had been made by
Fire and Sword in those Eastern Plantations. It was judged necessary to send
some Forces that way to put a stop unto the current of those Outrages, before
the Remainders of the Southern Indians could have opportunity to join with
them: To that end about an hundred and thirty English, with forty Indians were
dispatched away into those parts, under the Command of Captain William
Hatborne, Captain Syl, and Captain Hunting, who were to join with such as
could be raised in those parts, under Major Waldern, and Captain Frost: After
they had surprised the Indians that flocked into those parts, (as was Related
before) which was done upon September the 6th. 1676. Captain Hathorne who was
Commander in chief, marched the Forces by the Seaside toward Casco; For at
that time they were upon some demurre, whether to march directly toward Ossapy,
and Pigwauchet, where the head Quarters of the Enemy was supposed to be, or
else to march directly toward Casco Bay, where they heard Parties of the Enemy
were daily spoiling the Plantations of the English; At the last it was judged
most Expedient to try if they could not meet with some parties of the Enemy
amongst those Plantations near the Seaside, by that means at least to prevent
them from doing more mischief if they could not find an opportunity to fall
upon some of them, and destroy them: But their time was not yet come, nor were
all the Desolations as yet accomplished, which God had a purpose to bring about
by their means. For notwithstanding there was a sufficient Force to have
suppressed all the numbers of the Enemy, if they had been many more than they
were; yet being emboldened and grown subtle by their former successes, they had
so dispersed themselves all about the woods in those p^rts, that when our
Forces were in one place, they would be in another, and so did much mischief
thereabouts, while our Soldiers were out after them: For after they had by
several steps in ten days time gotten to Casco, from Newechewannick (about the
eight of September) they marched to Wells, and from Wells to Winter Harbor,
and so from thence to Black point they passed by water, and then arrived at
Casco Bay, about the twentieth of September, yet about that very time, were
several of the English cut off at Mount joys Island, and that in sight of our
Forces, when they were not able to come at them, for want of Boat, the Island
lying two Leagues off in the Bay; This happened the twenty third of the same
month, as was said before, and within two days after, another party of the
Enemy were doing mischief at Wells, and Cape Nidduck, and yet escaped away,
when they had done.

Nor could our Forces in all their Expedition meet with any of them, but two;
one of which soon after he was taken, was let go, by the Treachery or
Carelessness of them that held him. For when our Forces were come within a few
miles of the hither side of Casco Bay, some of our Natick Indian Scouts going
in Company with the Indians under Blind Will, (a Sagamore of Pascataqua, who
went in Company with eight of his men, supposed to be good Pilots for the
places more Eastward) met with some of the Enemy, and laid hold of a couple of
them; Justice was done upon one of them, the other, although he was led by two
of Blind Wills Indians, they made a shift to let go, who escaping away, got
over a River, and gave notice to the Indians who were on the other side, and
were heard but a little before threshing in a Barn that belonged to one
Anthony Bracket, (whom they had lately surprised) Another disappointment our
Forces met withal about the same time, for when Captain Hathorne was up at
Casco Bay with his Soldiers, he never could come up with the Indians, either
through want of Skill in them that were his Scouts, or rather want of
Faithfulness in one that should have been his guide, who had got his living by
Trading with the Indians, therefore seemed unwilling to have the Brood of them
destroyed: As was known afterward. And by that means a party of the Enemy
escaped the hands of our Soldiers. Yet it pleased God at one time to bring the
Forlorn of our Forces upon a party of the Enemy, who espying the English,
presently fled away into the woods, like so many wild Dear, yet one of them,
viz. that J. Sampson who had been of the Company, that killed Robinson the year
before, was by the special hand of Divine Justice, suffered to fall, by some of
our Forces: He was a very lusty, stout man, and one that was armed with several
sorts of Weapons, but there is no Weapon shall defend them, whom death has a
Commission to destroy: There is no Ransom in that War: The rest of the Indians
that were scattered about Casco Bay, having discovered our Forces, made their
escape: But, we hope their time is short, and that God will find some way to
cut off the bloody and deceitful Enemies of his People, and not suffer them to
live out half their days.

But by one such Accident or other; our Soldiers could not meet with any of
them that had done all the mischief about those parts And while out Forces lay
about Casco Bay; A small party of the Enemy came down upon the Borders of the
Town of Wells, where they lay in Ambush near a Garrison house, at one end of
the Town, and shot down Mr. James Gouge from his horse, September the twenty
fourth, being Lords day, as he was going home from the Meeting; and then
knocked down his wife, giving her several wounds with their Hatchets about the
head, of which she dyed within three days after.

The next day September the twenty fifth, the same party being not above seven
in number went toward York, and surprised Cape Nidduck in a barbarous manner,
killing most of the poor people belonging thereunto: Some of their Neighbors
hearing of the Guns, came to their Rescue: The Indians being on the further
side of a River, dared them to come over and fight with them man to man: using
several Reproachful Terms to them, making a Shot at them also, which some of
the Company not being able to bear, did very resolutely adventure through the
River after them; but they were not willing to try the valor of the English;
when they perceived they found a way to pass over the River upon them, but
returned back toward Wells; where they killed another, one George Farrow,
September the twenty seventh, as he was too carelessly venturing to his house
without any Company: These things happened while our Forces were at Casco, where
they tarryed seven or eight days. And hearing of these Outrages committed in
some of those places which they left behind them; and not being able to meet
with any of them in the place where they were, they returned back toward Wells,
and York; but the Indians were escaped away into the woods after their
Companions, before they came there: Our Soldiers having thus spent much time
and pains in a fruitless Expedition toward Casco, they resolved to venture
another march after them, up toward Ossapy, supposing they might by that time
be drawn homewards toward their Winter Quarters; or else, that they might
destroy what they had left behind them, to prevent their harboring there for
the future: But it seemed good to him, who by his Sovereign Power and Infinite
wisdom orders all Events and purposes (wherein his People or others are
concerned) to disappoint all endeavors used at that time for the suppressing
of the Enemy, or putting any stop to their wonted Successes: For soon after our
Forces were returned back from Casco, news was brought of the surprizal of
Black point, on the twelfth of October, as was mentioned before; which
notwithstanding; It was judged more advisable to venture and proceed on with
the Expedition toward Ossapy, (whether it was supposed by this time, the
greatest number of them were retired) rather then to return back again to
recover Black point, where was nothing to be expected but an empty Fort, and
some deserted houses, which it seems the Indians had forsaken by that time.

And besides that other Forces were about the same time ordered to repair
thither, sufficient for the repairing and securing of the place with what else
was left remaining from the hands of the Enemy; And likewise several Soldiers
were ordered to Garrison the Towns thereabouts, to prevent them from making any
further Assault upon them. However, they were so far emboldned by the taking of
black point, and the Ketch at Richmond Island with several Prisoners also which
were surprised at the same time; That a party of them came the very next week
after, toward Wells, hoping to attain that, and all the Towns, and places else
betwixt Cas^o Bay and Pascataqua, as they had done black point. For a party of
them under Mugg their chief Leader, brought Mr. Shendal along with them to
Wells, where they summoned the first Garrison at the Towns end To facilitate
the business, they sent the said Shendal as their Agent, or Messenger to move
them to surrender, without hazarding an onset; But the People were not so
despondent, to yield up the place upon so slight an occasion; which when the
Enemy discerned, they soon drew off, after they had done some little mischief
to the Inhabitants: For first they killed Isaac Lit^lefield not far from the
Garrison, It is said, they would willingly have had him yield himself Prisoner,
but he refusing, they shot him down, yet they were so Civil, as to suffer his
Friends to fetch away his body, without offering any further act of Inhumanity
to it, or Hostility toward them that fetched it off. An old man called Cross,
was killed by them likewise about the same time, and another, Joseph Bigford by
name, belonging to the Garrison, was sorely wounded at that time, so as he dyed
soon after: Thirteen head of ^at Cattle were also killed by them, out of which
they only for haste, took the Tongues, leaving the bodies of all the rest whole
to the Owners, unless it were the Leg of one of them, which was also taken away.

This was all the mischief was done by them, after the taking of Black point:
The Inhabitants of Winter Harbor, near adjoining thereto, being alarmed with
the surprizal of the other place; fled away with their goods, for a time; till
they heard the Enemies were removed farther Eastward, and then it was said,
they returned to their place again; In this posture have things in those places
remained ever since, in those Eastern Plantations betwixt Pascataqua and Casco
Bay.

But our Forces under the Command of Captain Hathorne, and Captain Syl, having
at the last obtained all things necessary for a Winter march into the woods,
did upon the first of November following, set forth toward Ossapy, where, after
four days march of very difficult way, over many Rivers, not easy to pass at
that time of the year, they arrived; but found never an Indian, either there,
or in the way, as they marched along: The Indians belonging to those parts, had
not many years before hired some English Traders to build them a Fort, for
their security against the Mohawks, which was built very strong for that
purpose fourteen Foot high with Flankers at each corner. But at this time the
Soldiers intending to disappoint them of their Refuge, made Fuel thereof,
which at that time was very needful for our People, who had marched many miles
through deep Snow in a very cold Season, when they could hardly keep themselves
from freezing as they passed along, so early in the Winter: None of the Enemy
being to be found there in their strongest Fort; It was not counted worth the
while for all the Company to march any farther: Wherefore a small party being
sent up eighteen or twenty miles farther Northward amongst the woods, whereas
they passed along they met with many vast Lakes, (supposed to be the Cause of
the sharpness of the cold, in that side of the Country) making the place scarce
habitable for any besides those Salvages that use to hunt thereabouts, for
Moose in the Winter, and Beaver in the Summer, (a sort of Creatures, whose
Skins are of more Account than all their bodies.) But at this time it is
supposed they were all gone lower toward the Sea side, to share the Spoils of
the English Plantations, lately surprised by them; which is all the Reward they
have met withal, who in former years, for the sake of a little Lucre by
Traffic with them, have run themselves there into the very Jaws of
destruction, either by Irregular dealing with them; or by their too much
confidence in their deceitful Friendship.

November the ninth, our Forces having spent nine days in this Service,
returned safe to Newechewannick, from whence they set forth at the first,
having run more hazard of their Limbs, by the sharpness of the Frost, than of
their lives by any Assault from their Enemies.

There was great probability that the design might have had some good Effect,
if Mugg a chief Leader of them, did not much abuse those he fled unto, with a
proffer of Peace; for he told them that there were about an hundred of them
about Ossapy, not many days before: But it becomes us to look beyond second
Causes, in Events of this nature; and conclude, that God had raised up these
Barbarous Enemies to bring a like Chastisement upon the English in this side of
the Country, with that which others had endured elsewhere, in the end of the
former, and beginning of this present year.

Whereas mention was formerly made of a Peace concluded at Boston betwixt the
Governor and Council of the Massachusetts, and Mugg an Eastward Indian, in the
name of Madockawando chief Sagamore of all the Indians about Pemmaquia and
Penobscot; which said Mugg, was sent from Boston, November the 21st with two
Vessels, to receive the Prisoners there detained by the Indians, and also to
see the Ratification of the several Articles of the said peace concluded upon.
Which Articles for the better satisfaction of those that have not been
acquainted with them, are thouhgt fit here to be Inserted.

Boston, November. the 6th. 1676.
Covenants and Agreements made and concluded by, and between the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL of the Massachusetts Colony in New England of the one part: and Mugg
Indian, in the Name and behalf of Madockawando, and Cheberrina Sachems of
Penobscot, on the other part. Witnesses.
Impr. WHereas the said Mugg has been sent and employed by the said Sachems
upon a Treaty with the said GOVERNOR and COUNCIL relating to a Conclusion of
Peace, does hereby Covenant and engage for himself, and in behalf of the said
Sachems, that from henceforth they will cease all Acts of Hostility, and hold
an entire and firm Union, and Peace with all the English of the Colonyes in
New England. 2dly. That immediately upon the said Muggs Return, the said
Sachems shall deliver up unto such English man, or men, as shall by order of
the said Governor and Council, be sent with him, all such English Captives,
Vessels, and Goods whatsoever, Arms and great Artillery belonging to the
English, as are in their Custody, or under their power, as have been taken from
them during the time of the late Hostility. 3dly. That they will use their
uttermost endeavor with all possible speed to procure pay; wherewith to make
full satisfaction unto the English for all such Injuries, Losses, and Damages,
as they have sustained by them, in their housing, Cattle, or other Estate,
during the time of the late Hostility; or else to pay such a number of Beaver
Skins yearly, in order thereunto, as shall be agreed on between the said
Sachems, and such person or persons as shall be sent unto them from the said
Governor and Council for the Ratification hereof, to be paid at such time and
place as shall be then agreed upon. 4ly. That upon Condition of the English
furnishing of them with Powder and Ammunition for their necessary Supplies and
maintenance, they do Covenant and promise not to Trade for, or buy any Powder,
or Ammunition, but of such persons as shall from time to time be deputed by the
Governor for that end. 5ly. That if it do appear that Walter Gendal and the
men sent with him in the Vessel from Pascataqua (with Goods from Mr. Friar for
the Redemption of the Captives according to Agreement) or any of them are
surprised and slain by any of their Indians, or any others whom they can bring
under their power, that they shall forthwith Execute such Murderer, or
Murderers, or otherwise, deliver them up into the hands of the English. 6ly.
That if the Amonos-Coggin, or any other Indians in the Eastern parts, that are
in Hostility with the English, shall not fully Consent unto these Covenants and
Agreements, but shall persist in Acts of Hostility against the English, that
then the said Sachems shall, and will hold all such Indians to be their
Enemies, and take up Arms against them, and engage them as such. Lastly. The
said Mugg as a Pledge and Assurance of his own Fidelity, and that he is
empowered by the said Sachems for the end aforesaid, and for the performance of
the aforementioned Agreements, does freely and willingly deposite himself, and
his Life in the hands of the English; to remain with them as a Hostage until
the said Captives, goods and Vessels shall be delivered up.
Boston, November. 13. 1676. Signed in the Presence of John Earthy. Richard
Oliver. Isaac Addington. The mark of Mugg W Indian

The said Mugg lifting up his hand to Heaven for the true performance thereof,
esteemed amongst them, a strong Obligation to perform what they promise.



Things were so ordered by the good Providence of God, that the said Vessels
arrived safely at Penobscot in the beginning of the next month, where they
found the said Madockawando, who was ready to confirm and make good the
Articles of the Peace concluded at Boston by his Agent in his Name; And was
willing also to deliver all the Prisoners that were then in his Power, or under
his Command, which were but two, who were taken in the Vessel at Richmonds
Island, the twelfth of October last. The said Mugg likewise being sensible of
the Obligation he lay under, to make good his word, did venture to go up
himself to another Plantation of the Indians, where was supposed some more of
the English Prisoners were, to see whether he could obtain their Release, as
also to persuade with the rest of the Indians thereabouts to join in the
confirmation of the Peace; It appeared to the persons belonging to the Vessels,
that the said Mugg went with some Reluctance, as fearing the Indians he was
going amongst, would either kill him, or keep him Prisoner; To which end, he
ordered the Commanders belonging to the Vessels to tarry for him, about three
days, or four at the most, assuring them, that if he did not return by that
time, they might certainly conclude that either his Life or Liberty was taken
from him; However the Vessels tarried about or near a week beyond the time
limited, in expectation of his coming; But after so long stay, they neither
seeing, nor hearing from him, were ready to fear the worst, viz. that his
Country men had made him sure from having more to do with the English.
Whereupon for fear of being shut up by the sharpness of the Winter from
returning themselves, they took the opportunity of the next fair wind of
setting Sail for Boston, (only turning in to Pemmaquid to see if they could
hear any farther News there) where they arrived with such Prisoners, as were
freely delivered by Madockawando, the twenty fifth of December following, Anno,
1676. Amongst which Prisoners, besides the two forementioned, who were found at
Penobscot, there was a third, by a more remarkable Providence then ordinary,
added unto them, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, Son of that Reverend and worthy Minister of
the Gospel, Mr. Thomas Cobbet (Pastor of the Church at Iptwitch, a Town within
the Massachusetts Jurisdiction) who had all the time of his Sons Captivity
together with his friends wrestled with God in their daily Prayers for his
Release, and accordingly he was with the more joy received by his friends, as
an Answer and Return of their Prayers. The said young man had lived with Mr.
Friar, Merchant of Portsmouth for some years before, and had been often at Sea
with Mr. James Friar the eldest Son of the said Merchant, and who had after
much Experience of his Faithfulness, dexterity, and Courage on all such
Accounts, borne him so much Respect, that when he was urged by his Father to go
along with Mr. Shendal, as was said before, he would not venture unless his
Friend Thomas Cobbet would go along with him; the which Service he only for his
Friends sake accepted, which proved a fatal Adventure to Mr. James Friar, and
might have done to the other also, had not God otherwise disposed of him,
having, as is hoped, more Service for him in the Land of the living. Amongst
all the Prisoners at that time taken, the said Thomas Cobbet seemed to have had
the hardest portion: For besides the desperate dangers that he escaped, before
he was taken. First, by a bullet, shot through his Wast-Coat. Secondly, by a
drunken Indian, who had a knife at his Throat to cut it, when his hands were
bound, when the Indians came to share the Prisoners amongst them, he fell into
the hands of one of the ruggeddest Fellows, by whom within a few days after
his surprizal, he was carried first from Black point, to Shipscot River in the
Ketch, which the Indians made them to Sail for them, into the said River, from
thence he was forced to travel with his Pateroon Four or five miles over land
to Damariscottee, where he was compelled to row or paddle in a Canoo about
fifty five miles farther to Penobscot, and there taking leave of all his
English Friends and acquaintance, at least for the Winter, he was put to paddle
a Canoo up fifty or sixty miles farther Eastward, to an Island called Mount
Desert, where his Pateroon used to keep his winter station, and to appoint his
hunting Voyages; and in that Desart-like Condition was the poor young man
forced to continue nine weeks in the Service of a Salvage miscreant, who
sometimes would Tyrannize over him, because he could not understand his
Language, and for want thereof, might occasion him to miss of his Game, or the
like. What ever sickness he was obnoxious unto, by change of diet, or other
account, he could expect no other allowance than the Wigwam will afford: If
Joseph be in the Prison, so long as God is with him there, he shall be
preserved, and in due time remembered.

After the end of the nine weeks, the Indian whom he was to serve, had spent
all his powder, whereupon on the sudden he took up a Resolution to send this
young man down to Penobscot to Mouns^re Casteen to procure more powder to kill
Moose and Dear, which it seems is all their way of living at Mount Desert; The
Indian was certainly over ruled by Divine providence in sending his Captive
down thither, for a few days before, as it seems, after the Indians in that
place, has been powawing together, he told him, that there were two English
Vessels then come into Pemmequid, or Penobscot, which proved so indeed: yet was
it not minded by him surely, when he sent his Captive-thither for powder, for
it proved the means of his escape; which his Pateroon might easily have
conjectured, if it had not been bid from him As soon as he Arrived at
Penobscot, he met with Magg, who presently saluted him by the Name of Mr.
Cobbet, and taking him by the hand, told him, he had been at his Fathers house,
(which was November the first or second before, as he passed through Ipswitch
to Boston) and had promised to send him home, so soon as he returned.
Madockawando taking notice of what M^gg was speaking that way, although he were
willing that he should be released according to Agreement, (his Pateroon being
one of this Sagamores Subjects, though during the Hunting Voyage of the winter,
he lived at such a distance from him) began to demand something for
satisfaction, in a way of Ransom, not understanding before that his Father
was, a great Preachman, as they use to call it: Reply mas made to him, that he
should have something in lieu of a Ransom, viz. a fine Coat, which they had
for him aboard the Vessel; the which the Sagamore desired to see, before he
would absolutely grant his Release: but upon sight of the said Coat, he seemed
very well satisfied, and gave him free liberty to return home. Whilst this Mr.
Thomas Cobbet was a Prisoner at Mount Desert going along with the Indians to
hunt, in an extreme cold day; he was so overcome with the sharpness thereof,
that all his Senses were suddenly benumbed, so as he fell down upon the Snow,
not being able to stir hand or foot, and had without doubt there perished in a
little time but that the Indians he was going along with, missing him,
presently ran about the woods to seek him, and when they found him, they were
either so pitiful to him, or so careful of their own good, as not to cast away
a likely young man, from whom they expected either much service, or a good
Ransom, for want of a little Care, and pains to preserve his life; wherefore,
taking him upon their shoulders, they carried him into the next Wigwam, so as
he soon after revived, and came to himself again, without any farther mischief.

At another time, the Salvage Villain whose Prisoner he was, so long as he had
strong Liquor, for five days together was so drunk, that he was like a
furious mad Beast, so as none durst come near him, his Squaws he almost brained
in one of those drunken fits.

The said Thomas was forced to get out of his sight into the woods all that
night, for fear of being mischiefed by him. Where making a fire he kept himself
alive: The Squaws being by Gods special Providence so inclined to pity, that
they came to him daily with Victuals, by which means he was at that time also
preserved: All which put together, makes his Deliverance the more Remarkable,
as an Answer of prayer.

As for the Rest of the Prisoners, (which are said to be fifty or sixty) They
were left with them who first surprised them at Kennibeck, and Shipicot River:
The Women are employed it seems to sew and make Garments for them; They having
plundered much English goods at Arowsick. They are so much elevated with their
late succesles, in spoiling so many of the English habitations, that they seem
not very ready to hearken to Terms of peace, as their Sagamore Madockawando
does desire: Nor are the English able to come near them with any of their
Forces this Winter season, in regard both of the Remoteness of the place, and
sharpness of the Cold, which uses to be extreme in those parts: How their
hearts may be inclined in the following year, or what the English may be
enabled to do against them, is known unto God only, on whom we desire to wait
for a comfortable Issue of these our Troubles. But until they have spent all
the plunder that is taken, it is no doubt, but they will seem averse from
having peace; As others to the Westward did, whole hearts were hardened against
all proffers of that nature, till they were destroyed; Possibly some Remnants
of them that escaped in those other parts, are got hither amongst these, and do
ani^a^e them all they can to Hostility against us, till they make these as
miserable as themselves, and so forced at the last to fly their Country. Many
have been the Troubles we have met withal from these our Barbarous Neighbors
round about us, but God we trust will deliver us out of them all, as he has
promised to do for the Righteous, who may in the darkest night of Affliction
say, Eight is sown for them, which shall spring up in the appointed Time
thereof.

No farther News came to hand concerning the English Prisoners at Kennibeck,
after the Return of Captain M^or from Penobscot, till the fifth of January.
When one Francis Card with another young man formerly an Inhabitant of some
place about Kennibeck, or of Arowsick, (but then a Prisoner with the Indians,
made an escape from the Indians, and so got over Casco Bay, and then to Black
point, from thence he was conveyed to Pascataqua soon after, and then to
Boston.

The manner of his escape, as he reports was this: He was employed by the
Indians to thresh Corn at a Barn a little lower in the River, than the place
where the Indians commonly kept being trusted alone, to go and come of himself,
because there was no suspicion of any coming to carry him away, or seeming
possibility to get away without being discovered, he found means to plot with
another young man, who was sent to look horses; whose flesh it seems is by
those wild Salvages, preferred before the best Beef, so as having their choice
of both, they took what they liked best; And this being the Employment of the
young man, he had the fitter opportunity when he was in the woods to make any
Contrivance to get away. Thus being resolved upon their design, they provided
necessaries accordingly, and sent such a Message home to their Maesters, as
might occasion them not to expect them very soon that night; Thus resolved,
they marched away, as soon as ever they perceived the Coast was clear; And
having provided a Canoo accordingly fit for the design, by the help of it they
got over the waters, by which they were to pass which were not frozen; And in
the night time turned into a Swampe, where they might make a fire to keep them
from starving with the Cold, without being discerned; So as within two or three
days they recovered the Fort, and Garrison at black point, from whence they
were soon conveyed to Boston.

This Francis Card made this Relation of matters when he came to Boston, viz.
that the Prisoners which he left behind were well, and not much misused, only
put to do the Servile work about the Indians: woe must it needs be with
Christians, when put not only to sojourne, but to serve in those Tents of
Kedar. Such of the women as were gifted at knitting, and Sewing, were improved
to make stockings, and garments for their Pateroons: So as it seems the Ware
house at Arowsick furnished them with Cloth, Stuff, and Linen, and the
Inhabitants served for Artificers to cut it out, and make it up.

He reported also that the Indians spoke nothing of any Peace; but rather being
heightened with their late and great Successes, were contriving how to get
possession of the other places in the hands of the English, on that side of the
Country, which God forbid should ever come to pass; but finding so easy work of
their former Exploits, they hope they shall accomplish their purposes with the
like facility in all other places where they come.

It seems Squando is their chief Leader, that Enthusiastical, or rather
Diabolical Miscreant; who yet has put on a garb of Religion, and orders his
People to do the like; performing Religious worship amongst the Indians in his
way, yet is supposed to have very familiar Converse with the Devil, that
appears to him as an Angel of Light in some shape or other very frequently.
This Francis Card also affirms, that there is nothing so great a number of
the Indians as is here reported, for he says, when they were going out upon
some design, while he was in their hands, he had an opportunity to count them
all, and could find but ninety eight of them, that were men: Neither could he
discern that there were any of the Western Indians, unless Simon and Andrew,
that formerly escaped out of Dover Prison: Although it was before apprehended
there were multitudes of them flocked thither.

Francis Card his Declaration of their Beginning, August the fourteenth.
The Indians came to Richard Hammonds, and there killed Richard Hamond, Samuel
Smith, Joshuah Grant, there parting their Company, eleven men came up Kennibeck
River to my house, and there took me, and my Family. Therefore the rest of
their Company went to Arowsick, and there took the Garrison: about a Fortnight
after came down Kennibeck River, and so went down to Damaris Cove, and there
burnt houses, and killed Cattle, there coming back parted their Company, one
party went to Jewels Island, and the other party went to Saga-de-Hock, being in
number eighty one; Those that went to Saga-de-Hock took a Shallop, from thence
came to Kennibeck River, and then went to killing and destroying of Cattle and
housing, for they had Intelligence of a Ketch and a Shallop at Damaris Cove,
and going there they took the Shallop, and killed two men, being in number
about eighty; The next day made up their Forces, went out to Black point, being
about one hundred fighting men, and are now in two Forts about sixty at a
place, with six or eight Wigwams between the two Forts.

Now the best place to land men is in Casco Bay, and in Kennibeck River, the
one place being eight miles, the other about fourteen miles from the Fort where
I was kept: And if the Army do not go now with speed, they will be gone forty
miles farther up in the Country; at the first taking of me they carried me up
to Taconet, and the men coming down they brought me and two men more down for
fear of our killing their women and Children, for they kept their Women and
Children at Taconet all the Summer. As soon as the warm weather does set in,
they do intend to go away to Taconet, and there to build two Forts, for there
is their fishing places, and planting ground. Squando does inform them that God
does speak to him, and does tell him that God has left our Nation to them to
destroy, and the Indians do take it for a Truth all that he does tell them;
because they have met with no Affront. Now Mugg the Rogue, he being come again
to the Fort, he does make his Brags and laughs at the English, and says, that
he has found the way to burn Boston, and does make Laughter at your kind
Entertainment, they make their brags how they do intend to take Vessels, and so
to go to all the fishing Islands; and so to drive all the Country before them:
so reckning to be a great Number in the Spring, there is a great many Indians
at Cannada that have not been out this Summer, both of Kennibeck and
Damarascoggin, therefore a great many of these Indians at Kennibeck do intend
to go to Cannada in the Spring to them. And they do give Gifts both of
Captives, and of Goods to the Eastern Indians, to have them to go out with
them; but as yet I do not know what they will do. For Madockawando and Squando
are of several Judgments, and so have parted, and Madockawando does pretend
love to the English, they do use our English Captives as Civilly as we can
expect by such a People.

That this is Truth is declared by me Francis Card,
Ian. the 22. 1676.
By the Report which he brings it does not appear so difficult a matter to make
an Attempt to recover the place, and destroy them that hold it, as was before
apprehended: Insomuch, as that design, that was under debate before the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL a little before, and was let fall for the present, as a
matter not Feasible, has since been set a foot with a fresh Resolution: And
another thing also occurred about the same time, which put new Life into the
said design, viz. an apprehension that there were several of the Narrhagansets
scattered about in these woods near Pascataqua, who it was feared might join
with those of Kennibeck in the Spring, and so come down upon the English
Plantations, and spoil them all that are thereabouts. For soon after Francis
Card coming to Boston, some of Major Wa^de^ns Indians at Quechecho, as they
were hunting in the woods chanced to meet with three strange Indians, the which
had Guns, at least two of them; but those of Quechecho were without. The other
Indians began to insinuate into them, to see if they could make way for their
acceptance with the English: Those Indians that this motion was made unto, in a
most perfidious manner gave them encouragement in the business,; And appointed
a place where to meet them the next day, saying, they would not have them now
go home with them to their Wigwams, least their Women and Children should be
frighted with the sight of their Guns; All which was spoken upon a Treacherous
Account, by that means to betray them, for they had neither Women nor Children
at their Wigwams; but not having Guns themselves, as the other had, they durst
not then seize upon them: The next day therefore according to Appointment,
their guests expecting a Treaty, and a Friendly Compliance, (yet coming apart,
as was ordered the day before to be the more easily surprised) arrived at the
place Appointed; And there presently the first being thus Treacherously brought
into the snare was dispatched out of hand. The like was also done to the
second; The third was not at such a distance, but he either discerned or
suspected, what became of his Fellows, and therefore made the more bast to
escape; but his deceitful Friends were too quick for him, who shot him down
before he could get out of their reach: So as they took him alive, as is said;
but he could not live much longer by Reason of his wounds: These Quechecho
Indians cut off the Scalps of their poor Countrymen, (which is their usual
manner, when it is too far to carry the heads) which being brought to Major
Walderns Indians, they were presently discerned to be Narrhagansets by the cut
of their hair. This Instance is a sufficient Evidence of the Subtilety, guile,
and Falsehood natural to all these Indians; and may satisfy any Rational
person, what little trust there is to be put in their words, promises, or
Engagements, though never so solemnly made, farther then they that make them;
see Advantage in the keeping and performing. Subtilety, malice, and Revenge,
seems to be as inseparable from them, as if it were part of their Essence.

What ever hopes may be of their Conversion to Christianity in after Time,
there is but little appearance of any Truth in their hearts at present, where
so much of the contrary is so ordinarily breathed out of their mouths.

These were the manners of the Gentiles in former times, while they remained
Children of Disobedience, until they were rene^d after another Image: Nor are
these incapable Subjects for Divine grace to work upon, yet are there some
natural vices proper to every Nation in the world, as Paul speaks of the
Grecians, from the Testimony of one of their own Poets: (...), etc.

But to Return; These things so concurring, and several Gentlemen from about
Pascataqua repayring to Boston, so represented the states of things Eastward
before the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, as that it was apprehended not only
necessary, but Feasible also to suppress the foresaid Indians in those parts:
Whereupon it was forthwith concluded that an Expedition should be made against
them; To which end two hundred Soldiers, whereof about sixty were of the
Natick Indians, that have given good proof of their Valor, and Faithfulness to
the English; All which were immediately dispatched away, the first week in
February by water, under the Conduct of Major Waldern as Commander in chief; A
person well approved for his Activity, as well as Fidelity and Courage in
concernments of that nature: They had to Encounter with Rough and contrary
Winds, and much cold weather the first week after their setting forth; But
having so much Experience of the favor and goodness of the Almighty, who is
wont always to be present with his Servants in like Cases, though he has
often for a time deferred for the trial of their Faith, and exercise of their
patience; yet uses not to fail his people, that put their trust in him, and
diligently seek his face; A solemn time being appointed for that end; To the
which we expect a comfortable Answer: we that have sent forth our Friends on
the public Service, being thus engaged to follow them with our Prayers, at the
present in silence wait upon the Lord of Hosts to give a blessing to the
design; Hoping our Friends in this necessary, though difficult Service, thus
called forth, have gone out with the like Encouragement, and Resolution, that
sometimes Joab did; Let us be of good Courage, and play the men for our People,
and for the Cause of our God; And let the Lord do that which seems him good.

Upon the eleventh of February two Indian Squaws, that had run away from Major
Walderns in the beginning of winter, out of discontent, because the husband of
one of them, and some of the Relations of the other were sent away, came back
again with more wit, than they carried with them, though with less flesh upon
their backs: for having wandered up toward Pigwachet, till they were almost
starved there, they say, some Indians were seen by them, pretending they were
going to the head of Connecticut River, with Hostile Intents against the
English; but they going away as they did, little heed is given to the Stories
they tell upon their Return.

February the nineteenth following, John Abbot, the Master of Mr. Friars Ketch
taken October the Twelfth, before at Black Point, came in to the Isle of
Shoales, having made a desperate Adventure to escape; he gave a more probable
Account of things in those parts.

He says, they were first carried to Shipscat River, where the Vessel in which
they were taken, was moored for all the Winter: In which time, the Indians
having spent all their Ammunition, and most of their Provision, counted it high
time now to be looking out for more: to which end, they caused the said Abbot
to fit up the Vessel, (being a Pinnace of about thirty Tun) as well as he
could, with such assistance as they could afford him; and ten of them shipped
themselves in the same, intending for Penchscot; from thence to Sail up that
River, as far as they could; and then leaving their Vessel to proceed on with
their Canooes, as high up the River as the stream would permit, and so to pass
on to Cannada to buy powder of the French there; It being at this time two and
thirty Shillings a pound amongst the Indians at Kennibeck. But, as Providence
ordered it, after these Mariners were launched into the deep, a small storm
with a contrary wind began to arise; of which the English Skipper found ways
in his steering to make the danger seem more than really it was. in so much
that they resolved to put in at Cape-bona-waggon, three Leagues to the Eastward
of Shipscot, where eight of them went a shore, leaving two Indians aboard with
the English Skipper: After he had got so well rid of them, he contrived how to
get shut of the other also: Therefore he persuaded them, that the Vessel would
not ride safely in that place, so as he prevailed with them to let him go to
another Harbor, called Damaris Cove, two or three Leagues more Eastward: In
the way as he Sailed, he so ordered his steering, that sometimes the waves were
ready to overrake the Vessel, which put his two Indians into a fright, so as
they made all the have they could to get a shore, as soon as ever they came
within the Harbor, urging him to go along with them; but he pretended a
necessary Excuse to stay behind to look after the Vessel but with intent, as
soon as ever he should see them a shore, to boyse Sail for some English
Harbor, having no body aboard with him, but a small English Child about three
^ears old: It seems the Indians had a Child or two of their own dead in the
Vessel, who dying after they began their Voyage, they were the forwarder to go
a shore with them, for buryal: The said Abbot now perceiving he had obtained
his purpose; (for he often resolved on this Project before) first tallowing the
Mast with a piece of fat Pork left by the Indians, as high as he could reach;
that he with his own hands might the more easily hoyse the Sail, so choosing
rather to cast himself upon the Providence of God in the waters, than to trust
himself any longer with perfidious Salvages on the dry Land; he came safe to
Isle of Shoales before the Evening of the next day, February the nineteenth.

Within a few days after John Abbot aforesaid, made his escape in the Vessel;
There came an express from Major Waldern that commanded in chief over our
Forces sent to Kennibeck to subdue the Indians in those parts, and deliver the
English Captives that have been detained in their hands, since August last,
which gives this Account of their proceeding.

February the seventeenth, this morning the wind North East, soon after South,
and South West, we sat Sail with our Vessels from Black Point, for Portland,
but on the East Side of Cape Elizabeth, we espied John Pain, (who was sent out
a Scout) who brought word the way was clear of Ice, and Indians whereupon we
steared for Mary Point at the head of Casco Bay, and got there this night, but
too late to get to the Fort before morning.

February the eighteenth, we sent this morning our Scouts out by Land, who
returning about eight of the Clock brought word they espied the Tracts of three
Indians, and found a Birch Canoo at Muckquitt about four miles off, by which we
feared we were discovered, the Companyes about four a Clock were drawn forth,
and just beginning their march, when we espied five Canoos of the Enemy about
half a mile off, they landed over against us on an Island, and holloed to us,
whereby we perceived they desired a Trea^y, hoping to gain the Captives, we
sent John Pain to them, they promised him to bring the Captives by morning, and
desired peace: After this John Pain was sent again, and stayed among the
Indians in the room of Simon, who came to the Major, he was questioned, and
Answered as follows:

Quest. How came you to know we were here?


Answ. We continually kept out our Scouts, and Yesterday our Indians left a
Canoo at Muckquitt, which this day we missed, and perceived the English had
taken it, and our Men that left the Canoo, espied you a a great way off at
Portland.


Quest. Why did you break your Covenant with me?


Answ. Blind Will stirred us up to the War here, and said, he would kill you at
Quechecho; Simon having said this, asked the Major what his business was here?
to whom it was Answered, we came to fetch off the Captives and make War as we
see good, Simon also told us that the Captives were all well, that we should
have them by morning, that Squando was there, and would give the Captives to
Major Waldern that they intended peace, had sent to Boston before now, but that
Mugg told them the English would be here shortly.


The Major upon this dismissed Simon, and sent for Squando, to which Squando
Answered, he would meet him half way if he would come alone in a Birch Canoo.
To this the Major Answered, he would not venture himself in our Leakie Canoo,
and that if he had no more to say the Treaty was ended: To this Squando
Answered, he would be with us again at Ten a Clock, and bring the Captives.

On the Nineteenth. Wind North East, the weather thick; About Noon we
discovered a party of Indians in fourteen Canoos about three mile above us in
the Bay: they landed on a point of Land and burnt one English house, and
shouted to some of our men that were Scouts, challenging them to fight:
Immediately on the Return of our Scouts we marched against them as secretly as
we could: upon sight of us they fled; but Captain Frost came upon them with his
whole body before they were half out of Gun shot: in this Skirmish we judged,
we killed and wounded several of them without any damage, yet some of their
Bullets hit some of our men. For the Captives sake immediately after this, we
hung out a Flag of Truce, and the Enemy did the like: John Pain was sent to
them to demand the Reason why they fired the house, and brake their Promise.

Simon met him half way, and Answered, the house was fired Accidentally without
Order from Squando: that they had sent for the Captives who were a great way
off, and the foul weather hindered their coming: He questioned John Pain also
why we fought them while we were in Treaty.

Pain Answered they brake it themselves in not performing their promise,
challenging our Soldiers to fight; this latter Simon denied, and Answered the
other as before: Simon told him they had two men wounded, and expected
satisfaction, but also promised the Captives the next day, and so left us.

On the twentieth. The wind North East, and Snow, it was resolved to Sail for
Kennibeck the first fair wind, whether we had immediately gone upon our
knowledge, that we were discovered by the Enemy, but that the wind and weather
hindered us hitherto.

February the twenty first, this morning the wind North West, we set Sail for
Kennibeck, and arrived at the Harbors mouth at four a Clock: About Sun set we
set Sail up the River, and got to the lower end of Arowsick.

Twenty second, we set Sail this morning, but could not get to the head of the
River for Ice, whereupon we landed our Soldiers about two a Clock, about
twelve miles off Aboundessit Fort, and immediately began our march, about eight
a Clock at night came to the Fort, we found no Indians, there we took up our
Quarters this night.

Twenty third we sent out Scouts to discover the march of the Enemy, but found
so many Tracts every way, that we knew not what way to follow them; At a
Council of War it was resolved that Major Waldern should Sail for Penobscot,
with two of the Ketches, and part of the Soldiers to seek after the Captives,
and fight the Enemy If he had opportunity: the rest to build a Garrison. In the
absence of our Forces, the Vessels espied several Fires below the River, and
one English horse was burnt, about Sun set, the Soldiers returned to the
Vessels:

Twenty fourth this morning the Major with two Boats and a Shallop went to spy
out a place to settle a Garrison, and found one against the lower end of
Arowsick Island, and the Vessels are brought to it

Twenty fifth. We rested here this Sabbath.

John Bakers house opposite to the lower end of Arowsick, being judged the most
convenient place for their purpose, as well for the convenience of water for
the Soldiers, as of a Cove wherein Ships might R^de, within Command thereof,
their Vessels therefore were immediately Anchored there, where they rested on
the Lords day, February the twenty fifth.

The next day according to the Advice of the Commanders, Major Waldern
embarked sixty men in two Vessels, with which he set Sail immediately for
Peno^scot, leaving the rest to be employed in making preparation for settling a
Garrison in the said place.

In their way, off from Gy-obscut Point, they espied two Indians in a Canoo,
that waved their Caps, as if they desired speech with them. John Pain and Wat.
Ghendal were presently sent; they gave them Intelligence that many Indians were
at Pemmaquid with English Captives, upon which they bent their Course thither^
where arriving they Anchored at four a Clock, the same day; soon after two
Indians holloed to them from Mr. Gardners Fort. John Pain was sent a shore to
enquire who they were, and what was become of the Captives: Sundry sorts of
Indians were found upon the place, with several Sagamores, the chief of whom,
was Mattahando, who told them he was glad to see English men there, and that he
desired peace, and promised to deliver such Captives as were at Penobscot, the
next morning; adding also, that he desired to speak with Captain Davis. After
John Pain returned to the Major, he was sent back with the said Davis, and
staid a shore, till three Sagamores went a board, and signified as much to
Major Waldern, as they had said before to John Pain. While they were in
discourse, an English Captive was espied in a Canoo with his Pateroon, with
whom they desired to speak, but it was not granted at that time, he being
carried farther up the River out of fight.

Soon after the Major went a shore with six men, yet carrying no Arms with
them. He found their words smoother than Oil, yet were there drawn Swords in
their hearts, of which some of their actions, gave no small ground of
Suspicion: for they deferred all till the next morning; nor were they willing
to let the man that was espied before in the Canoo come a board to see his
Friends without leaving an Hostage in his room, of which the Major was very
glad, that he might have an opportunity of a little discourse with one whom
they might trust. When they returned from the shore, a sign was promised to be
given for the Appearance of the Indians by the firing of three Guns. The next
morning, February the twenty seventh, the Major with the same number as before,
went to Treat with them: They with John Pain having first holloed to them; upon
their coming a shore their persons were searched on both sides, and all Arms
laid aside. The whole Forenoon was spent in a Treaty, whereat they seemed much
to rejoice in expectation of a Peace with the English; yet when Major Waldern
desired a present delivery of the Captives, with Assistance of men and Canoos
to fight the Monoscoggin Indians, Enemies to them both, it was denied, though
they could not have had a fitter Testimony of their Fidelity.

They alleged that the Captives were given them by Kennibeck Indians, and
they must have something for keeping them all Winter, and therefore were not
willing to let them go without Ransom; And for their Canoos, they said they
had them in present Service, being then bound for Penobscot. The price
demanded, viz. twelve Skins a person, was yielded to; upon which they presently
delivered William Chadburn, John Whinnick, and John Worwood, which were all
that they would own, or could be proved they had.

That part of the pay, which was to be in Liquor, was presently laid down, the
rest was promised to be sent in the Afternoon. The Commanders debated what was
farther to be done, one or two of the old Sagamores, (who were believed) seemed
sincere about the Peace, professed that none of them had any hand in the War,
but only some of their young men, whom they could not Rule: But several of the
Company affirming they saw some of the said Indians at Casco engaged in
Hostility against the English, it was resolved not to enter into any League of
Peace with them, but rather to fight them, or surprise them after they had
dispatched the business about the Captives.

This being determined, the Major with five of his men went a shore, with part
of the Ransom, the better to beget a Confidence in them; and then presently to
return a board, and fit his men for farther Service; But if he had not wisely
provided against all Exigencies aforehand, he might have been prevented from
ever going aboard more; for stepping aside a Rod or two from the place, for
better Circumspection, he espied the point of a Lance from under a board, hid
there, as were other Arms near by for a Treacherous design that was in their
minds, soon after, upon the receiving the rest of the Pay, to have been put in
Execution. Whereupon Major Waldern took up the Lance, and came toward them,
changing them with falsehood and Treachery, for hiding Weapons just by,
wherewith to destroy them as soon as they had delivered the goods: The Indians
discovered their guiltiness by their Countenances, some of them making toward
him, thinking to get the said Weapon out of his hands; but he bid them stand
off, threatening to kill every one that offered to touch him; And immediately
waved his Cap over his head, (which was the sign agreed upon, for the
Soldiers to come all a shore, in Case of need) upon which Token the Soldiers
all hasted away. In the mean while the English that went a shore to wait upon
the Major, were forced to bestir them, both to secure the goods from being
carried away, and to defend Major Waldern: Some of the Squaws with others of
the Enemy ran away, one of them catched up a Bundle of Guns that were hid near
by, and ran away with them, Captain Frost seized an Indian called Megunnaway, a
Notorious Rogue, (that had been in Arms at Connecticut last June, at the Falls,
and saw that brave and Resolute Captain Turner, when he was slain about green
River; and helped to kill Thomas Bracket at Casco, August last.) And with the
help of Lieutenant Nutter, according to the Majors Order carried him a board,
while himself searching about farther found three Guns hid in a Cow-house just
at hand, wherewith he armed the other three men that were with him: By this
time some of the Soldiers were got a shore, and instantly according to their
Majors Command pursued the Enemy toward their Canoos; In the Chaso, several of
the Enemies were slain, whose bodies they found at their Return; to the number
of seven, amongst whom was Mattahando the Sagamore, with an old Powaw, to whom
the Devil had revealed, as sometimes he did to Saul, that on the same day he
should be with him; for he had a little before told the Indians, that within
two days, the English would come and kill them all, which was at the very same
time verified upon himself: The body of our men overtook them before they all
recovered their Canoos, so as without doubt, diverse others of them were slain
likewise: for they sunk a Canoo, wherein were five drowned before their Eyes:
and many others were not able to paddle: four they took Prisoners, whom they
brought away with them. There being about five and twenty of the Indians
present at this Encounter.

Much more damage might have been done by our men upon the Enemy, if they had
known the ready way to their Canoos; but the Indians having prepared all things
ready for flight, in Case, as well as for fight, the more easily made their
escape. One of the Captives taken was Madockawando's Sister, who was
Entertained very Courteously by the Commander in chief, and had been carried
forth with to her brother, in hope by her means to have gained the better
Terms for our remaining English Captives, but it was certainly known that he
was gone from home upon an Hunting Design, and not to return in two Months.

The English took much Plunder from the Indians, about a thousand weight of
dried Beef, with other things, Megunnaway was shot to Death, the same day or
the next, so as Justice is by degrees pursuing those perfidious Villains, and
one after another they are brought under the Wheel of Destruction. Simon, that
Arch Traitor, seems as is said, by his Consumptive looks, to have received the
Sentence of Death, which may bring him into the same place or State with the
rest.

Feb. 28th. they set Sail for Shipscot, but the wind failing, they were put in
at Kennibeck, from whence Captain Fisk with forty men were sent to the said
place to seek after Plunder, where they found between thirty and forty Bushels
of good wheat, which they brought away with them, several other things they
lighted upon here, and there, some of which were brought away; As one or two
great Guns, and some Anchors, from Saga de Hock, Boards from Arowsick, where
they found an hundred thousand Foot, of which they brought home, enough for the
lading of their Vessels, leaving the rest to be Transported in a more
convenient Season.

While our Soldiers were upon Arowsick, two of the Enemy chancing to come upon
the place, one of them presently received his Reward, the other received his
Payment, which yet is supposed to amount to the whole; The Canoo wherein he
seemed to escape, being found the next day all bloody, and split asunder.

March the first, one of the Indian Squaws a Captive was sent to Ta^anet Fort,
with a Message to the Sagamores to Treat for the rest of the Captives: Five
days were given her for her Return, which were not expired, when Major
Waldern, with most of the Soldiers were called to return home toward Boston,
where they arrived March the eleventh, 1676. 77. having first put in at
Portsmouth. Bringing along with them the bones, or rather the body of Captain
Lake, preserven entire and whole and free from putrefaction by the coldness of
the long winter, so as it was when found by the discretion of one that was near
him when he was slain, easily discerned to be his, by such as bad known him
before.

It is hoped by those that returned, the Enemies are by this Encounter of the
English so scattered and broken, that they will not be able to rally again
suddenly, or make any after Attempt, if the present Advantage be seriously
pursued. And thus have our Enemies themselves many of them fallen into the pit,
which they have been digging for others.

This day also Letters were received from Major Pinchon of Springfield, but
without mention of any appearance of Enemies in that Quarter, whereby we are
encouraged to believe, that they have stumbled and fallen down backward, so as
they shall never rise any more to make farther disturbance. That which crowned
the present Service was the performing it without loss of blood; They all
returning home in safety, not any one being missed; Let them accordingly
remember to pay a suitable Tribute of Thankfulness to him, under whose Banner
they went forth, and returned in Safety; And say with Moses the Servant of the
Lord, JEHOVAH NISSI.

TO this Issue were our Troubles with the Indians brought in the end of the
year, 1676.

That which has been already said in that kind, may serve to give an Account
of the Murders, Slaughters, Captivities of several persons of the English
Inhabitants of New England: together with the burning and spoiling of diverse of
their Villages and houses, spoiling of their Estates, by those their perfidious
and barbarous Enemies. That which remains, is only to satisfy the Inquisitive
Reader about some other particulars, which have a Relation unto, or dependence
upon the former: as to show what may be the principal and leading Causes Civil
or moral, of those strange Successes of the Indians, in some of their first
Encounters with the English there, what presages or other ominous Accidents
were observed aforehand, what assistance they received from other Foreign
Nations, French, or Dutch, what is since become of those Indians that were the
Authors of the foresaid mischiefs, what progress Christian Religion has
already made, or is like furtherto make amongst the rest, all which may serve
as an Epilogue to the Tragical History foregoing.

It is no doubt but that (as sometimes was said of the Divisions of Reubin)
there have been, and are great thoughts of heart amongst them that wish well to
this poor Country; for the Calamities that of late have here fallen out, every
one taking occasion to put that Construction upon what has happened, which suits
best with his own understanding and humor. Possibly those that live at a
distance have made many uncertain guesses at things which have passed here. For
those that lived upon the place have very sad Apprehensions both concerning the
Rise and Issue of them. In a matter therefore of so much difficulty to give the
best account we can of the things under debate; It cannot be denied but that
things ever since the planting of these Colonies of New England, they have been
signally blessed of God, and made to flourish above many other Foreign
Plantations, both for the number of Towns and Villages, Increase of Families,
growth of Trade, flourishing of Religion, probably therefore, this sudden and
unexpected turn of Providence, may occasion many to think, that either there
has been some notable Declension from former Principles and ways, or else the
world has been much abused by former reports of our prosperous proceedings
here. But it should be observed that Arguments taken barely from Success, and
the Event of things, like Ciphers standing alone and not joined with others, as
some have said, do not increase the number, when the whole Sum is to be made
up, they will signify what they were intended for; Every thing is beautiful in
its Season, but in the mean time sad Events should rather be improved to our
own Instruction than the condemning of others: following the dark Cloud of
Providence without the fiery Pillar of the Scripture, will lead into uncertain
paths. This is not the first time that Christian People have been exposed to
many Outrages, and barbarous Calamities from their Pagan Neighbors, to whom
they have been many ways Officious. It is well known what happened in the
Neighbor Colony of Virginia on the twenty second of March, 1622. when by a
general Conspiracy of the Indians three hundred and forty seven persons of the
English Planters, were barbarously massacred; at that time when they had the
greatest hopes of Converting them to Christianity; yet need not this any whit
discourage charitable Endeavors that way; for if it had not been for one
Converted Indian, that revealed the Plot, in all likelihood all the rest of the
English there planted, had been in like manner cut off at the same time. The
Heathen in New England are situate in the same Climate, therefore cannot be
supposed to be much differing in their manners and disposition. But besides
that we are hemmed in on both sides, and almost round about, with People of
Foreign Nations, whose design is neither Religion, nor yet planting Colonyes
of Civil People, so much as present Emolument by Commerce and Traffic with the
Indians, who notwithstanding their barbarous manner of living, are yet
furnished with some rich and useful Commodities, for the obtaining of which,
those that come amongst them have not been unwilling to offer them in way of
Exchange, such Commodities as the Indians most fancy and desire, as Powder and
Ammunition, not considering how destructive the Trade thereof may prove to
others, which has made some wise men both fear and foretell the dangerous
Issue of Trading those things with the Indians here. It has been said the
Hollanders used so to deal with the Spaniards, at such times as they had their
fiercest Wars with them, saying, that if they did not, others would carry those
Commodities to their Enemies, which they thought they were as good to do
themselves, that so in Case of bad Success in the Wars, the gain of the Barter
might help to make amends for the loss of the Battle. The same Reason possibly
put them upon the like practice in that part of this Country called the
New-Netherlands: for which they have pretty well smarted themselves, as now
they have helped others to do by their Example. Some prudent Gentlemen that
governed in Virginia at the first, were aware of this mischief; wherefore it
was strictly forbidden them, upon pain of death to show an Indian the use of a
Gun; if the like Course had been continued here, it had scarce been possible
according to the Eye of Reason that so much mischief could have been done us by
our Indian Neighbors, at this time more than in former years. Their wills were
as good heretofore, but when they had nothing but Bows and Arrows to trust
unto, they were capable of no such mischief: But now by their frequent Converse
and Trading with the Dutch and French on each side of us, they are as well
skilled in the use of small Artillery as many other Nations.

Their young men so much delighting therein, that upon point they mind little
else, and are so proud of their Skill, that they thought they could easily deal
with, if not over-match their Masters; that first instructed them.

It is reported by an Ancient Mariner yet living in these parts, a person of
good Credit, that above twenty years since being in the Eastern parts about
Kennibeck, he heard an old Indian tell this story, that when he was a Youth,
there was a Fort built about Saga-de-Hock (the Ruins of which were then shown
this Relater, supposed to be that called St. Georges Fort in honor of Captain
George Popham, the President of the Company sent over Anno, 1607.) And
possessed for some time by the English: But afterward upon some Quarrel that
fell out betwixt the Indians and them, the English were some of them killed by
the said Indians, and the rest all driven out of the Fort, where there was left
much of their Provision and Ammunition; amongst which there was some Barrels of
Powder, but after they had opened them, and not knowing what to do therewith,
they left the Barrels carelessly open, and scattered the Powder about, so as
accidentally it took fire, and blew up all that was within the Fort, burnt and
destroyed many of the Indians, upon which they conceived their God was Angry
with them for doing hurt to the English; It had been well these Indians never
had had any other acquaintance with the nature of that Commodity, then by such
Experimental knowledge of its Force and power. But Covetousness was and will be
the Root of all evil in every Age of the World, of which this may be reckoned
one, and not the least, that for the sake of a little Lucre, Civil and
Christian Nations have been induced to instruct a barbarous and Salvage People
(before ever they had been reduced to good order or Civil manners, much less
Christianity, in the use of our A^tillery, and furnish them likewise with
Ammunition, to improve that Skill to the destruction of themselves, and their
Posterity. Thomas Martin was said to be the first that like Epimetheus opned
this Pandora's Box but he was not the Vulcan, that forged all their Guns, with
other weapons of War they are found so well furnished withal.

The Commissioners of our united Colonyes have for a long time carefully and
seriously endeavored the preventing this Inconveniency in every of the three
Colonyes, by strict prohibition of Trading Ammunition with the Indians; Nor has
it been given way unto, till of late years, when by the continual Solicitation
of some of our own People (that possibly since have paid dearly for their
forwardness therein) who a^leadged the Example of the French and Dutch, and of
some of our own Nation bordering upon us; The former restraint has been taken
off, and it is verily supposed that as to some of our People, that in the last
Insurrection of the Indians amongst us, have felt both the first and worst part
of their Rage and Cruelty; it was Effected by the Ammunition not long before
purchased of themselves, which it may be was reserved for that very end and
purpose. It is no small Aggravation of the misery befalling a place or person,
when it is known to be brought about, by means of their own projecting; As
sometimes was said to the Tyrant slain by a weapon of his own forging, suo sibi
hunc jugulo gladio.

But if Enquiry be made into the moral and procuring Causes, whereby God has
been provoked to let loose the Rage of the Heathen thus against us; It is not
hard to give an Answer. The Sovereign Ruler of the World need never pick a
Quarrel with any sort of men (the best of his Servants at all times giving him
too just occasion of Controversy with them) or be to seek of a ground why to
bring a Scourge upon them, having also other holy ends why he contends with his
People; of which he is not bound to render the world an account: It may be
Reason enough to work in them a Sympathy for the Sufferings and Calamityes of
others: or to keep them from being exalted above measure; or to humble and
prove them, that they should not by their long Peace and Prosperity be ready to
look upon themselves as less sinners than others, who have drunk deep of the
Cup of Trembling before them: To prevent what Evil may, as well as reform what
is already grown up amongst them. Standing waters are most apt to corrupt, Gods
Dispensations of this nature in the world, are usually observed to be for
Correction of the Vices, as well as for the Trial of the Virtues found in his
Servants. And what people or person is there upon the face of the Earth, who
has not Reason to lay their hand upon their mouths, and to abhor themselves in
dust and asher, if the Almighty should go about to enter into Judgment with
them: No doubt but after so long a time of Peace and Prosperity, as has been
enjoyed, the like Corruptions have began to bud forth, as are usual in such a
Gase, as Pride, Luxury, Inordinate Love of the World, etc. Nor need He be
instructed by men, what Instruments to make use of, in the^ hastening of his
People: Why may not God as well as Gideon teach the men of Succoth, and of
other places, by the Briers and Thorns of the Wilderness. If a more particular
Indagation of the (...) or the very original Offense in this matter be
expected; All things considered, it may be feared to spring from some
Irregularities and miscarriages in our Transactions and dealings with the
Indians themselves, according to that known Rule. In quo quis peccat in eo
punitur, yet must not this be understood, so as to reflect upon the People of
the United Colonyes in the Gross: Whose supreme Courts in their several
Jurisdictions, have endeavored by the sharpest and severest Laws imaginable to
prevent any miscarriage of such a nature; But it has arisen only from such
places and persons as border upon us round about, both Southward and Eastward,
yet never were, nor would be, subject to the Laws of our Jurisdiction, nor had
any Reprover in the Gate, or Magistrate to put the Offenders to shame Such as
make the Advantage they have in their heads the Rule for their Consciences to
act by; It is no wonder if they be ready to transgress the Rules both of
Sobriety and Righteousness in their dealings with men, as well as Piety before
God. The things that the Indians are more eager to Trade for, being known to be
either strong Liquor or Powder, and Ammunition: And many have been found
Indirectly and under hand to gratify their humor therein. The one has proved
always most hurtful to themselves, the other feared (and justly as it has
been proved) most destructive to our selves. The more sober and prudent of the
Indians have always most bitterly complained of the Trading of strong Liquor
in our English, as well as in the French and Dutch, whose ordinary Custom is
first, to make them, or suffer them to make themselves drunk with Liquors, and
then to Trade with them, when they may easily be cheated both in what they
bring to Trade, and in the Liquor it self, being one half or more nothing but
Spring water, which made one of the Amonoscoggin Indians once complain that he
had given an hundred Pound for water drawn out of Mr. P. his Well. But this is
not all the Evil that attends this wicked Trade of strong Liquor, for when they
are drunk therewith, they are ready to fight with their Friends, Parents,
Brethren, etc. Yea, often have murdered one another. Should I not be avenged
on such a People, or persons as these says the Lord? Good old Jacob sometimes
complained after the Villainy of his two Sons, committed upon the Sch^chemites,
that he was made to stink in the sight of the People of the Land, and that he
should be destroyed he and his house: It is well if some of our Borderers have
not had cause, not only to fear, but to feel the like Calamity in Reference to
themselves, or some of theirs, thus what has been gotten over the back of the
evil Fiend is lost under his belly according to the Proverb.

Besides all this, it has been observed of many of these scattering
Plantations in our Borders, that many were contented to live without, yea,
desirous to shake off all yoke of Government, both sacred and Civil, and so
Transforming themselves as much as well they could into the manners of the
Indians they lived amongst, and are some of them therefore most deservedly (as
to Divine Justice) left to be put under the yoke and power of the Indians
themselves, and hence it is that in many parts, the people void of Council and
common prudence as well as Courage, have so frightfully deserted, or Cowardly
delivered up several places of strength (though Tenable enough of themselves)
into the hands of Contemptible Enemies; and so like Ripe Figs upon the first
shaking of the Tree, have been ready to fall into the mouth of the Eater, as
the Prophet speaks; As has been too sadly verified in some of the Southern,
and all the Eastern parts.

If it be here Objected, that the same or like Calamities have befallen many of
those places and persons; where no such Evils could justly be complained of; It
may as easily be Answered, and that from the observation of Heathen themselves,
that in such public Calamities, it is not easy to distinguish between the good
and the bad, saepe Diespiter, iratus incesto addidit integrum. The Righteous
many times have an equal share with the wicked. In these Cases says Solomon,
all things come alike to all, no man knows love or hatred by all that is
before him: The Confused Events of worldly Affairs, are often times so limited
and restrained by the holy hand and wise Providence of God, that it is hard to
find a difference; therefore concerning such places, which may be thought not
touched with the guilt of the forementioned miscarriages, yet have by the
overruling hand of Providence been notwithstanding made to suffer as deeply as
others. I judge them not, yet hope, if they have ought for which to judge
themselves before him that searches the hearts, they will take occasion hereby
to humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, that in his due time they
may be Exalted to their former Tranquillity and Peace.

When Gods Judgments are abroad in the Earth, then should the Inhabitants of
the World learn Righteousness. This Caution is judged the more necessary here
to be added, in that it is the general observation of all indifferent and
unconcerned persons about the like Troubles; That they have ordinarily either
begun, or have fallen heaviest upon those places and persons that have had most
to do in the Trading with Indians.

If any such have as yet escaped their hands, to be sure they have been
Threatened, as if they had been before others, particularly looked upon by them,
as the Obj^ct of their Revenge, which makes some moderate persons fear, that
those men have either themselves offended in that kind, or else have connived
at others under them, to carry on the Traffic with the Indians, by such ways
and means, that have been as well offensive to God, as injurious to those they
have Traded with.

In the second place, touching the various Success we have met withal, in our
several Encounters with the Indians, Victory and Conquest did for a long time
seem to stand Neuter, and our Condition and Warfare not much unlike the
Conflict between Israel and Amalek in the Wilderness, nor can it be denied out
that our Enemies for a time had great Success in their Outrages, Providence as
it were seeming to offer them opportunities of doing us much mischief; when we
could find none of taking just Revenge: Things of that nature being strangely
either hid from the Eyes of the Leaders, or else the weather has so fallen out
as that it was not possible for our men to have pursued them: Although both the
Commanders and Soldiers, sent forth from all the three Colonyes, have jointly
and severally pursued their Advantages, with in-Credible hazard and diligence,
and with as Invincible Courage as ordinarily has been found amongst men. But
as it is said, the Battle is not always to the strong, nor the Race to the
swift, but Time and Chance has strangely Interposed to the prolonging of our
miseties, and the hardening and embolding of our Enemies: Much of our
disappointments, and the loss of many of our Forces engaging with them, must be
imputed in a great measure to our men's unacquaintedness with the manner of
their fighting, they doing most of their mischiefs, either by Ambushments,
sudden surprizals, or overmatching some of our small Companyes with greater
numbers, having had many times six or seven to one: Possibly also many of our
Overthrows have proceeded from our too much Confidence in our own weapons,
Courage and Martial Discipline (Not making Allowance for the difference of
Times, when they before engaged us, only with Bow^ and Arrows, but now came to
fight us with our own weapons) which has proved no small Advantage to our
Enemies, and disadvantage to our selves; or else to the distance of our Towns
one from the other so as ofttimes they were destroyed, or in danger thereof,
before any notice was taken of their danger. If that be a sure Rule whereby
Valor is to be judged, plus animi est inferenti p^riculum quam propulsanti,
sc. that there is more Courage seen in the Assaylants, than in the Defendants;
a few of our men have frequently defended themselves against multitudes of
them, unless at such times when Providence seemed as it were to trouble the
Wheels of our Motions, and fight against us, so as ordinarily our people used
not to want Courage: For at Lancaster where they seemed to have had the
greatest Cause of boasting for their Success in any Assault (although it were
since known, that they had five hundred fighting men when they Assaulted that
small Town of about fifty Familyes) yet were they able to surprise but one
garrison house; which neither was fenced round, nor were the Defendants able to
ply their shot behind it, but so as the Enemy came to the very Walls and Roof
on the back side with their Fuel, or else they had never been able to have
dispossessed the Inhabitants. The same Indians within a while after, had not
been able to have done the mischief at Groaton which they did, had not a
Garrison been unadvisedly as it were delivered into their hands. In one word
they were more beholding to their perfidious Subtlety and Falsehood, or to the
Advantage of Season, place, and Number than any Valor or Courage in all their
Victoryes, showing only a Belluine Rage and fierceness, when they had an
opportunity in their hands to destroy or do mischief. For soon after when the
time of Vengeance was come, and God seemed to own the Cause of his People, a
small handful of our men has surprised hundreds of theirs, as has been
already declared in the Narrative. The Dispensations of the Almighty have been
very awful toward us, for a long time, not seeming to go forth with our
Armies, nor helping us in defending, our selves, or defeating of our Enemies,
as if he had a purpose and design to bring a sharp Scourge upon us, by that
means to humble us, and prove us, and then (as we trust) to do us good in our
latter end: acting therein as wise Parents that after they have corrected their
Children, to cast the Rod into the Fire. For our Enemies to the Southward, were
in the beginning of these Troubles, possessed of many goodly Havens, many rich
and Fertile places, as at Mount-Hope, and all along the Narrhagansit Country.
But are by this occasion, (quarrelling with us without cause) themselves in a
manner all destroyed by the special hand of God, and their Posterity quite
rooted out, as were the Pequots before them, whereby it may be gathered as we
hope, that God is making way to settle a better people in their rooms, and in
their stead; when the whole frame of Gods Counsels, and purposes are put
together, and accomplished by the Issues of his Providence, it will, no doubt,
appear a work very beautiful in its Season, not only for the glory of the
Author but for the good and benefit of his people, that are concerned therein.

As for predictions, or presages of these late Troubles,

Something of that nature has been observed by some Judicious persons in
reference to the present Calamities, of which something has already been
published to the World, concerning which I have nothing to add, only that some
such things have been affirmed by credible persons, as presages of what has
lately come to pass. The noise of Guns is affirmed by many, to have been heard
in the Air, in sundry places not many years before; Concerning which the
Judicious Reader may take what notice he pleases. Although I would not be too
forward in obtruding uncertain Reports upon the belief of the far distant
Reader, especially considering how much the world has often been abused with
false Coin of the like nature.

But for other predictions of the present Calamities, some wise men have
thought it not unworthy to be communicated to Posterity what has been observed
amongst the Indians themselves, as if either God himself had left some
Impression on the minds of some of them this way, or that by some strange
Instinct or other, they had some Reason to forbode the Troubles now begun,
although not yet ended, sed dabit Deus his quoque finem, in his own time.

There was within the Compass of the last seven years now current, a Sagamore
about Ki^tary, or the North-East side of Pascataqua River, called Roules, or
Rolls; who lying very sick, and bed rid, (being an old man) he expected some
of the English, that had seized upon his Land, should have shown him that
Civility, as to have given him a visit in his Aged Infirmityes, and sickness;
It matters not much, whether it was totally neglected or not; to be sure at the
last, he sent for the chief of the Town, and desired a favor of them, viz.
that though he might, as he said, challenge all the Plantation for his own,
where they dwelt, that yet they would please to sell or give him a small Tract
of Land, possibly an hundred or two of Acres, and withal desired it might be
Recorded in the Town Book, as a public Act, that so his Children which he left
behind, might not be turned out, like Vagabonds, as destitute of an habitation
amongst, or near the English, adding this as the Reason; That he knew there
would shortly fall out a War between the Indians and the English all over the
Country, and that the Indians at the first should prevail, and do much mischief
to the English, and kill many of them; But after the third year, or after three
years, all the Indians which so did, should be rooted out, and utterly
destroyed.

This Story is reported by Major Waldern, Mr. Joshuah Moodey, Captain Frost,
that live upon, or near the place. And one of the three forementioned persons
was desired by the said Sagamore to make a Record hereof. Valeat quantum valere
potest aut debet. Many Stories of like nature are confidently told, by such as
have been more conversant with the Indians, which showed that either the
Conspiracy was a long while in Contriving, or else that some Impression was by
a Divine hand made upon the minds of some of them.

For the actings of our Neighbor Nations round about us, whether they have had
actually any hand in our Sufferings, either instigating of our Enemies, or
secretly and underhand supplying them with necessaries where with to carry on
their design against us, without whose Assistance, it is supposed they could
hardly thus long have held out. It is no question but there are those in the
world, that say Aha, at the Calamities of our Sion, and that like Edom in
Jerusalems day, cry, Raze it, Raze it, even to the Foundation thereof: But for
our near Neighbors, whether Dutch or French, their design in their several
Plantations, being solely, or principally Trade, and knowing that as formerly
they had, so may they still have more benefit, and Advantage by our Commerce
and Traffic than by our Ruin; it seems therefore not so probable, that they
should promote or design such a wicked end to themselves, much less that they
should join with Pagan Infidels therein; more Charity we judge is due to them
that profess the Christian Name, whatever Error or Superstition their Religion
or worship may be blinded with

We may well conceive that either of them would not be much unwilling to part
with any thing they have to sell for Beaver, nor would they very scrupulously
enquire what the Indians do with their Powder, provided they could get their
pay for it, no more than the Cutler did, to know (as the Tale goes) what the
Cutpurse did with the knife he made him: But that purposely either of them have
furnished our Enemies with means to do us mischief, we are not forward to
believe.

As for the French at Cannada they live at too great a distance, to have much
Commerce with our Enemies: And besides they are not themselves so secure of the
Indians they deal with as to be forward to ^et them against others, least
thereby they come to learn the way to fall upon themselves. And besides it has
been affirmed by some of their own Nation, that not long since were there, and
passed home this way, that they are more afraid of Attempts from hence, than
we have cause to be from them.

Other Reports possibly have been taken up concerning us, as if we were divided
in our Counsels, and were too tenacious of our goods, and readier to keep them
for our Enemies, than prudently to lay out what was necessary for our own
defense and preservation: no question but many such Rumors as these have taken
place, in the m^nds of some; But it is hoped that such as are wise and serious,
will not give too much to sinister Report till they are rightly informed.
Greater Unity of minds in things of such a nature, has seldom been found
amongst men, that might all along have been observed here. If in any thing
propounded for the better carrying on the war against the Indians, there has
been some difference of apprehension either from the seeming Impossibility and
Arduousness of the Attempt, or difficulty of the Season; it never occasioned
the least Remora of the Action, though in things of the greatest moment. Nor
was there ever any difficulty in the disbursing what was necessary for carrying
on the Affairs of the War, how chargeable soever and Expensive it has been
found. The scarcity of Coin has occasioned a little Trouble in some present
Exigent, otherwise no Reason has been given of any just complaint this way.
But it being the usual Lot of them that are most sorely afflicted of God, to be
most deeply censured of men, but we must expect to pass through Evil as well as
good Report.

Possibly a so some may here take notice of a very distinguishing Providence in
these our late Troubles, in that this Rod of Affliction has seemed not to ly
in an equal proportion upon the body of the people of New England; which is no
new thing to observe in Calamities of this nature; wherein it is very ordinary
for those parts of a Country that lie next boraering upon the Coast of the
common Enemy to be most obnoxious to their Incursions, and to be more
frequently than others harnessed thereby; As has been the Case of us here in
these parts of the Earth, ever since the first planting thereof: The great
numbers of the Salvages being swept away by some unusual mortality in all those
places, where the body of the people that came over hither, first seated
themselves; so as they were not so liable to their Injuryes and Insolences, as
those were, who not long after were called to plant the more remo^er parts of
the Country, where were greater numbers of them left. Which was the occasion
that the said Colony of Connecticut was then sorely afflicted with the Pequods
at their first planting, when above thi^ty of them fell into the hands of those
cruel miscreants, they bordering next or near upon them, so as they had an
opportunity to assault them in their first Attempt for planting that side of
the Country, as sometimes Amalek did unto Israel of old. Further also it may be
considered, that our Brethren of Connecticut have had no small part of this
present trial, in that they have been necessarily called to lend their
assistance to the other Colonyes, which they have upon all occasions (to their
honor be it spoken) most readily and freely done, not only by their Articles
of Confederation, but as they were of nec^ssity constrained in common prudence
for their own safety to do -- ^am proximus ardet Vcalegon: he that will not
help to quench the fire kindled in his Neighbors house, may justly fear to
loose his own. It may truly be said also, that they have had their turn in like
troubles at the first hand, their Fleeces being only wetred with a like bloody
shower, when the ground all about was dry; as now the contrary has ^emed to
fall out. To be short we are all but one Political body, which ought to be
sensible of the Sorrows that befell any particular members thereof: we all came
over into these parts of America, with one and the same end and aim^ viz. to
enjoy the libertyes of the Gospel in purity and peace, and to advance the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and b^ing in our first settling, (by the wise
Providence of God) farther dispersed upon the Sea Coasts and Rivers, then was
at first intended, so that we could not according to our desire communicate, in
one Government and Jurisdiction, and being likewise where we live, encompassed
with people of several Nations, which may prove injurious, as they have
formerly committed Insolences, and Outrages upon several of our Plantations,
we were necessitated to enter into a Consociation amongst our selves for mutual
help and strength in such concernments as have now fallen out, as is expressed
in the Preface to the Articles of Confederation, agreed upon May twenty ninth,
1643.

In the last place, upon the consideration of these late Vproars amongst the
Indians, some may be like to enquire, what is become of the Conversion of the
Natives, so much famed abroad, and what progress the Gospel has made amongst
them, fearing (as well they may) it is like to be not a little obstructed
hereby. It may probably be supposed, that the pious endeavors of some to
preach the Gospel amongst several of the Indian Natives, has given the first
occasion of the Quarrel, as usually it has done in the world, But that
Opposition meeting with no better Success in the Southern parts, than the Ruin
of those that made the first Rebellion against us, Satan has lately changed
himself into an Angel of Light, under that shape, making this his last Attempt,
to the Eastward. For the chief Leader of those Indians is a Sagamore called
Squando, who has (as is said by them that lately escaped from their hands
familiar Converse with the Prince of Darkness, though under the notion of a
good Deity, putting him upon a form of Religion, and forbidding any acts of
Cruelty and murder to be used against any they oppose, if they be willing to
yield, and in that way promising great Success to his Followers, what the
Issues of his proceedings will be, God only knows, and a little time may
discover. But for those that before these troubles have professedly owned the
Christian Name, many of them have given notable proof of their sincerity, by
fighting against their, and our Enemies, and have been very successful in their
Endeavors: as well these in the upper parts of Cape-God, commonly called Cape
Indians. as those about Natick, and Hassinameset, within the Massachuset
Jurisdiction. It is not my purpose to enlarge much on this hand, that I might
not raise the expectation of the world to greater matters than for the present
do appear.

There are about six Societies of Indians in the Country, who have professedly
owned themselves Christians; In every one of which it is supposed there are
some, that do make a serious profession of the Christian Religion. The
Salvation of whose Souls is worth far more pains and cost than ever yet was
laid out upon that work.

It is not a small thing, that in these dark places of the Earth, which in all
Ages past, since mankind had any knowledge thereof, have been full of nothing
but the habitations of Cruelty, the light of the Gospel should take so much
place, as to cause any number of those Vassals of Satan where he so long has
had his Throne, professedly to own the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. What
Harvest is like to be of the Boa^ of them, in the present, or in the future
time, is not for any of us to speak: neither at what hour, or under what Vial,
they shall be sent to labor in Gods Vineyard, least we should thereby seem to
entrench upon the Sovereignty of the Almighty, in whose hands are the times and
Seasons of grace, as well as of nature. There are many Nations in the world, to
this day, lying out from the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, who were never yet
known professedly to own his Scepter, although probably the Gospel has at
some time or other been preached unto them, or sent amongst them; It may be,
only to be a Testimony unto them, and so to leave them without excuse another
day.

Whether any farther end in Reference to these amongst our selves is aimed at,
in the wise and unsearchable Counsels of the great God, is known only to
himself, and may be thought more convenient for him that writes, and them that
read the present Narrative, to leave to the after determination of future
Events, rather than to intrude our selves into that which is out of our Line,
or beyond our Sphere. Thus much without offense may be affirmed, that in all
the habitable places of the Earth, wherever God has, or ever had a People
calling upon his Name, never any notable work of Religion was known to take
much place, where some kind of Civility, and Culture of good manners, had not
gone before.

Add quod ingenuas, didicisse Fideliter Arts:
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
God in his natural Providence, has taught the Husbandman to plough the
ground, to break and open the Clods thereof, before he casts in the Seed: In
the dispensation of his grace he usually observes the same method; to break up
the fallow grounds of the Nations of the world, and not to sow among Thorns.
When he that sits upon the white horse, with his Bow and his Crown, and went
forth conquering and to conquer, it was amongst the Civil, and not amongst the
Barbarous and Salvage Nations of the World: They that preach the Gospel else
will have a double Task, (the least of which has been found hard enough for
the best of men, who is sufficient for these things, says St. Paul) the great
Apostle of the Gentiles to convert men, First, from Salvage Paganism, then to
Ghristianity. It is commonly said that the Turks will not admit a Jew to become
a Mohammedan, till he has first turned Christian; To be sure we rarely find any
Gentill Nation turned Christian before they became Humane. Divine Providence
has improved the Roman Sword to make way for the Scepter of the Gospel of
Peace. That Civility that is found amongst the Natives of this Country, has
hither^^ been carried on and obtained, only by the gentle means of C^^^t^sy,
Familiarity, and such like civil behavior, which in other places was never yet
attended with any eminent Success that way. It seems some Religious Gentlemen
in Virginia, had great hopes of the Conversion of the Indians to Christianity,
a little before the Massacre there; The means principally used by them was
Familiarity and kindness: One Mr. Thorps well reputed for Religion, and in
Command, one of the principal in Virginia, did so truly affect the Conversion
of the Indians there, that whosoever under him did them the least displeasure,
were punished severely. He thought nothing too dear for them: And to content
them in all things, he caused many English Mastives to be killed, and would
have taken a Course to have sufficiently tamed the rest. He conferred often
with their great Sachem about Religion, and made him confess that the English
man's God was better than the Indians: This Gentleman out of his good meaning
was so full of Confidence and void of Suspicion, that he would never believe
an^ hurt of them, till he felt their cruel hands imbrued in his own blood; they
barbarously murdering him amongst the rest. Mr. Stockain a serious and
Judicious Minister in Virginia, and Pious also, for ought is here of his Life
at that time when all things were so prosperous there, and the Salvages were
thought to be at the point of Conversion, against the Opinions of all others,
both Governors and Council, wrote his mind to the Council and Company in
England about this point in these words.

For the Conversion of the Salvages, I wonder you use not the means: I confess
you say well to have them converted by fair means; but they scorn to
acknowledge it; As for the gifts bestowed on them, they devour them, and so
they would the givers if they could: Many have endeavored by kindness to
convert them, yet find nothing from them, but derision and Ridiculous Answers:
We have sent Boys among them to learn their Language, but they return worse
than they went: But I am no States man, nor love I to meddle with any thing but
my Books; But I can find no probability, by this Course to draw them to
goodness: And I am persuaded if Mars and Minerva go hand in hand, they will
effect more good in an hour than those Verbal Mercurians in their lives: Adding
that there will be no hope of their Conversion till their Priests (possibly he
meant their Powaws) be removed from them. The natural barbarousness and
perfidiousness of their disposition may in part be gathered by this Story

When some of Pocasse^ Indians in Plymouth Jurisdiction had professed their
Service to Captain Church; as they were in pursuit of the Indians our Enemies,
one of the said Indians from the top of an hill discerned a Company of Wigwams,
where those they went to seek, had taken up their Stations, he called to his
Captain, and pointing to one of the outermost Wigwams, told him that was his
Fathers Wigwam, and asked if he must now go and kill his Father; No says
Captain Church, do b^t show me where he is and I will deal with him, do you
fall upon some others: to which the said Indian only replied in broken English;
That very good speak; whereby their natural perfidiousness even to their
nearest Relations may be observed, which makes their Treachery toward us their
Foreign Neighbors, the less to be wondered at. And therefore till they be
reduced to more Civility, some wise men are ready to fear Religion will not
take much place amongst the body of them.

Likewise when Philip was kept in the Swamp at Pocasset, it is certainly
affirmed that several of their young Children were killed by themselves, that
they might not be betrayed by their crying, or be hindered with them in their
flight, when they made their escape.

The generality of the Indians in New England are in their manners and natural
disposition, not much unlike those in Virginia living much in the same Climate;
who have likewise made an Insurrection, much about the same time this year, as
our Indians did with us: But God who is able to graft in again the unbelieving
Jews, is able also of these stones to raise up Children unto Abraham: And if it
be the pleasure of the Sovevereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, to impart the
Salvation of the Gospel to any of these, far be it from any of us to repine at
his grace, or neglect any due means lying in our Capacity or reach to help
forward that blessed work, who knows what tendency the present troubles may
have to such an End. For though a great number that are implacable and
imbittered against us in their Spirits, may be for the sake of our Religion
found hardened to their own destruction, yet a Remnant may be reserved, and
afterward called forth, by the power of the Gospel, to give glory to the God of
all the Earth.

Errata.
PAge 2. l. 20. for to r. at. l. 36. r. Arowsick. page 3. l. 1. Magazine. page
5. l. 5. for in r. is. l 18. for which r. within. l. 19. for and r. are l. 26.
r. Spurwinke. l. 29. for promotor r. Proprietour. page 6. l. 5. r. real. p. 8
l. 30. for writes r. Suits. p. 9. l. 12 for Soil r. Seat. l. 17. for off r.
that of late. l. 22. for 29. r. 39. l. 34. r. Tho. Iupe. p. 13. l. 1. Vipers a
full point. l. ult. r. Mallet. p. 16. l. 5. for Waterly. r. Wakely and so else
where. p. 19. l. 4. leave out so. p. 18. l. 38. r. Tuesday. p 45. r Ghendal. p.
56. l. 12. r. 11. p. 30. pass before. r. pass free, p. 67 l. 8. your for ours.
p 71. l. 36. for Payments r. in part. p. 76. l. 29. leave out things. p. 76. l.
2. for Martin r. Morton. p. 77. l. 21. for head r. hand. l. 28. leave out best.
p. 82. l. 27. for blinded r. blended. p. 83. l. 24: leave out but. l. 31. for
harnassed r. harrassed. p. 87. l 4 for Stockain r. Stockam.

FINIS.

