Artificial Fireworks: BEING Directions to Order and Make Moulds, Rowlers,
Rammers, Coffins, Compositions, Heading, Fastening and Firing off Serpents,
Rockets, Fisgigs, and other Curiosities too tedious to mention

ALSO THE Art of Ringing: GIVING Exact Rules for Ringing all Sorts of Plain
Changes and Cross Peals, with Directions for Pricking; also how to hang Bells,
with easy Directions for every Thing which necessarily belongs to that ART.

Likewise The ART of GARDENING: GIVING An Account of the Tools, or Instruments
necessary therein; and also what is to be done every Month in the Year; as
likewise how to Order Cattle, Orchards and Hop-Gardens, etc.

To which is added, An excellent Receipt to make a valuable Liquor agreeable to
all Constitutions.

By J. White, Gent.

LONDON: Printed for G. CONYERS, at the Ring in Little-Britain.

Price Bound

Books Sold by G. C. at the Ring in Little-Britain.
1. ONE Thousand Notable Things in Gardening, Angling (...), Physic, etc. Of
Dreams, Moles, (...) ^^prove Bees. To kill Buggs, Rats, Mic^, and all other
sorts of Vermin. Take Spots out of Clo^ths. The Virtue of Dullidge Waters. To
make Wax, Wafers, Butler's Ale. A Dialogue betwixt a Divine and a Beggar. Bp.
Usher's Prophecy; and diverse other Matters. Pr. 1 s.

2. Art's Treasury; showing how to dye Silk, Hair, Cloth, Feathers, Ivory,
Leather, etc. To take Spots out of Cloth, Diaper, Linen, etc To make Perfumes.
The Art of Drawing, Limning, Painting in Oil, Etching, Graving, Enamelling.
etc. To make Clock work, color Maps, and thicken Linen. To gild Metals To
make Ink, Dyals, etc. To brew Pale and Fine Ale. Hocus Pocus, strange Stories,
and abundance of pleasant Reading and Curiosities ^rice 1 s.

3. Hill's Legerdemain; or, Natural and Artificial Conclusions to light a
Candle at a Picture, make Fire fly out of a Pot of Water, to spit Fire, make
Artificial Birds and Eggs fly in the Air. To walk on the Water. To take Fish;
and make a Cat piss out a Fire, or Speak To break a thick Rope with your Hands.
To make Sport with Fowls To know when Persons shall Marry. Physical Receipts:
With above 140 Sports and Pastimes more. Adorned with Cuts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

4. The Complete Vermin-killer; showing how to destroy Rats, Mice, Weasles,
Moles, Ants, Fleas, Buggs. Lice, and all Vermin that infect House, Garden,
Field, or Orchard. Price 6 d.

THE SCHOOL OF Artificial FIREWORKS.
1. The Ordering and making, in a true Proportion, the Moulds for Fireworks.
BEfore you proceed to the making of Rockets for Fireworks, it is requisite to
understand how to order, and make your Moulds and other Instruments for the
same; and first for your Moulds, You must provide a piece of good dry Box,
Holly, Walnuttree, Cr^b Tree, or some such like tough Wood, without Shakes or
Knots; and when you have thus done, it is fit to know of what length and
breadth you desire to have your Mould, for following this kind of proportion,
all other sorts of Moulds are made great and small, therefore you ought to have
a Turner to turn and bore the same: As for Example: I would have the Hole of a
Mould bored but an Inch diameter, or wide, then the length of the Mould must be
six times so long as the Hole is wide (which is six Inches) and on each side of
the Hole half an Inch thick: So that when the Mould is turned round, it is two
Inches over in breadth When you have done this, you must have a bottom made and
it is to be fitted therein.

II. The order and making of Rowlers, Rammers, and other things for the Coffins.
HAving provided your Mould, then you are to fit your Rowler, which must be two
third parts of the breadth of the bore of the Mould, and the length thereof six
Inches longer than the Mould, which is for rolling of your Paper, with a Hole
to be bored in the bottom to receive a Wyre, which must be fastened in another
piece of Wood somewhat shorter, to take out at your pleasure, the use thereof
shall be described, when I shall show the order of making the Coffins.

When you have fitted your Rocket, then proceed to the making of your Rammers,
which must always be two at the least, for each several Mould as they increase
in largeness, so you must be fitted with several Rammers, by reason of the
taper Needle: Having fitted your Rammers, provide a piece of Box, which must
serve to make your whole Coffins, to put the work which you intend, on the Head
of your Rockets.

III. How to order and make the Coffins of Paper.
HAving explained the manner and form of the Moulds, with the other things
belonging to the same; I will now show the use of them in their several orders.

Provide you some good large strong Paper for your work: And to know what
length your Paper must be, let it be always the length of your Mould, so shall
you have one Breadth left above the Mould the use whereof shall be showed
hereafter. Now having provided your Paper in length ready, take your rowler and
one length of Paper, and begin to roll; when you have rolled one Sheet, you
must have a Board with a Handle, to roll it with, which must be done in this
manner: You must hold the Rowler in your left Hand, and with your right Hand
hold the Board by the Handle. and then lay down your Rowler upon some smooth
Chest, or Table, which when you have done, roll another length of Paper, and so
proceed in rolling between every Sheet, until you have rolled on so much, as
will fill the Mould very straight. When you have thus done, draw forth the
Rowler about an Inch, and then take the other short Rowler, and put it in, and
there you shall have a place left for the choking of the Rocket, of which is
next following.

IV. The order and manner how you shall choke a Rocket.
WHEN you are to choke a Rocket, you must have an Iron Hook, or a Staple driven
into some Post, to which you must fasten your Cord, which must be bigger or
less, according to the bigness of your Rocket, by reason that a small Cord will
not choke a great Rocket for want of Strength, and a great Cord will not serve
for a small one, in regard that it will make too great a choking, so that you
must have a bigger and a less; and when you have so done, you must tie one End
of the Cord to the Hook or Staple, and at the other End, about a Yard off, tie
a strong Stick, in fashion of a Swing, (it must be strong, because it bea^eth
the Weight of the Body,) which when you have provided, put the Stick between
your Legs, and wind the Cord about the Rocketcace in the place appointed,
which must be between the long Rowler and the short; when that is done, girt it
by degrees, ever turning the rowler, to the End it may come together more close
and neat; and when you have sufficiently choked it, draw forth your short
Rowler, and where the choking is, tie it about with strong Pack-thread, and
then draw forth the Rowler, your Coffin is ready to be filled when occasion
serves.

V. The manner of driving a Rocket, with the Instruments belonging thereunto.
YOUR Coffin of Paper being sinished, take it, and with your hollow Rammer,
force the same down close into the Mould, and when you have done, strike two or
three hard blows to settle the Paper into its right form: Which being done,
then you must fill the Coffin, in doing whereof you must have a care, providing
a Measure which may contain the twentieth part of your whole Rocket; so by that
means you shall not fail, but every Rocket shall have a true proportion alike:
As for Example: I have a Coffin, which being filled, will hold an Ounce of
mixture, or thereabout: Then I take the twentieth part, and when I find what
quantity it is, I make a Measure of Horn or Latten which shall contain so much,
and then I begin to fill my Coffin with one Measure at a time, and putting in
my Rammer, I strike four or five smart Blows with a good heavy Mallet, and then
fill another Measure, and strike again, so I continue till I come to the top of
the Needle; then I take the said Rammer, and so continue with it, till I come
to the Top of the Mould: Now the Paper which is above the Top of the Mould,
must be turned down and beaten hard: Which being done, the Rocket is finished
from the Mould, which being forced out with as much ease as you can, for the
less you force it, (being filled, and the Needle taken out,) the better it is,
for knocking loosens the Powder, and so causes the Rocket for to fail. You
should have a Funnel to fill your small Rockets.

VI. Of the Composition and Receipts for your Rockets.
HAving thus finished your Rockets, it now rests to know the Receipts: For in
the making of them, the chiefest thing to be regarded is, the Composition that
they ought to be filled withal: For as much as that which is proper to Rockets
which are of less sort, is very improper to those which are of a greater Size:
For the Fire being lighted in a great Concave, which is filled with a quick
Composition, burns with great violence: And so contrary, a weak Composition
being placed into a small Concave, makes no effect: Therefore we shall here
deliver Rules and Directions, which may serve for the true Composition, or
matter wherewith you may charge any Rocket; from Rockets which are charged but
with one Ounce of Powder, unto greater, which require for their Charge ten
Pound of Powder: And here follows the Ingredients for several Rockets.

First, for Rockets of one Ounce. Unto each Pound of good Musket Powder beaten,
put two Ounces of Small-Coal-Dust, and with this charge the Rocket.

For Rockets of two or three Ounces. Unto every four Ounces and a half of
Powder-dust, add an Ounce of Saltpeter, or to every four Ounces of
Powder-dust, add an Ounce of Coal-dust.

For Rockets of four Ounces. Unto every Pound of Powder-dust, add four Ounces
of Saltpeter, and an Ounce of Coal-dust, but to have it more flow, unto every
ten Ounces of good Powder-dust, add three Ounces of Salt Petre, and three
Ounces of Coal-dust.

For Rockets of five or six Ounces Unto every Pound of Powder-dust, add three
Ounces and a half of Saltpeter, and two Ounces and a half of Coal-dust, and an
Ounce of Sulphur, and an Ounce of File-dust.

For Rockets of seven or eight Ounces. Unto every Pound of Powder-dust, add
four Ounces of Saltpeter, and three Ounces of Sulphur.

For Rockets of ten or twelve Ounces. Unto the former Ingredients, add half an
Ounce of Sulphur, and it will be sufficient.

For Rockets of fourteen and sixteen Ounces. Unto every Pound of Powder-dust,
add four Ounces of Saltpeter, of Coal-dust two Ounces and a quarter, of
Sulphur and File-dust, an Ounce and a quarter.

For Rockets of one Pound. Unto every Pound of Powder-dust, add three Ounces of
Coal-dust, and an Ounce of Sulphur.

For Rockets of two Pound. Unto every Pound of Powder-dust, add nine Ounces and
a half of Saltpeter, of Coal-dust two Ounces and a half, of File-dust one
Ounce and a half, and of Sulphur three quarters of an Ounce.

For Rockets of three Pound. Unto every Pound of Saltpeter, add six Ounces of
Coal-dust, and of Sulpher four Ounces.

For Rockets of four, five, six or seven Pound. Unto every Pound of Saltpeter,
add five Ounces and a half of Coal-dust, and of Sulphur, two Ounces and a half.

Here note, that in all great Rockets there is no Powder put, because of the
greatness of the Fire, which is lighted at once, which causes too gr^^^ a
violence, and therefore ought to be filled with a more weak Composition.

Now when you have provided your Powder, you must first meal it, and then
searce it, so that it may be free from any Corn, though never so small.
Likewise take good dry Coul, well burnt, and beat it to Dust; searcing it very
fine, which when you have done, mix them according as your occasion requires,
and follow your Directions.

VII. The manner of heading a Rocket, with the order of capping it.
IN the manner of heading a Rocket, you must use the thick Rowler, upon which
you must roll some Paper, or fine Paste board, and paste it so that it may
stick very close, and then choke it at the length of the thicker Part, so that
it may come close to your Stick in the lesser Part, which will be fit to be
tied to the top of the Rocket: So shall you have a Coffin to put in your works,
which must be of diverse sorts. This being done you must provide taper Caps,
which must be joined to the top of the large Coffin: The use of them is to keep
in your works, and to cause them to pierce the Air more swiftly. The manner of
making these Caps, is to take a pair of Compasses, and describe a circle in a
Paste board, then cut it out with a pair of Sheers, and that will make two Caps
being cut in he middle, and ^urned one corner under the other, and so pasted:
And let them so pasted, be put in a Napkin-press 'till they be dry, and when
they be dry, cut out a half circle in Paper, which shall sit round about the
said Cap, and shall serve to paste on the Cap to the Coffin; so you have all
things ready to the finishing of your Rocket.

8 The manner of fastening a Rocket.
HAving driven your Rocket, as I have showed, with the Paper turned down, you
must first prime it, which must be with cotton wick made for that purpose,
which you must put into the Vent, leaving a piece to hang lower than the mouth
of the Rocket by three or four Inches; which being done, tie a piece of Paper
over the mouth, that is may not fall out. Now having primed your Rocket you may
proceed to the heading of it, and that is done after this manner.

Take your Rocket, and on the head you should turn down the Paper, you must
with a Bodkin pierce two or three holes, that when the Rocket has spent it
self, the works which ar^ in the head may take fire; which holes prime with a
little Powder-dust, and then put on the head, with the choking fitted to your
Rocket, which must come over the same in such manner, that the bottom of the
greatest part must come even with the top of the Rocket; which tie fast to the
Rocket with thread, and then put in your works; but before you put in your
works, whether they be Stars, or any other works, you must put in a little
cotton-wool, being rouled in Powder-dust, to make your Stars to take fire, or
likewise may blow out: Having thus done, put in your Stars, or other works, and
if you make more than one tire, (as you may do of your Stars) then you must put
more Cotton rouled in Powder-dust among them, or between every tire, that they
may all take fire; then take your Cap, and fill the hollow place with Cotton,
because it is light, and likewise will fire quickly; which being fitted, paste
it close to the top of the coffin that it may stand upright; then must you fit
your stick, for the poising of your Rocket, which ought to be eight times the
length of the Rocket without the head: You must get the smoothest and lightest
you can, such as Ba^ket-makers use, and then cut one side of it flat at the
great end, then make two notches on the round side, that the one be differing
from the other, so much as is between the choking of your Rocket, and the end
of the Vent; for if you should tie it upon the Vent it would loosen the Powder,
causing it to break in the Firing: be careful that you tie not the wrong end of
the Rocket uppermost, but tie that end downward that is choked, and with a
piece of thread that is strong, tie it to the lower notch about the choking.
When you have ^yed that, then tie the other higher, and let the ^tick come even
with the top of the Roket. Then ^oyse your Rocket, by laying it on your finger
two or three Inches from the month; and if you find the stick be too heavy, cut
it shorter, till you find your rocket to balance your stick, for if the stick
be too heavy, the rocket will be a slug, and being too light, the rocket will
fall before it be half up. These things being provided, you have your rocket
ready to be fired, which must be after this manner following.

9 The manner of firing Rockets, with the description of a Staff for the same.
YOU must provide a long staff with a Pike at one end, to be thrust hard into
the ground, with a three-legged staff, having a hollow hoop at the top, to let
this long staff slide up and down, to the end that having Rockets whose sticks
are longer than the staff, yet by raising it through the said Iron hoop, you
may make it four or five foot longer than it would be standing on the ground.
Now this long staff must have a sliding place cut with several points, which
must be near the top; and at the bottom there must be a ring of Wyre, to let
the stick go through, which must be made likewise to slide up and down, so
thrusting the small end through the said Ring, your Rocket will ^est upon that
part above, which must be just opposite in a straight Line; so open the Mouth
of your Rocket, and pull out the End of your Cotton-wick, and with a piece of
Match fastened in a Linstock, give fire to the Wick, and by degrees you shall
see it fire your Rocket; which ordered well, will mount very straight and high.
Thus having showed the whole order of composing a Rocket, with firing of the
some, I will in the next place show you the order for making of Stars, and
other work^, which are necessary for the heads of your Rockets.

X. Several Compositions for the ordering of Stars of several Colors.
IF you will have your Stars of a blue Color with red, then take eight Ounces
of Powder mealed, of Saltpeter four Ounces, and of Sulphu^vive twelve Ounces:
Meal these very fine, and mix them together with two Ounces of Aquavitae, half
an Ounce of the Oil of Spike, and let it be dry before you use it.

If you will have a beautiful white Fire, take four Ounces of Powder, twelve
Ounces of Saltpetre, six Ounces of Sulphur-vive, and half an Ounce of Camphire:
Meal your Ingredients and mix them. Now to powder your Camphire, you must use a
brass Mortar and a Pestle, dipping it in Oil of Almonds, so stirring it by
degrees it will Powder, and then keep it close from the Air till you use it, or
the Camphire will lose its Spirit.

If you will have a white Fire, and to last long, then take four Ounces of
Powder, one Ounce of Saltpeter, eight Ounces of Sulphur vive, one Ounce of
Camphire, and two Ounces of Oil of Peter: meal those which are to be mealed
very fine, and mix them according to the former Directions.

XI. The order and manner of making the best sort of Stars.
HAving showed the Composition for Stars, now I will show you how to make them,
which is thus: You must make little square pieces of brown Paper, which fill
with your Composition, and so double it down, rolling it till you make it
somewhat round, about the bigness of a Nut or bigger, according to the size of
the Rocket; you may put in a dozen on the head of a small Rocket, binding them
round with a Thread, and then draw a Cotten-wick through them, being prepared
for priming.

Also there is another way which is thus; take a small Rowler, about the
bigness of an Arrow, and roll a length of Paper about it, and paste it round,
letting it dry, and then you have a hollow trunk of this Paper, fill this with
your Ingredients, thrusting it hard till it be at the Top, and then cut it into
short pieces, about half an Inch long, and then in warm glue dip one of the
Ends therein, and let them dry to the End that both Ends of your Stars fire
not, and then put the other End into Powder-dust; you may put them on your
Rocket, in one or two tires, putting in Powder-dust between every tire, that
they may all take Fire.

The priming is thus made; Take Oil of Camphire soaking Cotten-wick therein,
and being moist roll it in fine Powder-dust, and then hang it up till it is
through dry, and then keep it close from Air till you use it, or the spirit of
the Camphire will decay.

XII. The order and making of other several Fireworks for the Rockets, as
Serpents, or Fisgigs, Reports, Golden and Silver Rain, etc.
THE Serpents or Fisgigs, are made about tho bigness of ones little Finger, by
rolling a Paper upon a small Stone, (as it was for your Stars) and choking the
Paper Coffin an Inch from the End, then fill it three Inches with Powder-dust,
and then choke it, and then put in a little Corn-powder, when your Serpents
have played a while to and fro, it may break and give Report: You may fill it
with the Star Mixture, and putting diverse of them on the head of the large
Rocket, they will first appear like Stars, and when the Stars are spent, take
hold of the Powder-dust, and they will run rigling to and fro like Serpents,
and at last will give (...) many reports, very delightful to behold.

The reports are made in their proper cases as the Serpents are, but the Paper
must be somewhat thicker, which will cause it to give the greater report: These
are to be filled with grain Powder, or half Powder and Star mixture.

To make the Golden Rain, you must get store of Goose Quills; and cut them off
next the Feathers, and fill these Quills hard with the same Composition that is
in your Rocket, and must be put on the head of the Rocket, with the open end
downwards: If it were possible to put a thousand of these Quills upon the head
of a Rocket, it were a dainty sight to see how pleasantly they spread
themselves in the Air, and come down like streams of Gold, much like the
falling down of Snow, especially if the Wind be any thing high.

If you will make silver Rain, it is performed as the other; only you must fill
your Quills with the same Ingredients that you did your white Stars.

XIII. How to make your Fi^e-works to run upon a line backward or forward.
TAKE small Rockets, and place the Tail of one to the Head of the other, tying
a Ca^e to them to run on a Line soped; the line may be a Hundred Yards long or
longer if you please, being well stretched and set on Stakes: And at last (if
you please) may be placed a pot of Fireworks, which being fired will make good
sport; having Serpents and other things in it, which will variously intermixe
themselves in the Air, and upon the Ground and every one will extinguish it
self with the report.

XIV. How to make a Wheel of Fireworks to run forward and backward upon the
Ground.
YOU must get a pair of light Wheels like spinning Wheels, both of a bigness,
which must be fastened to a small light axle-tree, in such manner, that they
may not move about the same, and on the middle of the axle-tree, fasten also a
Fire-wheel, which must not be so big in compass as the two other Wheels,
because it must not touch the Ground, so that being fast in the middle upon the
same axle-tree, it cannot run unless it carry the other Wheels with it; these
being set on an even Ground, will run a great way without ceasing: Now that you
may make it return back again when it has run its course forward, you may make
your middle Wheel in such manner, that it may have Rockets on both sides, so
that when one side is spent, it may give fire to the other side, the mouths of
the Rockets being fastened the contrary way will make a return with a swift
motion.

XV. Another way for a single Wheel to be placed on a Post to turn both ways.
THIS may be performed with a single Wheel, so that the Rockets may be placed
on each side, (as in the other middle Wheel, with a Hole from the one side to
the other for a vent; then place your Rockets first upon one side, but so that
the last Rocket be placed over the said Hole) and boring a small Hole in one
side of the last Rocket, put in a Cotten-wick for priming, letting it come
through the Hole in the Wheel, to the mouth of another Rocket, which shall be
turned the contrary way on the other side: So that the Wheel having finished
its revolution on one way may take fire on the other side, making a retrograde
motion: But if you place the Rockets all one way on both sides, it will
continue twice so long as another of the same bigness.

XVI. The order to make a fixed Wheel, standing upon a Post, giving diverse
reports.
THere must be a Wheel turned two Foot wide, and out of the upper side must be
a groof turned half an Inch wide, half an Inch deep; to which groof you must
have a piece of Wood so f^ted, that it may just slide in; which piece of Wood
must have so many small Holes bored in it, as you will have reports about it,
and be sure you set them not too ne^r together, lest the Fire of one beat the
other down; having thus provided your Wheel, you must make a conveyance or
hollow Trunk of Paper, which will just fill it, and fill the same with some of
your slow mixtures of Stars, and then putting on the cap of Wood so fitted with
Holes, being made fast with Glue, pierce every hole into your hollow
conveyance, so that putting a Quill into every one, they may take Fire, and to
the Quill fasten a Report; so shall you have a peal of Chambers placed in a
small Room, which being once Fired, will follow in Order, till the whose Train
be spent.

XVII. Another fixed Wheel upon a post, which will cast forth many Rockets into
the Air.
THIS Wheel is not much unlike the former, which will give Fire to diverse
Rockets standing circular, differing little from the former, only you must make
a hole for every stick to pass thorough, and therefore it must be made somewhat
broader, which will work the like effect that the other does, by conveying Fire
from one Rocket to another, till they be all spent

The mixture for this conveyance must be very slow, therefore use these
Ingredients: Take eight Ounces of Roch-Peter, four Ounces of Sulphur-vive, half
an Ounce of Camphire, two Ounces of fine Powder-dust, and meal these very fine,
and mingle them together, adding half a quarter of an Ounce of Linseed Oil, and
as much of the Oil of Peter, these Oils must be dropped in by degrees, and so
wrought up, till you find your mixture bound like Dough, and this is both slow
and sure.

XVIII. Another dainty fixed Wheel, which will cast forth diverse Fisgigs, or
Serpents, and as many Reports.
YOU must have a Wheel turned with a groof on the top thereof to put in the
conveyance of Paper, then fit on a piece of Wood (as it was before showed) with
small Holes to put in Quills, which are for Firing your Reports, and must be
Placed round about the upper Part of your Wheel, and on the side thereof diverse
holes must be made of the bigness of your Fisgigs, which must be pierced
through to the Paper conveyance, those Fisgigs that are placed round on the
sides, and the Reports on the top, one Train will Fire them all; and in firing
you shall see all the Fisgigs flying round about, one after another as the Fire
passes to them; and for every Fisgig which passes out shall be fired a
Report; so that there shall be a continued Motion until the whole Train be
consumed.

XIX. Of Night Combatants with Faulchions and Targets, Clubs, Maces, etc.
THIS is performed by two Men seeming to Fight, or to make way in a Throng of
People, the Clubs at the great Ends are made like a ^ound Basket (or other
Form) with wicker or small Sticks on a Staff, which must be filled with Rockets
in a spiral Form glued, and so placed, that they Fire but one after another:
The Faulchions are made of Wood in a bowing manner, having large backs to
receive many Rockets, the Heads of one near the Neck of another, glewed and
fastened well together, so that one being spent, the other may take Fire: The
Targets are made of thin boards, which are challenged in spiral Eines to
contain Primers to Fire the Rockets one after another, which is all covered
over with a thin covering of Wood or Paste-board, bored with Holes spiral also,
which Rockets must be glewed and made fast to the Place of the Channels: Now if
two Men have in each Hand a Target and a Faulchion, or a Mace of Fire, and seem
to Fight, it will appear very pleasant to the Spectators; for by the Motion of
Fighting, the Place will seem to be full of Streams of Fire. And there may be
adjoined to each Target a Son or burning Comer, with Lances of each Fire,
which will make them more beautiful and resplendent in that Action.

XX. Another dainty one with Fisgigs, called, Jack in a Box
THE manner of making the fame is in this Order, cause a B^x of Plate ^o be
made about six Inches deep, and of what compass you please (with a Socket at
the bottom to put in a Staff) then putting in a quantity of Corn Powder, or
Powder-Dust in the bottom of the Box, you may fill it with Fisgigs or Serpents,
leaving a place in the middle for a Cane to go through the bottom, which Cane
must be filled with a slow Receipt, in which you must put a quantity of
Camphire, but no Oils, in regard of the narrow Passage it has to burn, without
any other vent, then put your Cane down, leaving it an Inch above the Box, and
take a thick piece of Past-board cutting a Hole for the Cane ^o pass through,
and glue it close to the Cane that the Fire pass not through before its Time:
This Paste-board must be of sufficient breadth to cover the Box quite over,
then put it on a Staff and Light your Cane, which will appear only like a
Candle, and after a little space of Time you shall hear a sudden Noise, and see
all those Fisgigs flying some some one way, and some another: This has given
good content to the Beholders you may if you please make Clubs or Maces of the
same.

XXI. Of Pots of Fire for the Ground which will make the Air rebound with their
Reports.
MANY Po^s being fired together, do give a fine Representation and Recreation
to the Spectators; for those Pots being filled with Balls of Fire, or flying
Serpents for the Air, will so intermix one within another in flying here and
there a little above the Ground, and giving such a Volly of Reports, that the
Air will rebound with the Noise, and the whole Place be filled with sundry
Streams of pleasant Fire; which Serpents will much trouble those near the Place
to defend themselves in their upper Parts; and they will be no less busied by
the Balls of Fire which will seem to annoy their Feet.

XXII. The making of a Fire-Ball from the Ground, which will be in continual
Motion.
YOU must get a Ball turned of some light Wood, and then let it be sawn through
the midst with a thin Bow saw, then make on each side a hollow groof to lay in
two Rockets (joined together after the manner of the Runners) and then close up
your Ball with Glue; only in the Place where the two Rockets join shall be a
groof, which must be pasted over with Paper, that the second Rocket taking Fire
may have a Vent, otherwise the Ball will serve but once, then Fire it and you
shall see the Operation with pleasure

XXIII. The making of a Ball for Water, which shall burn with great Violence.
SOW a round Case of strong Canvas, in shape of the case for a Football, but
somewhat lesser, and very round; having thus made your case, then proceed to
the filling of it, which must be done in this manner: You must first put in
three or four good spoonfuls of your mixture following, and with a Stick made
round at one End, force it close together, and so continue filling it, and
between every filling put in your Stick and force it together, round it
continually in your Hand till you have finished it; which having done, sow it
up close, and then arm it with small Cord, which is called Marling; after you
have thus done, you must coat it with a quantity of Rossin, Pitch and Tallow to
dissolve, and dip your Ball all over in the same, provided that you leave two
Vents to fire it, which must be pierced a third Part into your Ball, which must
be stopped with two small Sticks, till such time that you come to use them then
pulling forth the Sticks, fill the two Vents with fine Powder Dust, and firing
it, cast it into the Water, and you shall have your desire; but you must always
be sure that your Ball be thoroughly fired before you cast it from you: The
Receipt for this Ball follows.

Take one pound of Powder, eight ounces of Roch-water, four ounces of Sulphur,
two ounces of Camphir, one ounce of Oil of Peter, one ounce of Linseed Oil,
half an ounce of Oil of Spike, and two ounces of Colophonia.

XXIV. Another dainty Water Ball, which will shoot forth many Reports.
THIS Ball must be made of Wood (as was showed before) in two Pieces, because
you may join it close together at Pleasure, having small Holes bored round
about it to put in your Quills which justify the Reports, which Reports, or
Breakers must be made of Paper, choked at both ends and primed through the
midst; they must be fastened round with Pitch, and so covered round about, that
no Water may pass in: You must fill this Ball in two halfs, that you may force
it very close together, and when it is filled glue it fast, and arm it well with
nealed Wire, then put in your Breakers, with a quill which must enter into the
Ball, and likewise into the breaker.

The Receipt for this Ba^l are these; Take one pound of Roch-Peter, four ounces
of powder dust, three ounces of Sulphur vive, two ounces of Camphire, one ounce
of Linseed Oil, two ounces of Rosin, and one ounce of Oil benedict; you must
powder those Things which are to be powdered and mingle them all together, and
by little and little sprinkle your Oils, till you have wrought it like Paste,
and then use it: The Quills must be filled only with Powder-Dust, because it
must Fire suddenly.

XXV. How to make a Dragon, or the like, to run on the Line, spitting of Fire.
THE body of the Dragon must be made either with Paste board, or with fine Rods
of wicker, being hollow, with a place in the Belly to put in two Rockets and
must be so ordered, that there may come a small Pipe from the Tail of the one,
to the Head of the other: Then make a Place for the Eyes and Mouth, to put into
each Hole fire, which must be made up in rouled Paper, and thrust in, then on
the Top of the back, let there be fastened two small Pullies for a Line (...)
which being done, your Dragon is finished for firing, which must be thus* First
set it at the Eyes and Mouth, (always observing that this Receipt must be some
slow mixture, such as your Stars) then fire that Rocket which is placed with
his Mouth toward the Tail of the Dragon, which will make it seem to cast fire
from thence till he come to the end of his Motion; and then on a sudden (as a
Creature wounded with some accident) shall return with fire coming forth of his
Belly: This being well ordered, will give good Content to the Beholders of the
same.

XXVI. The manner and form to represent St. George fighting with a Dragon in
Fire, on the Line.
WHEN you have formed your Figures of Paste-board, or Wicket (as aforesaid) you
must make a hollow Trunk through the Body of each Figure, for a great Line to
pass through, and likewise for a smaller Line to draw them to and fro from each
other which must be fastened in this manner; At the Breast of the Dragon let one
end of one Cord be tied, which must pass through the Body of the George, and
turning it about a Pully at the other end, fasten it to the back of the George,
and at the Breast of the George let another Cord be ^ed, which must pass
through the body of the Dragon (or a Trunk on the back) and so returning about
a Pulley at that end, must be pulled strait and fastened to the Tail of the
Dragon, so that as you turn that Wheel, the George and Dragon will run
furiously at each other; and when you please, you may cause them to make a
Retreat, and come on again: But by all means forget not to scope your Line
extraordinary well, and likewise have a care that your Work be not too heavy
above Line, but that they may hang in an equal Balance, otherwise they will
turn their Heels upward, which will be a great disgrace to the Work and
Workmen: And thus much to the Ingenious I suppose will suffice.

XXVII. How to make a Whale, a Mermaid, or other to play and swim upon the
Water.
YOU may make Figures of what Shape your fancy best pleases; The Body must be
made of light wicker Rods, and in the midst of the Body let there be placed an
Axle-Tree, having two Wheels coming into the Water, yet so as they may not be
seen: These Wheels must be made hollow, to contain a quantity of Sand or Water:
The use of it is to keep the Body of your Figure upright, and able to sink it
so far into the Water as is needful, and likewise to make it swim more steady:
Note that these Wheels must be loose, and the Axle-Tree fast: In the midst of
this Axle-Tree, place three or four great Rockets one by another, with their
Mouths all one Way: Yet so provided that there may be such a distance between
each Rocket, that there may come a Vent from the Tail of the first to the Mouth
of the second, and from the second to the third* And to the end that it may
continue the longer in Motion, you may place diverse Lights about the Body, to
make it the more beautiful; every of which Lights extinguishing shall give a
Report, and so conclude. There are diverse other fine Works to be performed on
the Waters, which a judicious Artist may invent.

XXVIII. Of diverse other rare Works, which are to be performed on the Water.
THOSE places which are situated upon Rivers or great Ponds, are proper to make
these Recreative Fires on; therefore if you desire to make some of consequence,
they ought to be built upon Boats, or light Timber, which may be framed like
Beasts, or Fishes spitting of Fire; upon which may be built Castles, Pageants,
Turrets, or other Conceits as you please. As if you would present a Castle, out
of which shall issue a Dragon, which shall swim through the Water, and that
Dragon be encountered by a Horseman, which is thus performed. Cause a Castle to
be framed on light Timber, and let the bottom of the Door of the Castle with a
ground Plat be two Foot under the brim of the Water, (the Reasons follow) and
at a Foot high within the Castle let there be a certain Line tied which may
pass through the Body of the Dragon, and may be fastened near the Shore, where
must be a float sunk so far under Water, that the Line may not be perceived;
then fasten on your Dragon (as was showed before for the Line) but so that the
Head of this may always be above the Line, whereas the other was under then at
the appointed time, there must be one ready within the Castle, to Fire those
Parts of the Dragon which is requisite; which being done (by the help of the
Pulleys) shall pass it through the Water, which so soon as it presents itself,
Neptune on a Sea Horse shall come, and encounter the said Dragon, and at last
shall overcome it: Or you may order the work so that which you please shall
have the Victory; for that which keeps Fire longest, is supposed to have the
best, and that which is soonest spent, to have the worst.

You may if you please, build upon Boats, or Timber, Turrets, Pageants, or
Castles, as is, said, to receive or hold diversity of Fireworks that may be
made within them, which may play out, and play diverse Fires, as Reports, Stars
Golden Rain, Fisgigs, Grenades, and Balls of Fire to burn in the Water, which
will give great content to the Eyes of the Beholders; and in the conclusion, it
may be so ordered, that they Fire one another, for which End they were made.

XXIX. The manner to compose a Ship of Fire works, which being once fired,
diverse Motions will present themselves.
YOU must make a Mould or Body of a Ship to be made, that you may take off the
upper Deck, to place some Works underneath, where you must have a Fire-wheel
placed with a Screw on the Axle-Tree; this Wheel must be placed in the Stern,
and must turn a rouler, on which must be two girts placed that must pass on
each side of the Main Mast, and ruin on to the Foreship; in this Wheel there
must be a hollow spoke and Axle-tree, as I have showed, which must be so
ordered, that the Wheel being spent, it may convey Fire to a tire of Guns,
lying round about, which must be fired with a close Conveyance; and having
passed that, it must take hold of another Conveyance which shall give fire to
certain Rockets, which must be placed in the Body of some Figures representing
Mariners, and must be so fitted; that they may have a Cane joined to their Body
to guide them, that they may run on the Ropes from the Deck to the top of the
Masts. This and other the like may be performed with great facility.

XXX. Of Lances of Fire for Pleasure and for Service.
STanding Lances are commonly made with hollow Wood, to contain sundry Petards
or Rockets; these Lances may be fastened to Posts, so that they may not be
overthrown in the flying out of the Rockets or Petards: But there are a lesser
sort of Lances, whose Cases are of three or four foldings of Paper of a foot
long, and about the bigness of ones Finger: The composition wherewith these
Lances must be filled is this; Unto every four ounces of Powder you must add
two Ounces of Saltpeter, and unto that add one Ounce of Sulphur; and then it
will make a brick Fire red color before it be half spent, if the Lance be
fired and held to it: Now if Twenty such Lances were placed about a great
Rocket, and shot to a House or Ship, it would produce a mischievous Effect.

Or, if unto the End of the Rocket there were fastened an Arrow (which must not
be too heavy) and instead of the Feathers, it should be of thin white Tin
Plate, and if you give Fire to it, being thus prepared, you may see how
serviceable it will prove. To the Head of such Rockets may be placed Petards,
Balls of Fire, Grenades, and the like, and so may be applied to warlike
Affairs.

Short, but certain RULES for the Making all Sorts of Fire works for
Recreation, as Rockets, Fifgigs, Runners on the Line, Serpents, Stars,
Fire-Wheels, Clubs, Jack in a Box, etc. Together with the Quantity of all the
Ingredients thereunto belonging, and the manner of Compounding them.
How to compose a Castle of Fireworks with small Charge, that in the Fireing
will yield as much Variety, and give as much content as any.
IN all Things actual, a certain Method is requisite to be observed. Therefore,
such as intend to put in Practice these ensuing Instructions, are first to
provide themselves of such Rocket Moulds as are suitable to the Work they
undertake. The Description and Proportion of them, I conceive somewhat
needless, in regard any one may be furnished in London with what Sizes they
please. This being premised, I shall begin with

Fisgigs, by many called Serpents.
THE best way of making them is thus: Having provided a small Mould with a
Needle, make a Coffin of Paper fit for it, which choke half an Inch from the
end; then put it in your Mould, and fill up three Inches with Powder-dust only,
finely beaten and sifted, then choke it again, and afterward fill it about an
Inch with Corn-powder, then choke it close, and your Fisgig is prepared. To use
these on the tops of great Rockets put into the Mouths of them, some of the
Composition for Stars, which will show very delectable to the Spectators; for
after they have continued a good space in the Form and Manner of Stars, they
will then riggle to and fro, like so many flying Serpents: Of these Fisgigs
most sorts of Fireworks are composed. When you can perfectly make these, you
may then proced to the making

Runners on a Line.
AND for them is likewise requisite a Mould, five Inches long without a Needle:
First make your Coffin of Paper, choke it at the end as before, then put it in
your Mould, and fill it four Inches with Powder-dust: (N^te that in the filling
it you must put in but a little at a time and ramm it down close, and so of all
others) Then choke it, and fill the rest of it with Corn powder (to give a
Report) leaving only so much of the Coffin void as will serve to choke it. This
being done, tie it to a hollow Cane three Inches long; so as in tying of it you
do not bruise the Rocket. And so have you a single Runner for the Line finished.

If you desire to have a double one to run forwards, and back again, you must
then be provided with two Runners made after the manner of the former, only one
to be an Inch longer than the other: And to finish these, use this Method.
First tie the long Rocket to the Cane, and at the Mouth of it fasten the Breach
of the short one, by rouling over them a little piece of Paper, with some
Powder-dust in it to give fire to the long one, not forgetting to make a small
hole in the Breech of the short one with a Bodkin, that so the long one may
take fire: Having done so, then turn back the short Rocket so, that the Mouth
of it may reach somewhat further than the Breech of the long one; lest in
firing it you accidentally fire both, and by that means spoil your Runners: The
best way of tyeing the double ones is to fasten the short one so, as the long
one may be betwixt it and the Cane; for by that means it will run without
swagging; whereas, if they be both joined to the Cane, as Mr. Bates, and some
others direct, it is both unsafe, and uncertain; unsafe in this, in case the
first accidentally break the other with the force of it will be struck off; and
uncertain it is likewise, in regard after the first Rocket is spent, the Coffin
of it coming back will swag and retard the Passage of the other, and by that
means endanger burning of the Line. Let your Line be well rubbed with Soap;
which will both secure it from fire and facilitate the Passage of the Runner:
Likewise for these and all other, let your Powder dust be beaten, and sifted
very small, for the least Corns in it may danger the breaking.

How to compose a Wheel.
FIRST provide a Wheel, either round or square, the better sort are eight
square, made fit to the length of the Rocket, five Inches each, the best
proportion is about sixteen Inches diameter. Now having provided a Wheel, take
so many Rockets, made after the same manner as those are which run on the Line,
which you must fasten together, by joining the Mouth of the one to the Breech
of the other, in the same manner as those for the Line; in the tying them on,
have a care you do not bruise them, and be sure to leave some space betwixt the
Mouth of the first, and the Breech of the last, that so by firing the first,
the last may not take, and by that means breed a confusion.

You may order these Wheels to burn either Horizontal or Vertical: For the
Horizontal provide a Post or Staff, with a pin on the top of it to put the
Wheel on; if vertical, then provide a pin fastened to the Side.

How to make a Club to cast forth diverse Fisg^gs.
TO do this, first cause a piece of Wood to be turned four Inches Diameter, let
it be bored with an Augur of an Inch and half bore from the top toward the
bottom, leaving the bottom somewhat above an Inch thick, and a place underneath
to fasten a Staff in; the length of it may be about eighteen Inches: Then draw
a Line spiral way about it from the bottom to the top in manner of a Screw,
each Line an Inch and half asunder, in that Line bore small Holes an Inch
asunder; within half an Inch of the bottom, and then pierce it through with a
Piercer; let your Holes be of that bigness fit to contain a Fisgig, and make
them somewhat slopeways, that so the Fisgig may stand fast, though slack,
otherwise they will not come easily forth.

Load your Club or Trunck with the composition following, and then put in your
Fisgig made as before, priming each of them, and likewise each Hole with
powder-dust, then fire your Club at the top, and they will fire one after
another, and fly about in a confused manner.

The Composition for this Club is.
Roch Peter eight Ounces, Sulphur vivum four ounces, Powder-dust two ounces,
Camphire one ounce, Linseed Oil half an ounce; beat and mix these according to
the order prescribed in the compositions following.

To make Rockets for the Air.
PRovide first a good Mould of what size you please, with a Needle in it, and a
Rowler with two Rammers, the one hollow for the Needle and the other solid, to
ram it after the Needle is covered. Having made a good strong Coffin of Paper
fit for the Mould, and choked as before, then fill it with the composition for
that size your Rocket is of, the several Proportions and Mixtures hereafter
follow. To fill it, take a little Tin scope, and put in about the twentieth
part of the quantity it holds, and then ram it with your hollow Rammer, and so
continue till you have filled it to the top of the Needle, always beating it
down with two or three good strokes of a Maliet, then fill in more almost to
the top of the Mould, ramming it as before, but with your solid Rammer leaving
only so much unfilled as that you may double down some of the Paper and ram it
close, making a little Hole with a Bodkin to give fire to some Corn-powder (to
give a report) put within that ^aper as is left unsolded down, and then choke
it, next prime it, as shall be shown hereafter, and proceed to heading of it,
which you may do several ways, either with Stars, Serpents, Crackers, or golden
Rain: the composition for the making these hereafter follows. To place these on
the Rocket, first make a thin Coffin of Paper, the inside of it somewhat wid^r
than the outside of the Rocket, which you may fit by rouling it on the outside
of the Mould, and fitting it to the Rocket, then fasten it to the top of the
Rocket, and strew all the powder in it, having first made a small Hole in the
top of the Rocket to give fire to it: In this Coffin you may place short
Serpents with the Mouths downward made as before, or with Stars only, Crackers
or golden Rain; having done this, take a piece of thin Pastboard, and with a
pair of Compasses make a round Circle in it, then divide it in two, and with
the one half make a Cap taperwise, fit to cover the Head, and with glue fasten
it to it: Then provide a dry Osier stick, about eight times the length of the
Rocket, straight, and flatted at the end, to this fasten the Rocket, tied at
both ends just in the choking place, that so you may not loosen the
compositoin within, then poise the stick, by ballancing it on your finger three
or four Inches from the Mouth of the Rocket.

The Ingredients for Rockets for the Air of All Sizes.
FOR Rockets which contain from one Ounce to four, to one pound of Powder-dust,
put two ounces of Charcole-dust: For Rockets which hold from five ounces to
ten, to one pound of Powder, put two ounces and a half of Charcoal-dust; and
for Rockets which hold from ten to sixteen ounces, to one pound of Powder put
three ounces of Charcoal-dust; but be sure that both your Powder-dust in this
and all other be well beaten, and finely sifted, as likewise your Coal-dust. If
by trying your Composition you find it too strong, you may mend it by adding a
small quantity of Coaldust to it; if too weak, then by adding a little
Powder-dust. My Advice is, to mix a pretty quantity together, that so by the
trial of one Rocket you may be ascertained of the rest: for all Powder is not
of one and the same strength.

Priming for Rockets
TAKE Cotten-wick (such as the Chandlers use) and soak it in Oil of Camphire,
then take it out and roll it in Powder-dust, then dry it, and keep it close,
otherwise the strength of the Camphire will decay. The Composition for Stars
will likewise fire them.

Composition for Stars, and first for those of a Blue and Red Color.
POWDER mealed fine four ounces, Salt-pe^er two ounces, Sulphur vivum six
ounces, beat these very fine, and then mix them, adding thereto one ounce of
Aqua-vitae, and a quarter of an ounce of Oil of Spike. To make these up for
use; take a Rouler about the bigness of an Arrow, and roll Paper on it, and
paste it close, then fill it with the Composition before prescribed, and beat
it hard, then cut it into short pieces half an Inch in length, dipping one end
in Glue, and strewing the other with Powder-dust, it is then finished, only let
it dry before you use it.

A Composition of Stars of a very beautiful Color, the easiest, best, and
surest way, never till now made public by any.
Saltpeter one ounce, Sulphur vivum one ounce, Powder-dust one ounce, Camphire
a quarter of an ounce, beat these very fine and mix them, afterward make paste
of them with the Oil of Turpentine, and then make up little pieces about the
bigness of a Pea, which roll in Powder-dust, and let it dry. Of this sort you
may put two or three dozen at the Head of an ordinary Rocket, the charge and
trouble of making is far less than any other way.

To make golden Rain.
PRovide your self with a good quantity of Goose Quills, cut them off at the
end next the Feathers, then fill the Quills with the following Composition, and
they will make a very glorious show. To one quarter of a pound of Powder dust
add half an ounce of Coal-dust, and for use put the open end of the Quill
downwards.

To make a Jack-in-a box.
PRovide a Tin-box six Inches deep, with a socket made under the bottom of it
to place it on a Staff, let it be of what bigness you please, in the bottom of
it strew some Corn-powder almost half an Inch thick, then fill it with
Serpents, or Fisgigs placed with the Mouths downward, leaving a place in the
midst for a Cane to pass through, which fill with a slow Composition; (that for
Stars, or these following are very good) then put in the Cane, and fasten a
cover of Pastboard very close over the Box, that so it may not fire before its
appointed time.

A Composition that burns with a Flame slow and sure.
ROch-peter four ounces, Sulphur vivum two ounces, Camphire a quarter of an
ounce, Powder-dust one ounce. Meal these very fine and mix them, adding thereto
one quarter of an ounce of Linseed Oil, and a quarter of an ounce of Oil of
Peter dropped in by degrees, and so wrought to a Paste. To meal your Camphire,
dip the Pestle in Oil of Almonds.

Another sort of Mixture that burns sparkling.
POwder-dust four ounces, Coal-dust two ounces, this rammed close in a Cane,
renders the sight very delightful to the Spectators.

A Composition for a White Fire, that lasts long.
Saltpeter eight ounces, Powder-dust two ounces, Sulphur vivum four ounces,
Oil of Peter one ounce, Camphire half an ounce; meal those which are to be
mealed, and incorporate them together.

How to compose a Castle of Fireworks with small Charge, that in the firing
shall yield as much Variety, and give as much Content as any.
FIRST provide an indifferent large Frame of Wood, four square, with little
round Towers of Pastboard at the Corners, the best size is eighteen Inches
square, and twelve Inches high, let the bottom be made firm to stand on any
place. and the Sides with Gates, (as your fancy shall direct) then fasten on
the inside three Ledges of Wood on each side about, each Ledge with a groof
made on the top of it, then make so many Holes in the Frame of Wood, suitable
to the Ledges, as you intend to have the Castle give reports: You may easily
make eight to each Ledge, which contains ninety six reports, you may add more
as you see cause; or at the top fasten many Crackers, which at the end will
fire like a Volley of Shot: The manner of making these Reports shall be showed
hereafter; and to place them, first prime your Groof with a slow Composition,
and from the uppermost Row to the second put a Wick, primed as for Rockets, and
so from the second Row to the third, leaving some hanging forth at the Door to
fire it, then put in your Reports the Mouths inward, fix them to your Groofs
and cover it close, afterward fit a Board four square to cover the top of the
Castle, of each side half an Inch broader than the Castle: On the four Edges of
it you may fasten Pastboard cut Stone-work ways in manner of a Battlement, and
at each corner, place a small Jack-in-a-box with a long Cane in each of them
filled with slow Composition, made as before; which Canes let be of the
largest, as may burn all the time the Castle is firing: In the midst of the
Board on the top, place a Pin to put a Wheel on, made of thin Deal-board, five,
six, or eight Inches square, proportionable to the length of the Rockets, which
fasten to the Board by making Holes in (...) tie them to it: On the top of this
Wheel you may fasten little Statues of Babies, as Soldiers, Drummers, or the
like; and as the Wheel turns, they will move about like Anticks, with much
delight to the Spectators: And so have you finished your Castle; to fire it,
first fire the four Canes in the four Boxes at the corners, then fire the Wheel
at the top; and lastly, fire the Cotten-wick at the Gate, and so the Reports
will by degrees fire upwards, and in the end conclude with a Volley of Shot. If
it be exactly made, it will continue a long space with abundance of delight.

How to make Reports for a Castle.
FIRST make a Coffin of Paper choked as before, of what size you please, then
fill it about an Inch and a half with Corn-powder, ramming it close; and at the
end ram in a piece of Paper as you do to a Mosket, leaving the M^uth open, and
then it is finished: When you use them, prime the Mouth of it but a little

How to make Rockets for the Ground.
FIRST provide a Rocket (ready finished) ^s for the fire, then put the Breech
of it into (...) Bladder, blow the Bladder up, and then fasten it at the
choking place, by tying it close: When you fire it, throw it from you, and the
force of (...) when it comes to the Ground will make it rebo^^^ and so be in a
continual Agitation.

ADVERT^SEMENT.
AN English Herbal: Or, a Discovery of the Physical Virtues of of Herbs in this
Kingdom; what Planet governs each Herk, and how to gather them in their
Planetary Hours; concerning some Hundred of Medicines made of English Herb^^
whereby any Person may keep his B^dy in Health, or care himself when (...) for
a small Charge, with such Hee^^ and Roots (...) ^ally grow in England. To which
^s added, The Way to Health and Long Life, (...) a Discourse of Temperance,
showing how every Man an^ Woman may be their own Doctor. Also a sure Way to
(...) Bees and Fruit Trees, and to keep Sheep and Horses free from all Diseases.

Sold at the Ring in Little-Britain. Price 1 s. 6 d.

THE ART^^ GARDENING: Showing the (...) Times for ordering Cattle: Also
Orchards, Gardens, Hop-Gardens, Flower-Gardens, and Bees, throughout the Year.
GARDENS ought to be in a free open Air to the East and South, but South East
it best, and the North, defended by tall Trees, by the House, or indeed by
both, which is better than Hills, for Hills to Trees are not so good, because
they give too great a Reflection of Heat in Summer, and likewise hinder the
cool serene Air that often comes from thence: Tall Trees break the Wind and
fierce Air, that in Spring and Winter damage the most delicate Plants and
Flowers, affording most, pleasant, sweet Air, and Shade in hot Weather.

As to your Ground, the Quality thereof ought to be inquired into; and it is a
great Happiness to enjoy good Ground, for it will yield more than that which is
mended at great Cost and Charge. The Quality of your Ground it to be regarded,
as whether it be soft or strong, light, dry, or moist; and how to choose proper
Trees to plant it withal; also what sort is proper to me^d those that grow on
dry warm Ground, a^^ make them bear the best sorts of Fr^it. Those that gro^^
on moist Ground, produce large Fruit, though not not so pleasant, nor well-tasted
as the form; as you may observe in we^ or dry Years, all La^d proper for
Wheat, Barley, Rye, Beans, Peace, etc. are ki^dly for O^cha^ds; the most
improper is extreme hot and dry Sands; and on the contrary, Grounds that are
very wet and cold.

In Ground that is moist, don't dig your Holes too deep, but heighten your
Ground, and be careful; before you plant Trees you may cut the Roots that shoot
down, more especially the Pin-roots, or else you must put Brushes underneath,
that the Water shoot off, and the Ro^t not strike too deep into the cold Earth.
The upper Ground is always the best, for what is deep in the Ground, has not
felt the He^t of the Sun, nor received the sweet Moisture of Rain or Dew.

A^ for Soils proper, and all other Matters requisite to be known, I refer you
to peruse Meager'^ Complete English Gardener, adorned with 24 Copper Cuts of
Garden-Plars, which is the most plain and easy Book extant, that I know of.
It Is sold at the Ring in Little Britain for 4 s. 6 d.

The Miscarriages and Disappointments that are met with in Planting, proceed,
First, From the wan^ of Knowledge, which is the best and properest sorts of
Plants for Fruit, and often using the worst. Secondly, For want of their being
well ordered and managged after they are planted. Thirdly, Some Seasons have of
late proved bad, and spoiled Fruit, though the greatest Care and Skill have been
made use of.

To remedy these Inconveniences, endeavor to find out such Gardeners as will
deal faithfully by you, and such as have Judgment to know the vast Difference
of Fruit, for there are several sorts of Fruit, which some call by one N^me^
and some by another: and Mistakes of this Kind often cause a quite different
sort to be set, not proper to your Purpose, being neither proper for your Soul
not Exposure, and seldom or never comes to M^tu^ry: Nay, though you have the
best, if the Soil and Exposure be not proper, they may grow, but will not
arrive at that Perfection or M^r^^^ty which th^^e do that ^r^ s^wn or planted
in a proper and agreeable Soil; heref^re et your Gardener he acquai^ted with
the Aspect ^f the Wall you design to plan^ (...), as also to the Height and
Extent of it, and what sort of Earth it stands upon, whether hot and dry, or
cold and moist, that he may regulate and furnish the whole Plantation with
Trees proper and necessary.

The well ordering or man^ging of Trees is to be chiefly regarded; for if you
plant against an old W^ll, where other Trees have died the Year before, and put
'em in just where the others were, it is great Odds but your Expectation is
frustrated. Or if it be a new Wall, if the E^th it is set in be not good and
proper, though you fill up your Borders with good Earth, it will return back
again, and so your Fruit will be small, and have little Taste or Goodness,
Therefore use a proper Depth and Width, with good Earth, and let your
Fruit Trees be carefully Plantedand headed in their proper Times and Seasons,
and likewise watered in Summer, with the Borders cleared from Weeds: Let
nothing be sown by them, as Beans, Pease, etc. nor yet any Flowers, for all
these suck away the Nourishment from them; and be sure let all your Fruit Trees
be well pruned, and the Fruit carefully picked and looked after, or you will
never obtain what you expect.

As to the most proper Seasons.
When you have used a^l your Endeavors to plant and graft according to the
Nature of your Ground, the various Seasons (either too much Rain, or too much
Cold) give a quite different turn to your Fruit: sometimes 'twill prove small,
sometimes watery, and of little or no value; nay, you would scarce believe the
same Trees could produce such different Fruit: Therefore if when you have used
the proper Means, your Expectation is frustrated, what must be the Fate of
those who are careless, and perhaps plant Pears, Apricocks, Peaches, etc. not
regarding the several Aspects against the Wall which is required, as, when they
should plant against a South, they do it against a North, or North-East Wall,
etc. Likewise observe in Trees, you are to plant against a Wall, you do not
plant 'em for D^arss, for then they will not come to their due Perfection.

Great Allowances must be made for the Fickleness of Seasons, the Diversity of
Soils and Climates, (which are almost numberless) and to the Nature of the
Trees and Stock, and to the way that Trees grow to the greatest Perfection;
these are Things that require mature Consideration, and a quick Apprehension,
to balance the Opinions of proper Judges.

It Is a great Matter to know the Nature of the several Soils, their
Infirmities, and their proper Remedies, with the Applications required to
invigorate exhausted Mold, sweeten the foul and tainted, reduce the sour,
harsh, stubborn, dry, and overmoist, and dilated Earth to its genuine Temper
and Constitution; and what Scituations and Aspects are most adapt to the
several sorts of dwarf, standard, and other Fruit Trees.

The requisite Qualifications of a good Gardener are such as these, viz. He
should be a middle aged Man, vigorous and active, one of Experience and a large
Capacity. Diligent, Honest, and Good-natured, which are Qualifications
necessary for any Person.

As for the Exposure of Gardens, if they be of a strong Earth that is cold, to
be exposed to the South is best; if light and hot, then the East is counted
best; the Nor hern Aspect in England is best for Baking Fruit; the Eastern
Exposure is subject to the North-East Wind which withers the Leaves and new
Shoots; besides Eastern Wall-Fruit have little benefit of the Rain which
generally comes from the West; and as the Eastern Exposure is subject to
North-East Winds, so the Western suffers by North-West Winds in Spring, and the
Fruit in Autumn is often blown down by them; and as all Exposures have their
Advantages and Disadvantages, it requires some considerable Prudence and Skill
to prevent the latter.

FINIS.
THE GARDENER'S Monthly Calendar.
In JANUARY,
PLOUGH up your Pease Ground, or fallow it; water Meadows and Pasture, drain
arrable Land, designed for Pease, Barley or Oats, wean Calves, remove Bees,
dung Pastures, prune Fruittrees and Vines, and other Trees, and bare their
Roots; plant Timber Trees and Coppice Wood, set Quick-sets, cut away Ant-hills,
gather your Stones, take care of Ewes and Lambs, geld Cattle, keep your self
warm, drink a Glass of good White wine fasting, set Beans and Pease if mild
Weather, and begin to graft and gather Cions for grafting, sow Coll^flowers,
make hot Beds, sow Sallads, cover the choice Flowers and Plants, destroy
Vermin, and Bull-finches and Sparrows, that spoil the Heads of Fruit Trees, by
Lime-twigs, Sh^oting, etc. your Beehives turn up and sprinkle with Wort, dig
weedy Hop-Gardens, bleed not the 1st, 2d, 10th, 15th, or 20th, except the Sign
be good, cleanse Trees of Moss, by findging it off with a handful of Wheat or
Rye Straw, preserve Gilliflowers and Auricula's from too much Wet and Snow keep
the Conservatory close where the Greens are housed. If it freeze hard, put some
lighted Charcoal in the midst of the Room, let in Sun shine at Noon, and shut
it close again as it declines the Door.

In FEBRUARY.
SET or sow all sorts of Beans, Pease, and other Pulse, dung your Plough and
Pasture Ground, spreading it before the Plough, the stiffer your Ground, begin
your arrable Land the sooner, take heed of Cold, plant Quick-sets, set Poplers,
Alders, Willows, and other Aquaticks, sow Mustard and Hemp Seed, if a mild
Spring, bleed not except the Sign be good, on the 4th, 6th, or 8th Day; cover
the Roots of Trees, and cleanse from Moss and Caterpillars, set Asparagus,
Raddish, Parsnips, Carriots, Onions, Colliflowers, Garlic, plant Cabbages,
Potatoes, Parsley, Spinach, and other hardy Pot herbs; destroy Vermin and
Bullsinches, pick up Snails, plant Hops and dress them, half open the Passage
for ^ees, and remove them, stow Fishponds, water Oranges and Lemons with Water
wherein Sheeps-Dung has been steeped two or three Days in the Air or Sun; but
let it not touch the Leaves, for it will destroy them.

In MARCH.
ADry March generally produces Plenty, sow Turnips, Beans, Barley, lop, graft,
and remove Trees and Plants, take Cattle out of the Marshes and Meadows you
intend to mow, roll Wheat, if the Weather prove dry, make an end of sowing all
sorts of Pulse, brew your best Beer, and raise the best Brood of Poultry, set
Osiers and Willows, etc. sow March Rye, sow Hemp and Flax, if temperate
Weather, also Clover and St Foin, and other French Grasses, kill Moles, sow
white Pease, graft all sort of Fruit Trees, set Sage, Rosemary, Lavend^ and
Time, sow Endive, Succory, Leeks, ^addi^^, Beets, Farsnips: Skirrits, Parsley,
Sorrel, B^gloss, Borage, ^hervil, Lettice, Onions, Gar^^ck Turnips, Pease,
Carriots, Cabbages, Cresses, Fennel, Ma^joram, etc. cover the Roots of Trees
laid bare, cover Muskmelions Plants on hot Beds, with Beer-glasses 'till you
remove them, dress up and firing your Strawberry-beds, sow Pinks, Carnations,
etc. plant all Garden Herbs and Flowers that have fibrous Roots, plant Hops and
dress them, the ^ee^ now fit, keep them Morning and Night close, if bad Weather
you may yet remove them, stake and bind up the weakest Plants against the Wind,
turn your Fruit in the Rooms where they lie, eat Reasons and Figs, and
Sweetmeats.

APRIL.
A Dry April is good to fallow Ground in, and a dry Season prevents Weeds
growing among Barley; purge and bleed; lop Ashes, and set VVillows; pick up
Stones, sow Hemp and Flax, set Osiers, VVillows, and other Aquaticks, cleanse
Ditches, sow Clover, Saint-Foin, and all French Grasses and Hays, sow Marjoram,
Hysop, Basil, Thime, VVinter-savory, Scurvey-grass, Raddish, Pursley, Lettuce,
Marrigolds, Carnations, etc. set slips of Artichoaks, Lavender, Thime,
Rosemary, set French Beans, remove Shrubs, and slip them after Showers, gather
up Worms and Snails, sow Flowers that come of See^s, continue Hot Beds, for
Exoticks that arrive not to Perfection without them, bring out of the
Conservatory the tender Plants, except the Orange tree, which may remain till
May, put Tiles over your best Tulips, plant Hops, and pole them, and bind them
to the Poles, open the Doors of Beehives, for now they hatch, and be careful of
them.

MAY.
ANgling is now in its Splendor, wean Lambs, kill Ivy, feed your rank Corn
with Sheep, or mow it, sow Buck-wheat, late^ Pease Flax and Hemp may yet be
sown, fallow your stiff Clays, stub the Roots of Broom, Fern, Goss, burn Bait,
weed Quick-sets, drain Fens and wet Grounds, carry out Soil and Compost, turn
out Calves to Grass, mow Clover Grass, and Saint Foin, and other French
Grasses, take care of ^heep if wet VVeather, least the Rot take them, plant all
sorts of VV^nter Greens, set Sage and Rosemary, transplant Amaranths, Fl^s
^ffric^nus, Nasturtium-Indicum, Mirabilia Peruviana, etc from (...) your
Hot-Beds with good, rich So^l, as much as may be in the Sun, bring out your
Oranges and Limons, and other Greens, give all your Houshold-plants fresh Earth
at the top, in place of some of the old taken away, a Hand's Depth, with a Fork
loosen the rest, without hurting the Roots, bind Hops to their Poles, and make
up the Hills after Rain, watch Bees ready to swarm, cover no longer your
Cucumbers and Mellons, except with Glasses, sow Purslain and Lettuce.

JUNE.
IN this Month some mow Hay, shear Sheep and wash them, cast Mud out of
Ditches, etc raise Swine to breed fallow Wheat Land, manure your Ground, sow
Rape and Cole-seed, and Turnip-seed, weed Corn, take care of Sheep if wet, set
Garden-beans for a latter Crop, set Rosemary, Thyme, Marjoram and Hysop, clip
the Branches of Vines, begin to inoculate, water Trees later planted, lay moist
Weed at the Roots of them destroy Ants and other Vermin, as ^nails, Worms
etc. set Saff^on, plant Gilliflowers, sow Lettuce, and other salleting Herbs,
gather Seeds that are ripe, transplant bulbous Roots plant Myrrh, dig Ground
for a Hop Garden, and bind such Hops as the VVind has ^haken, to the Poles,
mind your Bees, that now swarm, take up Anemonies, Ranunculas, Tulip-roots,
keeping them from moulding till planted again, keep Seed of July Flowers, that
are of good Kind, leting them have but few Layers to give Nourishment to, keep
from Venery, and bleed not, except thou have great need, drink Water, and ea^
temperately.

JULY.
NOW mow your Hay, and mow your head Lands, graft Apricocks, fallow your Land
that wants it, gather Hemp and Flax that is early, reap Corn that is ripe, and
manure Ground, sow Turnip-seed, inoculate Roses and choice Fruit water young
Plants ^rees and Layers, prune Apri^cocks and Peaches, let olitory Herbs run to
^eed, sow Lettiuce, Radish and Chervil, graft and inoculate Jessamin and
Oranges, and water Hops if very dry Weather, if it prove moist, renew and cover
the Hill still with fresh Mould. Bees that swarm now are worth little, and best
to prevent them if you can A Swarm of Bees in May, is worth a Load of Hay,
A Swarm of Bees in June, is worth a Crown.
A Swarm of Bees in July, is not worth a Fly.
Clip Box out of order after Rain, sow Anemonyseeds in fine sifted rich Earth,
in Beds or Boxes, gather early Cyclamen-seeds, and sow it in Pots presently,
keep from Venery, and bleed not without great need, the 13th or 15th is said to
be dangerous.

AUGUST.
LAY Compost and Soil on Barley and Wheat Land, you may yet lie fallow, provide
good Seed, and well picked against Seed-time, satin Ewes and Cows, get in your
Harvest about the end of the Month, mow Clover, Saint-Foin, and other French
Grasses, and geld Lambs, forbear all manner of Worts, and Meats and Drink with
Spices, pull up young Suckers, inoculate early, prune superfluous Branches and
Shoots of the second Spring, clip Roses that have done bearing, sow Ca^bages
and Colliflowers for Winte-plants and Scurvey-grass, Angelica, Endive, Onions,
Spinach, Turnips, Marygolds, Parsnips, Carrots, Lettuce, Corn sallad, and such
Plants as will endure Winter, pull up Garlic and ripe Onions, gather olitory
Seeds, gather Seeds of Shrubs that are ripe, now Orange Trees are budding,
inoculate therefore at the beginning of the Month, take up Bulbous-roots and
Lillies, etc. dry and lay them up, plant some Anemony-roots, earth your Pots of
Auricula's, transplant and divide their Roots into a rich, lightsome Earth,
prop up your Hop-poles the Wind has blown down, at the end of the Month gather
Hops, likewise take Bees, destroy Wasps and other Vermin, and streighten the
Passage to secure Bees from Robbers, sow Larkseels, Columbines, Holly-hocks,
etc. remove about Bartholomew-Tide, Perennial Greens, Jessamines, Pomegranates,
Roses, and what is obnoxious to Frosts.

SEPTEMBER
GELD Cattle, etc. sow Ponds, put up Boars in the Stye, put Swine into the
Woods, amend your Fences, eat ripe Fruit, bleed in the 17th or 18th. for
Phrensy, Dropsy, or Falling-Evil, and it preserves thee that Year, beat out
Hemp Seed and water Hemp, gather Mast, manure your Wheat-Lands before the
Plough, make Cider and Perry, gather your Winter-Fruit that is ripe, sow
Lettuce, Raddishes, Spinach, Colliflowers, Cabbages and Winter-herbs and Roots,
plant Strawberries out of the Woods, earth up Winter-plants, Sallad herbs, take
up Bees, and straiten the Entrance of their Hives, also you may remove them,
sow Turnips, Onions transplant Artichoaks, and plant Tulips and other bulbous
Roots, transplant fibrous Roots, gather Saffron, gather and dry Hops, cleanse
the Poles of the Hawm, and lay up the Poles, put your choice Plants in the
Conservatory, and shelter those that are tender, Myrtles w^ll endure near a
Month longer, set Plants that will not endure the House, into the Earth, the
Pots beneath the Surface two or three ^nches, covering them with Glasses,
cl^athed with sweet and dry Moss, on warm Days, and Sunny Showers, uncover
them, make thin Turnips when they grow too thick.

OCTOBER
BARLEY Land lay as dry as can be, Seedtime continues for (...), water the
Furrow, and drain Corn Land new sown, sow Aco^ns or Nuts, Master or Berries for
Timber Coppice and Hedges, sow ease in fat warm Land and lash Quick sets, wean
Foles, fell Sheep you will not VVinter, mind your ^alting scower Ditches and
Ponds, use Physic moderately, and Recreation, feed on good Dier, transplant
Fruit Trees, having lost their Leaves trench the stiffer Grounds, Orchard^ or
Gardening, set Fruit-stones three Inches deep, the sharp end upermost, and
cover them with Fern or Straw, plant Hops, and pack up those that are dry,
remove Bees, house your Hiacinths, Tuberous, set choice Tulips, plaat Anemonies
and Ranuncula's, and cover them from the Frost, and give them Air in temperate
VVeather, bury all sorts of bulbous Roots, ^ow Carpet-works and Camomile.

NOVEMBER.
ON burn baited Lands you may still sow Wheat, kill Poultry and Swine, fell
Coppice wood, and plant Timber and Fruit Trees, bunch Flax and Hemp, thrash out
Wheat till March, least it prove musty, lay Stuff and Straw in moist Places
for to rot for Dung, and lay Dung on Heaps, destroy Ant-hills, and drown
Meadows that are fed low, furnish your Nursery with Stocks for grafting, turn
Mellon Ground, and mix it with rich Earth, that of the last Year's Hot-beds,
and lay it in the Spring in Ridges, trench and fit Ground for Artichoaks, plant
Trees that are Standards, or fit for the Wall, c^op Asparagus, and cover it
with long Dung, and make Trees to plant in the Spring, set and sow early Pease
and Beans, lay in Cellars for to transplant in the Spring Colliflowers,
Cabbages, Turnips, Parsnips and Carrots, plant fibrous Roots, sow
Auricula-seeds, cover Ranuncula's that begin to peep, plant fibrous Roots,
Roses, Alt^ea, Fruitex, Lilax, Syringays, Peonies etc. if the Weather is hard,
quite enclose your perennial Greens and tender Plants, etc. preserve your
Conservatory from sharp Winds, if the Plants are very dry, and it does not
freeze, refresh them sparingly with qualified Water, i. e. Water mingled with
Cow Dung, and a little Sheeps-dung; if it freezes in the Green-house, keep a
final Charcoal Fire in the middle of it, if a fair Day, and Sun shine, show
them the Light, and enclose them again at the Suns going off water not Sedums
nor Aloes all VVinter, dung Hop-gardens, and mix it with store of Earth to rot
against Spring, stop your Bees close, or House them till March.

DECEMBER.
HOUSE Cattle, cut Timber, fell Coppice-wood, fatten Swi^e, bleed Cattle, plant
all Trees that shed their Leaves that are not too tender, plough Land for
Beans, overflow Meadows, and drain your Cornfieldsd, plant Vines and Stocks for
grafting, prune and nail VVall-fruit, and Standard-fruits, or you may defer
them six or eight VVeeks longer, set all sorts of Stones and Kerne^s, kill
Vermin preserve Anemonies from Rain and Frost, and keep your Conservatory well
matted and warm; if open VVeather, set Ranuncula's in a Bed of rotten Thatch or
Straw, with good Moss above and below, set Anemonies in rich lomy Earth, dig a
weedy Hop garden, and Dung it, mixing it with Earth, feed weak Stocks of Bees,
bleed not, except great need, sleep from the Fire side.

To make a Liquour of more Value than Tea or Coffee etc.
TAKE a quart of Conduit, Spring, o^ Riverwater; boil it 6 or 7 min then put
into it whilst boiling hot, about 25 or 30 Leaves of Sage of Virtue ^red, or
common Sage, and about half the quantity of Rosemary with about 12, 15, or 20
Grains of Saffron; let them boil in the Liquour about 6 or 7 min close stopped,
then you may pour it off, and drink what quantity of it you think fit, as a
quarter or half a Pint; sweeten it with white Sugar, and you may eat Bread and
Butter with it if you please. This Liquor far exceeds Coffee, Tea etc. and is
good against Foison, resisting it, all Infections and pestilential Air, and
^^isom Stinks; it comforts the Spirits, strengthens the Brain Heart and Nerves
breeds good Blood, expels ^ll Humors, if they off^nd the Stomach and Body. It
is in short, a general Preservative against all Distempers, especially those
reigning ones of ^gue and curvey. This I recommend for the Good of my Country,
without Fee or Reward.

FINIS.

