Articles to be inquired of the Clergy: Set forth by the Reverend Father in
God, Thomas Bishop of Lincoln^, in his first visitation for his Diocese. Anno
Domini. 1571.

Imprinted at London, in Fleetstreete, by Rafe Newbery.

Articles.
FIrst whether your Persons, Vicars and Curates, do say their divine service in
their Churches at due hours, and convenient times, and also do reverently
minister the Sacraments to their Parishoners according to the book of Common
Prayer, set out by common authority, of the Parliament of this Realm.

2. Item, whether they do exercise themselves in godly study of the holy
Scriptures, and in virtuous bringing up of youth, as in teaching of them the
Cathechisme, and other Godly exercises from time, to time, or no.

3. Item, whether they do decently and orderly go in their apparel, according
to the book of Aduertisements, lately set fourth in that behalf.

4. Item, whether they or any of them do frequent or use, any Tavern,
Alehouse, or any other suspected house, or do use unlawful Huntinge and
Hawkinge contrary to the Ecclesiastical law and their order.

5. Item, whether they be residente upon their benefices and maintain
Hospitality, to their hability, and whether they have more benefices then one,
and whether their houses and Chauncels be in sufficient reparacion.

6. Item, whether such as be absente from their benefices, do leave sufficient
Curates in their places, and whither any of them do serve two Cures, without
special license of the Ordinary.

7. Item, whether any of them do discourage any person from the reading of any
part of the Bible, either in Latin or English, and do not rather comfort, and
exhort every person to the reading of the same, at convenient times, as the
eternal word of God, the true food of Man's soul.

8. Item, whether they have admitted any man to Preach in their Cures not
being lawfully licenced, or have refused and denied such to preach as have been
licenced accordingly.

9. Item, whether they do use to pray for the Queens Majesty in their
Churches, and exhort the people to obedience of her grace, and other
Magistrates being in aucthority under her.

10. Item, whether they exhort their Parishioners to receive the holy
Communion, at the least four times in the year, and whether they presume to
minister the same to any person that is out of Charity or infamed with any
notorious Crime.

11. Item, whether they have their four quarter Sermons by such as be licenced
to preach, and whether they do read once in the year upon some solemn day
in their Church openly, when the most resort of people shall be present, the
Confession and articles agreed upon by the Reverend Father in God the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and York, and other Bishops of this Realm.

12. Item, whether your Parsons and Vicars be married or no, and if they be
not, whether they keep in their houses any suspected Women, under the name and
color of their Butlers, Kinswomen, or otherways.

13. Item, whether they or any of them have any sedicious books privily, or
openly, lately set forth by Doctor Harding and other his accomplices, enemies of
Gods true Religion, and to their Native Country, or if any of them do
supporte, maiteyne, or succoure, the said Doctor Hardinge, or any of his
Accomplices with money or otherways whereas they be in the parts beyond the
Seas.

14. Item, whether they do distinctly and sincerely read the homilies set
forth by the Queens Majesty's aucthority upon the Sondayes, and Holidayes,
when there is no Sermon, and whether they do visit the sick, in exhortinge
them to consider the poor, and other Charitable deeds.

15. Item, that no Minister in the Ministration of the holy Sacraments shall
use any Popish or supersticious Garment, saving that kind of Garmente, as
shall be appointed by common aucthority or by the Bishop of the Dioces and
whether they receive any to be Godfathers or Godmothers that have not received
the Communion or no.

16. Item, whether your Parsons, Vicars, or Curates, do use to tole any Bell in
the time of Lent as to confession in the Popish time, whether their tables be
hanged like Aultars or no, and whether they baptize any Children on the
workenday (or no) and bid and keep any other holy days and fasting days then
which are appointed by the Book.

17. Item, whether any of them do go in their Surplesses in the Rogation week,
and whether they do read the Queens Majesty's Injunctions quarterly or no.

18. Item, whether they deliver the holy Sacrament of the Lords supper to
their people rather into their mouths, then into their hands, and whether
they or any of them do whisper or breathe over the Bread in the time of
consecration or no.

19. Item, whether they do keep the order for the bringing of the Coarse to the
Burial according to the Book, etc.

20. Item, whether they do visit the sick, and impotent persons, to comfort
them in the time of their sickness, with necessary Doctrine out of the holy
Scriptures necessary for that purpose.

Articles to be inquired of the Laytie.
FIRST whether you have the Bible of the greatest volume, the book of common
Prayer set forth by aucthority of Parliament, the Paraphrase, both parts of
the homilies, the Psalter, and other books, necessary according to the
Queens Majesty's Injunctions.

2. Item, whether there be a comely desent framed Communion table, with a Carpet
to the same, according to the order of a book set forth in that behalf, and
also a convenient Pulpit, set up in such place of the Church as Gods word may
be best heard out of it.

3. Item, whether any in your Parish do deprave or dispraise ye book of Common
Prayer, set forth by aucthority of Parliament, or speak against the homilies,
or do maintain or hold any eronious opinions, contrary to the word of God,
and the laws of the Realm.

4. Item, whether any man do stubbernly contemn or despise the order of
Administration of the holy Sacraments set forth in the English tongue and do
obstinately refuse to receive the holy Communion at the least four times in
the year.

5. Item, whether any man does absent him self from divine Service in the holy
days without lawfull^ and just cause, and if such do, whether the
Churchewardens do levy by the way of distress the penalty, according to the
statute, and put the same in the poor man's Box.

6. Item, whether there be any within your Parish that does not reverently use
the ministers, or whether there be any common swearers, seditious slaunderers
of their neighbors, or hau^ters of any Alehouses, in the time of divine
service, or any walkers, Ianglers, or Talkers, that disturbeth the minister in
the time of divine service.

7. Item whether there be any whoremongers, adulterers, or any that do use any
sorcery, inchauntmentes, or witchcraftes, or vehemently suspected of naughty
living, within your Parish or no.

8. Item, whether all monumentes of Superstition be defaced and taken down
within your churches, or whether any do use to pray upon Beads, the Latin
Primmer, or other supersticious books, or keep any superstitious Relics, as
Vestimentes, Albes, Banner clothes and such like, in their houses, or other
places or no.

9. Item, whether your Chalices being mere monuments of the Popish Mass, and
Popish Religion, be translated and converted, into decent and comely Communion
Cups, and the same to be silver at the least according to the value of their
Chalices or no.

10. Item whether your Churches be in sufficient repair and the Church yardes
well fensed, and kept from Swine, and other filthy beasts.

11. Item, whether there has been any Fraye made in your Churches or Church
yardes, to the disturbance of Gods service, and to the evil example of the
rest of the Parish, you shall present by whom, when, and after what sort.

12. Item, whether there be any Scholemaisters, within your Parishes that do
teach any Grammar schole either privately or openly, how long they have
taught, and what their names be.

13. Item, whether there be any Legacies withholden given to the Church, or
otherways, by ye Testatours, in whose hands it is, by whom it is given, and by
whom it is withholden.

14. Item, whether Collection be made for the poor according to the Statute,
and the same distributed and accounted for according to the same Statute, and
whether any man refuses to give to the poor accordingly.

15. Item, whether any do stubbornely refuse to bring their Children to the
Minister on the holidays to learn the Cathechisme or no.

16. Item, whether your Churchwardens do truly administer the goods of the
Church, and make a true account of their office, and chose new at the least
once every year.

17. Item whether any man has put away his wife, or any wife absent her self
from her husband, without just cause, or any that has married within the
degrees Leuiticall and other orders within this Realm set forth in that
behalf.

18. Item, whether any do violate or break the Saboth day and holly days with
their manual labor, and do keep open their shops, alehouses, and other
tiplinge houses, in the time of divine service.

19. Item whether there be a convenient chest for the poor man's box and
whither there be a Register book kept of all those that be Christened, married,
and buried.

20. Item, whether any within your Parish have any sedicious books lately set
forth from beyond the seas or that secretly do hide Monumentes, of Popish
Relics, as Images, and such like.

21. Item, whether the Churchewardens have provided the Postels of M. Becon, as
it was given them in a charge at the visitacion or no.

Injunctions of the Reverend Father in God Thomas by the sufferaunce of God
bishop of Lincoln^ given in his first visitation, Anno Domini. 1571. to be
observed within the Dioces of Lincoln^.
FIRST that the common prayer be said or song decently and distinctly in such
place of the Church according to the largeness and straightness of the
Church and Quire, so that the people may be most edefied.

2. Item, that your ministers shall go in decent and comely apparel, as also
shall say the Divine service appointed, and minister the holy Sacraments,
within their Churches in decente apparel and to use no Copes, unless it be in
Cathedral and Collegiate churches, according as it is set forth by a book
called the aduertisements.

3. Item the parish shall provide a decent communion table upon a Frame with a
comely Carpette to the same at their costs and charges as they will answer to
the contrary for their doings.

4. Item, the churchwardens shall search the Tauernes, Alehouses, and other
tippling houses, to se whether any person be there drinking or playing at any
unlawful game, in the time of divine service, and they to present their names,
and the names of them that keep the said houses.

5. Item, the churchwardens shall make their account yearly of their offices
in the presence of the Ministre and the other of the Parish, and immediately
upon the same account finished to choose new from year to year.

6. Item, none shall be admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, unless they
have received the blessed Communion.

7. Item, that on the Sundays and Holydaies, there be no shops open, nor
Artificers commonly goinge about their worldly affairs, and that in all
Fayres and common Markets, falling upon the Sunday or Holidaies, there be no
showing of wares, before the service be don.

8. Item, that the Ministers shall suffer none to preach within their cures,
unless he be able to show some sufficient license from the Bishop of the
Diocese, or other that have authority to license the same.

9. Item, no Priest nor Lay man shall be admitted or suffered to keep any
Grammar schole openly or privately within this Diocese, except he be allowed
and licenced by the Bishop or his Officers.

10. Item, the Ministers shall call upon their Parishoners to receive the
blessed communion, at the least four times in the year and also shall call
upon their Parishioners to send their children to the church to learn the
Cathechisme, upon the Sondaies and other convenient times.

11. Item, your Parsons and Vicars shall not suffer nor admit, any strange
Curate coming out of any other Diocese, to serve within their cures, without
he be first licenced by the Bishop or his Officers.

12. Item, that no man shall enterprise nor presume to ring nor Iangle any
Belles upon all Halowen day, or in the night of the same day, superstitiously
or Popishly, as they have been accustomed to do, otherways then to call the
people to Divine Service.

13. Item, that none of your Parsons, Vicars, nor Curates, shall minister the
holly communion, to any Forener or stranger, coming out of any other
Diocese, or from any other Parish, with in this Diocese, without the special
license of my Lord, or his officers, or the Minister of that place, from
whence the said forener or stranger shall come.

14. Item that no Parson, Vicar, nor Curate shall minister to any person or
persons, the holy Sacraments in any other church or churches, at any time or
times, but in their own, without the special request of the Parson, or Vicar
of the said Parish.

15. Item, no man shall keep any supersticious or erroneous book of late come
from beyond the Seas, and set forth by Doctor Harding and other his
accomplices, but the same shall bring forth and reveal before the Bishop and
other his officers according to the Queens Majesty's proclamacion set forth in
that behalf.

16. Item, that every week or every fortnight at the least they shall read
openly in their churches the proclamation set out of late by the Queen her
Majesty for the calling in of books of sedicion to be delivered to the
ordinary according to the Tenor and meaning of the said proclamacion.

God save the Queen.

