ARTICLES TO BE INQVIRED OF IN THE ARCH-DEACONRIE of Salop, within the Diocese
of Hereford, in the year 163^ At the Visitation of Morgan Godwyn Doctor of
Laws, Archdeacon of Salop.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON 163^

The Tenor of the Oath, to be Ministered to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen.
YOu shall swear that you, and every of you, shall duly consider and
diligently inquire of all and every these Articles given you in charge; and
that all affection, favor, hatred, malice, hope of reward and gain, or fear
of displeasure set aside; you shall present all and every such person or
persons, that now is, or are, or of late has or have bee^ within your Parish,
as has or have committed any offense, or made any default mentioned in these
or any of these Articles; or which are vehemently suspected or defamed of any
such offense or default: wherein you shall deal uprightly and fully; neither
presenting, nor sparing to present any, contrary to truth: having in this
action God before your eyes, with an ernest zeal to maintain truth, and to
suppress vice: So help you God, and the holy contents of this Book.

First concerning the Church, the Furniture and Ornaments thereof, and the
Church Possessions.
INprimis, Whether have you in your several Churches and Chappells, the whole
Bible of the largest Volume and the last Translation, the Book of Common
Prayer, the two Books of Homilies, Bishop Jewel his apology and the form of
Prayer for the 5. of November set forth by authority, all well and fairly
bound? as also the Book of Canons or Constitutions Ecclesiastical, as is
commanded?

2 Whether have you in your Church or Chapel a Font of stone whole and clean
with a cover set up in the ancient usual place: a convenient and decent
communion Table, with a Carpet of Silk or some other decent stuff continually
laid upon the same at the time of Divine Service, and a fair linen cloth
thereon at the time of the receiving of the holy Communion. And whether is the
same Table placed in such convenient sort, as that the Minister may be best
heard in his Prayer and Administration: and that the greatest number may
Communicate. And whether is it so used out of time of Divine Service, as is not
agreeable to the holy use of it; as by sitting on it, throwing Hats on it,
writing on it; or is it abused to other profane uses: And are the Ten
Commandments set up at the East end of your Church or Chapel where the
people may best see and read them, and other sentences of holy Scripture
written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

3 Whether are the afternoones Sermons in the several Parishes turned into
Catechizing by Question and Answer, according to the form prescribed in ye
Book of Common Prayer? and whether does every Lecturer read Divine Service
according to the liturgy Printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood, before
the Lecture? And whether are his Majesty's instructions in all things duly
observed?

4 Whether have you in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for
your Minister to read Service in, together with a comely Pulpet set up in a
convenient place, with a decent Cloth or Cushion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion Cup of Silver with a cover agreeable, a Flagon of
Silver, Tyn, or Pewter to put the Wine in, whereby it may be put or set on the
Communion Table at the time of the consecrating or blessing thereof, with all
other things and Ornaments necessary for the celebration of Divine Service, and
the Administration of the Sacraments? And whether have you a strong Chest for
the ^s for the poor, with three Locks and Keys; and another Chest for keeping
the ^ookes and Orn^ments of the Church, and the register Book? And whether
have you a register Book in parchment for Christnings, Weddings, and Burialls,
and the same kept in all points according to the Canon in that behalf
provided? And is the Mothers Christian name therein registered as well as the
Fathers, and a transcript thereof brought in yearly, within one month after
the 25. of March in to the Lord Bishops principal Register? And whether have
you in your said Church or Chancell a Table set of the degres, wherein by Law
are prohibited to marry?

5. Whether is your Church or Chapel with the Chancell thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicaridge house, your Parish Almes-house and Church-house in good
reparation: are they employed to godly and their right holy uses? Is your
Church, Chancell, and Chapel decently and comely kept as well within as
without, well tyled, well glazed, well paved, and the seats well maintained
according to the 85. Canon in that behalf provided? Or have any Patrons or
others decayed the Parsonage Houses, and kept a stipendiarie Priest or Curate
in place where an Incumbent should be possessed? Whether is your Churchyard
well fenced with Walls, Rayles, or Pales, and by whom: and if not, in whose
default the same is, and what the defect or fault is? And whether any person
have incroached on the ground of the Churchyard, or whether any person or
persons have used any thing or place consecrated to holy use, profanely or
wickedly? Is your Churchyard well and orderly kept without abuse? And is the
whole consecrated ground kept as becomes the place so dedicated free from
soil and all other nastines, as pissing against the Church, and defiling the
Churchyard with their excrements and the like? And are the Bones of the dead
decently interred or laid up in some fit place as beseems Christians.

6. Whether have any ancient Monuments or glass windows been defaced, or any
brass Inscriptions, Lead, Stones, Bells or any thing else belonging to your
Church or Chapel been at any time purloyned, and by whom?

7. What Legacies have been given to the use and benefit of your Church, and
how have they been bestowed? Who has received and detaineth them without due
employment? and whether does any withold the stock of the Church, or any
goods or things given to good and charitable uses.

8 It there any in the Parish, that has or does refuse to contribute toward
the reparation of your Church, and toward the provision of such things as
belong thereunto?

9 Whether does any private man or men of his or their own authority erect any
Pewes or built any seats in your Church, and what Pewes or seats have been so
built, by whose procurement, and by whose authority?

10 Whether has any Popish Recusant being lawfully excommunicate, or any other
excommunicated person, been interred or buried in your Church, or Churchyard,
before absolution from that censure and excommunication obtained? if yea, then
by whom and when?

11 Whether have you a true Terrier of all yt Glebe-lands, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements, and Portions of Tithes,
whether within your Parish or without belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage
taken by ye view of honest men in the said Parish? and whether is it safely
kept and preserved and in whose hands? and whether has there a true Copy
thereof, under the hands of the Minister and Churchwardens, been transmitted
and laid up in the Bishops Registry, there to continue for a perpetual memory
thereof? And if you have no such Terrier yet made, you the Churchwardens and
Sidemen together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence, your Curate, are
to make diligent enquiry of the Premises, and to make, subscribe, and sign the
said Terrier, and to bring in a true copy of it into the Bishops Restistry, as
is before said.

Second Concerning the Clergy.
1. Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate distinctly and reverently say
Divine Service upon Sundays and Holy Days and other days appointed to be
observed by the Book of Common Prayer, as the Conversion of S. Paul. S.
Barnabas day, Wednesdayes and Frydayes, and the Eves of every Sunday and
Holy Day, at fit and usual times? And does he duly observe the Orders, rits
and ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common Prayer, as will in
rea,ding public Prayers and the Litanie, as also in administering the
Sacraments-Solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick, burying the dead,
Churching of we^men, and other the like Rits, and Offices of the Church, in
such manner and form as in the said Book of Common Prayer he is enjoined,
without any omission or addition? And does he read the Book of the last Canons
yearly, and wear a Surplice according to the said Canons? And if he be a
graduate, whether does he also wear upon his Surplice such a hood as by the
order of the University is suitable to his degree?

2 whether have you any Lecture in your Parish? If yea, whether does he twice
at the lest every year read himself Divine Service, both Morning and Evening
two several Sundays, publicly in his Surplice with an Hood thereon
answerable to his degree of school; and also twice in the year administer
both Sacraments. with such Rites and Ceremonies as are prescribed by the Book
of Common Prayer? Also, whether does he read Divine Service according to the
Liturgy Printed by authority, in his Surplice and Hood before his Lecture,
according to his Maiestyes late directions? whether does he at any time preach
in his Cloak, and not in his Gown? whether does your Preacher or Lecturer
behave himself in his Sermons and Lectures as he ought to do, teaching
obedience, and edifiing his auditorie in matters of Faith and good life,
without intermedling with matters of State or other discourse not fit for the
Pulpit?

3 Whether have you any Lecture of Combination set up in your Parish? if yea,
whether is it read by a company of grave and Orthodox Divines near adjoining,
and in the same Diocese? and whether do they preach in Gowns and not in
Clokes?

4 Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate bid Holy Days and fasting-dayes as by
the Book of Common prayer is appointed? And does he give wa^gs before hand to
he Parishoners for the receiving the Holy Communion, as the 22 Canon requires?
And whether does he administer the Holy Communion as often, and at such times
as that every Parishioner may receive the same at the least thrice in every
year, whereof once at Easter? And whether does your Minister receive the same
himself on every day, that he Administers it to others, and use the words of
institution according to the Book at every time the Bread and Wine is renewed,
according to the Proviso of the 21. Canon? And does he deliver the Bread and
Wine to every Communicant severally, and kneeling.

5 Whether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate before the several times of the
Administration of the Lord's Supper, admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if
any of them have their consciences troubled and disquieted, to resort to him,
or to some other learned Minister, and open their grief, that they may receive
such Ghostly counsel and comfort, as their conscience may be releived, and by
the Minister they may have the benefit of absolution, to the quiet of their
conscience and avoidance of Scruple? And if any man confess his secret or
hidden sins being sick or whole, to the Minister, for the unbarthening of
his conscience and receiving of spiritual consolation of mind from him, does
he the said Priest or Minister, or has he at any time revealed and made
known to any person whatsoever, any crime or offense so committed to his trust
and secrecy, contrary to the 113. Canon.

6 Whether has your Minister admitted to the holy Communion any notorious
offender or Schismatic, contrary to the 26. and 27. Canon? or has he received
any to the Communion being not of his own cure? or has he put any from the
Communion, who are not publicly infamous for any notorious crime? does he
always use and never omit the sign of the Cross in Baptism* or does he
Baptize in any Basin, or other Vessel, and not in the usual Font, or admit
any Father to be Godfather, or Mother to be God-mother to their own children,
or such to be Godfathers and Godmothers who have not received the holy
Communion; or Baptize any children that were not borne in the Parish, or
wilfully refuse to Baptize any Infant in his Parish, being in danger, having
been informed of the weakness of the said child: and whether the child dies
without Baptism through his default?

7 Does he refuse to interre any which ought to be interred in Christian
burial, or defer the same longer then he should; or bury any in Christian
burial, which by the Constitutions of the Church of England, or Law of the
Land, ought not to be so interred?

8 Whether has your Minister Married any without a King, or without Banes
published three several Sundays or holy days in time of Divine Service, in
the several Churches or Chappells of their several above, according to the
Book of Common Prayer* or in times prohibited albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a License or dispensation from the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Lord Bishop of Herford, or his Chancellor, first obtained in
that behalf? Or not between the hours of 8. and 12. in the Fore-noone, or
have Married any in private houses; or if the parties or either of them be
under the age of 21. years, before their Parents or Governors have signified
their consent unto him?

9. Is your Minister a Preacher allowed? If yea, then by whom? If not, whether
does he procure some who are lawfully licensed, to preach monthly amongst you
at the least?

10. Does your Minister (being licensed) preach usually according to the
Canons, either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel near
adjoining, where no other Preacher is, and how often has he been negligent in
that behalf, and does he preach standing and with his hat off. Or whether does
he or his Curate upon every Sunday when there is no Sermon, read an Homily or
some part thereof according as he ought to do? or in case he be not licensed to
preach, does he take upon him to preach or expound the Scriptures in his own
Cure, or elsewhere? If so, then you are to present the same, the time and
place, when and where he did it.

11 Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty King Charles, and for
the Queens Majesty, for Prince Charles his Highness, and all the Royal
Progeny, with addition of such style and titles as are due to his Majesty, and
exhort the people to obedience to his Majesty, and to al Magistrates in
authority under him? And does he also pray for all Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Ecclesiastical persons?

12 Does your Minister, Preacher or Lecturer observe the form of Prayer (and
no other) before his or their Sermons, that is prescribed by the 55 Canon,
therein moving the people as they are there directed, to join with him in
Prayer for Christ's holy Catholic Church, and for the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and the rest of the Royal Progeny, Clergy and
Council, as in the Canon is required, always concluding with the Lords Prayer?

13 Is your Minister continually resident upon his benifice, or how long time
has he been absent? And in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he
cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied according to the Canon? or in case
he has another benifice, Whether does he supply his absence by a Curate
sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure, where he himself is not
resident? or otherwise, in case the smalnesse of the living cannot find a
preaching Minister, does he preach at both his Benifices usually.

14 Does your Minister or Curat serve any more Cures then one? If yea, then
what other Cure does he serve: and how far are they distant?

15 Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday and Holyday, before Evening
prayer, for half an hour or more, examine and instruct the youth and ignorant
persons of his parish, in the tenn Commandments, Articles of the Creed, and
in the Lords prayer, and the Sacraments according as is prescribed in the
Catechism set forth in the Book of Common prayer only? And if he do not,
where is the fault, either in the Parents and Masters of the Children, or in
the Curat neglecting his duty? And is he careful to tender all such youth of
his parish as have been well instructed in their Catechism, to be confirmed by
the Bishop in his Visitation, or any other time, as is appointed by the Book
aforesaid?

16 Does your Minister in the Rogation days go in perambulation of the
Circuit of the Parish, saying and using the prayers, Suffrages, and
Thankesgiving to GOD, appointed by Law according fo his duty, thanking GOD for
his blessings, if there be plenty on the earth: or otherwise to pray for his
Grace and favor, if there be a fear of Scarsity?

17 Has your Minister admitted any Woman, begotten with child in Adultery or
Fornication, to be churched without License of the Ordinary?

18 Has your Minister or any other Preacher, baptized children, Churched any
woman, or ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise than by
Law is allowed?

19. Whether have there been any Children baptized in private houses, by any
person, or Midwife, or Popish Priest? and have such Children thus privately
baptized, and surviving, been afterward brought to your Church, to the intent
the Congregation and the Minister of the Parish (in case they were not baptized
by him) may be certified whether they, or any of them were lawfully bapt^zed or
no?

20 Whether have the children that have been borne to any popish Recusant or
Recusants in your Parish, been publicly baptized in your Parish Church, by
your Parson, Vicar, or Curate? or by whom else were they baptized, or where to
your knowledge?

21 Does your Minister endeavor and labor diligently to reclaim the Popish
Recusants in his parish from their errors (if there be any such abiding in your
Parish?) Or whether is your Parson, Vicar, or Curate over-conversant with, or a
favourer of Recusants, whereby he is suspected not to be sincere in Religion?

22 Has your Minister taken upon him to appoint any public or private Fasts,
Prophecies or Exercises not approved by Law, or public Authority; or has
used to meet in any private house or place with any person or persons, there to
consult how to impeach or deprave the Book of Common Prayer, or the Doctrine
or Discipline of the Church of England? If yea, then you shall present them all.

23 Does your Minister or Lecturer either in time of public allowed Fasts, or
at any other time, usually deteine the Assembly or Congregation with Sermons
longer than a full hour? If yea, then you shall present the time and place.

24 Whether has your Minister been present at any private conventicle, to
consult there of any course to be taken by them, or by another upon their
motion, which may any way tend to the impeachment or depraving of the Doctrine
of the Church of England, or of the book of Common Prayer, or of any part of
the Government and Discipline now established in the Church of England?

25 Whether does your Minister publish in his Sermons any Doctrine which is new
and strange, and disagreeing from the Word of God, and from the Articles of
Christian Faith and Religion, agreed on and published Anno Dom. 1562. And
whether does he teach any thing which he would the people religiously to
observe and believe, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that
which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of that
Doctrine according to the Canon?

26 Whether does your Minister in his Sermons enter into and handle any points
of controversy, contrary to his Majesty's directions? whether does he, or
any other Preacher in your pulpit particularly impugn and confute any Doctrine
delivered by any other Preacher in the same Church, or in any Church near
adjoining, before he has acquainted the Bishop of the Diocese therewith, and
received order from him what to do in that case?

27 Has your Minister stayed the publication of any excommunications or
suspensions, or does he every half year denounce in his parish Church, all
such of his Parish as are excommunicated, and persevere therein without seeking
to be absolved, or does he wittingly and willingly keep company with such as
are excommunicate? and has he admitted into your Church any person
excommunicated, without a certificate of his absolution from the Ordinary or
other competent Judge?

28 Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from
time to time call upon his Parishioners to give somewhat as they can spare, to
godly and charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments?

29 Does your Minister or Curate resort unto such as be dangerously sick in
your Parish, to instruct and comfort them in their distresses, according to the
order of the book of Common Prayer: not omitting, then especially, to move
them earnestly to liberality toward the poor?

30 Whether does your Minister, or any, having taken holy Orders, being now
silenced or suspended, or any other person of your knowledge, or as you have
heard, hold any conventicles, or does preach in any place, or does use any
other form of Divine Service than is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer?
If yea, then you are to present their names, and with whom?

31 Whether is your Curate licenced to serve by the Bishop of this Dioces, or
by any other, and by whom?

32 Whether is there any in your Parish, who having been admitted into holy
Orders, either Deacon or Minister, does voluntarily relinquish and forsake his
calling, and lives in the course of his life as a mere Layman?

33 Whether is your Minister studious in holy Scripture, and abstaineth from
mechanical trades or labor not befitting his function, and from apparel
unseemely for his calling, using that decency and gravity therein, as is
prescribed in the 47. Canon?

34 Is your Minister noted or defamed to have obtained his Benefice or his
Orders by simony, or any other way defamed to be a simoniacall person, or any
way noted to be a Schismatique or schismatically affected, or reputed to be an
incontinent person, or does table or lodge any such in his house: or is be a
frequenter of Tavernes, Innes, or Alehouses, or any place suspected for ill
rule: Or is he a common Drunkard, a common Gamester, or player at Dice, a
Swearer, or one that applies himself not at his studies, or is otherwise
offensive and scandalous to his Function or Ministry?

Third, Concerning Schoolmasters, Physicians, Chirurgians, Mid-wives and
Parish-Clerkes.
1 Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School,
without License of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now
established? and does he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear Divine
Service and Sermons? and does he instruct his scholars in the grounds of the
Religion now established in the Church of England, and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his scholars in learning?

2 Does your Schoolmasters tea^h and instruct his youth in the Catechism
allowed by authority, or in some other Catechism? if in some other, what is
that Catechism that he so teaches?

3 Is any Living or Means given toward the erection or maintenance of any
School withheld back, or otherwise employed and by whom?

4 Does any keep School in the Chancell or Church, by which means that holy
place and the Communion Table are many ways profaned, and the windows broken?

5 How many Physicians, Chirurgians, or Mid-wives have you in your Parish? how
long have they used their several sciences or Offices, and by what Authority?
and how have they demeaned themselves therein? and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their professions?

6 Have you a fit Parish-Clerke, aged twenty years at least, of honest life,
able to read and write? are his and the Sextons wages duly paid without fraud
or diminution, according to the ancient custom of your Parish? what is his
wages? by whom is he chosen? whether is he approved by the Ordinary? Is he
diligent in his Office, and serviceable to the Minister? does he keep the
Church clean and doors locked? Is there any thing lost or spoiled through his
default? and does he execute his Office duly?

Fourth, Concerning the Parishioners.
1 Whether any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards,
or others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, do
wilfully absent themselves from your Parish Church, upon Sundaies or
Holi-daies, at morning and evening prayers? or who come late to Church, and
depart from Church before Service be done upon the said days? or who do not
reverently behave themselves during the time b^ Divine Service, devoutly
kneeling when the general Confession of sins, the Letanie, the ten
Commandments, and all prayers and Collects are read, and using due and lowly
reverence when the blessed Name of the Lord Jesus Christ is mentioned, and
standing up at each Creed, at the Gospel, at each Glory be to the Father.
etc. and at the Te Deum, according to the practice of his Majesty's Chapel
Royal, and of the Cathedral Church of Hereford; or who do cover their heads
in the Church during the time of Divine Service, unless it be in case of
necessity, in which case they may wear a nightcap or Coyf? or who do give
themselves to babbling, talking or walking, and are not attentive to hear the
Word preached or read? whether any of your Parish being of 16. years of age or
upwards, do not receive the holy Communion thrice every year, whereof once at
Easter, and whether they do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof? And
whether any having diverse houses of remove, do shift from place to place, of
purpose to defeat the performance of their Christian duties in that behalf?

2 Whether any of your Parishioners being admonished thereof, do not send
their children servants, and apprentises, to the Minister, to be catechized
upon such Sundays and Holy Days as are appointed? or whether any of them do
refuse to come; or if they come, refuse to learn those instructions set forth
in the Book of Common Prayer?

3 Whether do any of your Parish entertain within their house, any soiourner,
common guests or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine Service, or
receave the holy Communion as aforesaid? present their names, qualities, or
conditions.

4 Whether does any in your Parish under the degree of a Nobleman, or not
thereto allowed by the Law, keep in his house any Chaplain? present their
names.

5 What Recusant Papists have ye in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present
their names, qualities or condition: whether they keep any Schoolmasters in
their house, which comes not to Church to hear Divine Service, and receive
the holy Communion? what is his name, and how long has he taught there or
elsewhere?

6 Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other schismatiques, do labor
to seduce and withdraw others from the Religion now established? or instruct
their families or children in Popish Religion; or resuse to entertain any,
especially in place of greatest service or trust but such as concur with them
in their opinions?

7 How long have the said Popish Recusants abstained from Divine Service, or
from the Communion?

8 Is there any in your Parish, that retain, sell, utter or disperse any
Popish books, or writings, or other books, Libraries, or writings of any
Sectaries, touching the Religion, State, or Government Ecclesiastical of this
Kingdom of England, or keep any Manuments of superstition, uncancelled or
undefaced?

9 Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being Popish Recusants
or Sectaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to hear
Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments? If yea, then who are they? and how
long since have they so reformed themselves? and whether they still remain in
their conformity?

10 Are there any in your Parish that refuse to have their children baptized,
or themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege; or have
any married Wives refused to come to Church, according to the Book of Common
Prayer, to give God thanks after their Childbirth, for their safe deliverance?
And whether do any of or in your Parish, refuse to have their children
baptized in your Parish Church, according to the form prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer?

11 Do an^ of your Parish usually go to other Parish Churches to hear Div^ne
Service or Sermons? Or do they communicate, or baptize their children in any
other Parish?

12 Whether be there any in your Parish, who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to public Prayers appointed in the Book of Common Prayer,
making a schism or division (as it were) between the use of public Prayer
and Preaching?

13 What persons within your Parish for any offense, contumacie or crime of
Ecclesiastical cognizance do stand excommunicate? present their names, and
for what cause they do stand excommunicated, and how long they have so stood,
and what person or persons do wittingly and usually keep them company.

14 Whether any, not being in Orders, do execute any Priestly or Ministerial
Office in your Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, and what be their names?

15 Has any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister, or has stricken or quarrelled with any other person
within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned himself disorderly in the
Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any base or immodest behavior? Or has
disturbed the Minister in time of Divine Service or Sermon, or has libelled,
or spoken slanderous words against your Minister, to the scandal of his
vocation, or defamed any of his neighbors touching any crime of
Ecclesiastical cognizance?

16 Whether any of, or in your parish, without consent of the Ordinary, or
other lawful authority, have caused any to do penance, or to be censured or
punished for any matter of Ecclesiastical cognizance, by any Vestry-meetings,
or otherwise by their own authority? or have taken any money or commutation for
the same? present their names that have done it, and who have been so
punished, in what manner, and upon what cause.

17 Whether any person in your Parish do exercise any trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open Shops or Warehouses upon any Sundaie or Holy Day, by
themselves, their servants, or Apprentises, or have otherwise profaned the
said days, contrary to the Orders of the Church of England? And whether there
be any In-Keepers, Ale-house-keepers, Victuallers or other Persons, that permit
any Persons in their Houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the time of
Divine Service or Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoone or
afternoon, upon those days?

18 Whether is the 5 day of November kept Holy, and thankesgiving made to God,
for his Majesty and this States happy deliverance, according to the Ordinance
in that behalf?

19 Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any Conventicles or private
Congregations, or make or maintain any Constitutions agreed upon in such
assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against the
Book of Common Prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the
Articles of Religion agreed upon in Anno 1562. Or against the Kings Supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastique or against the Oath of Supremacy, or of allegiance, as
pretending the same to be unlawful, and not warrantable by Gods word? or
against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England, now
established? Or against the Government of the Church of England under the
Kings most excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes,
and other Officers of the same; affirming the same to be repugnant to the word
of God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers are not lawfully ordained?
Or whether there be any Authors, Favorers, or maintainers of Heresy or
Schism, or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, Brownists, of the
Family of Love, or of any other Heresy or Schism? present their names.

20 Whether have any in your Parish Married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, and where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your Parish being
Lawfully Married, live apart one from the other, without due separation by the
Law; or any that have been Divorced, which keep company with any other at Bed
or at Board?

21 Whether your Hospitalls and Almes-Houses, and other such Houses and
Corporations, founded to good and charitable uses, and the Lands, Possessions
and Goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of, as they should be? And do
the Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and
Corporations, behave and demean themselves according to the holy Ordinances
and Statutes of their several Foundations?

22 Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame or
report, which have committed adultery, fornication or incest: or any which have
impudently bragged or boasted, that he or they have lived incontinently with
any Person or Persons whatsoever: or any that have attempted the chastity of
any woman, or solicited any woman to have the carnal knowledge of her body:
or which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy
Name, common swearers, common slanderers of their Neighbors, and sowers of
discord, filthy and lascivious Talkers, Usurers, simoniacall persons, Baudes,
or Harborers of Women with child which be unmarried, or conveying or suffering
them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the Church, or any that
having been heretofore presented, or suspected os any of the aforesaid crimes,
have for that cause departed your parish, and are now returned again? Or any
which have used any enchantments, Sorceries, Charms, or witchcrafts, which are
not made Felony by the Statutes of this Realm: Or any that have committed any
perjury in any Ecclesiastical Court in an Ecclesiastical Cause, or which have
committed any forgery punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws; or any procurers
or abettors of the said offenses: Ye shall truly present the names of all and
singular the said offenders, and with whom they have committed the said
offenses, in case they have not been publicly punished to your knowledge for
the said crimes.

Fifthly Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. Whether you, and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen from time to
time do, and have done their diligence, in not suffering any idle person to
abide either in the Churchyard, or Church Porch, in Service or Sermon time,
but causing them either to come into the Church to hear Divine Service, or to
depart, and not to disturb such as be hearers there? And whether they have,
and you do diligently see the Parishioners duly resort to the Church every
Sunday and Holy Day, and there to remain during Divine Service and Sermen? And
whether you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any Plays,
Feasts, Drinkings, or any other prophaine usages to be kept in your Church,
Chapel, or Churchyards, or have suffered any person or persons, without
restreining them to your and their uttermost power to be tippling or drinking in
any Inn or victualling house, in your Parish, during the time of Divine
Service and Sermons on Sundays and Holi-dayes?

2 Whether and how often have you admitted any to Preach within your Church or
Chapel, who was not sufficiently licensed? And whether you together with your
Minister, have not taken diligent head and care, that every Parishioner being
of 16 years of age or upwards, have received thrice every year as aforesaid:
and also that no stranger have usually come to your Church, from their own
Parish Church?

3 Whether have there been provided against every Communion, a sufficient
quantity of fine white Bread, and good and wholesome Wine for the Communicants
that shall receive? And whether that Wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing Pot of Pewter, or some other purer metal?

4 Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the parishioners?
And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for their time, and
delivered to their successors by bill indented the money and other things
b^longing to the Church, which was in their hands? And are the Alms of the
Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor?

5 Whether do you see the names of all Preachers, which are strangers, and do
preach in your Parish-Churches, to be noted in a Book for that purpose, and
whether ev^ry Preacher do subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License?

6 Whether any man do trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

7 Whether be there any Legacy given to the Church or poor people, or to ^e
mending of highways, or otherwise by the Testators, with holden? ^n whose
hands is it, by whom was it given, and by whom is it with^olden?

8 Do you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiastical Cognizance? ^f
yea, you are to present the same by virtue of your Oaths.

THe Minister of every Parish may and ought to join in presentment with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen; and if they will not present, the Minister may and
ought himself to present the defaults and crimes aforesaid: And there must be
several presentiments made to every several Article: and the Minister,
Churchwardens and Swornemen are to meet and confer about the said
presentiments, and answering of every the aforesaid Articles.

FINIS.

