ARTICLES to be inquired of, Jn the Diocesan Visitation, of the most Reverend
Father in GOD, Toby by the providence of GOD L. Archbishop of York, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan.

Begun and continued in the years of our LORD GOD 1622. and 1623. And in the
17. year of his Graces Translation.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe. Anno 1623.

The tenor of the Oath to be ministered to the Churchwardens and Sworne-men.
YOU and every of you shall swear by Almighty God, that (all affection and
respect set aside) upon due and deliberate consideration of these Articles
given in charge, you shall make a true, full and particular answer in writing,
to the same Articles and every of them, presenting all and singular offenses,
and offenders therein mentioned: wherein you shall deal faithfully, and
uprightly, as before God. So help you God in Jesus Christ.

Articles to be inquired of, by the Churchwardens and Sworne-men in the said
visitation of the Lord Archbishop of York. Anno Dom. 1623.
For the Clergy.
INprimis, Whether your Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister be a Preacher of
Gods Word, and a maintainer and furtherer of Religion now established by
public authority within this Realm of England, or no?

Charles, Frederick the Prince Elector Palatine, the Lady Elizabeth his wife,
and their Royal issue; with addition of such style and title as of right does
appertain to his Majesty, and whether any, since the 25. of September 1605.
have refused, or willingly omitted, or neglected so to do?

York, or Bishop of the Diocese, where he dwells, or one of the
Universities, under their Seal?

and Holydaies, according to his Majesty's late directions in that behalf
signified and registered in the Consistory office at York? And how many Sermons
has your Parson, Vicar, or Minister preached in his own Church within this
year last past? And if he be not a Preacher, how many Sermons by his
procurement or otherwise have there been preached this last year, and by whom?
And whether were they that preached the same, licenced or no, and by whom?

England? And whether any such so reading or exercising, do teach or profess
any doctrine of Innovation, inclyning to Papistry, Brownism, or any other
Heresy or Schismatic error, whereby themselves or others may be drawn from
their true obedience in causes Ecclesiastical?





danger of death, having notice of the weakness thereof? And whether in his
default has any dyed without Baptism?









Curate or Minister licenced to preach, or not? And if he be, then by whom is
he licenced? And what distribution does he make thereby to the poor, where he
is not resident?





















Anno Domini 1603. according to his Majesty's commandment?

For the Laity.






and by a lawful Minister: and if yea, then whose children were they, and by
whom were they baptized? And whether such so baptized, were afterward brought
to the Church for further manifestation and approbation thereof, according to
the Book of Common Prayer?















God and the King, according to his Majesty's Proclamation?





chappelrie, any Rush-bearing, Bull-baitings, Beare-baitings, May-games,
Morice-dances Ailes, or any such like profane pastimes or assemblies on the
Sabbath, to the hinderance of Prayers, Sermons, or other go^ly exercises?





Elizabeth? And whether the day and year of every christning, wedding, and
burial, which have been in your parish, has been duly written in the
book? And whether you have a sure coffer, with three locks and keys for the
safe custody thereof? And whether are the names of all such so christened,
married, or buried, transmitted yearly within this Diocese, to the Lord
Archbishop or his Chancellor, to be preserved in the Registrie of the said
Lord Archbishop, according to the seuentieth Canon and Constitution
Ecclesiastical?



September 1605. any Usurers, Drunkards, Swearers, or any other who are
vehemently suspected or defamed of any such crime, and who be they?



January, being Hillarie day, or between Septuagesima Sunday, and the Sunday
next after Easter, or between the Sunday next before the Ascension day, and
Trinity Sunday next ensuing? let their names be expressed, as well of the
Minister so marrying any, as of the parties so married.

baptized in your said Church or Chapel, according to Book of Common Prayer,
and who they be?











September 1605. have taken upon them to grant any license for marriages within
your parish? And how many licenses have been so granted, and what be the names
of them that have been married by virtue of any such license, and by what
Minister have the same been celebrated?

September 1605. censured, or absolved any person or persons, which have by law
incurred the sentence of Excommunication ipso facto, either for solemnizing or
being present at any marriages, the banes not asked, nor any lawful license
obtained, or for fighting, quarrelling, or brawling, or drawing any weapon with
purpose to strike in any Church or Churchyard?

September 1605. granted any admissions for Curates, licenses for
Schoolmasters or Parish Clerks, sequestrations of vacant Benefices, by their
supposed authority, and how many, and to whom, and what be their names?





FINIS.

