Ad generalem Sessionem pacis pro Comitatu praedicto tent. apud Chelmisford in
dicto Comitatu die Martis Quinto die Octobris Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli
Deigratia, Angliae, Scotia, Franeiae, and Hiberniae Regis fidei defensor is,
etc. Sexto. Coram Roberto Comite War. Gulielmo Domino Maynard, Harbottello
Grimston milite and Baronetto, Thoma Cheek mil. Henrico Mildmay de Moulsham
mil. Nicholao Coote mil. Thoma Wiseman mil. Henrico Mildmay de Graces mil.
Arthuro Herris mil. Gulielmo Maxey mil. Humfreydo Mildmay mil. Thoma Fanshaw
mil. Drugone Deane mil. Gulielmo Towse Iohanne Darcy, Iohanne Brampston
servientibus ad legem, Roberto Aylet Iuris Civilis Doctore, Henrico Gent,
Martino Lumley, Iohanne Wright, Iohanne Argall, Roberto Wiseman, Iacobo Heron,
and socijs suis Iusticiarijs dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Com.
conservand. Nec non ad diversas felonias, etc. audiend. and terminand.
assignat. inter alia ordinat. est ut sequitur.
WHEREAS the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council by his
Highness express direction have by their several Letters commended unto us
several instructions tending to the prevention of the scarcity and dearth of
Corn, and other Victual, and to the abatement of the price thereof, already
grown to very great and high rates, with special charge to put the said
instructions in execution within all the parts of this County. It is thereupon,
and for the reformation of some other abuses tending to the general and
public prejudice and grievance of this County, ordered.

FIrst, that the Justices of peace of every division within this County do with all convenient speed before the next Quarter Sessions meet together, and do so
meet and assemble themselves once at the least between every Quarter Sessions,
to enquire, and take care, and course for the due execution of the several
Articles hereafter following, and of all such other directions as we shall
hereafter receive from his Majesty, or from the Lords of his Privy Council.

SEcondly, that the said Justices of peace at their first meeting do suppress
the third part at the least of the Alehouses within every several division:
It being conceived both by his Majesty and the Lords of his Council, and so
intimated to us by the said Letters, that the great number of Alehouses is a
very great wast and consumption of Malt, already grown to an extreme price.

THirdly, that no Inne-keepers, or Ale-house-keepers do permit or suffer any
the Inhabitants, in, or near unto the Parishes where the said Innes or
Alehouses are situate, to sit drinking or tippling in their houses contrary to
the laws in that case made, and provided: the true use of Innes and Alehouses
being to entertain passengers and travelers, and not for the maintenance of
riot and drunkenness.

FOurthly, that no Inne-keepers, Ale-house-keepers, or Victuallers be permitted
to sell less than one full Ale-quart of the best Ale, or Beer, and two quarts
of the second sort for a penny upon penalty of twenty shillings for every
default, which defaults are diligently to be enquired after, and carefully to
be levied and disposed to the use and relief of the poor of the Parish where
such defaults shall be made according to the Law in that behalf established.
And for the better observation thereof it is further ordered that no Brewer,
Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper, or Victualler be permitted to brew any Beer or
Ale of greater strength than according to two bushels of Malt to one hogshead
at the most.

FIfthly, that all such as shall keep unlicenced Alehouses, or shall use
their Innes as Alehouses to the maintenance of excess and riot in drinking,
be from time to time complained of unto the Justices of peace next adjoining,
and that such Justices of peace upon such complaint, and due proof thereof,
do forthwith execute the penalty of the Law upon such offenders, and that in
default of such complaint all such offenders be presented to the said Justices
at their meetings aforesaid by the high and petty Constables of the several
Parishes within every such division, who are likewise to present at the said
meetings at the furthest all and every the offenses against any of these
Articles, and condign punishment to be inflicted upon them for neglecting
their duties in making such presentiments.

SIxthly, that the said Justices of peace take special care for suppressing
the unnecessary number of Malsters within this County, and confine the residue
to such a proportion, as that as much Barley (as with convenience may) be
preserved for bread corn in this time of scarcity of corn, and the penalties
to be duly levied upon all such Malsters as shall not conform themselves
therein according to the laws in that behalf provided.

SEventhly, that the said Justices of peace within their several divisions do
take special care and order from time to time to have the Markets well
supplied with Corn, and other Victual, and to use the best endeavor they
lawfully may for the abating of the price thereof, especially that the poorer
sort of people may have grain and other victual at as easy rates and prices
as can lawfully be procured. And that they with all ^are and diligence prevent
and hinder all transportation, forestalling, engrossing, and regrating of
Corn, and other victual, and to punish all offenders therein, by inflicting
upon them the uttermost penalties which by law they can.

Eighthly, that there be special care had that Millers do not take excessive
toll, but that the offenders therein be carefully enquired after, and duly
presented to the Justices at their meetings aforesaid for such course to be
taken for reformation of that abuse as shall be agreeable to law and justice.

NInthly, that no Rogues, Vagabonds, or other loose, idle or dissolute persons,
either English or Irish, be suffered to beg, or wander, within any part of
this County, but that as well the laws for punishing them, as for inflicting
penalties upon such as shall relieve them, or upon the Constables for not
punishing them, be duly observed and put in execution. And that the petty
Constables do whip and send away by passes with guides to the place of their
birth or last settling according to the laws, the ordinary sort of the said
Rogues, loose, idle, and dissolute wandering persons, and such as are Irish, to
punish and send them away by guides and passes as aforesaid unto the next Port
for their transportation into Ireland according to his Majesty's late
Proclamation in that behalf. And that the said Constables do apprehend and
carry all such of the^ as wander under the name of soldiers or mariners, or
shall appear to be fearful or dangerous to the inferior sort of people,
before some, or one of the next Justices of the peace to be further proceeded
against according to the Law: And because the remissness and negligence of the
said petty Constables is generally observed to be a special cause of the
swarming of Rogues in all parts of this County, the high Constables are
specially required within their several divisions to take care thereof, and
from time to time to enquire of such defaults of the said petty Constables, and
of such as shall relieve the said Rogues contrary to the Law, and to inform
the next Justices of peace thereof, and to present the same at the furthest to
the Justices at their said six weeks meetings. And that the said Justices of
peace do at their said meetings exact a strict account thereof from the said
high Constables of their care and proceedings therein, the rather for that
those Rogues and wandering persons do now in this time of scarcity eat up the
bread of the true poor Inhabitants by preventing them of that charity which
otherwise would be afforded to them.

TEnthly, for the better execution of the Laws against the said Rogues, and
other wandering persons, the high Constables within every division are to
appoint watches in the night, and wardings in the day for the apprehension of
the said Rogues, and other wandering persons; this to be done at such times and
places as the said high Constables shall think fittest for the apprehension of
them. And the said high Constables are also once every month at least to cause
privy searches to be made in every Parish within their several divisions for
apprehension and punishment of the said offenders.

ELeventhly, the high and petty Constables are to present to said Justices of
peace at their said fix weeks meetings, and to cause then to be brought
before them all such young men and women being unmarried as live at their own
hands out of service, and others though married, and householders that live
idly, or will not work for reasonable wages, or that wast, and consume in
riot, drinking or play, what they get by their work, suffering their wives and
children in the mean time to be pinched with want of food, and other
necessaries, and when sickness, age or death comes, then leave their wives
and children to the charge of the Parish.

LAstly, because the high ways within this County are in great decay,
occasioned principally by the neglect of the works appointed by the Law both
with laborers and Carts, and by not scouring the ditches adjoining to the said
high ways, and the watercourse for conveying the water out of the said
ditches, and by not lopping and cutting the trees, and bushes adjoining to the
same high ways. It is ordered, that the Justices of peace within every
division do take special care for the cleansing and scouring of all the said
ditches, and watercourse, especially such as adjoyne unto the great and high
Roades: and for the speedy carrying away of all such earth as shall be thrown
into the high ways out of any such ditches or watercourse. And because many
are this year behind with their works, some with laborers, and others with
carts, whereof some have been presented at this Quarter Sessions. It is now
ordered, that all the Surveyours of the high ways within this County which
have not already presented the defaults in the said works, do at the next
Quarter Sessions of the peace to be holden for this County, make a just and
true presentment of all such defaults within their several precincts, and in
default of such presentment the penalty of forty shillings to be inflicted upon
every such Surveyour for not presenting such defaults unto the next Justice of
the peace according to the Law in that behalf provided. And that the Justices
of peace within their several divisions do by their own view inform
themselves before the said next Quarter Sessions of all defaults in not
scouring the said ditches and watercourse, in not carrying away the earth
thrown out of the said ditches into the highways, and in not lopping and
cutting the trees and bushes in or adjoining unto the same: and that the
Justices do at the said next Quarter Sessions present all such offenses (as
upon their own view) that the offenders may be punished according to the Law.

Per Richardum Dove Clericum pacis.


