Good News from Florence: OF A FAMOVS VICTORY OBTAINED against the Turks in
May last 1613. both by Sea and Land:

By the great Duke of FLORENCE, the Earl of CANDALE, and diverse French
Commanders and Gentlemen hereafter named.

Translated faithfully into English out of the French copy, printed with
privilege at Paris and taken out of the Italian discourse printed at Florence.

printer's device? VERITAS FILIA TEMPORIS



LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter at Saint Austins gate,
1614.

A RELATION OF the taking of the Haven and fortress of SELEVCIA called AGLIMAN
in CARAMANIA, and of two General Galleys and other ships of the TVRKES.
THe great Duke Cosmo the second, heir of the valor and glory of his most
princely Ancestors as well as of their fair and flourishing States in
Tuscanie, knowing in himself he had as great an inclination and as much
obligation toward all high and great attempts in general, and particularly
those that were for the sea, as he saw himself left with few occasions and
little means for the same, having been prevented therein by the ambitious
valor of his father Ferdinando, which seemed to have left after him nothing of
any possibility, or such as was full of extreme difficulties: he seeing that
(I say) fell not a crying with that Alexander which first got himself the name
of Great, but rather the more moved with laudable emulation, endeavors
himself daily to follow the victories of his father, and if possible be, to
raise them up to the top of all perfection.

For this effect being resolved to give over those flyings on the sea, and
utterly transported to the fair enterprises by land, after he had made a most
curious fearch and examination of the fairest and hardest among them, the first
he judged worthy of himself was this of Agliman, a fortress of Caramania or
Cilicia: a Country indeed which in old time has had two most famous Cities,
Tarsus the Metropolitan thereof and S. Paul's country, and Seleucia with the
port and haven thereof, now adays called Agliman; from thence sailed out
armies for sea the most strange and formidable that ever were heard of.
History tells us, that the Pirates which heretofore there assembled, did set
out together sometimes more than a thousand great ships, so sumptuously
furnished, that many had their sails of purple, the roapes and gables of gold,
and the oars set with silver, that by their inrodes and scourings they had
spoiled and ruinated above four hundred towns, and broken and marred all the
trading and commerce thorowout the Mediterranean sea, so that proud Rome did
acknowledge by them she was not invincible as she thought, and was forced then
to set out against them that great Navy whereof Pompeius the great was
Admiral. This great Duke then aspired to the same place on the which formerly
Pompeius deseigned his great enterprise. And though this noble object was more
than sufficient to move his spirit, yet the Christian zeal and piety was his
chiefest and most regarded motive. For upon the walls of the same fortress
were set up the heads of forty worthy and brave subjects of his, cruelly
slain when the ship Prospera was lost by the stubborn ignorance of the
Captain, which being drowned in the same did escape the exemplarie punishment
he deserved. This horrible trophey which the Turks had thus erected to their
pride, still kept a flea in the ear (as the proverb is) of this great Duke,
more than the victories of Miltiades in the head of Themistocles. And such a
pitiful pawn miserably staked up there touched his heart to the quick, more
than ever was touched the heart of that famous The bane for the loss of his
shield. The Agah of the place did foresee it very well, which many times
endeavored himself so to deal at Constantinople, that these heads might be
taken away, assuring that they could avail to no other purpose, but as baits
or spurs to the great Duke to enterprise the ruin of that place. Now then
such has been the enterprise which this year amongst many others given in
charge (according to the custom) unto the Admiral Ingherrammi did segnalize
and ennoble the fame of the great Duke. The Galleys have been these six: the
Capitana, the Padrona, the S. Maria Magdalena, S. Francese, S. Stephano, S.
Giouanni: the which well furnished with victuals and all kind of munitions for
war, manned also with six companies of soldiers, under the command upon land
of Sor. Iulio de Conty, called Montauto, with more than forty Knights, and a
good company of Nobles willing to venture with them, amongst the which was
reckoned Don Pietro di Medicis. They did set out the last day of March from the
port of Ligorn, after they had devoutly called upon the divine favor under the
happy guidance and luckie presence of the Dukes most excellent greatness
their master. The second day of April they arrived at Ciuita Vecchia, and
there found the Earl of Candale, Duke of Alluyn eldest son to the Duke of
Espernon, a young Lord of some two and twenty years of age, which burning with
a generous flame in the love of valor, and to be segnalized by the worth of
wars and deeds of arms, the only mean worthy of himself, and practiced by
his ancestors, was exceeding desirous to be one in this enterprise.

Which his Excellency understanding, had commanded the Admiral to receive
him, and to use him according to the worth of his person and house whence he
was descended. Thus that young Lord with fifty others which accompanied him
were shipped and taken in, amongst which was Monsr. de Cipierre, Monsr. de
Themines, the Barons of Momberault, de la Tour and his brother, of Auenes,
Deltour, Du Plessis, De la Motte Magnas, S. Cyre, Monplaisir, de Loieres, de
Vick, de la Boissiere, de Verneug, de Villandreco. The tenth of April they
were at Messina, and the fourteenth departed thence, having well refreshed
themselves and provided all commodities for their voyage. So they went running
the Archipelag sea, without any worthy exploit, until the six and twentieth
of the month, because they could not bring happily to pass another enterprise
they had upon Geronda a little town of Natolia, which is held to be the
Gerunda of the Ancients. They landed there by the favor of the stillness and
darkness of the night, but being entered there in due order, the next day
morning they returned thence without doing any thing, having found the place
abandoned by the inhabitors, which many months before had retreated themselves
in another place for fear of the like surprises. They set on and went forward
their journey Eastward for many days, even till the 13. of May, without
atchieuing any deed, but the prize of three Changuis, which are ships as big
as Caramussals, and some other shippings of less bigness. The morning of the
fourteenth day finding themselves near Namur (a place some other times
ruinated by the Galleys) they took it for a luckie sign, and resolved their
enterprise upon Agliman, and making on that way about the break of day, they
spied a ship some ten miles far off. The Admiral knew full well what
difference is betwixt surprising and having in chase. But because that ship was
judged to be a Galley for the form of their sail, and for the obscurity
which as yet was great, also because they held for certain, if that ship
should escape, it would give warning to the whole Coast: again, that the
situation of the Coast was such, that by reason thereof and of a little Island
not far from thence named Papadula, the ship could be well and easily had in
chase, close and from the sight of the fortress, he with the Counsel
resolved it should be chased and made on. Thus making toward it and well
pursuing it was over reached and taken in less than one hour. The ship was of
a reasonable bigness of them which are called Grips, and was coming from the
port and fortress of Agliman, and gave intelligence that two days before two
Galleys of Cyprus were arrived there, the Captain of Cerrigna of 25. Beys, and
the Captain of Paffo of 22. Beys, having brought the tribute which from thence
is carried upon Camels backs to Constantinople. The sum could amount to some
200000. crowns. Besides that they said that the same fortress was very well
fenced and furnished, and well guarded, and that about it there was more than
400. horses, and that but a little while after them there was to go out one of
the two Galleys, even the same way, to come to the Island Papadula to take a
Mast for their ship: for this cause the Admiral sets forward with his fleet,
and places it close under the Island in a place whence it could not be
perceived, having set his scout or guard on ground. Whilst they were thus
waiting for the same, the return was suddenly made, and intelligence given,
how the Gallie had made toward the sea more than twenty miles, and in all
haste with her Keeper or Conserua was retreating toward the Port, whence they
conceived that they had been discovered in giving their chase. Thereupon was
made a great difficulty, whether they should go forward in their enterprise,
or else keep themselves for a better occasion; but all contrary opinions set
aside, it was resolved to go on and follow their design. To this effect they
made toward Port Caualier, being from Agliman some twelve miles distance, and
arriving there about six a clock in the evening weighed ancour hard by a very
commodious lands end, and very secret, with a deliberation to go out in the
night in time that might be fit and safe to land. Toward the end of the night
they sent out their long boat to spy and discover. About two hours after or
little more they return and report that all the Country was up in arms, the
walls furnished with armed men, the horsemen about the fortress, and the two
galleys with two other ships within the Port. There on again arose a great
doubt if they should go on, but notwithstanding the manifest appearance of so
great a danger, they had such confidence in their great courage, in the fortune
of his princely Excellency, and in the help and favor of God, that they
confirmed again their former resolution. They therefore take their way about
three a clock in the night in deep silence, and before six in the morning
their landing was made some mile and half from the Port. The Lord Iulio
Montauto did land with the Comte Candale and some other choice men, few in
number, to take a view of the Country, and though that they had some mile and
half from them spied the Cauallerie or horse men of the enemy, yet never
thelesse in any case he commanded to land, which was made without the
disturbance of any of the companies, having left only twenty soldiers for the
keeping of each Gallie.

The fortress of Agliman is seated upon a fine hillocke right opposite to the
south, extending it self from the top of the hillocke to the very sea shore,
in figure ouall, or like an egg, the uppermost end whereof is on the top of
the hillocke Northward, and the nethermost, at the hills foot Southward. The
wall is of very good stone, the mortar lime and sand, a fadome broad and five
fadomes high, so that a man may easily walk upon it. In the third part of the
inward space there is a crossing wall, which crosses through and ioineth to the
compass of the wall from the East to the West, so that it diuides the place in
two unequal parts; the less is as it were a reduction and retreat of the
biggest. The going in is by one gate only place diust in the midst. In the
girt of the walls there are five whole and full towers, and three half ones:
the full ones are of a square form five fadomes every face; the half ones
have one face of the same bigness, and the other less by half; their height
exceeds not that of the walls, except that which is in the point of the
hillocke, which is eight foot higher: the first full tower is altogether within
the retiring place eastward; the other is also eastward, but half within and
half without: within the half which is without fouthward is the first gate;
the second is in the inward face turned westward. The third tower is likewise
half within and half without of the same side some 200. foot fair from the
second: between them both is one of the meaue towers situate outwardly. The
fourth is at the foresaid top and point of the hill, and makes as it were the
corner by it self, being all inward. At the going down of the hill westward
the two other half towers equally distant from the fifth tower, which is half
without half within, and directly opposite to the gates tower. There be five
little stairs to go upon the wall; four of them are of stone within the
great place, and the fifth is of wood within the retreat. In this place were
more than 300. fighting men, the third part whereof had showed out themselves
the evening before. There was abundance of victuals and of all munition for
war, and many pieces of great ordinance. Without the place about a hundred
horses went up and down, and within the port there were two Galleys, a
Carramussall and a Greek Brigantin with some hundred and fifty fighting men:
they had retired within the fortress all rowing people. The order of the fight
thus was ordered and contrived by Montauto; For the principal gate and for
that of the retiring place he appointed the company of the ship Cappitana, and
that of S. Stephano with the petards under the command of the Earl of Candale
head of that troop, with order taken that all should obey him. The order being
given, my Lord Candale conducting the point, spied a corpse de guard of footmen
and horsemen, whereof he gave intelligence to the General, sending word that
still he would go on toward the fort, to perform what he was bidden, and
that if the Turks should make toward him, he would pass over their bellies,
because the country was very favorable and good for the Infanterie or
footmen. The General praised his resolution, though many gave advice to
retreat within the Galleys. So the way was followed on, till they came within
six score paces of the place. Then was my Lo. Candales troop saluted with
great force of Muskets from the town before him, and from them of the Galleys
behind him, and from them of the hill at his side, and with such outcries and
howlings of the Turks, that many were astonished at it, and particularly the
sea men which carried the petards, so that they let them fall and ran away.
They were taken up by the Baron Momberault and le Tiel a soldier of Languedoc.
Being fifteen paces near the place, my Lo. Candale met eighteen or twenty
Turks salliing out, which he set upon and suddenly put to flight; but in stead
of pursuing them, his advice was to turn to the gate, to the which he ran
amain, thinking to have found it yet open, but the Turks with all diligence
had shut it again. Therefore he commanded the Petart to be applied, which
quickly was ready, but not without the hurt and death of many: amongst the
which Dom Piedro de Medicis, which had done this honor to my Lo. Candale to
rank himself in his troops, was beaten down under such a number of stones
flung at him, that he fell down half dead. The Lords de Callonges, de
Momberault, de la Tour, d'Auenes, and Deltour, had taken this charge, the one
carrying the Petard, the other the hooks, another the Madrer, and all the rest
that was necessary to make it go off more readily. But as this sernice was a
doing, the Sergeant Mayor came and cried out unto my Lo. Candale, that they
were all undone, and that there was coming right upon them a troop of 300.
Musketers: these were the two Beys, which were sallied out of the Galleys in
the port, through the naughty watching and garding of two companies left by
Comte Iulio, and by him appointed to withstand them, and hinder their coming
forth: so that my Lo. Candale was forced to take some part of his own men and
make head against that troop, leaving the other part for the Petard. But when
the Beys saw him ready coming to receive them, and almost at handie blows,
they turned away toward the mountain, yet still shooting and playing with
their Muskets upon him. My Lo. Candale would not follow them, and thought it
was more fit and convenient to go back to his Petard, which instantly did
play on and made such a breach, that three men a breast might easily enter.

Now for the tower above, the company of horsemen, commanded by Lieutenant Len
Zour, and the company of the galley of S. Maria Magdalena with two Ladders were
appointed.

For the retreating place toward the fourth, the company of the galley Padrona
with a Ladder.

And to the galleys and ships in the haven, the company of the galley of S.
Giouanni.

In that order they marched, conducted by Sor. Iulio Montauto, and by Captain
Alexander di Taranta Sergeant Mayor, the Cauallerie of the enemy being still
aside of them on the top of the hill. They were no sooner within a caliuer shot
of the walls, but they were saluted from thence with pellets and arrows
lively and thick: being come nearer, there flew a shower of huge stones upon
their heads. But all this notwithstanding, their Petard played on very happily,
as we have said, and the second gate being opened, the Earl of Candale with
his troop entered the first with a marvelous fury: and no sooner were they
in, but that they ran to the retreating place to apply there another Petard;
which was done, and the effect thereof very brave and serviceable. The Turks
as well at the first as at the second Petard were so abashed and astonished, that
they knew not what to do, but run away and fly to the walls, towers, and
fortifications or barricadoes which they had made in the streets: our men
pursue them lively and press upon them on all sides. The two ladders below
were planted at the same time that the first Petard played on them. But one
which was of the south side being broken, not without some hurt to those that
were upon it, all of them ran to help the other of the south side, where the
Cauallerie of the enemy was charging them very fiercely; by the means of
which succor, they forced the horsemen to break away, and took their flagge
or Cornet, and having planted the ladder against the walls, a great many of
our men got up, and then divided themselves into two companies to charge both
the one and the other side, opening by force of arms that narrow way, and went
directly to the towers, where they gave many furious assaults. The squadron of
horsemen and the company of S. Maria Magdalena having had a longer and harder
way to make, could not arrive before the effect of the Petards; at the noise
and terror of the which the Turks having retired into the higher place, they
of the squadron found a marvelous resistance before, and were laid on behind
very fiercely by the Cauallerie or horsemen of the enemy, and by the foot
which sallied from the Galleys in the port: by reason whereof the Lieutenant
after he had done as much as a worthy honest man could do, with his brave
Caualieroes, seeing that he could advance nothing, by the advice of the wisest,
he resolved to go thence and make toward the place where it should be more
necessary. But as he was staying the last in that retreat (like a valiant
Captain, as also he had been the first at the coming on) he was shot through
with two musket shots, and fell dead on the place.

The company of S. Giouanni mastered at an instant the two Galleys in the port,
and our Admiral at the sign given came with his Galleys to take possession of
them in the port without any difficulty, and touched not the two other ships,
because they were of Greece. The fighting and skirmishing did continue still
with all the towers and barricadoes of the place, and the combat grew more and
more eager from both sides, ours being kindled with a brave courage and held up
with a wonderful constancy of resolution, and the Turks having the advantage
both of the stronger place and of their despair. Finally, God the giver of
victories, was willing to favor his own cause: and the Turks by little and
little begun either to yield or to offer themselves to the slaughter, and so
the hoped-for victory was fully obtained, to the honor and glory of God, and
of his Excellence. The fight lasted above four hours, very dangerous and
bloody, a good number of ours having been lost there in the place, besides
fifty five which were hurt. The combat being finished, and our dead brought
aboard one of the Galleys, amongst the which were found Monsr. de Vernueil and
the young la Boissiere, very much lamented for the great hope of his noble
valor: the place was disfurnished of all the ordinance, artillery, munitions
and commodities, and all carried away; and the houses having been fired, every
one retired into the Galleys, whose heads were presently turned toward Europe
with the two Captives Galleys, all very rich, and with huge booties, as well
for having taken eight other ships with a great deal of ordinance, munitions,
and merchandises, as also for having brought with them 350. Turks for slaves,
and slain above 200. furthermore for having ruinated that famous Fortress,
and pulled down that horrible trophey of 40. heads of his good subjects, and
freed from captivity some 240. Christian slaves; It was a thing above all
which greatly reioiced the great Duke. The day after, they met with a big
Caramousall, the which though it was manned but with fourscore Turks, yet
stood for the eight Galleys, and never would yield, so that the Captain of the
Padrona at the request of Monsr. Candale was feign to make toward them; which
did so well defend themselves, that they killed and hurt above four score of
our men, three of the which were slain hard by Monsr. Candale, which alone of
all the French had permission to fight at the fore deck, and shot three or
four shots within six paces of the enemy, two of the which were slain
thereby. Finally, as the seamen of ours began to get in, the ship was splitted,
and as many as were within both ours and enemies sunk and drowned. Some other
ships were taken with less combat. Then they arrived at Messina, where all the
people with admiration beheld Monsr. de Candale after the rehearsal which the
Admiral and Comte Iulio di Montauto made of his valor.

FINIS.
Brief of the Kings privilege.
BY special grace and privilege of the King it is granted unto Peter Porter
Merchant Stationer of Paris, to print or cause to be printed, sell, and expose
the Relation of the prise of the fortress and port of Seleucia or Agliman made
upon the Turks, with the map thereof, all translated out of Italian into
French: with most express inhibitions in his Majesty's name unto all
Stationers and Printers of this kingdom to print or have printed, sell or
distribute the said book or Card, but by the will and consent of the said
Porter, during the time of three years, upon penalty of confiscation of the
books, as the Privilege contains at large. Given at Paris the 26. of Iulie
1613. Signed by the Counsel Brigard and sealed.

The said Porter has granted and consented, that Lague hay shall enjoy the
same privilege. Done the 30. of Iulie 1613.

FINIS.

