THE APOLOGY OF THE REFORMED CHVRCHES OF FRANCE.

Wherein are expressed the Reasons, why they have Joined their Armies; to
those of the King of Great BRITAIN.

Translated according to the French Coppie.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniell Butter. 1628.

TO ENGLAND, IN HER REPRESENTIVE BODY. The High and Illustrious Court of
Parliament,
LORDS. KNIGHTS. BVRGESSES.
YOu have here (in all humility) presented to you, the sighs and tears of
our sister Church of France, who is at this present miserably persecuted by the
bloody power and Malice of Antichrist and his adherents; as also the naked
grounds and motives, why she ioynes her Arms with those of our Sovereign, in
her lawful Defense and preservation; For although Rebellon be the false
pretect, yet Religion is the true cause why the Pope by his Champion the French
King, now seeks her final rain and extermination. She now mournes both in
tears and blood, and breathes forth her wounds and sorrows to us in a
fainting; yea, almost in a dying eloquence; Shall we therefore (who profess
our selves to be the best of Christians, and the dearest of Gods Children)
permit prophannesse to prevail ore piety, Idolatry to triumph ore true
Religion, and the Church of Rome, ore that of God, if our Religion be theirs,
must not their dangers and persecutions be ours, For what Peace can we have
whiles they are oppressed with War, or how can our consciences be at rest and
tranquillity, whiles theirs are tovmented with all sorts of afflictions and
cruelties, Can that Church of France be beaten but this of England is
threatened, or the Protestants of that Kingdom be extinguished but we are
Eclipsed, yea, do not their fears presage and predict ours, and their dangers
fatally denounce and portend ours: We have already seen and suffered Gods
Church in Bohemia, the Pa^atinate, Selesia and Morauia to be ruined, and shall
we not therefore believe, if that of France go next, that this of England must
immediately follow, We see the Pope is as bloody in his malice, as boundless
in his Ambition, and that with high wrestling, and an insulting bravery, he
proceeds in his Envy and power, at one time to root out the name and memory
of Gods Church and Children in all places and Countries of Christendom. How
powerfully has he lately prevailed with the Emperor and the King of Spain
and Poland in this bloody quarrel, who with barbarous hearts and sacrilegious
hands have played their prises in oppressing and de-pressing these Churches in
their Countries, and (now by a policy as subtle, as execrable) has likewise
drawn the French King to make himself guilty of the same impious and bloody
crimes; to ruin the Protestants of his Kingdom, whose Valors and Fidelities
placed the Crown on his Fathers head; and to exterminate those Churches which
with so much Piety and wisdom he had established in the Meridian of their
perfection and glory.

The which to prevent, and oppose, God has inspired the heart of our Gracious
King CHARLES to reach them out the hand and Scepter of his Royal assistance,
and so to prove himself a true Defender of the Faith, as well in Fact as
Title. Knowing therefore that by the Laws of Honor and Religion we are bound
to aid and asist them, and not to suffer the Vineyard of Gods Church to be
thus miserably trampled ore, and rooted up by the Champions of Rome and Hell,
it will be a pious and a Noble work for you Illustrious Lords and Gentlemen,
the Great Senators, and Elders of our Israel, to contribute the means, as our
King has the Will, to the preservation and building up of so Religious and
glorious a Work; by affecting it tenderly in your selves, and by cheerishing
it carefully and dearly in the hearts of all the parts and members of this
Kingdom; For as the Protestants of France call on our King, so does his
Majesty on you (who are the essential and figurative body thereof) and God on
you all, for the speedy and vigorous assistance of this his afflicted Spouse
the Church, and he who is the searcher of all hearts the witness of all
souls, and the Judge of all actions, will infallibly judge betwixt you and
him, with what true Devotion and Zeal you perform this part of his service
and glory.

Wars are made as well with Gold as Iron, therefore in assisting this our
afflicted Sister the Church of France, we must second our words with deeds;
our promises with effects, and our Prayers with our purses. Their Enemies are
strong and powerful, their afflictions and dangers great, so therefore must
our assistance be to them. They are near to us by Cituation, but far nearer
in Religion, for as their cause and quarrel is ours, so should the sense and
feeling of their calamities, and in this sense I may justly affirm, that they
are a great part of our selves, because we generally belong all to one Church,
as that Church does particularly and peculiarly to God.

As truth is the best eloquence to persuade us to this assistance, so Religion
is the best truth, and it would be an act not only of Impiety, but of shame
in us, if these our three flourishing Churches, of England, Scotland and
Ireland, should not now powerfully assist that afflicted one of France, which
sues to them for it, with tears and prayers. But Illustrious Lords and
generous Gentlemen, my Judgment prompts me that I should wrong yours, in
seeking to persuade your affections to so charitable and religious a work,
from which I know nothing is capable to direct, or dissuade you, and in that
behalf I rest hopeful, if not confident, that you will at least excuse my
zeal, if not pardon my presumption for proferring up the sighs and tears of
this poor persecuted French Church, to your sublime Protection and Patronage,
or rather to your charitable care, and religious consderacion, as esteeming it
every way as worthy of your pity and compassion, as of your knowledge. May
the sight of her afflictions, myseries and calamities, teach us how to prevent
our own, May God of his best mercy so operate with our hearts and souls, as
we may esteem and repute them our own, and may England (by the Kings royal,
and your Illustricus example) stretch forth her hands, to relieve this poor
French Church and people, so unjustly afflicted, and so wrongfully oppressed
and persecuted for God, and his Cause.

JOHN REYNOLDS.

The Apology of the Reformed Churches of France; wherein are expressed the
Reasons why they have joined their Arms to those of his Majesty, the King of
Great BRITAIN.
THERE is none but will judge that a sick Patient is extremely oppressed with
his disease, when he frequently takes violent Physic, whereof as yet he
has his stomach wholly charged and afflicted, and therefore loathes and
abhorres it, were it but only for the bitterness thereof. Right so we must
confess, that our wrongs have exposed and reduced us to the last point of
necessite; since we are enforced to have recourse to that remedy wherein we
have formerly felt so many violencies, as the very name thereof gives us many
terrors and tremblings. For if ever any People have had just cause to abhor^e
and detest War, it is we above all others of the world, to whom it has
brought so many ruins and desolations, that our Houses remain yet either burnt
or demolished, our Lands and Inheritances in prey, our Vines rooted up, our
Trees cut down, and which is worse, the very Earth is yet red, and almost hot
with our Blood. And because after all these deplorable effects of Arms, we are
ag^ne seen to resume them; it is justly to be presumed, that it is the
descouerie of some great or in^itable danger, which despite of our contrary
inclinations, has enforced and drawn us to it. For we are reduced either to
perish without any hope of recovery, or else to seek our subsistence in our
lawful defense, by embracing the means which God gives us by the assistance
of the most Eccellent King of Great Britain, whose heart he has touched with
pity and compassion of our miseries, and therefore to employ his forces to
make us enjoy peace, which was sworn and consigned into his hands, and whereof
his Majesty was made the Depositor.

It is to justify this last necessity that we put our hands to the Pen, at
the same time we do to the Sword, and we are confident, that who soever will
hear us without any preiudicat envy or passion, we will make them so
apparently see our innocence, and so soundly prove and justify the injustice
wherewith it is oppressed, that if they are not obdurat, or insensible Rocks,
they will pity our miseries in excusing the resolutions which we are
constrained to take, and will be the first to condemn the unjust proceedings
of those who have precipitated us hereunto, and whom henceforth we ca^ term
no other then our Enemies.

At the very entrance whereof, we solemnly protest, that we will not
comprehend under this Name, the sacred Majesty of the King our Prince, and as
we will not impute unto him, the blame of infringing his Edicts, and of
violating his Royal Word; so we have no intent whatsoever in our Hearts which
shall derogate from the most humble subjection, and constant fidelity we owe
him; the two essential Articles whereof our Religion is composed, is, To fear
God and honor the King; and if any trad^ce or calamniate us, of the contrary,
blessed be God they are those who made the baracado^s against their Sovereign,
and who tumultuously and treacherously drove him out of his Capital City, and
never left before they had proditoriously and inhumanely murdered him; they
are those who assembled the Estates General, which begat that monster the
League, to take away the Crown from the lawful heir Hen. 4. and consequently
to declare his posterity incapable to succeed, which was directly to snatch
away the Septer from our present King before he was borne; and who have caused
to issue from their Cloisters such execrable Paracides, to thrust their
impoysoned knives in the breasts and hearts of our Princes, who have been
quelled and fallen thereunder; and who in the iniquity of such times must
abandon their Estates to the first intruder, and their lives to the first
Asasinate, If the Pope please to declare them Heretics or Tyrants.

To have such for our accusers results to our glory and redounds to our
justification, and indeed all Histories witness for us, That although our
Kings have been of a contrary Religion to us, have set fire to the Temple of
our Peace, and with high hands and cruelty have persecuted and massacred us;
that yet we have never thought of such accursed attempts, but contrariwise upon
the very ruins and cruelties thereof; the zeal of our prayers for them, have
triumphed ore the feruency of their flames, and for the irreproachable
approbation of our fidelity: when God permitted that the factions of Rome and
Spain conspired against their Crowns, they have found no surer nor vigorous
refuge then in our defense; so that if Hen. 3. could revive from his Tomb, He
would give us the honor and glory to have conserved his life and Septer. If a
Friar whom Hell created had not bereaud him of the one, and deprived him of the
other: and as for Henry the Great (of glorious memory) every one knows how
much we have spilt of our own blood at his feet, to mount and establish him
on his Throne, where in all appearance of truth he had been still reigning, if
the Iesuires and their Em^ saries had not approached him, or that the sacred
treasure of his life were still entrusted and deposited in our hands.

We have not so well served the Father to eclipse our glory in so ill serving
the Son; and may it please the divine providence and goodness of God, that
those who have destoyed his royal Predecessors, and which bend their designs
and monopolies against him, by the same ways they have done against them, do
not in the end reduce him to the same extremities and miseries; and in this
cause and quarrel he shall find that we have no wealth but we will expend,
nor blood but we will sacrifice to justify our fidelity, which our Enemies
(with as much subtlety as malice) endeavor to make him suspect, and so to
have his Laurels still flourish and continue green, wherewith hitherto he has
been crowned: So if grief now draw complaints from us, and enforce and
compeil us to take up Arms, We here lift up our voices to make it known to
all the world, that it is not against his sacred person, but only against the
impetuositie of those ministers of his, who have been depured by him to
execute his royal words; and to make us enjoy peace according to the tenure of
his Edicts; and who contrary thereunto have oppressed us with all sorts of
Injustice and violence, and after whole years of unprofitable patience, do in
the end constrain us to provide for our conservation, by the only means and
remedies left us, which are the Laws of Nations and Nature?

To the end therefore that our Innoc^ncie, and their Injustice may appear to
all the world; we mustr^fume matters as they were at the last Peace and
pacincation, and come to the Edict which was then published: There is none
therefore so blind or ignorant in matters of State, who apparently knows not,
how prejudicial those conditions were to us: If the poor City of Monpellier
should remain buried in silence, and so according to the unjust maxims of our
Enemies should seem to be condemned to eternal servitude and slanery;
besides, the yoke of subjection (...) the precedent peace imposd upon our
Ecclesiasticali assemblies, which they make wholly unprofitable unto us, were
not taken away: and there was no right nor justice done unto us, upon an
infinite number of other infractions of the said Edict, whereof we can produce
whole books of just complaints and grieuances, whereby we foresee that our
Enemies will draw them into consequence purposely to authorize them hereafter.
Moreover, in that which was one of the most important points, and the chiefest
motives of our resumption of Arms, to wit, the subsistence of the Fort before
Rochell, they would express nothing in the Declaration touching the promise
made to us for the razing and demolishing thereof. And that promise which was
yet given us by the Ambassador of the King of Great Britain, as also of the
Lords States General, was couched in such ambiguous and general terms, that
it manifestly appeared the intent of those who gave them, was not to observe
and keep them: because by their artificial providence they prepared the way
to euasions, which they have since practiced, and would thereby infer, and
pretend that they had promised us nothing.

So that in what estate soever our affairs then were, finding more safetic in
a weak resistance, then in a peace which publicly cuts our throats: we
therefore refused to accept it upon those conditions, which we held would
infallibly draw after it our fatal ruin and destruction: But at length we
found our selves obliged, yea we dare affirm almost enforced, by the urgent
and reiterated assummons which were made us by the aforesaid Ambassadors, who
in the name of those they represented, were established unto us as Pledges and
Sureties, that we were proceeded with sincerely, and especially for the
demolition of the said Fort, whereof they alleged they had express promise
and assurance. As also that this peace was not of the qualitic and nature of
the precedent peaces, which had been treated only with us, whereas this was
properly not so much with us, as with the King of Great Britain and the Lords
States, so as whosocuer violated or infringed it, the infraction and injury
thereof was properly offered to them, who would not spare either their
intercession, or other means, to make good their words to us.

And although this were very preualent and powerful to induce us to accept and
admit thereof, they yet further represented to us, That our Arms was the only
obstacle that the King employed not his against the inueterate Enemy of our
Estate and Religion, and why he did not so soundly wed himself to the affairs
of Germany, with the King of Great Britain: so that whatsoever ill success
betided, it would be justly imputed to our obstinacy, and would occasion all
those who hitherto have wished us well, wholly to abandon and forsake us.

To these important reasons we suffered our selves to be vanquished, and
although we then foretold them that they would find themselves deceived, as
well in the assurance which was given them to conferue peace unto us, as also
so to join their designs and Arms with them against Spain, yet we would no
longer oppose against their requests and instances, but sacrifized up our
selves and all our common interests to the advantages of the King of Great
Britain, and his Allies, and so accepted the peace in the same manner and
form as it was given us, only we drew an Act from the Ambassadors of Great
Britain, verifying all which was formerly alleged, the which because it is
the foundation of the Justice of his and our Arms, it is requisite we do here
insert it.

WE Henry Rich Lord of Kensington Earl of Holland, Captain of the Guard to
the King of Great Britain, Knight of the Order of the Garter, and Privy
Counselor to his Majesty, And Dudley Carleton Knight, Privy Counselor,
and Vice-Chamberlaine to his said Majesty, extraordinary Ambassadors for him
to the most Christian King: to all present, or to come, Greeting, Whereas
Monsieur Montmartin and Monsieur Mania^d, General Deputies of the reformed
Churches of France, together with other particular Deputies of my Lords the
Dukes of Rhoan and Soubize, as also of many Towns and Provinces, which have
joined their Arms with those of the said Lords; having made Peacewith the Most
Christian King, by our advice and interuentions, agreed and consented by the
said Most Christian King their Sovereign, and that the said Deputies, have
yielded to and cut off many things which they esteemed to be most important for
their safety, every way conformable to their Edicts and Records, which they
were expressly charged to obtain in the Treaty of peace, and wherein they had
powerfully persisted, but that the Obedience which they owe, and will render to
their King and Sovereign, and the consideration and regard which they will
yield to the express requests and intrauentions of the King of Great Britain
our Master; in whose name we have exhorted and councel'd them to condescend to
the Conditions offered and given them by the said Peace in favor, and for the
prosperity of this Kingdom in particular, and the content and assistance of
Christendom in general, To which causes, We declare and certify, That in
the words which were heretofore given unto us, for the accomplishing of the
said Treaty, and proffered by the Lord Chancellor at the acceptance of the
peace, containing, that through their long services, and continual obedience
they may expect that from the goodness of the King, which they could not else
obtain by any other Treaty, and in those very things which they esteem the
most important and pressing, in convenient time they might hear and provide
for their Supplications made with respect and Humility; There was a cleerer
interpretation brought unto us from his Majesty, and the Lords his Ministers,
by those who were the Agents and Negotiators of the peace, being Men of Honor
and quality, ordained and established with power from his Majesty and his
Privy Council, whereof the sense and meaning is, That they understand to
speak of the Fort Jews before Rochell, and thereby to give assurance of its
demolition in convenient time, and in the interim some remedies of other
matters which should remain by the said Treaty of Peace, to the prejudice of
the Liberty of Rochell.

Without the which assurance of Demolition, and the ease and exemption of
Garrisons, the said Deputies protested unto us, that they would never have
consented to the subsistence of the said Fort, being commanded and resolved to
conserve the right of that Demolition. As they do by this present declaration,
with assurance that the King of Great Britain will labor by his
intercessions, joined with their most humble supplications to hasten the time
of that demolition, whereof we have given them all the royal promises and
words which they can desire, after we had showed them, that they might and
ought to remain satisfied and contented. In witness of all which now formerly
expressed, we have signed and sealed this present with our names and arms, and
have caused it likewise to be vnder-signed by one of our Secretaries, Dated in
Paris the 11. day of February 1626. And so signed Holland, D. Carleton, with
seals under every sign, and underneath by the commandment of the said Lords,
signed Augier.

This Act so dressed and finished, the Deputies carry it home to their
Provinces, to serve for comfort and consolation to our poor afflicted
Churches, who wept and trembled at so prejudicial a Treaty, and yet
notwithstanding labored with all diligence to a punctual accomplishment of
all things which were conceded and granted by us, to the end that calumny
might not take the least hold of our actions, and that there might not remain
the least shadow of pretext to v^e us as accustomed, to wit, not to observe or
perform any thing which is solemnly promised unto us.

To which end the City of Rochell, contrary to the privilege of frontier
Towns, as also of her own in particular, does speedily demolish a notable
piece of fortification, which with much cost and labor it had built, and
joined to her walls. They dismissed the Earl of Lauall, and his troops, who had
assisted them in their necessity, and in their places received the Kings
Commissioners; whose coming they well knew would prove extremely prejudicial
to their liberties, and their residence to their safety: and in a word, from
point to point with a scrupulous curiosity, they discharged all that they were
enioynd to perform. The Duke of Rohan likewise dismissed all his Regiments and
troops which had followed him, and our swords fell out of our hands in all
places where we had drawn them: The sorrowful honor of war was presently
seen changed, and converted into Bonefires of Joy for the peace, and into
public vows and acclamations for the Kings long life and prosperity; and
briefly, our Obedience was so entire, that the most malicious research of our
Enemies could find nothing whereat either to contradict or scandalize us.

So if we had had to do with people any way just or charitable, it had been
capable to have molified their hearts, and to have began to deal and agitate
with us, otherwise then formerly they had done, and faithfully to have
performed what they had so solemnly promised: But the only Article of their
Faith which they keep inuiolably, is never to keep or perform it to us; and
at the very first abord they showed us effects thereof, when we came to
inregister and verify the Edict of Peace in the Parliaments, and (only that
of Grenoble excepted) there was none of them which would absolutely do it,
some obiecting one restriction, and others alleging another, until they came
to point and cavil at matters of no moment, which unprofitably showed the
perverseness of their auerse natures and inclinations, As upon the word of
Temple, as if the places where we assembled to pray unto God were Mosques: and
again upon that of Ecclesiastical Assemblies, as if they were the
Congregations of Pagans, or the Synogogues of Jews.

But yet we believed that we had much cause to extol the moderation of those
who have quarrelled with us but with words; It is easy for us to suffer
injury for the love of him, who before us, was in derision called Samaritan,
howsoever that those contemners were wholly unworthy, in the neglect, but much
more in the violation of the Edict, custom (in that nature) having made us so
insensible, as we almost disdain to open our mouths to complain thereof. But
the ill consists in this that the greatest parts of those Modifications which
have bin used, do derectly concern our safeties, and therefore makes the Kings
Declaration wholly unprofitable.

This has been particularly seen in the Parliament of Thoulouze, whose
Jurisdiction is known to extend upon the greatest number of those, whom
necessity had armed in these last emotions. For in two only Articles they
almost anihilated all the substance of the Edict. First they placed among
causes reserved and execrable, the demolition of the Temples of the Romish
Churches, expressly abolished by the Declaration of the year 1622, conformable
herein to the Edict of Nantes, and also then absolutely verified by them, by
which means, the hatred which they conceive against us, carries them from the
shame to be held factious and inconstant. But they proceed further, for they
limit the abolishing of hostilities committed the 5. Febr. 1626, although the
Declaration of Peace was not published until many days after we subsisted in
Arms in all places where we were constrained to resume them. So in those two
turns of the pen, they have inwrapped us all in the condemnation, preparing
the way to all sorts of injustice and cruelties which they have since practiced
and committed upon us. And although his Majesty commanded that these
Modifications should be withdrawn, as directly opposite to his intentions,
and preiuditiall to the public tranquillity, yet notwithstanding all these
reasons, this Parliament has obstinately made good what it formerly so
unjustly and so factiously resolved against us, to the great prejudice and
blemish of the Authority Royal, and for a most complete and entire
justification of our complaints and grieuances, not being able to find
security or safety in the words and promises of our Prince, because what good
affection or intents soever he retain for our behalfes, those who ought to be
the executors of his Royal will, and pleasure, do directly combine and band
themselves against it, as triumphing and glorying in the infringing of his
promises.

These beginnings were not to give us hope of any much happy success, or if any
one intended or expected them, experience stayed not long to vndeceaue them,
the eruptions of the Peace having been so grossly and presumptuously committed,
with such a violent impetuositie, that they feeme to be affected thereto, it
being impossible to give it any other interpretation then this, Misery to
those, who are weakest, and vanquished.

This was manifestly seen and known at the refuse which was given to our
general Deputies to send Commissioners through all Provinces according as it
was inculcated and intimated by the Declaration of Peace. The necessity of
their sending being extreme, to the end the Edict might be put in execution
where it was infringed and violated. To reestablish the exercise of our
religion in those places from whence it had been banished. To replace in their
houses a numberless number of poor families which had been expeled and
exiled. And in a word, to prevent and remedy those disorders which drew with
them the licentiousness of war, and to make us feel some effects of so many
promises which had been made us. But it is that which no supplications can ever
obtain, so as most of the chiefest Churches of the Kingdom have fainted and
languished in misery, that they are so far off that this Peace has any way
improued or bettered their condition as contrary-wise it has disarmed us, to
expose us naked to all manner of tortures and persecutions.

The which to approve and justify, at least 60 poor Churches will undertake
with weeping hearts and voices, to whom according to the tenor of the Edict,
the exercise of their Religion ought to be free, and where it was confidently
hoped they should have now been reestablished by the peace, they yet have
remained in a pitiful desolation, without that all their requests and prayers
can any way steed them for their restoration, or produce any other fruits or
effects then the immense charges of their unprofitable solicitation. Injustice,
which has not only been practiced in those Towns subdued by the violence of
Arms, and where this hard measure might peradventure be imputed to the
severity and sharpness of the Roman Catholics against us for having committed
some acts of hostility, but also in those places who refused to join to the
resistance of their brethren, and had stooped the most ^ruily under their
yoke, and in those places also where ours have no power to agitate any thing.

Particularly, we may here remember the Church of Tours, whereof the Temple
having been burnt in the midst of peace before the troubles of the years 1620
and 1621, and during the two Edicts of Peace which have been since establshed
and published; they cannot hetherunto reedifie and repair it. And although the
king with his own mouth has ordained the restablishment thereof, and to that
end granted out a commission to see it performed the last year, yet
notwithstanding, the malice and wickedness of his Officers has rendered it
vain and unprofitable to whom the execution thereof was given and belonged, so
that for the term of 7 whole years, more than 2000 Souls have there
languished in a miserable captivity of Conscience, without having permission
or liberty to seru^ God. And for as much as sometimes they have assayed to
assemble secretly to administer the Sacrament of Baptism to some Children, and
not to suffer so great a number of Souls without some exercise of Religion,
they have followed them closely and severely, have publicly abused the
Minister, and condemned him in a great Fine, for lending of his House for so
piousan Action.

Yea so far it is that those poor troops of Christians so pitifully
dispersed, and so long time deprived of the food of their Souls, could be
assembled or gathered together, that the insolency and cruelty of our Enemies
have begat and perpetrated new dissipations. The year 1622, the Duke of
Ventadour (formerly held to be a moderate Prince) has in a settled peace
demolished the Temple of Chailar in Vizaretz, and forbidden all this poor
Town (wherein there are not 10 Families of a contrary religion to ours) the
exercise of their religion, authorizing by this remarkable example, in regard
of his dignity, all those of his government to an implacable hatred against
us, and even to outraged with a licentious fury and boldness. The Baron of
Perant, Governor of Beucaire in Languedoc, imboldned by this insolency, after
he had taken from us, and usurped the Temple of God, wherein we were accustomed
to serve God in the Church of Vezenobre in Sezennes, he not only contented
himself to deprive us thereof, and to dedicate it to Idols, but to leave a
perpetual memorial of his outrageous and violent injustice, caused there a
Bell to be founded with this Inscription, That Such a day he had chased Heresy
thence. And not long since when the National Synod was held at Castres, the
Cardinal of Sourdis came furiously rushing upon a troop of harmless and
innocent Souls, going to Montrauell, with the great incommodities and labors
of their bodies, to seek the Food of their Souls, where violently he pursued
the Pastor (whom it pleased God to preserve) shut up a great number of women
and small children into a barn, where he held them a long time captives in the
fears and apprehensions of death, and every minute threatened to set fire to
them and burn them, and in the end by a profanation full of horror, converted
to a stable this Temple where these servants of the Lord were accustomed
frequently to serve him, and which had continued without interruption since the
fury of the Masacres.

And in this manner it is, that Our Enemies do accomplish that which his
Majesty's Declaration had promised us, concerning the reestablishing of our
dissipated Churches, that is to say, by new invented outrages, and performed by
great and noble personages, against whom it is impossible for us to obtain any
Justice, yea not lawful to frame or exhibit a complaint.

Enery one may judge of what a dangerous and pernicious consequence these
examples are, and what we may attend or expect from people already exasperated
and animated with implacable hatred against us; having before their eyes, those
and the like great personages, which serve for firebrarnds and incendraries to
their rage: and indeed they are grown to so boundless and licencious a rage,
that they can make us suffer no more, and in imitation of others, they triumph
and glory to abuse us, and do openly depresse us with their outrages. So that
almost every where to be known to be of our Religion, is to be marked and
distinguished for Monsters, and those who are of the sweetest, and most
temperate inclinations, do think they extremely gratify us, if they do but
simply abhor us, and eschew our companies and meetings, as people who are
infected with the pestilence, especially in those places where they prevail in
number, and it is almost throughout the whole Kingdom, that we cannot go to
our Divine Exercises, but either in going or returning the vulgar do assemble
to hush and shout at us with public outcries, throw stones at us, and beat us
down with injuries; so that in the Capital City of Paris it self, it is not
long since that there were some slain upon the place, without that the
presence of the King, and the respect of that famous Parliament there resident,
could prevent or hinder that this blood was not spilt before their eyes, and
themselves to be almost destroyed therewith. Yea they advance so far in this
insolency, as they rush into particular men's houses to execute the excess of
this their cruelty. And the example is resent and fresh of that which happened
in the aforesaid Church of Vezenobre, where a furious number of Asasins break
by night into the house of the Minister, and clapped a rope about his neck
purposely to strangle him, if miraculously he had not escaped their tallents by
leaping out at a window, from whence he secretly crept along to some
neighboring cottage, almost dead with the blows and wounds he received of
them. Those whom they cannot force in their houses, the seduce forth by
subtlety; as an Advocate of Sommieres, who being fallen into some revolt,
during the last civil combustions, but then immediately after returned again
into the Church, he was sent for to the Castle under a false pretext and
errand, and there was surprised and seized on by a multitude of furious Friars,
and appointed Soldiers who there drew him into the Fryerie, where he was
forced to endure all that which could be expected from the humanity of those
pitiful fathers. Our children are often surprised and stolen from us by
public violence, to bring them up in their Cloisters, as many times there
remains nothing to the poor fathers and desolate mothers, but their
unprofitable tears to have engendered them to Idolatry and superstition. It is
a common custom now among Friars, to thrust themselves into families and
houses to seduce servants against the will of their master, and children in the
sight of their fathers, and if they will have them forsake their houses, they
cry out, Murder, murder, as if they had been outraged and set upon, and
finding witnesses enough for their purpose, to depose that which they desire,
they follow them in suits of Law, as cryminals, and many times they are very
happy if they can be quit and freed of them for a great part of their goods.
Others they accuse for speaking ill of their Prince, and so frame informations
against them, which they press with so much malice and violence, that some
finding themselves circumuented, and in danger of their lives, do leave
themselves to be drawn and seduced by them, and so wretchedly to redeem their
crimes with their revolt and Apostacy, whereof there is as a late remarkable
example near Nay le Fineuse, in one who had the charge of Ancient of that
Church. Yea many times they very impudently enter into our Temples during the
time of Sermons, and there very loudly contradict our Pastors to their faces,
to the end they may stir up some mutiny, or sow some sedition among them,
which happened at St. Maixert very few months since, and it is commonly
practiced in all parts of Poictow, the which it seems those maleuolent Spirits
do particularie practice, thereby the more to torment them in this manner.
These sort of people do again go and besiege the patience and brains of
sick and dying people, purposely to disturb their wits and memories, and to
engender some scruples in their Consciences, and what testimony soever the
poor sick patient gives, that he will receive his consolation from his own
Pastor: If it fall out that he but once open his mouth, then they are presently
up with their insolent cries which they obstinately continue until such time
as they see the sick patient in the last agonies of death. This Death although
it be commonly termed the last and best remedy of all evils and affictions,
yet it does not wholly take us away from their cruelty; for they rail upon our
dead bodies, persecuting us to the very tomb, permit not that we are
accompanied or conducted, fill our graves when we are making of them, wish and
desire that we were devoured of Dogs, and constrain us almost every where to
solemnize our Funerals by night. But alas! what will you say, when in our very
graves, our bones and dust cannot find repose? for with unmerciful and cruel
hands they violate our graves, whom very Pagans would esteem as sacred, and
finding nothing else but pitiful dust, they are yet so barbarous as to throw
it into the wind. The burning of the Temple of Towrs began by the vnburying of
a dead carkase; and so have been unburied the bones of persons of qualitic and
Honor as of late Monsieur de Teligny la Nene, and very lately of Monsieur de
Saint Fulgents. Not long since near unto Londun, as a husband had caused a
grave to be made for his dead wife near unto the Churchyard, the rage of the
Commons was such, as they would not suffer this poor body this last place of
repose, but they unburied it by night, and exposed and abandoned it to Woolues,
which indeed devoured part thereof, so that when the afflicted Husband began
to make researches and examinations of this inhumaine cruelty, he received a
poor reward for this his pitiful and charitable office, and was in a morning
found to be slashed, and slain.

And let none here believe, that we speak by Hyperboles, for they are pure and
naked truths: the Sun sees them, we feel them, our Enemies make us suffer
them, and France is the cruel Theator whereon are represented such bloody and
mournful tragedies, and as God beholds them, so it is incompatible to his
divine Justice that one day he do not revenge them.

But here our Enemies will not fail to object unto us, that although all this
be true (as indeed the justification thereof is clear and apparent) yet that
they are particular actions, not auowed, but disproued, and which therefore
ought not to cause the infraction of the Edict of Peace, the which as much as
possible we can, we ought to endeavor to preserve and maintain. But this is
the exception of our Enemies, which through their vain euasions desire to be
covered with our complaints, and to have a law of themselves to condemn them
as iniust. But besides that, we go on plainly to justify their iniustices,
altogether armed with Patents, and publicly authorized, they in vain
endeavor to free and wash themselves of these outrages which are committed on
us by particular persons, for that they themselves introduce them by their
examples, and to embolden them thereto through their impunitie, for wherefore
have they the swords of Magistracy in their hands, but to defend and secure us
from injuries, and to do us right and justice when we have received them:
wherefore do they contemn all all our complaints and grieuances? whence
proceeds it, that having presented a full list thereof, which was yet but the
abstract and compendium of more important, that we had no justice done us upon
any one of them, no nor so much as vouchsafe to hear or read them: so that who
can otherwise take or consider them, but as the Authors of these cruel
indignities we endure and suffer, in that having the authority to prevent them,
they absolutely refuse to put their hands to it? The Edict of Peace which is
given us, is fraudulent and deceitful, because those who are ordained to make
us observe them, do send apparent contrauentions, and permit-^and suffer them.

But their injustice stops not, at a simple tolleration of outrages, which we
see them do by their particulars, for they themselves are the first and
chiefest which infringe all the clauses of the Edict, which is fit for us to
clear and justify; to the end, that all men being well informed thereof.
Detest their disloyalty and sympathize with us against the cruel oppression
which they make us suffer.

The Kings Declaration imports, that we shall be reestablished in the free
exercise of our Religion, in our Goods, Offices, and Honors, and in a word,
all sorts of favorable and gracious usage for the General, besides that which
was couenanted and granted to some partilars, as namely for the Town of
Rochell, It is therefore question that we examine or see how all these has
been performed and executed: As for the free exercise of our Religion, besides
that which has been formerly objected and represented of a fearful number
of poor Churches which remain deprived, and that the Ministers of the State
have scoffed and mocked when they endeavored to demand their reestablishment,
which was granted them by the Edict, besides those which are newly rased and
discipated, and in those very places where this exercise does in some manner
yet subsist: we are held in a cruel captivity, for there are Fines ordained
and also corporal punishments, for those who sing Psalms in their houses,
wherein are contained the praises of God, whiles the streets regorge with
blasphemers, and resound with obscure and vilanous songs. We are forbidden our
Schools in diverse places, as at Niort, and in all Bearne, to the end that our
Children remain ignorant and without learning and instruction. The Parliament
of Pau has decreed and pronounced a sentence against consistories, which shall
profess and practice that which is expressly mentioned in our Ecclesiastical
discipline, to wit, to censure Fathers and Parents which send their children to
the Schools and Colleges of the Jesuits to be there by them instructed.
Although Friars which give their first oath to a Stranger, I mean the Pope,
who subject Kings to him, and who maintain and defend those paracides which
they themselves have committed; I say, although they are received into this
Kingdom of all sorts of Nations indifferently; nevertheless it being question
of our Ministers, of whom calumnies has never had the face to impute them the
least of these horrors, we are debarred to receive any who are strangers, and
the ancient alliance of this Crown with the Kingdom of Scotland, has not
been considerable or valable to reobtaine the return of Master Prymrose, in
the Church of Bourdeaux, where he served many years with a singular
edification, and testimony from our very adversaries, of a most modest and
temperate personage; and others, although natural Frenchmen, are condemned to
an unjust and eternal exile, because they were known to be excellent
instruments to serve God, as Monsieur d^ Moulin, whose very name was respected
and admired of our Adversaries: and likewise Monsieur Suffrein, to hinder whose
calling back with some pretext and color, the most wicked and impudent
imposture that could be, as the approbation of the popular esmotion, wherein
the President De Cross was killed. As for those who yet subsist in their
Churches, if it be known that they are profitable laborers in Gods Vineyard,
then there is nothing vnomitted to expel and banish them, as has been seen
in deceased Monsieur de la Chapaliere and Monsieur Salbart, whom to drive and
take away from Rochell, they left no stone unremoved, whether in the Town, or
in the Provincial or General Synods, yea they went so far therein, as they
abused the Kings name, and by a public letter from his Majesty addressed to
the body of the Town, to drive them thence: The one and the other of them
being notwithstanding known to be honest men, and being guilty of no
other-crime, then of their zeal and affection to the Church of God, and
accompanied with a rare experience; and for the first of the two, who is now
gone to God, we have drawn those true testimonies from our Enemies after his
decease, that he was a rare and singular personage, whom no threatenings could
shake, no offers how great or frequently reiterated could corrupt, whom no
dangers could ever make to fear, whom no misfortune could daunt, and who
trampling under his feet all particular interests, was wholly bent for the
conservation and good of his fiocke: That which causcth them so to praise him
after hisdeath, was that which made them hate him, so during his life: but for
him, he is now escaped their cruelties; but those who remain in life, are
enforced to lament under their tyranny: and it is not lawful for them to
speak or write that which their consciences suggest and dictate to them,
between us and our Adversaries, for the long and miserable captivity of
Monsieur Constant, and of Monsieur Bellot in the Prisons of Bourdeaux, does but
too much depose and confirm it; and besides that, witness the personal
adiournments and Decrees for the corporal detentions granted out against
diverse of them for the same cause; among other of Monsieur de Bransillon, for
having answered to the declaration of a wretched Apostate: The Pastor of Saune
in Sauennes for having refuted a calumniating and railing book, which a
Jesuit set forth, and Monsieur Sauonnet in Poictou for having published the
Acts of a Conference, which a Capuchin Friar equally ignorant and impudent had
constrained him thereto, who after he had vanquished him shamefully, was yet so
audatious as to publish the trophes of an imaginary victory. As it is not
lawful for our Minister to speak or write, so it is prohibited to our
Printers to publish any Books of our Religion. That at Nismes he of the
Academie suffered a long imprisonment for imprinting an ancient manuscript
which was publicly sold in Paris of the great pardon of God opposed to that of
the Popes, and another Minister in Poictou named Bureau has been extremely
checked by the Presidiall Court of Poictues for printing the aforesaid dispute
of Monsieur Saromet, and henceforth they have made a general Decree whereby
they will exclude and ensnare us by virtue of a Declaration published Anno
1625, in the behalf of an ex^crable Book composed by the Jesuits,
prohibiting the imprinting of any Book without being licensed and privileged,
which is clearly and absolutely to defend us from printing or publishing any
thing, since we know well that this approbation and privilege will never be
allowed or granted us, so as the permission which was formerly yielded and
given us, will remain void and annihilated, and the Edict which authoriseth it
to us, consequently violated and infringed.

And no less it is for our Ecclesiastical Assemblies, wherein there is an
innovation made repugnant and contrary to the Edict, by this yoke which is
imposed on us to receive Commissioners. For in those assemblies we do not
frame, or exhibit any unjust complaint, for fear of being there checked, and
reproved, where all things pass religiously and according to Gods Word. But it
grieves us that thereby they will traduce and abuse us, as if we had any way
wronged those venerable assemblies, to make, or introduce Monopolyes. Moreover,
experience has made us observe, that the aims and intents of our Enemies is
hereby to make us unuseful, yea prejudicial through the election of such
Commissioners which most commonly we know to be hired and stipended against us,
and who indeed place themselves there purposely to offend and abuse us. For
according to their ^antasies and pleasures we must assemble, or separate our
selves, make our consultations long or short, and according to their advise and
relish, every point which we treat of, is a question and maxim of estate,
although it symbolize no nearer then day to night, and thereupon they raise
their sple^ne and bitterness. And although in these our affairs and
assemblies they should bring but their ears to hear, yet they interpose and
vsurp upon all matters that are proposed or consulted, for to speak their
opinions hereof, and to make them as authentical and valable as if they were
the most passionatest Partisans. We have observed of many among them, some
pernicious spies to mark out in Rubrikes those who are best affected to the
Church of God, to oppose good men, to support wicked, and to intimidate and
shake the weaker sort of people, and in favor of some miserable reward to make
them fall off from themselves. To be short, for the heaping up of oppression in
that which concerns our consciences, they will force us to that which is more
bitter and insupportable then death itself, and which with abomination we
abhor and detest, as a most express and gross Idolatry, that is to bow our
knees before the Host, or Agnu^ dei of the Roman-priests, I say they will
enforce us thereto, and the decrees thereof have bin newly dated and published
in many places, more particularly at Diepe, where there are so great a number
of our Religion, that it is impossible they are not often engaged with this
fatal meeting. And in this sort they have performed and executed the
declaration of peace in regard of the chief point thereof which concerns the
free liberty and exercise of our Religion, they have not established it in
infinite places where it ought to be, they have expelled and banished it from
diverse others where it lawfully subsisted, and if any where they have left it,
it is in the manner, and terms as we have here formerly expressed.

As for the regard of the offices and dignities whereunto we ought to be
indifferently admitted with our other Country men and fellow Citizens, it is
this which our Enemies have impugned and prevented with all sorts of passion
and violence. In many places where those of our contrary Religion make not the
tenth person, they have wholly taken from us that part and portion which we had
in the Consuls Court, as at Bagnols: Or if in any place they have left us any
thing, it has been the very least and meanest part, as at Montelimard. There
has been bribery, combination, or corruption employed almost every where, to
introduce in the Town houses or seats of Justice and Judicature: those which
most malign us, and consequently to expel all honest men. Very lately contrary
to the exclude privileges of the City of Nismes, the Commissioners of the
Chamber of Besiers, by a Decree of their Council would there assist at the
election of the Consuls, to make it fall on people wholly to their devotion,
and because the Baron of Aubais who was not of their crew, was there lawfully
elected and accepted the Dignity, they granted out a power to arrest his Body,
and most cruelly ransacked his houses. The order hitherto inuiolably observed
calling Monsieur le Cocque Counselor of the Parliament of Paris to enter into
the Great Chamber, the door was shut against him, in hatred of his Religion,
and the long services of this venerable old man, whose probity and merits are
apparently known to all men, could not prevail with their passion against us,
nor secure him from their outrageous Injustice.

Generally there is seldom granted out any Office whatsoever, though it be but
of a poor Sergeant to any that is of our Religion, if they do not first
abjure it, or promise those services which is required of them, which is,
hereafter to betray us in the midst of our selves; so that Monsieur de Russan
having many years since paid for the Office of General of the Court of Aids
at Monpellier, has not as yet been received, because he will not perform the
one, nor promise the other. And now again in the Town of Rochell there having
been many Offices and dignities vacant, whom many of the said Town have
sought to obtain and purchase; these suits of theirs has been in vain,
because they will not play false play to their consciences, in betraying their
Country, and in this manner it is that the Faith has been kept and practiced
with us in this regard.

It may be, that being contented to have bereaved and dispoyled us of our
honors, they will be then more just to restore vsto our goods, and to secure
us from injuries, and generally to conserve our Rights in matter of Justice
which was solemnly promised us. So here it is that some enraged passion has
strangely blinded them, that trampling under their feet all manner of divine
and humane Laws, they have wretchedly abused the authority which gave them
Laws, every way to afflict and oppress us. When grounding our selves and
Actions on the Edict of Peace, we would question before Judges, the unjust
detainers of our goods, whereof they so violently possessed themselves during
the fury of the Wars, and so to demand the Principal which was due to us,
before the taking of Arms, all our Law suites and Processes have been
rejected or adjudged against the Plaintiffes to their great cost and charges,
and our Enemies the Desendants still maintaind in their usurpation; so that to
the Province of Languedoc alone, is owing more then two millions of Livres,
which is 100000. li. sterling, and to the town of Rochell immense and infinite
sums, and it is so far off from restoring us what is due to us, as by Acts of
palpable injustice they have many where is condemned us to restore those prises
which we had taken during the wars, and among others there was a sentence
given thereon, in the Chamber of the Edict at Besieres, against deceased
Mrnsieur de St Blancard.

Our processes are judged by the ticket on the bags, so that those of a
contrary religion boldly sue all manner of actions against us how unjust so
ever, being confident that the contrary Judge of our Religion will make them
gain their Causes: And so at the Great Council, The Earl of Beanfort was
overthrown in a greatl uite he followed against some Communalites, and which
imported him the greatest part of his whole Estate, although the equity and
justice of his cause was perfectly clear, and that in confirmation thereof he
had heretofore obtaind sentence upon sentence; but notwithstanding, the only
remembrance of troops of assistance which he conducted into Montauban, and his
perseverance and constancy in the true Religion, have prevailed with his Judges
that his Right was unjust.

But might it please God, that they did not abuse their power but in
disployIing us of our goods, and that their cruelty would at least leave us our
liberty and lives, that their seats of Justice were only Courts established
unjustly to grant and give away our goods to our Enemies, and that they became
not scaffolds expressly erected to draw innocent blood from us. It is a horror
of the bloody Decrees and Judgments which every day they pronounce against us,
and whereby they manifest and demonstrate to all the world, that their souls
are far redder then their Scarlet gowns. The least fault which any of us
commits is a crime which can neither hope, nor obtain pardon, and in the
whitest innocence it self, their hatred makes them find out lawful causes to
condemn us. A young man of Auignon, named William Astier, for having framed and
collected some reasons which moved him to abandon the Church of Rome, was
thrown into prison, where with Geeues and fetters he miserably remained two
months among the greatest criminals, and could not yet obtain his liberty
before he had paid a great sum of money for a fine. Another very lately at
Lions, after the miseries of a long imprisonment, received sentence in the same
City, which was confirmed by the Parliament of Paris, to go all the City
over in his shirt, bare footed, with a halter about his neck, and a great
burning torch in his hands, for having declared to one who proposed and
enquired of him If he held the Pope to be Antichrist. And as every one knows
that it is one of the Articles of our Faith which we preach in our Sermons, and
confirm in our Books; so this sentence given against him, does comprehend and
enwrap us all in the same condemnation, and adiudgeth us to the same disgraces
and torments. The Court of Parliament of Toulouse has inflamed and armed the
Popish Communalties to execute horrible outrages in the Town of St
Paul-Lamata, Cuque and other pitiful relics of forepast burnings. All
France has conceived horror at the fearful injustice used against an
innocent man in the Isle of Ree, To whom his Judge termed Briet (a name of
abominable memory) having suborned witnesses to affirm against him, that
during the last commotions of An. 1622. he had broken and burnt an Image, and
therein pronounced sentence of death against him. The Court of Parliament of
Paris without examining his witnesses, who were easily to be convicted of
falsehood and imposture, without admitting the reproaches which he gave them
which were more then valable, without regarding that if the accusation had
been true, that it was an hostility committed during the war, and which
ought to have been abolished and buried by the Edict of peace, their passion
made them to consent and conform this unjust sentence, and so to charge their
consciences with the blood of this poor harmless child of God, who
constantly expiring his last breath in the midst of fire and flames, confirmd
his innocence in this action of his death: and heaven afterward discovered it,
yea this unfortunate and fatal Image is since found again, and to this day
does subsist, to accuse the execrable wickedness of his Accusers and Judges,
which have lent and held up their hands to circumuent the whitest and candidst
innocence that ever was. The fury and injustice was not less but the
precipitation far greater, in the person of one named Roumiou, who during the
wars was Provost in the Army of the Duke of Rohan, who being at Castres in May
1626. and one of the Consuls of that Town, a very vicious man, and wholly sold
to our Enemies, coming to him and occasioning him a paltry drunken quarrel,
and so outraging and abusing him in the open street, necessity obliging him to
put himself upon his defense and resistance, he was presently seized on by men
placed there to the same effect (for it was a premeditated quarrel)
imprisoned, and sentence as soon given: whereby he was condemned to the
Galleys, he threw in his appeal to the Chamber of Besieres, but instcad of
good Judges, from whose virtue and integrity his innocence might receive some
assistance, in an Act so outrageous as was offered him, he found cruel Tyrants,
who cherishing the injustice of his former Judges, aggrauated his crime and
their sentence, and so pronounced judgment of death against him, which by an
unparalleled example was the very same hour executed, so that in all he stayed
not four and twenty hours in their prisons: it is thevehemency of a strange
passion which made them proceed with such celerity where there was question of
a man's life, and it is far opposite and distant from the moderation of those
ancient Judges, which still left thirty days between the sentence and
execution thereof, to the end that if there were any light break forth for the
innocence of the accused, they would not have been sorrowful to understand it
so late, but because they would spare the efusion of blood, and never spill it
but with compassion and sorrow, whereas these are insatiably thirsty thereof.
And yet we may term these Judges of Besicres modest and temperate in regard
of that which was perpetrated lately in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, against
Monsieur de St Germain, a Gent. of mark and quality, but extremely hated of
them because he was a man of valor and service; the Baron of Montendre who had
a quarrel against him, and who greatly fea^'d his generosity and courage,
judged the passion of this Parliament, to be a very fit instrument for the
execution of his, and so to free him of this formidable enemy; to which end he
seduced a wretched Priest to become Plaintiff a against the said Monsieur de St
Germain, and so accused him for robbing of his Church, whose witnesses were not
difficult to be found out, because it wasagainst one of our religion; so the
informations were framed and dressed against him, but with an absolute unheard
of silence, and they are put into the hands of a Provost, expressly chosen for
such a one which was requisite for such an execution; who watching his time,
surprised this braueGentlema^ when he least thought or dreamed thereof, and
speedily led him to Bourdeaux, where that Parliament being extraordinarily
assembled, without hearing any of his just alegations and answers, presently
held him guilty, and pronounced sentence of death against him, so as in less
then 8 hours this Judgment was given, and executed.

These are the hands which now dispose soueraignly of our lives, and thus is
our Religion turned and imputed to crime, and the faith which was given us by
the Edict of peace to lures and snares, the more easily to draw us to the
scaffolds, the which we have not ceased to oregore and destaine with our
innocent blood, ever since that upon the assurance of this peace we put down
our arms; and the number is infinite which are daily hunted after for forepast
actions, so that within the extent and jurisdiction of the Parliament of
Thoulouse, there are 2000 of us decreed and commanded to be apprehended for the
like causes, and there is nothing but flight can warrant them from the bloody
hands of th^se cruel Tyrants.

We assure our selves there are none except they are more then barbarous, who
having considered all this, are not touched in heart with pity and compassion
toward us, and that he will not approve our wrongs to be immense, and infinite,
because notwithstanding all these most sacred and inviolable promises which
were made us, we are still tyranized in our consciences, oppressed in our
honors, ruined in our goods, and our lives continually exposed to the swords of
those, who having them in their hands to do Justice, do abuse them in the
execution of their hatred against us.

But it may be we would yet support all these outrages and persecutions more
patiently, if as they are committed against some particulars now here and anon
there, that the generaltie could promise themselves some repose and
tranquillity; In this case those to whom it falls out to suffer, must yet
glorify God in their sufferances, and still embrace and endure them with
consolation, seeing that the rest of Gods children, do at least yet subsist
though in I know not what poor estate and condition. But our greatest grief
and misery is, That we apparently perceive, that the designs of our Enemies
are wholly bent to root us out, as also our Religion, and so to give the last
blow to our ruin, what sugared words soever they employ to persuade and make us
believe the contrary.

The justification whereof is clear and evident, by the breach of 2 Articles,
which does not simply touch the intrest of some particulars, but which
concerns our general subsistence. The first regards the holding, and
observing of our politic assemblies, being divided and spread as we are in a
Kingdom, whereof every one knows, the greatness and extent, and being to
live among people who are animated against us with ragefull fury, we shall but
live there exposed to these their injuries, and coming to massacre us one
after another in our houses, we may almost al perish before we have knowledge
thereof, or only have the means to have recourse to the justice of our Prince
to implore his protection. One of the remedies of this our evil is, our mutual
correspondence, and communication one with the other, and indeed our king
knowing the necessity hereof, thought it fit and requisite, and therefore gave
us express commission by their Edicts to assemble at least every 3 years to
consult of our common affairs, and to compile all our grieuances together, to
the end to bring and prostrate them to their feet, and in their justice to find
the Palladium and sanctuary of our safety, according whereunto it was
expressly promised so the last peace, that we should have a Pattent delivered us
to make our assemblies, the which if it had bin performed, and his Mtes ears
open to our complaints and grieuances, without doubt he would have taken pity
of the cries and tears of so many thousands of his poor subjects, and
according to his royal goodness in providing for our wrongs, they had preuerted
the calamities and miseries under whom France now breaths and sighs. But our
Enemies have so powrfully prevailed, that this promise has bin violated to us
as well as all others, and our 2 whole years patience improfitably employed to
make remonstrance thereof, has produced us no other fruit, but to make us
comprehend by their obstinate denials, that they intend to deprive us of all
means to confer together for our common subsistence, thereby to work more
commodiously and surely to our ruin, as to beat down and destroy a body,
first to cut all the sinews which linck'd the members one to another.

The same design to ruin us does furthermore plainly appear, and remains
perfectly verified by the proceedings they have observed and held to bereave us
of those Towns and places which the Edict granted and gave us in every
Province to assure our lives. Experience had made us see that what Edicts
soever our Kings could publish in our favor, they were not bars stong enough
against the fury of the people. At the first seditious Sermon (and Friars make
none others) the fire of a popular emotion waslighted, and the knives in the
hand of an enraged multitude which came to seek us in our beds to cut our
throats, which is no less then all the whole world knows, and that there have
bin infinite numbers of Gods children which have felt and made trial of these
more then barbarous horrors, within that the public faith, the respect of
Laws, and the authority of the Prince, was powerful enough to secure us from
them, and after, to oppose some more powerful remedy. Our Kings themselves
have assigned us places to serve us for refuge, if any should seek to assail
or destroy us, as formerly they had done, and have ordained that the guard and
keeping thereof should be wholly giued and committed to us, even so they have
remained in our hands not as hostages of the faith of our Princes, who have
never doubted of our fidelities, but as pawnes and pledges that our Enemies
should contain themselves in their duties. And we kept them not, against those
of whose grace we received and held them, but against their rebellious
subjects, which would presume to violate and infringe their Edicts, yea and
masacre us, against the declaration of their will. And this properly is the
nature of these towns which for this regard have bin names of security and
assurance, of which whiles we have bin the possessors and depositors, the
insolency of the people has bin retained and restrained, and in stead of wars
and combustions wherewith this Kingdom has bin long and miserably afflicted,
and which made her the true theater of misery, we have seen her ascend to the
height of all felicity and glory.

And it cannot be said, but that the K. has bin truly and perfectly obeyed of
us, and that the gates thereof were open at all times he pleased to enter, as
indeed he was received into most part of them with joy and acclamations, when
he past by Saumur to his marriage, and had ever bin so since, if wicked
counselors had not abused (our respects and obediences, and had not made us
know by many deplorable experiences) that they contrived and fashioned the
snares of our ruin, and to draw us from forth these places, not that the K.
should be better served, for that was impossible, but because they would find
means to violate his Edicts with impunitie.

But how they have borne themselves to bereave us of them, is that which it
imports every one to know, and the which we will fetch from its head fountain
and original. First they would have enterprised it by force of Arms, whereof
they laid the foundations a little after the death of He^y the great of happy
memory, by the innovation which they decreed and resolved to do in Bearne, in
diuerting the reuenews which the deceased Q. of Navarre and the Estates of that
Country had assigned for the maintenance of Ministers and Colleges, and in
employing them to furnish the pride of some Bishops, and the insatiable
covetousness of the Jesuits. They believed that, that poor people would
understand this with grief, as also that thereupon we would presently run to
arms. But our moderation deceived them, so that we contented our selves from
time to make our humble complaints and remonstrances to his Mtie, and the
wisest of his Council held along time these matters in suspense. The other
nevertheless pushed still obstinatly to their former designs, and after having
obliged the assembly of Loudoun to separate them selves in An. 1619, through
hope that for 6 months after there should be no innovation in this business,
and yt in the interim they would consider ye reasons of these of Bearne, long
before that time was expired, they led away the King into Guyene, and then go
suddenly thundering on these poor people, where by violence they passed in
the Parliament of ^an, that which formerly they had resolved and concluded;
ransaking this Country with strange hostilities, cruelly beat and outraged
those who could not save themselves by flight, defiling with indignity the
Temples where they were accustomed to pray unto God, and to preach his holy
Gospel, thereby to hold this miserable Country in eternal servitude and
slavery, filling all places with Garrisons, and having drawn the Lord of Sales
out of the Town of Navarrins, through a thousand oaths that they would leave
him the government thereof, of which when they were become masters, for his
good service they paid him with scoffs and laughtres, and laughed at his
credulity.

They had not so well begun, not to pursue the point of their good fortune: the
Deputies of the Assembly of Loudun repair to Rochell, at the first brute and
news of these outrages, according to the right which had been expressly
given them before their last separation, and there prepared themselves to go
again and present their humble supplications to his Majesty, but this is
imputed to them for crime, and they have order to disperse and divide
themselves; and because they would persist in their remonstrances, they are
there held as encrimed, our enemies armed against us, who then thought to
persorme that in the midst of our other Churches, which they came from doing
and exploiting in Bearne, as if nothing could hold out before them, or
withstand them.

For having taken Saumur by the same lure which they had Navarrins, they is by
oaths presently violated, and corrupted the Governors of many other places,
which they rendered unto them without striking stroke, obliged others to receive
compositions, the which they as soon infringed, as at St. ^ohn, and Cle^ae,
they then came to Montauban, which served as a bar to their entryes, and the
year after, which was Anno 1622. they assailed Montpellier, where they found
so vigorous resistance, that they lost all hope of becoming masters thereof,
whiles Rochell for her part acted wonders at Sea, and defended her self so
well by Land, that those before it did nothing else but consume themselves.

But for all this they were not daunted or discouraged, and knowing that their
first design to vanquish us by Arms, no way succeeded to their desires, they
spinne a contrary thread, and clewe, and so resolve to overthrow us by a
Treaty, since they could not do it by force: to which effect, they propose and
seek with all variety of Art and policy, and do so industriously and
obsequiously comply with the Duke of Rohan, that he suffers him self to be
enchanted, and lulled a sleep with their flattering promises, who not able to
persuade himself that they could so wickedly and perfidiously break his
Majesty's word as they did, he concluded to peace with them on these conditions
among others:

That his Majesty entering into Montpellier, should make no change or
innovation, that Marans should be rendered up unto us, and that the Fort built
a^ioyning to Rochell, should be demolished; and for the other places, which as
then we held and enjoyed, there should no alterations at all be made.

Here then are our enemies drawn out of some rubs and dangers, by the only
means of this Treaty, but yet they have not fallen from their first intents.
The City of Montpellier having opened her gates to the King, gave him to
brave a reception and entrance, as she thought she had thereby given him an
eternal confidence of her sidelity: but the recompense she received, was the
Garrison which was left there against the public faith, so solemnly sworn,
with instructions to the Commanders and Officers, so to afflict the
Inhabitants, that they themselves should be constrained thereby to demand that
which all other people naturally detest and abhor, that is to say, to be
subjected to the tyrannous Yoke of a Cittadell, according to which order, the
houses of the chiefest, and most eminent, are stuffed up and oppressed with
Soldiers which eat them out, who spoil their Vines, desolate their fields,
quarrel with all, assail the honor and chastity of their wives and
daughters. Some in regard of these injuries, consent to make this demand, and
some three or four score present the request of our Supplication: this (as
they say) is not to prejudice the right of the rest of the Town, nor to the
remarkable interest which all our other Churches had therein; nevertheless
this great tumultuous Garrison would not fail to take them at their words: so
the foundations of this Cittadell were presently laid, and in a short time
brought to perfection, and then it was that with all sorts of licenciousnes,
they began to grate and afflict this poor City, far more then before, all
her privileges are annihilated, the Inhabitants disarmed to their very knives:
the chiefest Cittie-Virgins are snatch away from their fathers and mothers, to
marry them to some vagabond Soldiers of a contrary Religion, many are compeld
to Apostasy, and in a word, once this rich City, now this poor people, are
made slaves to an unheard of, and matchless tyranny. In, and in this manner
they assured themselves of Montpellier.

As for Marans, when the restitution thereof was pressed, it was found in the
warrant which they had caused to be dispatched and expedited, that they had
committed a notable imposture: for instead of that which they had showed to the
Duke of Rohan, and whence the peace was concluded, they had absolutely
promised, that this Town should be restored into the hands and keeping of his
first Governor, but in this last, they adjoined an Alternatiue, which
destroyed the precedent proposition, to wit, Or recompense shall be given him,
whereby they euaded and eluded our demand.

But all these are yet but small matters. As Rochell was the place which most
of all crossed their designs, considering that in regard of second causes, she
is as one of the Axell Trees of our Subsistence: It was to become Masters
thereof, that the first and chiefest intents have these many years aimed, but
not being able to procure and compass it by Arms, not to reduce and bring
them to the point of confidence, which proved so mournful and miserable to
Montpellier, to wit, to open their Gates, they attempted another way which they
judged less chargeable and more easy, and peradventure which might more
fortunately succeed, then all that which they had formerly done during the time
of Wars; there was a Fort began to be built before this Town, which by this
peace was to be demolished, as by an express warrant to that effect was sent
and expedited as we have formerly said: But how solemn soever this promise
was, they resolved not to hold or perform it; and so to operate and work by
means of this Fort in time of peace, that which they could not have to effect
during the Wars: And as this Town cannot subsist but by the means of
comerce and trade: so they already preiudged that the subsistence of the said
Fort, would infallibly wholly deprive and take it from them; there being no
great hope or appearance that Merchants would frequent a place so near to
danger, much less hazard or entrust their goods: Besides, this Fort being so
near to their Town, it might facilitate their Enemies Intelligence, and
chalk out a way to surprise: And put the worst, if they were enforced to come
to Arms, they had therein a strong and powerful Arcenallready to their h^nds,
and therein all sorts of prepara^iues for a Siege. The Rochellers who carefully
save these consequences, and likewise foresawe how ruinous they might be unto
them: dispatched their Deputies to the King at the very instant of the
acceptance of the peace, as well to tender him their Submissions, as to procure
necessary warrants for the demolition of the Fort: These Deputies find the King
at Lions, of whom they are favorably received, and obtain of his Council as
many good words and papers as they can desire: returning thus with Letters to
Monsieur Arnaud (which commanded the Fort) which enjoined him speedily to free
the same, and to suffer it to be demollished. But he who had already the
watchword given him, mocked at all these their dispatches and expeditions, and
told them plainly, he knew the Kings intentions better then they all: and so
fortifying, in stead of demollishing, spared neither cost, labor, or
diligence, to advance his work. The others have speedy recourse to their
complaints, and resound very loud the indignity and disobedience offered them,
to the end they should not fly out, before the Fort were brought to perfection:
they are entertaynd with good hopes, and promised they shall have Commissioners
sent them, to see if they have performed and satisfied that which they never
enjoyed by the Declaration, and that they upon notice thereof would give them
all content. Whiles these Commissioners add delay to delay, and purposely
travel toward Rochell by very small journeyes, the Fort is finished, and
furnished with abondance of Ordnance, and with all sorts of provisions of War
and Victuals: guarded by a mighty Garrison, and with a most exact vigilance and
care: in a word, in that Estate of power, no longer to fear Rochell, but to
make Rochell fear them. And then it was that arrived these long expected
Commissioners: who finding nothing to question or contradict with obedience
whereunto the Town was obliged to the King, they without giving them any
contentment, went to finish their Commission in the Isle of Ree; by committing
strange outrages and afflictions on that poor people, and by making exact and
curious researches of all that had passed during the War. The Rochellers
seeing themselves so grosely mocked and abused, do not omit* nevertheless to
reiterate their complaints to the King, with such sense and passion, that he
being touched therewith, gives them again good words: but those of whom the
performance and execurion thereof depended, have contrary intents and designs:
so that whiles those busily pursue their complaints, these are incessantly
conspiring and plotting of many Enterprises upon the Town. Particularly of one
managed by a certain fellow named Courselles, who being on the very point to
execute it, it pleased God so well to detect it, that the undertaker thereof
was taken; and others with whom he had conspired, convicted hereof. Whereup on
the Deputies of Rochell are again in Court to demand Justice: but they were
flatly refused, and told they were too importunate in their complaints, which
if they continued, they should be imputed to no less then crime, yea they
proceeded too recriminatious; and told them that they were a mutinous and
factious people. A deplorable condition of a Patient, who is forbidden to
consolidate his sickness by his complaints and sorrows.

All these proceedings clearly demonstrate, what the design of our Enemies
was against this poor Town: But their impatience finding all these delays
and courses too long, they again resolve to make trial of their Arms: so
they proved great and powerful preparations by Land: but chiefly they rigge
and make ready a strange Fleet at Blauet, purposely at unawares to thunder upon
this poor Town, which they hope cannot escape them. Which conjoined with the
other breaches of the peace every where committed, obliged the Duke of Rohan,
by whom it had been treated and conducted to advise of the means to divert
this great storm, which threatened speedily to befall our Churches: and above
all to prevent that this Town, which so much imports us, were not taken from
us; who believed that there was no better, expedient, nor truer remedy, then to
take from our Enemies the means which they had destined to ruin us. So
Monsi^ur Soubize went and possessed himself of those Ships which were
preparing against us at Blauct; and came to the Isle of Ree to free them from
the yoke which the aforesaid (...) had subjected them to, and after to assay
to deliver Rochell from this Fort which so much oppr^ssed it.

Our Enemies seeing their design so prevented, and gone retrograde, they make
Heaven and Earth refound with their complaints, as the disturbers of the
public peace. It is a crime to us not to suffer our selves to ^e ruined: and
to prevent the blow which was in^ended totally to overthrow us. Every where
they d^file us with black calumnies, as if we were the greatest Traitors of
the world; so that through their artificial insinuations, his most Excellent
Ma^ie of Great Britain, and my Lords the States, that without us they were
ready to ioy^e their Arms with theirs against the Common Enemy, and under
pretense to have again resumed that design, they draw Ships from them, but
employ them against us: so as presently there was a new face on our affairs,
having to do with such powerful Enemies: and the grief hereof was the more
sensible to us, to see that our destruction approached by those, from whom we
ought to have expected all aid and assistance.

And yet our enemies saw, they could not so soon arrive to the point and
period of their pretenses: for although Rochell had received a check, yet she
wanted neither courage, men, or provisions. The Duke of Rohan cut out business
in other places, and what ^rt or policy soever was used, there was no meares to
sever Montauban, and the other Communalties from the general cause. Moreover
the King of Great Britain, and the Lords the States, seeing how they were
deluded and surprised, would no longer permit the stay of their ships against
us, which were the true motives that made our Enemies become more flexible, to
the Ouertures of accommodating and advancing the peace made by the Ambassadors
of the said King, and the Lords the States: But yet we must not belecue that
they had changed their maxims, or left off their designs, to deprive us of
Rochell, and all other places which remained, on any terms or rates
whatsoever.

And indeed their actions and deportments since the peace, has manifestly
declared it to us. The peace was no sooner concluded, but they enforced the
Lord of Montauban to depart with, and leave his house of Meouillon, which were
the inheritance of his Ancestors, because the situation thereof being strange,
it might serve as a retreat to the poor neighboring Protestants. Since the
death of the late Constable, the Marshall of Crequy has expeld all those of
the Religion from the Governments which he held in Daulphine; So as all the
Churches of this Province do now remain without shelter or protection, and
exposed to all the storms of persecution; and there is Scarce a Town which
remains in our hands, of any esteem or consideration, but since the we
peace, can justify they have made many designs and enterprises thereon.

But above all, there has been an obstinate perseueration in their resolution
against Rocheil, and they are so far from demolishing the Fo^t (as we have
formerly justified) which they promised to the Ambassadors, that they have
newly ^ged and fortified it, and there those have had refuge, who either
attempted to betray it in the time of war, or to surprise it in the time of
peace. There is (...) wonderful, yea a formidable Magazin of all (...) (...)
for a siedge laid before it the (...) (...) redo^d, who bear^ themselves (...)
(...) (...) ^gious, have denoted all the remainders, left by the last wars,
and yet insolently threaten very shortly to do worse.

Moreover, all the little Towns, and Hamblets about Rochell, which by express
Articles given likewise in writing to the Ambassadors, were to be discharged of
Gariso^s, is it yet so far from being performed, as contrariwise they
presently filled them up with new supplies, which being placed and dispersed
near the Town, could in one night be there, either for a surprise, or the
advancing of a Si^ge: and yet they extremely afflict those with whom they are
billi^ed, and enforce them to take passeports from them, as if it were in the
midst of war, putting I axes and jmpositions on their goods: spoiling their
Vines and Harucst, and keeping these poor people as prisoners in their own
houses.

But it is nothing for them to shut us up by Land, if they do not the like by
Sea: so as judgei^g the Isle of Ree very commodious for their purpose, although
they g^ue their words there should be no innovation or change: yet they send
Mounsieur de Thorax to build a strong Fort there: which having performed, and
with the very goods of the Rochellers that they had in that Island, wereof he
violently possessest himself, although by an expres^e Article of the
Declaration they were to restore it: then he began to play the part of a
Sovereign, compelling all Ships which departed forth the River, to attend his
pleasure and permission: stayed others who would enter; but especially if they
were laden with any provisions or victuals: and in a word, dealt with them, as
if war had been proclaimed.

Having thus advanced their affairs by Sea and Land without they presently
after carry their malice into the very bowels of the Town, by abusing (in
aduenturing to lose it) the sa^red respect which it bears to his Majesty in
the person of his Offi^ers: He had so wrought, that his Majesty should send
Commissioners for the execution of the Peace, and accordingly they were
received with all sorts of respect and honor: but at their very entrance they
^lye at Monopolyes; and there being then some grudge and diffrence betwixt the
body of the Town, and the other Inhabitant for some point of order and
government among them, they set fire to this division, animating the one part
against the other: yet both to betray each other, to the end to ruin them all
by this their proper divisions. There was observed a particular intelligence
between them and the Fort, and every day they held secret conferences in their
Lodgings, whereat there were none but were either known or suspected to wish
ill to the Town: and for the full conviction hereof, one of them was surprised
as he would have c^rrupted a Townesman, who had the Office to search all Ships
that came into the Harbor, and so to stop his mouth that way. And briefly,
whereas their Commission might have been ended in two days: they obstinately
remained in the Town, until the arrival of the war sent them away. So
because they stayed there so long without business, without doubt it is a
strong presumption, they were sent thither to sow some Treasons, and to
introduce within the Town, the means of her ruin, whiles others labored
powerfully without, likewise to effect it.

The last blow of their pernicious designs, before we wholly take off the
Mask, and so come to the last effects of violence, was a general defense to
transport any Corn by Sea: yea, not only to foreign Countries, but from one
harbor, to another in France: and this defense was set on foot, when France
abounded and regorged with Corn: so as many who discovered not the true intent
hereof, wondered to hear it published: and di^ers who had great store of Corn
on their hands to traffic abroad, as accustomed, extremely murmured thereat.

But the true end and aim thereof was, to prevent that Rochell should not
victual it self, and when they pleased to besiege it, that they might with
more facility quell her by famine.

We doubt not but those who will please to reflect and cast their eyes upon
this Table, whereon we chalk out our griefs and wrongs, will not find it very
pleasing, but that it will offend and weary their sight, to fix them so long
upon such distasteful and sorrowful objects of iniustices, di^oyalties,
outrages, ransackings, oppresing of so many Towns, and of so many thousands of
people, with the several designs, generally to root them out, and for ever
to exterminate them. But yet we assure them, that we have not here inserted the
thousandth part of our miseries: for whosoever would fully and punctually
represent them, his paper must be as great as France, and he must resolve to
write many Volumes. It suffices by this small part, to judge of the whole
piece: for by this clawe they may sufficiently know these Lions, and see into
what extremity and gulf of miseries, they have reduced us: For in a word,
they have robbed us of our goods, wronged us in our Honors, spilt our blood, and
not spared our Tombs after our death; and all this in detestation of our
Religion, the memory whereof eternally to abolish: there is no violence, but
they have employed: no cruelty, but they have practiced: nor no faith or
promise, but they have infringed and delacerated, especially of the last peace,
whereof they have wilfully broken all the Clauses and Articles, and during the
time thereof, have publicly sought our utter ruin and destruction.

To remedy all these our miseries, we have continually haunted: yea I may say,
beseiged the Gates of our Prince his Palace, and lifted up our voices, thereby
endeavoring to make him understand our grieuances: but particularly Rochell
has still had their Deputies prostrate at his Maie^ies feet; to beseech him
to show them some good effects of his Royal promise. But we have found deaf
ears to our requests, or else taken up and preoccupated, with all that which
the foulest villainy of our Enemies has been accustomed slanderously to vomit
sorth against us: so that we have bin sent back with reproach and judig^ie, and
taken from us all hope to do us right and justice: yea the more we have
complained of our slavery, the more we have found them to increase and
aggrauate it, that now this remedy has increased the sickness of our misery.
And as for Rochell, as her oppression was greatest, so were her complaints, and
also more frequent, till they were peremptor^ly defended to exhibit any more;
and told openly that they should no longer ex^ the demolition of the Fort.

(...) this indeed was to be reduced to the last point of extremity, since our
Enemies lest us not that which is commonly given to those who are most
miserable, (to wit) Hope. Whereon, who will not presently judge, that finding
nothing but despair of that side, nothing but all sorts of d^ialty and
pe^nesse, and an obstina^ resolution to ruin us; That the care which every one
naturally ought to have of his proper conservation, obliged us to seek out
for other remedies? And where should we else find them, but in having our
recourse to those, which were despositors and pledges to us of the peace, which
was so ill kept and observed to us? and if any one doubt of the right or equity
we have in this our resolution, he will therein show himself, either
absolutely ignorant, or wholly mal^ous.

For who but knows, that when he that is obliged, comes to fail of his
promise, that then the party interested, has his lawful recourse to the
Surety, and consequently ^ust cause to call on him? for this, nature informs
us; all laws teach us; and daily experience in the practice of all^people
confirm^s to us.

Because therefore that the peace was given us; by the means and mediation of
the King of great Britain, and of the Lords the States, and that they
consented to give us assurance for the observation thereof, who sees not, that
we have all right at the breach and contrauention thereof, to address our
selves to them, and to seek their refuge? And surely the difficulty was not
in the right and equity, but in the means to be able to do it, especially in
a public way, the cap^tie wherein we were held being such, that the first who
had dared to have made this proposition, had infallibly^ lost his head for the
same: whereof we need no other pro^ or testimony, then that which happened in
the same Town of Rochell, where an Inhabitantnamed, La Uigne, having been
long suspected to have received a Commission from the King of England, he was
thereon imprisoned, and condemned to dye. Such was the power and authority of
the Commissioners.

There remains then one only way, which is, That the Duke of Rohan, who in
quality of chief General of our Churches, had dealt in former occasions, and
who interuened in the two Treaties of peace, would take on him this care.
Indeed the zeal which he has ever borne to the good of our Churches, having
opened his eyes to see the extreme peril wherein they were, and given him
courage enough, (notwithstanding the great dangers which threaten us) to
advertise the King of Great Britain thereof, God has so singularly favored
his good intents, given such an efficacy and power to his requests, and to
those of Monsieur de Soubize his brother, fortified with those of many honest
men, (of all conditions) of our Churches, that the heart of this great King
has been touched with compassion and pity of our wrongs, to employ his
power, to desingage to us his Royal faith.

Since then it is for that which he is now armed, to consult if we should accept
of his good will, were properly to dispute, i^ a sick patient that is dying,
should open the door to a Physicion who comes to cure him; or if a poor man
who is nere drowning, should refuse to take the hand of him which extends it to
him, to draw him out of the water, wherein he is panting, and near dying. So
the ^ice being absolute, the necessity extreme, and in this necessity and
^tice, the occasion so favorable; what remains for us to do, but after our
most humble thankefulness and prayers to God the Author of all blessings,
likewise to address and offer up our humble thanks to the King of Great
Brit^ne, for so fit and timely assistance, ((...) say) to give a full
approbation to his Arms, as raised in our favor, to join our selves to him
with all our powers and ^orces, with a most humble supplication to his
Majesty, that he will please to continue us the effects of his Royal
protection, until the obstinacy of our Enemies be vanquished, and that they
suffer us to approach the sacred person of the most Christian King our Prince,
to obtain of his Justice the accomplishing of his Edicts, and the reparation
and damage of the breaches which have been offered us, since the decease of
Henry the Great, of happy and glorious memory?

Here doubtless our enemies will make tragical exclamations, to defame our
proceedings, and maliciously to impute unto us the want of affection toward
our Country, in joining our Arms with Strangers: But let them justly impute
the blame hereof to themselves, because they in their consciences know, that it
is their cruel and obstinate oppression, which has imposed on us this
necessity; and therefore whatsoever the events thereof be, they are their own
proper works, not ours. But contrariwise, with what face dare they enterprise
or tax us upon this point, since they have committed those things which are
still recent and fresh in our memories? Do they believe that we have forgotten
their enraged furies during the League, when to defend our lives and Religion,
we accepted aid and assistance from England? Have we defaced the Arms of our
Prince, and contemned his obedience as they then did? Have we rendered up any
one Town, as they then delivered to the Spaniard, all those whereon they could
become masters, and among others the Capital Citic? Have we laid hands upon
the sacred person of our Prince, as they wickedly and damnably have done? What
resemblance is there in a defense drawn from necessity as is ours, (always
in subjection, and still ready to return to duty) with their audacious
revolt; so long, so obstinate, so pernicious: having not the least pretext to
charge us of the least outrage in their persons, of the least disgrace in their
honors, of the least extortion in their goods, or of the least force in their
consciences, and who allege for their only griese and complaint, that the
Prince, who became then weary of killing, was more merciful then they would
have him, in spilling of our blood, since from thence they have derived their
Law to use surious resolutions, which all men have beheld and seen? Are they
not impudently ashamed to accuse our moate, having such great beams in their
eyes, and to calumniat our innocence, being guilty of the same crimes?

Here therefore let shame and confusion stop their mouths, to the end that we
may open ours in the true protestations which we make of our innocence, and of
^he inviolable fide^y (whatsoever be said of us) which we will observe, and
bear to the King our Sovereign; being wounded in heart (through the violence
of his bad ^ruants) to be reduced to do any thing which (...) him, and are all
of us ready to cast our selves at his feet, to demand his favor, when he
will please to receive us, and to secure us from their cruelties.

Or if there be any faithful Servant near his Person; we pray him to serve us
as an Echo, that we may make him understand by his mouth, how false and
sla^derous those impressions are, which cont^ariwise are given to him of us:
and that in effect, after our obedience due unto God, we breath, nothing but
his service, and (our Religion set apart) will therein ever be ready to
sacrifice our lives.

Wherefore we humbly beseech him, to spare our lives, and in stead of pursui^g
us by the violence of his Arms, that he will once seriously command, that we
may be better used hereafter, then heretofore.

The more powerfully to induce him hereby, and so by this means, to persuade
him to regiue a good and perdurable Peace to his Subjects: he shall do well,
to draw the picture of the desolations of his Estate, to make him see therein
so great a delug^ of blood sp^, which properly, and truly is his: because it
is that of his people: So much treasure exhausted, I mean the sweat and the
substance of the Artificer, and of the poor laboring Country man, who already
starve with hunger: So many houses beaten down and dimolished, whereof (to
speak truth) it is he that suffers the decays and ruincs, for that he is
Lord in Ca^. So many ransakings and outrages, indeed ought to touch his Royal
heart: because it is his Kingdom, that fe^s and endures them, and that they
are his own proper bowels which are torn in sunder.

Let it farther represent unto him, the great advantage which he gets by these
divisions and miseries, who is the most dangerous Enemy of his Crown, who
daily increases his own Estates and Countries, and conqu^reth new, whiles he
spoyleth and ruineth his own: and who mounts to so high and sublime a degree
of power, that there is no Christian Prince to whom hereafter he ought not to
be formidable: and France above any other, has (...) cause to fear him: for
that all the world knows how passionately he has a long time hunted to
possess it; and were it not for any other cause and title, th^n that which
Navarre assures him, (to wit) Usurpation, and that it were fit and proper for
him.

And put the case that this apprehension were yet more retired: yet let this
picture still endeavor to make him ^ee, what a blemish it is to the glory and
luster of his Crown, now to permit all his Allies, so miserably to perish,
whom his Predecessors so gloriously maintained and defended. And what will
posterity say of him, when they shall understand, that the Grisons, the King of
Denmark, and all Germany shall stoop under the yoke of the house of Austria,
when Lewis 13. sat to the helm of the French Monarchy; and that in stead of
assisting of them, as he was bound by his ancient Alliances and confederations,
and by his new reiterated promises, that he has abandoned them as a prey to
the Usurper, and cast away all care to assist them, to kindle a fire in his
own proper estate, and so to ouer-couer it with flames and ruins?

Yea, let this Picture employ it self, to take and remove from him all ^uples
of con^ce, whereby they (...) inflamed and flesh, d him against us. because of
Religion, and so endeavor to make him comprehend that ali Souls belong to God,
(in which regard, he is termed the Father of Spirits) and for him; although it
be told him, his Scept^r has no ^risdiction. Yet say that we were in an
error: that it is a disease of the soul; which to cure, there is none but
spiritual remedies that have efficacy to perform it, and that all constraint
and violence offered to the body, is incapable thereof; that it has ill
succeeded to those who have made trial of these violent cures, as the
experiences of many of his Predecessors (without ascending higher) do but too
sufficiently make good and confirm.

That those who suggest these bloody counsels to him, and to tolerate but one
Religion, do notwithstanding practice the contrary in their own Estates. The
Pope permitting Jews in Rome, Ancona, and Auignon, although they openly
blaspheme against the name of Jesus Christ: and the Spaniard (said to be so
good a Catholic) was ready to allow the exercise of our Religion to the
Netherlands, if at that time there had been no other differences but that.

That by all these considerations collected together, and others which his
wisdom shall dictate unto him, this good Servant endeavors to incline him
to give us a good Peace, whose Ciment may be the inviolable execution of his
Edicts, that by the continuance and preservation thereof, this poor Kingdom
may revive and breathe from her former miseries, and re-obtaine the happiness of
her pristine felicity, and he also may be now blessed of all his Subjects, and
enjoying peace at home, may show himself for the defense of those his Allies
abroad who yet subsist; and erraise the others from the ruins and miseries
wherein they are fallen for want of his Royal assistance.

And hereafter we have addressed our selves to the person of our Prince, we
also inuoke all those, who although they are of a contrary Religion to us, are
yet people of good consciences, and retain still the hearts and affections of
Loyal Frenchmen, to the end to speak here in presence of God, that if the
first can some way consent to so many iniustices and disloyalties, which have
been offered to us, whereby we have been wronged and circumuented: And if the
other make them not to join in pity and compassion, for the miseries and
calamities of our common Country, wherein it is plunged and precipitated, by
the enrage and furious desire they have to ruin us. What, our dear
fellow-Citizens will you still permit your selves to be led by the Notes by
your Friars, who owing their Oaths and Eyes to the Pope, and looking with
their hearts toward Spain, have been the fatal Firebrands, and mournful
Torches of our former flames and miseries, and under the same pretext of those
times, would now again enkindle them? Do you not bewail the Reign of Henry
the Great, during which, every one praying to God, as he understood; that Peace
brought us then in plenty and abundance, and we all conspired and united our
affections to the service of our Prince, and to fill and heap up our Country
with happiness? Were you then less saved, and blessed, then now ever since we
have begun to be persecuted? What indiscrection is it in you to disturb your
Peace and tranquillity, because we believe not as you believe? Or if it should
be so, are you answerable for our consciences? and is it not only to our
selves, that the prejudice and detriment must accrue? Why leave you not us to
the judgment of him, before whom we must all appear at the latter day, and to
whom ye shall not be accountable for what we have believed or done? Do you
think, that to wrong us, is a good way to convert us? So often as you have
attempted these merciless and cruel courses, what has there followed or
succeeded thereof: but the same desolations and miseries which this present
time presents unto you? And what can he more desire, who is as much the Ancient
Enemy of this Estate, as he feignes to be of our Religion: but to see us
armed, and bloody minded one against the other, that after he may become Master
of all. In the name of God? at last begin to vndeceiue your selves. dispoyle
and strip your selves of your Animosities, and contribute your wise Counsels to
reclaim those, which an inconsiderate zeal has transported to such furious
emotions and combustions. Tell them (although they are made to believe the
contrary) it will be on them, which the greatest and (...) ^urthens of the
war will fall: they will be laden with imposts and exa^tions, to quench the
thirst of blood-^ounds, who will suck them dry, to the very reins. Their
Fields shall be the prey and pillage of Soldiers; they shall be the first
obliged to expose themselves to eminent p^rils and dangers, and after all this,
when those who manage these combustions, for their own particular ends and
interests, have made up their markets, and well filled their purses, then they
shall see things tend and bend to hopes of Peace, whereof they will reap no
other fruits, but grief and sorrow for their losses, labor and pains, and
also to see how they have been abused and fooled through their simple
credulity, by those who having in their mouths the specious names of the
Estate, and Religion: and yet to no other end, but to enrich themselves by the
public calamity.

But as for you, our most dear Brothers, who in this Kingdom profess with us
the purity of one and the same Religion, in what place or quality soever you
are, we expect from you, that as our griefs and afflictions are common, so our
feelings thereof may be. We will not here discover the searres and cicatrices
of our wounds, by reproaching those among you, who heretofore have beheld our
calamities with dry eyes, or who thought to have done much to bewail them. No,
no, we will impute this blame to the deceitful Songs of the Sirens, who have
sometimes heretofore enchanted and lulled us asleep our selves: But now we
conjure you by all that is holy and sacred, not to permit your selves to be any
longer deceived: you shall have many Offers made you, to rent and disioyne your
selves from us. They will extort Declarations from you, that you hold us
Rebels: they will oblige you likewise to arm your selves against us: But in
the name of God, consider with your selves, that all our reb^llion is, because
we will not rebel against God; and that as by the grace of God, we remain
constant in the same Religion which you profess, so your disauowing of us,
will in effect be the renouncing of Jesus Christ, and your Arms, if you are so
miserable to take them up against us, and to offend us, will wound our Common
Savior and Redeemer, and again crucify him in his members. Know likewise,
that our Enemies intend no less cruelty to you then to us, because they
esteem us as the Dike and ^ences to hinder the Torrent from going to swallow
down, and submerge you. Those wild Boares have no intent to spare any thing in
the poor Vine of the Lord: but they rush upon us, as believing that we are the
hedges and enclosure. It is impossible that in our ruins, you be not bruysed
to death, because we are but one house: In our Shipw^acke, you will infallibly
perish, for that we sail in one and the same Ship. All the favor which you
can hope or expect from them, is but that of the Cyclope, to be devoured last.
As dear to you then as is our common subsistence, let us unite our selves
together for our common defense. Be not then so faint hearted, to suffer us to
perish, except you intend immediately after to have your throats cut in your
own houses: Remember that your particular conservation, cannot be but in the
general, whercunto if you contribute with us, it will be the truest way to
secure your goods, to conserve your lives, and above all to maintain you in
liberty to serve God: Or if yet there live any so stupid or insensible, not to
be moved for all this, then all that we can do, is to send them to these Words
of Mordocheus: Think not that you only can escape: for i^ you hold your peace
in this time, comfort and deliverance shall appear to Israel from another
place, but you and all your houses shall perish.

But as we expect better things of you, so do we likewise hope the same of our
brothers beyond the Seas, and particularly from those of the United Provinces:
already the interest of the same Religion should make them know, that the cause
is common, and if it be persecuted in the midst of us, it is not very
probable or likely, that there be any great affection to maintain and conserve
it in the midst of them, what fair show soever the Pope make them to the
contrary, who is the great wheel that makes all move, and work for our ruin,
to the end to make a step and Ladder to theirs: but if they are not possessed
of this sear, yet it seems they are obliged to be sensible and compassionate
of our afflictions, because of the affection which heretofore has made us
lament and weep at theirs, during the (...) of (...) troubles. All Europe has
seen how we have run by tho^ands to ciment their liberty with our bloods,
and particularly the Town of Rochell held nothing too dear for their regard,
at the very point of their last necessity, and now that the tine of our
calamity is come, we again demand them the effects of the like good will and
affection.

But there is yet more: for if our dangers be extreme, we may say, that it is
they who are the first and (...) cause thereof, in lending their ships to our
enemies, which they employed and used to ruin us, and although therein (...)
are confident, that they were politikely surprised, nevertheless ^nce our
misery proceeded from thence, what can they do less then affirm and
testify, that they are sorry for it, in stretching forth their hand of
assistance, to withdraw us from this Gulf wherein they have made us fall,
although it were done without thinking thereof?

If they will, they have the same virtue of Achi^es, and can cure our wounds,
by the very same means and instruments they made them. And say that all these
reasons will not pass for current money with them (although we assure our
selves they will not so judge) yet the interuention and mediation of their
Ambassadors in the last peace, and their promises, that those Commissions
should be performed and accomplished to us, gives us all right and reason, now
they are broken, to address our selves to them, that they make good their said
promises, and to disingage us their ^aith.

It is therefore in this regard that we have recourse to them; and generally we
pary all Princes and Potentates, to extend their assistance and favor to us.
We doubt not but our enemies will endeavor traduce and disparage all our
actions to them, and publish against us, variety of false reports and infamous
Libels: but whosoever has ^ares only to hear accusers, then innocence, will
often be (...) into (...). It is the custom of the strongest, when they
resolve to oppose the weaker, passionately to allege, they are guilty: as by
the report of the Wolf, the Sheep had troubled the water. Our enemies desame
and disgrace us, but it is only for that their Injustice is so palpable, as
they are ashamed thereof; and because they dare not make it appear ^aked and
in the meridian of its truth; they must therefore find out a mask, and
disguize it under the false name of calumny.

We therefore besee^h the aforesaid Princes, not to condemn us before they
have first understood our defense and reasons, and cast their eyes upon this
small Epitomie of our Iustifications: and we dare assure our selves, that they
will after pity our innocence so unjustly oppressed: And as it is for the
maintenance thereof, that God has given them their power, that they will
therefore please to employ it in our defense and assistance.

And thou, O eternal God, who searchest the reins, and art Judge of the
intentions of our hearts, arise as witness, and decide betwixt us and our
enemies: See whether they or we have broken the Alliance of thy sacred name,
used disloyalty and fraud to oppress and ruin the innocent, Judge who are
true offenders and criminals toward the Prince which thou have established to
be thy Image to us; either they who have infringed us his Edicts, and against
the faith thereof, done us all sorts of indignities and outrages, or we who
have been constrained to suffer them as a warrant and caution of the faith.
Make the violation thereof fall on the heads of those who are guilty; and as
the Protector of innocnecy, shoot forth thy vengeance on those who have
oppressed it.

Our consciences which are pure before God, embolden us to address him these
our vows, and we doubt not but he will hear them to our advantage, and be a
just revenger of the Faith, which has been perfidiously broken to us: Of our
goods unjustly stolen from us: Of our blood inhumanely and cruelly spilt; and
of our consciences which have been afflicted with all variety of rigors; So we
hope that he will power down all sorts of blessings on our Arms, who is the
true God of victories and Arms. And as it is only necessity, which has made
us to assume and take them up: so we protest to be ready and willing to lay
them down, as soon as we receive lustice, and that the liberty of our
Religion and lives be re-established, according to the Edicts published in our
favor, and particularly of that of Nantes.

FINIS.

