A Proclamation made by the High and Mighty FREDERICK by the Grace of God King
of BOHEMIA, etc.

Commanding all those his Subjects which are now in the Service of his
Majesty's Enemies, to repair Home with in the space of 14. days, upon pain
of his Highness displeasure, and Confiscation of Goods and Lands.

Translated out of the Dutch Coppie.

Printed at Prague, 1620.

WE FREDERICK, By the Grace of GOD King of BOHEMIA, Count Palatine of the
RHINE and Elector, Duke of BAVARIA, Marquess of MORAVIA, Duke of LVTZELBVRG,
and of SILESIA, Marquess of Upper and Lower LVSATIA, etc.
TO ALL most Illustrious Electors and Princes, our loving Cozens and Kinsmen,
all friendship and good will to the outmost of our power: As also to the Right
Honorable, Noble and generous, Earls, Barons, Lords, and Gentlemen, together
with the Mayors, Senate, Communalties, and all others whatsoever holding of us
and our Crown of BOHEMIA, with the Inhabitants and Subjects of their
hereditary Lordships, Lands, Teretories, Cities, Castles, Towns and Villages,
Grace favor and all welfare.
MOST Illustrious Cozens, Electors and Princes, and most Honorable, Noble and
generous loyal Subjects, We doubt not but that it is known and more then
notorious unto all as well within as without the Empire, into what most
miserable Estate this Crown of Bohemia, with the incorporate Countries
thereunto adjoining, has been plunged and reduced by their Adversaries and
their Assistants, Ayders and abetters, not only without lawful precedent
causes, but also of mere envy, and an insatiable desire of revenge; whereby
most cruelly and barbarously, yea more then Turks, Tartarians and Infidels
there tyrannized upon, and against the Bodies and goods of the Subjects and
inhabitants of the said Countries, and have as it were recreated their
malicious minds by shedding of innumerable innocent Christian Blood, to the
great and unspeakable damage of many thousands of poor people, and the most
lamentable compassion of all confining Countries.

And although in the mean while after lawful and enforced abdication of
Ferdinand the Emperor, and our Election, through Gods singular providence and
special Grace, by the vnanime, orderly, and unreprovable consent of our loyal
Estates of Bohemia and the Countries appertaining thereunto, we have desired
and aimed at nothing more then that the most hurtful and devouring combustion,
war, and disquietnes of these Countries might speedily be appeased and
redressed: As also that by the ripe, wise, provident and careful advise and
counsel of our most illustrious Cozens, Allies and Friends, together with the
consent and wills of our loyal Estates, Subjects and Countries, we have not
refused, but rather upon serious well meaning motions (long since) have
accepted of and agreed unto, and offered our Adversaries to enter into a
comodious Truce, cessation of Arms, and peaceable treaty, and (as much as
possibly in us lies, without impairing of our Royal Dignity, State, Honor
and reputation) to proceed therein, That thereby the long desired Peace and
tranquillity of these Countries, by our help might be restored and
reestablished, the most cruel and unspeakable tyranny, murtherings and
deuastations auerted, the banished wholesome Tranquillity reobtained, and the
Countries restored into their former pristinate and peaceable Estate. To the
contrary we find that our said Christian and most just intent has not only
slightly, but most scornefully bin altogether refused, and utterly rejected,
and which is more, not contented with the former barbarous and inhumane
Tyrannies by the enemies already practiced; they have resolved to stand unto,
and to continue in their said forcible practices, proceedings and hostility.

From whence it is easily to be gathered, and firmly to be concluded, that the
intent and meaning of our Adversary tends to this only end and scope, that
under the coulorable name of sovereign Authority, together with many
additions, he may obtain aid and assistance, and thereby insinuate himself
into the good will of diverse renowned Potenrates as well within as without the
Empire, yea and of the mere vassailes and dependants of this our Crown of
Bohemia: whereunto they have already made an entrance, by bringing in of
foreign Soldiers, contrary to the ordinances and liberty of the Empire of
Germany, and the Imperial (by Oath) ratified capitulation.

But for that our most constant Royal mind, neither will nor can endure to
see our selves, together with the loyal and faithful Estates and members of
our Crown of Bohemia, and the incorporate Countries thereof, as also so great
a number of innocent poor people and godly Christians longer to be so
molested, and by such Calamities oppressed, being their lawful King called by
GOD, and Elected and Crowned by the Estates of the said Kingdom, to whom by
due and right true and ancient Custom it belongs. And although we have
already agreed and taken order with our aforesaid obedient Estares, in what
manner, by their help, counsel and assistance, the Hostile dealing and
unchristianlike wrongs might be auerted, and redressed, further resting in
this confident hope, that none either of high or low estate or degree, being
allied unto us and our Crown of Bohemia, either holding of us in Fee, or by
Oath of Allegiance, will in any wise, under any color or intent whatsoever,
hinder this our forcible defense and lawful Action, nor yet attempt to invade
or oppress us and the Crown of Bohemia with the incorporate Countries thereon
depending, nor enter into the same by force of War and open hostility,
especially if he will but vouchsafe to ponder and consider the causes at large
set forth in our Deduction not long since Published: Notwithstanding we have
thought it convenient to send forth this our friendly warning and admonition,
as also our strict Command and inhibition, (moved thereunto, as well by the
Counsel and advise, as by the most humble and instant request of our obedient
Estates:) hereby friendly requiring and admonishing all and every person and
subject of our said Crown of Bohemia, and strictly Commanding by virtue of
our Royal Authority and Superiority as the Liege and Sovereign Lord upon
that fealty, and Allegiance whereby they are bound unto Us and our Crown of
Bohemia, and the penalties and feodarie Ordinances therein made, that none of
them of what Dignity, estate or Degree soever they be, shall take part in any
thing whatsoever with the Intimated adversaries, against us and the general
Estates of our Crown of Bohemia, and the Countries appertaining thereunto,
neither yet to aid or assist them by any means with Men, money, Ordinance,
Munition, Victual, Intelligence, relief, or any other way that may be done,
practiced or sinisterly devised. But rather (for that none will do nor attempt
the same that is capable of Law and equity) if any such or the like occurrances
might happen and fall out, to prevent, hinder and auert the same to the
uttermost of their powers, and join themselves with all their Forces speedily
and without all delay with Us, our generals, Captains, and Armies now employed
about the Freeing and releasing of our said Countries from ruin, and
subversion, to aid and rescue them, if necessity require, and hereof not to
fail as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

We likewise hereby admonish and recall all and every Captain, Officer and
common Soldier, Subjects unto us and the said Crown of Bohemia, mediately or
immediately by fealty, Oath and service, or that have and possess any
Territories, Lands, revenues or goods either in Bohemia, or in the Fees thereon
depending, be it in any Cities, Towns, Castles, places or grounds, and are
now in the pay and service of our adversaries, or their ayders and Assistants
in this War against us and the Crown of Bohemia, and under the aforesaid
Penalties, most earnestly and strictly charge them, within the space of
Fourteen days next and imediately following upon this our Royal insinuation,
and Mandate, signified and made known unto them, to leave, forsake, and
abandon the said service and pay, of our Adversaries, (any Oath, promise, or
Alliance by the which they are bound either unto them or their ayders and
dependants notwithstanding) hereby promising all security for Us, and our
Crown unto him, them, or any of them, that within the time herein limited,
shall fully perform and observe this our will and desire, and to the contrary
continuing therein, certainly and fully purposing Irreuocably and without any
restitution to proceed against them (according to the before mentioned and
menaced feodarie Penalties) that refuse to embrace this our gracious offer,
Pardon and benevolence, and go on in their premeditated intents and purposes.
Whereof let every one hereby take notice, that will or intend to avoid the
Damage and peril, that may thereby ensue: for such is our Will and pleasure.
In Witness whereof, we have confirmed these our Letters with our Royal Seal.

Given at our Castle of Prague the xviij.th. Day of August, Anno Dom. 1620. In
the First year of our Reign of Bohemia. Ad Mandatum Sacrae Regiae Maiestatis
proprium.

