A PVBLIKE DECLARATION Made by the United Protestant Princes Electors and other
Princes, States and Lords, of the HOLY EMPIRE,

Thereby showing for what causes and reasons, they are moved to join together
in a straight Unity and Alliance, to Aid and Assist the Princes Electors of
BRANDEN BVRGH and the PALSGRAVE:

In the Possession of the Dukedomes, Countries and Dominions of Gulike, Cleave,
and BERGE.

Translated out of the Duch Copy, printed at Amsterdam by MICHAEL COLYN, Ann.
1610.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BVDGE, and are to be sold at his shop in Britanes
Bursse. 1610.

REASONS MOVING the united Protestants, Princes Electors, and other Princes,
Lords and States of the whole Empire, to join together to assist the Prince
Elector of Brandenburg and the Palsegraue, in the possessions of the Dukedomes
and Dominions of Gulicke, Cleave and Berge.
WE the united Protestant Princes Electors, and others etc. send greeting with
all obedience, offer of service, friendship, favor, and grace first to the
Roman Emperors Majesty, our most gracious Lord and sovereign, and to all
other Christian Potentates, Electors, Princes, Prelates, Earls, Lords,
Knights, Cities, Towns, and to every man both within and without the Dominion
and Country of Germany, of what estate, quality or condition soever they be,
certifying the said Emperors royal Majesty, and all and every one of them,
according to their estates and quality.

That although in this our native Country of Germany, by the consent and
agreement of the head, and particular members thereof, many wholesome, good,
and profitable ordinances, and among them also a common and religious peace is
established; and for the better observation and maintenance thereof hereafter,
openly published and proclaimed: to this end specially, that, not only
justice, as the foundation of good Government, but also inward love, peace,
and unity might be vpheld and maintained; wherein the Emperors Majesty, as
well as all Princes Electors, Princes and members of the holy Empire, openly
and faithfully promised and bound themselves together, That none of them, of
what estate or quality soever they were, for any cause whatsoever: nor upon any
outward show or ground that might be made or devised, should or would make
war, trouble, molest, vex, rob, spoil, ransacke, besiege, nor secretly
conspire or make aliances or compacts against any others of the said State and
holy Empire. And also that no man should by force of arms dispossess, or
violently take from any other, any of their possessions, hereditary or
committed unto them in custody, whether they be Towns, Castles, Villages,
Churches, Cloisters, Cluysen, Tinsen, Revenues, Tenths, moveable or immovable
goods, Royalties, Jurisdictions, Rights, Signeories, Lordships, Toles, Waters,
Meadows, or any other their property and lawful Dominions, none excepted: nor
once move nor stir their Tenants and Subjects to rise up against them in arms,
or to show them any unnatural disobedience: But that every man should suffer
each other to enjoy and possess his own peaceably and quietly, without any
molestation or trouble, and by no means to endure that any man (submitting
himself to law and justice) should by force be put from his right, nor any
ways impeached in his honor, privilege and freedom (although there is
sufficient provision made by former laws concerning the points aforesaid,
against all those that shall in any wise whatsoever do contrary to the same)
That then the towns of the holy Empire should join together, and by force of
arms aid, assist, help, defend and maintain the parties or Towns, etc. in
their right, and withstand the violence and oppression, by such parties used,
as seek to do contrary thereunto.

But for that within certain years forepast (as experience sufficiently
shows) such Statutes of the holy Empire (which truly in themselves are very
commendable, and made to a good end and purpose) and especially the penalties
therein set down for the execution thereof, are partly hardly taken and
misconstred, and partly obstinately and wilfully broken and not observed: and
that the parties grieved and oppressed are neither aided, assisted, comforted
nor relieved, how earnestly, submissiuely and publicly soever they have sued
and complained: whereof has ensued, that such oppressions and misdemeanors in
the holy Empire, the longer, the more have increased: whereby unless provident
care be specially had therein, (if we should any longer wincke thereat, and by
Gods help, by our Assemblies and meetings together, not take some good and
speedy orders to stay and prevent the same) in the end certainly there would
ensue an utter overthrowing, and subversion of all such wholesome Statutes and
Ordinances, and of the common peace and tranquillity of the holy Empire.

We therefore in the name of Almighty God, for the maintenance and advancement
of his godly Majesty, the upholding of justice, and the furtherance of peace
and unity, have already for certain years united and joined our selves
together, thereby to intertaine a greater, nearer and faithfuller combination
and contract of friendship; and that in no sort, nor by no means, to the
hinderance or molestation of the Roman Emperors Majesty, our most gracious
Lord and Sovereign, to whom we are lawfully bound to show all dutiful and
submissiue obedience, nor of any members of the Empire (that show themselves
conformable unto the Statutes and Ordinances aforesaid) whereunto we all
together, and every one in particular, with all friendship, favor, grace, and
neighbourely good will are bound and obliged, nor also to any man in
particular, and much less to the breaking of any of the Constitutions of the
said holy Empire: but much rather for the maintenance thereof, and for the more
assured upholding of better peace, quietness and unity, in such manner and
form, as the like contracts and combinations of amity have heretofore been
made and observed by our ancestors and forefathers of famous memory, in regard
of the great love and affection which they bear unto their natural Country.

Therefore we most humbly require and beseech the Emperors Sovereign
Majesty, and all other Kings, Princes, Electors, Lords, Knights, etc. in
general, and every one in particular, if it perchance (as we understand) his
Majesty, or they should be already persuaded (by the means and devises of
turbulent, envious, and unquiet persons) or hereafter might be seduced to
believe, that such our Assemblies and meetings, were made, done or tended to
the contempt or dispising of the Imperial Majesty, or for the suppression of
the Romish Religion, or specially for the disanulling, subuerting and present
oppugning of ancient Jurisdictions, to the great hinderance of Knights and
Gentlemen, to whom the benefit and properties thereof, have until this time
belonged and appertained: to take and draw them from them, and to put and turn
them to their own proper uses. That it would please them not to give any
credit unto any such false and untrue suggestions, and slanderous
calumniations; but rather to assure themselves, that it is done by us only of
mere and dear fidelity, love, and affection to our native Country, and for
the maintenance of a peaceable estate; which (if it pleases God) we will in
time make known, and manifest to the world; so that none that are or have
united themselves with us, shall have cause to dislike of our proceedings, but
which is more, others both of the one and the other Religion shall have cause,
to unite themselves with us, that so all hurtful distrust, hitherto had and
entertained, may be taken away, and good and perfect unity planted and vpholden.

But we cannot refrain, but must let the Emperors Majesty, and all other
Potentates Electors, Princes and States, both within and without the Land;
Understand, and be advertised, That it is manifestly and openly known unto all
men, how that after the death of the high and mighty Prince our friendly loving
Uncle, cousin, brother in law, brother, and gossip of famous memory, John
William, Duke of Gulick, Cleave and Bergh, Earl vander Marcke, Rauensburgh and
Moers, Baron of Rauensten, and Christmilder, in the right of the wives of the
Electors of Brandenburch, and the Palsgraue Philip Lodowicke, and of either of
them by themselves: the temporal Possessions of all the aforesaid Duchies,
Earledomes, and Baronies not clam or precario, but freely, openly, and with the
good will of most of the Countries and Towns, is lawfully descended and fallen
unto them: and that with manifest protestation and Declaration by them made,
that it is not done of covetousness or wrongfully to withold any man from
being a Competitor therein if he has any right thereunto, but that both the
said heirs protest, touching the same, either for any part, or for the whole
in general; unto every man that will not desist from their claim: before an
impartial Judge, and in such Towns and places, where the cause properly (and
according to the authority of the holy Empire, and specially of the Princes
Electors) belongs to be heard, to yield good sufficient, and true reasons and
answers unto them to maintain their right; and which is more, if need be, to
give sufficient Cautio de iudicio sisti and iudicatum solui, to prove their
cause. And therefore we altogether seek to foresee and prevent that no man
shall hinder nor molest them herein with unlawful power and forces, contrary
to the Ordinances and Constitutions of the holy Empire.

All this notwithstanding, their protestations and lawful right not once being
considered nor respected, in the Emperors Court, and in the Emperors most
Princely Majesty's Name and authority, it is evidently and earnestly practiced
and undertaken de facto without due course of law and Justice by power, and
forcibly to dispossess and utterly to expel the said Princes, being lawful
heirs thereunto, from the right and possession thereof. To the which end, not
only Leopoldus Archbishop of Austria, and Bishop of Stratsbourgh and
Passauwe, suddenly and secretly first has taken and entered into the town of
Gulick, and the same hitherto holden and kept by force, but has proceeded
further, and seacute;eketh to seize upon, and forcibly to hold certain
Gentlemen's houses, vilages, and Schonses lying thereabouts, and to invade other
neighbor towns and places next adjacent, to keep the subjects thereof from
their due obedience, and threatening the Princes Electors the right heirs and
possessours thereof as also all those, that with due obedience and fidelity
submit themselves unto them with the most undeserved pain and punishment of
contempt (although in such a case never heard of before in the holy Empire) if
they resist him; all to the end (as it is manifestly made known and verified
unto us) That these Countries may be unburdened, freed and cleansed ex
faucibus hereticorum, as the States of the confession of Ausburg ( e diametro
contrary to the religious peace) are falsely called.

In regard therefore that our aforesaid brethren and members with their
Adherents (according to the force and power of the Laws and Ordinances of the
holy Empire, and for the peace of the Law) have desired aid and assistance of
us, and therewithal protested, that their intent never was, nor yet is to
oppose themselves against the most high and puissant Imperial Majesty, as
being their gracious Lord and sovereign Prince: And we diligently considering
all the circumstances, cannot otherwise find nor perceive, but that they seek
and desire the accomplishing of the Ordinances and Imperial Laws of the holy
Empire, as they themselves for the defense of their right, in a printed
pamphlet have sufficiently and truly declared: whereunto for brevity sake we
refer you. We cannot likewise think, imagine, nor once be persuaded, that
the Emperors Imperial Majesty takes any pleasure in, or is content to
permit any such disorderly and unlawful proceedings to have their course
against the said Princes (specially being well informed of the equity of the
cause) considering that their capitulation specifieth and contains in it,
that his Majesty is bound in all cases and by all the means he can, to
maintain (not only all the Princes Electors, but also all Princely members of
the holy Empire, and all other Princes and States) in their dignities, honors,
rights, privileges, powers and forces, and to suffer them freely to hold,
possess and enjoy them, and for his own part not to do any thing to the
contrary, nor yet to suffer nor endure the same to be done by any other
whatsoever. And also if his Majesty or any other whatsoever had any thing to
say unto the Princes Electors, Princes, and States aforesaid, or any intent to
do any such thing; that (to cease all vprores, contentions and other
Controversies in the holy Empire, to maintain peace and unity therein) he
should suffer and permit them altogether and every one particularly, to be
heard, and have their causes adjudged before lawful Judges, and in open Courts
of Law; but by no means to permit them (in any such or other causes, under any
pretense, or any man's name whatsoever, whrein they may have Justice, and offer
and submit themselves thereunto) to be robbed, taken, ransomd, burnt, fought
withal, besieged, exposed, or in any ways ouer-run, spoiled and forcibly
handled.

Therefore we have thought it our duties, according to the faiths and
fidelities, whereby one Territory (in such like case) is bound and obliged to
another, and by the force and power of the foresaid Ordinances of the holy
Empire, to aid and assist our brethren and fellow members as obedient Princes
Electors of the Empire: but in no other manner, but yt every one may lawfully
proceed in his right, touching the principal matter without hinderance, and
that they proceed not unduly with unlawful power, against the aforesaid
capitulation and Ordinances of the Empire, but that they may be suffered
peaceably in their possession, and to enjoy the benefit of the Law, for the
due proceeding therein, as also without it (according to all equity) they ought
to have.

Therefore our friendly request and motion unto all Christian Princes and
Commonwealths, but specially to all the Princes Electors, Princes and States
of the holy Empire, is, not to take this our defensive, and natural due
assistance and aid given at this time (as proceeding from Christian love,
fidelity and commiseration, and of it self being reasonable and very
necessary) in any evil part, much less to hinder the same, but rather to show
all further ance and assistance therein, and to put too their helping hands, to
the end that all the aforesaid troubles may be ended, and a better, truer and
vprighter concord be held and maintained, among the States of the holy Empire.
Which we in general, and every one by himself according to his estate in
particular in the like cases and oceasions will requite and acknowledge to our
powers.

FINIS.

