nes all the days of our life, rendering unto thee (...) Majesty. And for so
much as (O most gracious God and loving Father) thou have seen it good now at
length to-stirre up thy chosen servant Elizabeth our Queen and Governor to
raise her force and strength, as well by land as by Sea, to withstand foreign
enemies and outlandish power, which have a determination to invade thy servants
which profess thy word and Gospel, prevent now (O Lord we beseech thee) the
cruel devise of Amon, stay the rage of Holophernus, break the counsel of
Achitophell, and confound our enemies: guide her highness with thy truth,
preserve her with thy power, defend her with thy Sheeld, assist her with thy
Angel, bless her with victory, sanctify her with thy Spirit, save her with
thy mercy, and Crown her at length with thy glory: (O Lord) be evermore
present and president with her most honorable Counsel, send courage to the
Nobilitye, grant sincerity of doctrine and purity of life to the
Spirituality, duty and faithfulness to the Comminaltie, happy success and
prosperous victory, to this noble Realm of England. Be favorable and
gracious O Lord to this thy English Syon, behold in the bowels of thy mercy
our Navy on Sea, guard, guide, protect and defend the right honorable the
Lord high Admiral of England, the Vize-admirall, with all honorable and
woorshipfull personages, Captains, Masters, Officers, Sailors, and Soldiers
now employed, whether on the Western or South Seas, show thy mercy and
favor upon all persons, of what estate, degree, or calling soever they be,
that have charge, rule, or bear any authority in Marine causes, serving under
her Majesty for the defense of this Realm: let not furious storms, winds,
or tempests hurt them, nor surging Seas harm them, let not Papists amaze
them, nor foreign enemies fear them: but thou Lord of hosts encourage their
hearts, enable their hands, endue them with valor, grant them safely to
return with glorious victory. Be thou their Captain, their leader and their
guide: plead thou their cause with the^ that strive with them, and fight thou
against all such as fight against them. Also O Lord we thy Servants humbly
beseech thee, to bless and prosper not only our Sea causes, but also all our
land service, her Majesty's most honorable General, Marshall, Captains,
Officers, and English Soldiers whatsoever, strengthen them with courage and
manlynes, that they may suppress the sleightes of Antechrist, with all the
force and power of foreign enemies, and papisticall practices, that dare
presume to attempt any harm or hurt to her royal Majesty, their honors, her
English People, or to this noble Realm of England: so shall we sing forth the
songs of glory in our great congregations unto thee, and declare to our
posterity these things among the wonders that thou have done of old, namely
how thou have girded us about with might to battle, and how thou have subdued
under us, them that rose against us, and how thou have given us the necks of
our enemies to their destruction, and to our great comfort and consolation, we
saying evermore, he that is mighty has magnified us, and holy is his name. To
whom with the Son and the holy Ghoast, three Persons in Trinity, one God in
might and Majesty, be all lawd, praise, honor, and glory, now and evermore,
Amen.

Rob. H.

Imprinted at London by Edward Allde for Hency Car. 1588.


