

CHARLES, Earl of Nottingham, Barron Howard of E^^ingham, Knight of the most
Noble order of the Garter, Lord Lietetenant of his Majesty's Counties of
Sussex, and Surry, Constable of his Majesty's Honor and Castle of Windsor
chief Justice and Justice Itinerant of all his Majesty's Forests, Parkes,
Chases and Warrens on this side Trent. Lord high Admiral of England, Ireland,
and Wales, and the Dominions and Isles of the same, of the town of Callis, and
Ma^^hes thereof, Normandy, Gascoigne, and Gwines, and Captain General of his
Majesty's Seas, and Navy royal.

TO all and singular Viceadmiralles, Justices of peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Cunstables, Churchwardens, Headboroughes,
Tythingmen, Collectors, and all other his Majesty's Officers, Ministers, and
l^uing Subjects whatsoever, to whom thiese Presents shall be (...) greeting.

WHEREAS the bearer hereof Anastasius Joseph, borne in Amasia the chief City
of Capadocia, a Merchant by his t^^de, and of good account and worth, was by
the malice of some wicked men in Walachia, envying his wealth and prosperity,
accused, falsely, cast in prison, robbed of all his goods, and his only Son
taken from him and sold to the Turks, who keeps him still in slavery and
bondage until such time he either deny his Savior Christ and turning Turk,
embrace Mahometisme, or pay for his ransom and liberty seven hundred
Crowns, upon consideration whereof he has a Testimonial under the most high
and mighty Emperor of Germany, his hand and seal of the Duke of Walachia,
of the Patriarch of Constantinople, of the Archbishops of Lacedemonia, and
Bulgaria, of the Earls of Pembrooke, and Mountgomery, of diverse Bishops,
Deanes, Mayors of Cities, and sundry learned men of this kingdom, and of the
Council of Scotland, who have favorably assisted him with their (...) Alms
for his own better relief in his travels, and the more speedy redemption of
his son. Thief are therefore in his Majesty's name, and by highness
authority royal to me in this behalf Directed: to require you and every of
you in your several places, to recommend his miserable estate and condition
unto the charitable devotion of the people, and to permit and suffer him the
said Anastasius Joseph (he behauing himself honestly and soberly according to
his Majesty's laws) to travel by you and every of you, through any parts of
this Realm without any trouble or molestation, and by the way to help him
with convenient lodging, he demanding the same in due time: And hereof fail
ye not. Given at London in his Majesty's High Court of the Admiraltie of
England, the second day of July in the year of our Lord God 1613. and in the
eleventh year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord James. By the grace of God
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
And of his Reign of Scotland the ^xe and ^or^^eth. 1613.

Hareward.


