papal insignia blazon or coat of arms
BE it know(...) ^^isten men and women / that these be the great Indulgence /
pr(...) ^^rdon / gracyously granted by dyverse Popes of Rome / And also
confyrmed by (...) fath^^ in god Pope Leo the.x. to all the Brethren and
Susterne and benefactours of the Ho(...) of saint Thomas of Acres in the cite
of London^ / where the said glorious Martyr saint Tho^^ (...) ^^^^erbury was
borne of his mother into this world and has of old time ben admytted by
com^^^ (...)one of the.iiij. places to gader the Alms of Christian people for
the health of their souls.

First our holy fader Alexan^^^ (...)e of that name sometime Pope of Rome
gracyously has relesyd to all christian people that help or (...) ^he place
with their goods or alms / Or to take fraternity of the said place / and
yearly to the same any benefyte give or pay the (...) penance enjoined. Also
our holy fader Benet the.xij. of yt name sometime p(...) (...)rndeth all
prelatesto suffer the procuratours of the said place to pronounce and freely
expowne their needs and Indulgences (...)at (...)urche to the Clergy and to
other common people. Also if the said procuratoures come into any City /
Ca(...) (...)erdyted ones yearly have power to open the Church doors the
(...)te / So that dyuyne service solempnely may be said / curs(...) people
(...)e put out / and deed bodies in the Churcheyerde to be buried / And tho
that should do open penance that day shall be relesyd an^ (...) all brethren
and susterne / which shalll give to the said place certain quantyte of their
goods and yearly pay to the brethren (...) (...)ts of the said house / and
in their dyenge bequeth or assygne any goods to them / may chose yearly to
them an able and di(...) wh^^^ may assoyle then plenarly of all sins of the
which they be very contryte and confessyd / except such as be (...)e of Rome
and to dispense with them of all vows made the which they may not
conuenyently nor profytably kep^ (...) the vow of Iherusalem / and the holy
cross. Also every brother shall have his letter or writing of the said
Fraternity and (...)e shall not be denied him what manner death he dies or
decesyth but if he be accursed by name by the sensure of holy church.

Also our holy fader Pius the second to all very repenta^t (...) that devoutly
vysyt the house and Hospital of saint Thomas of Acres in London every tusdaye
from quinquagesime vn^^ (...) (...) Ester and.iiij. days next before Ester
day / And every day with (...)


