THE ARGUMENT of Mr. PETER de la MARTELIERE Advocate in the Chart of Parliament
of Paris, made, in Parliament, the Chambers thereof being assembled.

FOR THE RECTOR AND UNIVERSITY of Paris, Defendants and Opponents, against the
Jesuits Demandants, and requiring the approbation of the Letters Patents which
they had obtained, giving them power to read and to teach publicly in the
aforesaid University.

Translated out of the French Copy set forth by public Authority.

blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Jmprinted at London, and are to be sold near S. Austins Gate. 1612.

TO THE Honorable Sir THOMAS FLEMMING Knight, Lord Chief Justice of England
MY Lord,
The same reason which first incited me to undertake this task, has been a
principal motive likewise, emboldening me to offer it unto your Lordships
view, and to presume to publish this discourse, under the protection of your
Lordships name. The matter herein handled is a notable and famous
controversy, arising between the ancient and renowned University of Paris, and
the new and infamous, yet cunning and powerful sect of the Jesuits, referred
unto the determination of Law and Justice, and upon the pleadings formally and
iudicially argued and discussed: the Actor a man of Law, a learned and famous
Advocate, as this his elaborate Argument does sufficiently testify; and by a
learned Doctor and Rector of the University of Paris, styled os Themidis, fori
deliciae. The persons and place, before whom, and where it was represented; the
Presidents and Counselors, in that great Court Parliament of Paris, the stern
and guide of the Commonwealth and affairs of France, the justice and
authority whereof amidst the cruel rage and tempests of civil wars, as a
firm anchor vpheld and preserved the same, from most apparent shipwreck. As
then it cannot be accounted, I trust, superfluous and impertinent in me, whose
study is conversant in the Laws of this Kingdom, to intermeddle with that
which is within the compass of my profession, and to join the view of the
Laws and customs of other Nations, and their manner of proceeding with those
of our own, since that all humane Laws have but one soul, which is reason;
and one only function, which is the peace and quiet of Estates and
Commonwealths: So I hope it will not be deemed presumption or rashness, in
that I present it unto your Lordship, who worthily presideth in a supreme Court
of Justice, not inferior unto that of Paris, in regard either of antiquity or
Majesty, the Basis and pillar of this great Monarchy, the firm supporter of
the royal Crown and dignity. To you (my Lord) who in regard of the place, to
which your worth, learning, piety, and eminent virtues have justly advanced
you, do bear that honorable style of Lord Chief Justice; a most significant
title, denoting the special charge and interest which is committed unto your
Lorship in the execution of Justice, which you most sincerely, wisely, and
religiously, do exercise, with all integrity and moderation: to you who by
reason here of, are of the Law and professors thereof Deus tutelaris, a Patron
and Protector; and therefore what our industry can effect, is but a small
acknowledgement and retribution, of duty to be offered and dedicated unto you.
Besides, the subject of this discourse, is chiefly against that new excess of
impiety, and King-daring doctrine of the Jesuits; which like a contagious
disease, has infected all the quarters of Europe, bred strange combustions in
Estates, and been the cause of most desperate attempts; against the venomous
poison whereof, there is not a more forcible preservative, then the severity of
your Justice; nor has there been ever any stronger bulwark and defense of the
sacred authority and persons of our Kings, in all times and ages, then the
common Laws of this Land, and Statutes of the Realm, of the which your
Lordship is the Chiefe-gardian, and by due execution do addelife and soul
unto them. These reasons (my honorable Lord) have moved me, though with the
discovery of mine own imperfections, to hazard these first and untimely
fruits of my idle hours on your Lordships favorable acceptance; wherein I
shall have received full content, my desire and intention, being only to yield
unto your Lordship, an humble acknowledgement of that reverent regard and due
respect I owe unto you, and to testify that I am,

Your Lordships in all duty devoted, GEORGE BROWN.

AN ADVERTISMENT to the Reader.
READER,
To the end that thou fall not into this discourse abruptly, I have thought it
not impertinent, by way of Preamble, to insert this short aduertisment,
touching the first institution of the Jesuits, with their beginning, and
proceedings in France, and the occasion of this present controversy; which may
serve, not only for an introduction, into the discourse ensuing; but also for
an explanation of sundry passages, alleged therein. Whatsoever is here related
I have taken partly out of Steeuen Pas quier sometime Attorney general of the
King at Paris, in his 4 book of Epistles and last epistle, which I would not
conceal, the rest I have collected out of the histories of France.
As for the University of Paris, I shall need to say little, for it is
sufficiently set forth in the discourse, but that it was first founded by
Charles the Great, in the year of our Lord 791. and that the Sorbonne so often
mentioned is naught else, but a famous College of Divines, founded about the
year 1253. by Lewis the 9. called Saint Lewis, as my Author says; or as
others write, by Robert brother of the said King. Now as concerning the
Jesuits: this Order first arose in Christendom, about the year 1540. the
Author and Founder thereof, was one Ignacius Loyola a gentleman of Navarre, who
all his life time had followed the wars, and being hurt in the Town of
Pampelona, which is the chief City of Navarre, whilst his wounds were a
healing, he fell to reading the lives of the Fathers, resolving upon the
pattern of their lives to frame the tenor of his own: afterward ioining with
some others, who were some 10 in number, they altogether swore a kind of
Society; and Ignatius being cured they made voiages to Paris, Rome, and to
Jerusalem, and at last retired themselves into Venice, where they made their
abode some few years, and seeing they had many followers, removed thence to
Rome, where they began to make public profession of their Order, promising two
things especially; the one, that their principal end and scope, was to preach
the Gospel to the Pagans and Infidels, for to convert them to the Christian
Faith: the other, freely and without reward to instruct Christians in good
letters: and for to fit and accommodate their name to their devotion, they
termed themselves religious men of the Society of the name of Jesus. They
presented themselves unto Pope Paul the 3. of the house of the Farneses, about
the year 1540. which was the time that Germany began to take arms, by reason
of the alteration of religion; and because that one of the principal points
which the Germans controuerted, was concerning the power of the Pope, whom
Martin Luther sought to quell and pull down: these making a contrary
profession, gave the Pope to understand, that the first and principal Vow
which they made, was to acknowledge him to be above all earthly powers; yea
above the general and universal Council of the Church. The Pope who at first
doubted, whether he should approve of them or no, and afterward had permitted
them, to use the title of religious men, but upon condition that they should
not be above 60. in number, at this promise began to hearken unto them, and to
give their devotion free passage: and after him Julius the 3. until that Pope
Paul the 4. called the Theatin, who was one of the chief promoters of this
Order, authorized them absolutely; and consequently, almost all the succeeding
Popes, in respect of the services they received from them, have endowed them
with most large and ample privileges. Their Order is composed of two sorts,
whereof the one is called of the greater Observance, the other of the less.
The first are bound unto four Vows; Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, which
are the three ordinary Vows of religious men, and besides they add a fourth
Vow, which is of particular obedience unto the Pope, as has been already
said. The second are tied only to two Vows: the one regards the fidelity
which they promise to the Pope; the other is of obedience unto the General of
their Order. These are termed lay brethren, who do not vow Poverty, but may
hold Benefices or Offices; they may inherit their fathers, mothers, and
kindred, enjoy lands and possessions, and marry at a need, as if they were
bound by no religious Vow. They have besides many scholars, whom they call
Nouices who are (as it were) Probationers, from whence they take fresh
supplies, and thence it is, that their Colleges are commonly called
Seminaries, they having two sorts of lodgings ioining together, the one for
their Priests, the other for their scholars and nouices. And this may shortly
suffice for the description of their Order.

Now as concerning their proceedings in France, it so fell out (they being
established, as has been already set down) that the Bishop of Clermont took
a liking of them, and was very desirous to settle this Order in Paris;
whereupon he brought in 3. or 4. of them, who used likewise the recommendation
of Pope Paul the 4. At their first coming they were lodged meanly in a chamber
of the College of the Lombards, and afterward set up their abode in the Bishop
of Chemo^t his Palace, by the permission of him who first entertained them.
Afterward their affairs succeeding according to their mind, they presented
themselves diverse times to the Court of Parlaiment, requesting it to authorize
their Order. But the king his Solliciter general, that the^ was called
Mouncieur Brulart, opposed himself against all their requests, not for that he
favored not the Roman religion as much as any one could do, but because he
misdoubted and feared above all things novelties as the mothers of many errors,
especially in religion. Wherefore he told them, that if they had their minds
wholyaltenated from the world, they might safely without bringing in any new
Order, confine themselves under some one of the ancient religions approved by
many Councels, or under some one of the four Mendicants. Thus they were
rejected by the Court of parliament, who not being satisfied with her own
opinion, nor willing to rely only thereupon, had recourse unto the faculty of
Theology, by the decree whereof they were scensured, partly in that entitling
themselves by the name of religious men, they did neither we are the habit,
neither did confine themselves within their Cloisters, as others did; and
partly in that some of their opinions derogated from the liberties of the
French Church. This is that decree of the year. 1554. often mentioned in the
ensuing discourse, not long after the Bishop of Clermo^t deceased, who by his
testament bequeathed great sums unto them, they having received this legacy,
the troubles about religion happened, in the beginning whereof there was an
assembly of the French Church at Poissy in the year. 1563. they then began to
break off their long silence, and presented a request unto the Court of
Parliament to be received and approved not as religious men, yet at the least
as a College of scholars only. The Parliament conceiving that this concerned
principally the superiors of the Church, referred them over unto the assembly
of Poissy, where the Cardinal of Tournon was President, as the most ancient
Prelate, who in the City of Tournon had before founded a company of them. By
his intercession, they obtained to be received only as a society and
College, upon condition, that they should be bound to take another title then
that of Jesuits, and to conform themselves in all, and throughal, to the
Canons of the Church without enterprising any thing upon the Ordinaries, and
that they should first and foremost renounce expressly, and in precise terms,
the privileges, which their bulls did import; otherwise if they failed herein,
or obtained any other, that their approbation should be utterly void. This
decree was ratified by the Court of Parliament, according to the form and
tenor thereof. Shortly upon this they purchased them a house in the City of
Paris, and called it the College of Clermont in memory of their benefactor,
and by reason that they had at that time diverse learned personages amongst
them, they were favorably entertained, and drew an infinite number of
scholars after them. And seeing they had the wind at will, they presented a
request to the Rector and University of Paris to be incorporated therinto.
Whereupon there was a solemn Congregation assembled, in the which it was
concluded, that before they proceeded any further, they should declare whether
they took upon them the quality of regulars or seculars which did put them
into a great perplexity, for if they should deny they were religious men, they
belied their Vow, and to say they were so, had been to contradict that which
was enjoined them at Poissy, and for that they took no precise qua itie upon
them, the University gave them the repulse. Yet would they not give over but
had recourse unto the Court of Parliament, to the end that they might gain
upon the University by constraint that which they could not obtain of
freewill, whereupon a short day was given to both parties for to plead, and
the matter was argued on both sides, by Pasquier for the University, and
Versoris for the Jesuits with such veh mencie, as so great a cause required,
and in conclusion it was or deined that they should remain in that estate they
were, without decreeing ought in favor of either party, for neither were the
Jesuits incorporated into the Vniuer sitie, as they desired, neither were they
excluded from reading lectures as they had done in former times, as the
University requested. In this estate they continued until the year 1594.
when upon occasion of the execrable attempt of Peter Barrierre (who had
purposed to murder the king Henry the fourth, but was discovered by a Iacobin a
Florentine, to whom he had revealed it by way of confession, and thereupon was
taken at Melum where the king was watching his opportunity, and found seized
with a double edged knife for the purpose, and afterward was executed for it at
Paris) the University renewed her ancient process against them, demanding to
have them banished and rooted out, in as much as Barrier had undertaken it by
the persuasion of their mischievous doctrine, and by the special instigation
of Varad rector of their college: and the matter was handled in Parliament by
Arnaud who argued against them, and Versoris for them, both grave and bearned
advocates: but they were so strongly supported, by some great men, as namely
the Cardinal of Bourbon and the Duke of Neuers, that at that time nothing was
done against them, until that the prodigious and bold fact of John Chastel a
nouice of their society (who in the kings own chamber at the Louure, and in
presence of his Nobles and gentlemen, stabbed at the king, and missing his
belly as he had purposed, by reason that the king stooped to receive two Noble
men, who kissed his knee, struck him in the mouth) and brake out one of his
upper teeth extorted that famous decree of the 29. of december 1595. whereby
besides the condemnation of John Chastel, the Jesuits whose doctrine had
seduced him were banished out of France, as enemies of the king and the estate,
corrupters of youth, and perturbers of the public peace and quiet, and the
house where the father of that monster dwelt, which was situate before the gate
of the Palace being rased, a Pyramide was erected containing (for a perpetual
monument) the effect of the said decree. Thus they stood banished until that
as well by the incessant importunity of some great ones about the king, as
especially by the earnest intercession of Pope Clement the eight, they were
revoked in the year. 1604. in the month of January, and the Pyramide taken
away, notwithstanding the great instance, and admonitions of the Court of
Parliament to the contrary: yet with diverse restraints and conditions, amongst
the which one was, that they should erect no College, nor make any residence
but in the towns named in the letters of their reestablishment, without
express permission of the King, and particularly within the resort and
jurisdiction of the Parliament house of Paris, unless it were in the towns of
Lion, and La Fleche. Notwithstanding the late King by the means of father
Cotton, whom he had made his Confessor, gave them permission to return to
Paris, and made them restitution of all their goods, and of their College of
Clermont, but did not permit them to keep public school, or to intermeddle
with ought which concerned the University: notwithstanding that they labored
by all means possible to be incorporated thereinto. Instantly upon the
disastrous death of the King, they thinking it to be best fishing in troubled
water, renewed their pursuit, and by the favor of the Queen Regent, obtained
the letters here mentioned, licensing the^ to read lecture, to set open their
schools in the University, whereupon the University presented a Petition
unto the Queen Regent for to prevent them thereof. The Jesuits on the contrary
pressed their letters, and presented them unto the Court of Parliament,
requiring the allowance of them: the Court would not proceed without signifying
it unto the University, who formally opposed them, and thereupon it was
ordered, that both parties should be heard iudicially, and the cause was
remitted to the opening of the Court, the morrow upon Saint Martins day, and
from thence it was put off until the seventeenth of December; all which time it
was openly and solemnly argued on the seventeenth and ninteenth of the said
month, when Montholon the advocate of the Jesuits, having demanded the
allowance of the foresaid letters, and argued for them. De la Marteliere for
the University made this argument ensuing, whereupon followed that sentence
interlocutorie annexed unto the end hereof. Since which time I do not
understand of any further proceeding: it is likely that the Jesuits perceiving
the inclination of the Court, and of all in general, contrary unto them, and
fearing to be drawn further into question, have retired themselves, expecting
some fitter opportunity for the effecting of their designs, which it is
probable, that they now failing in, will hardly be able ever to bring to pass.
This is shortly the whole process of this business and controversy.

Now I am not ignorant that diverse discourses have been of late set forth in
this kind, but I dare confidently affirm, that none is of equal weight with
this, in that it is no particular calumny, but a public account justified in
open Court, and published by authority, the Positions herein alleged are
these of the famous University of Paris, and the school of the Sorbonne
(whose mouth this Advocate was, and spoke as he was instructed) and not any
private censure or opinion. If ought be said herein which is not altogether
consonant to the doctrine of our Church (as I am certain there is very little)
let it be remembered whose words they are, and where they were spoken. Thus
hoping that this may help to dissipate and purge that noisome and pestilent
air of the Jesuits, wherewith they seek to intoxicate and infect the weak
and tender consciences of men, to the dishonor of God and of religion, to the
danger and prejudice of sovereign Princes, their persons and estates, to the
ruin and overthrow of their own fortu^es, the shipwreck of all good
conscience, and scandal of Christians, it being impossible that a good
Christian should be other then a true and loyal subject to his Prince: I will
no longer withhold thee from the discourse it self, praying thee favorably to
interpret my endeavors and good intention herein.

Errata sic corrige.
page 10. lin. 6. there for these. p. 14 l. 11. Giuinier for Cuimier. p. 18. l.
28. except for without. p. 22. l. 1. removing for remaining. ibid. l. 22. add
which. p. 29. l. 6 Grasius for Grassins. p. 30. l. 2. College for Colleges.
p. 39 l. 19 having for have p. 41. l. 2. which that, dele which. p. 44. l. 13.
where it is for whence it is. ibid. l. 15. maintained hierarchical for
maintained the hierarchical. ibid. l. 23. where Christ should have for where
Christ had p. 45. l. 16. singulus for singulis. ibid. l. 21. rigor for vigor.
p 47. l. 9. concordate king Frances between, for Concordat between etc. 50.
penult direct for divert p. 54 l. 21. which for with.

After that MONTHOLON the Advocate of the demandants, had required the
allowance of the Letters which they had obtained, notwithstanding the
opposition made against it by the University, De la MARTELIERE for the
University of Paris, said thus:
MY Lords,
The History shows us, that after the battle of Cannas, in which the Romans
received the greatest loss, that ever befell them; forty thousand Citizens,
the General of the Army, with fourscore notable persons of the Senate, being
killed upon the place, the rest of their troops either taken, or dispersed; the
Enemy victorious and triumphant, at the gates of the City, the name of that
magnanimous Commonwealth, brought almost to nothing: those of Capua which had
always nourished an ill will toward the Romans, forgetting all respect of
obedience due to the Empire, without any apprehension of the bonds and
obligations, wherewith they were bound to the people of Rome; upon the very
point of such an occasion, thought to make themselves Lords of Italy; so that
in stead of contributing to the necessities of the State of Rome; offering the
succor, and aid, which was required of them; they demanded to participate in
the chiefest dignities, and that the honor of the Commonwealth might be
divided between them and the Romans. After the loss of our great King, whose
Person ought to have been as dear to us, as his Monarchy: you have seen the
Jesuits (instead of compassion) seeking to raise themselves by the common
calamity of France, and without giving us any leisure to set in order the
domestical affairs of the Estate, to labor with might and maine, and to
loose no time for the entire establishment of their own authority: I do not
say, that they have demanded to partake in the greatest charges, but by means
of the Hostages of all your children, which they have required, to become able
to distribute the^ absolutely, and to rule at their pleasure, as they have
already promised unto themselves.

The sequel of the History touching this generous people, adds further,
that at the ouerture, which was made of such a proposition, the affliction of
the Romans, was upon the instant converted into an extreme indignation,
against such ungrateful persons, which they knew well how to accompany with a
Resolution, beseeming their courage: I will represent it in the same terms:
Indignatione orta, submoueri a Curiaiussos esse, missumque lictorem, qui ex
vrbe educereteos, atque eo die manner extra fines Romanos iuberet; The Romans
being moved with indignation, commanded them to be conveyed out of the
Senate, and sent a Sergeant with them to bring them out of the City, and
forbadde them from that day forward, to enter into the Territories of the
people of Rome. If God had given our poor nation, as much prudence and
steadfastness, as bounty, and facility; and that theeies of our understanding
were as cleare-sighted as those of the body, the example and resolution of the
wisest that ever the Sun saw, might have served for a direction in this
occurrence; which is unto us of no less importance. And as this sage counsel
was soon seconded with good success, (for the enemy diuerting his enterprise
from against the scat of the Empire, to receive the affections of those of
Capua, gave the Romans time to take breath, and to make their greatness
appear more redoubtable, then ever) the same remedy would undoubtedly have
secured us from the troubles and divisions, which they sow amongst us; wherein
the enemies of France take far greater assurance, then in all their force.
But (alas) being given to understand by the manifold harms we have sustained
of their designs, both already past, and yet continued unto the fourth
generation, shall not we be touched with a lively apprehension, that at this
time their only drift is, to see us the last of French men, and never to live
in repose; that the condition, and life of our Kings, and Princes, our own,
and that of our posterity be no longer assured?

This is the third time, that the University of Paris eldest daughter of the
thrice Christian Kings, has been reduced to this necessity, by the
enterprise of the Jesuits: near upon their first arriving, there was nothing
else heard to resound in this place but Prophesies of their intention, that
they would confound all politic order, and deprave the Laws divine and
humane: what presages were there of the desolation of learning, and of the
ruin of the greatest, and most famous University, which has been upon the
face of the earth? Although that this were declared by the mouth of the
greatest personages, whose memory shall ever be honored by us,
notwithstanding it was hard to persuade us, that which has proved since but
too too true, even then, when the Royal dignity was in estate so assured,
that it seemed we never needed to fear any mutation: and besides, the
Catholic religion, accustomed to propose nothing but amity, faith, and
inviolable concord, made men little to mistrust, that it was possible to bring
into the Church, which had flourished so many ages, without taking advantage of
trouble, and dissension, this new learning, in her old age, which has done so
much harm, and made the remedies more dangerous then the disease.

As it is not commonly seen, that prophetical declarations are frustrated of
their effect, so these predictions have been authorized by the events, in such
wise, that the Jesuits working at one and the same time upon two contraries,
they have stirred up that which was of ill disposition in our stomachs, as
well the cold as the hot, and for thirty years continuance have molested
France with such a fury, that we have found by experience, but too late, that
having made us lose all fidelity, duty, and charity, we were out of hope of
any recovery; if he, whom God would have to be the Physician of our griefs,
had not by his balm of amity, and reconciliation, (a most gentle lenitiue,
and most profitable for our afflictions) brought back our quiet and repose.
The University did not then fail to give the watchword, and to advertise us
what were the causes of these mutatio^s, which were by her worthily and truly
represented, and plainly and manifestly laid open, the subject of so great an
inflammation, and of such a continual fever.

The University of Paris, being more mortally injured, thought on nothing but
sorrow, and sought by an eternal remembrance, to immortalize the merit of her
benefactor; there was not any Temple of this great City, which she filled not
with tears, with holy services, with funeral discourses in his honor: the
time did not suffice to recount the wars, the travels, the counsels of her
King, whose honor can neither increase, nor be diminished: when the Jesuits
puffed up with hope, and courage, did raise this great Nouitiate in the Suburbs
of Saint German, A new College now in building for their nouices.
for the which, designing out so large a circuit, they do not dissemble any
longer, but plainly declare, that they will no more fail of the prey, which
they have so long pursued: they do reedifie, and augment their Citadels, and
withal do denounce war against the University, under the favor of
Letters, which by importunity they had obtained in the month of August, in
the year, one thousand six hundred and ten: they require to have the
instruction of the youth, to have power to set open their houses, and to read
Lecture in all sorts of Sciences, in stead that the year before, they had
required permission to read only in Divinity: against which demand, the
University then opposing it self, they with-drewe their Letters, fearing that
in such a season, the great inconveniences of their proceedings, and of their
institution might be discovered.

Their last Letters were presented unto the Court, the three and twentieth of
the month of August, and (as there is no artifice whatsoever, of which they
have not the practice in hand) more then three weeks before, they had
canuassed the faculties of the University, yea they vaunted of the consent of
some particular men, which had always thought well of them, they did publish
their victory without any resistance, they did press with might and maine the
approbation of their letters. The court notwithstanding ordered, that they
should be communicated to the rector, and the university, which having bin
done, and the body thereof assembled, never any man saw more resolution showed
in the defense of their liberty, yea with all earnestness. And there were but
three, whereof the faculty of the Canon law is composed, which failed her at
this need, (as if the blood, which they have in their veins, did proceed from
some other different nourishment, and that they had habituated themselves to
some strange affection,) notwithstanding being constrained to yield unto the
rest which were in greater number, (yea a hundred for one) the oppositition was
framed and received in this parliament, under the name of the rector of the
university in general. The Court having done me this honor, to name me the
advocate of the university, I have blessed that day a hundred times, which I
will hold always as dear as that of my life, in which my small labor, and
merit have found so great a recompense by your judgment, as that I may render
to my country, to whom I owe the good fortune of my birth, and to the
university, to whom I am bound for my education, this witness of my duty, and
respect, and that I may be reckoned by posterity in the number of those, to
whom this defense in his time has happened.

Me quoque principibus permistum agnoscat Achiuis. Our time of pleading of the
Parliament past, ended the morrow upon S. Martins day; our adversaries vanished
as fire in a clowd, leaving unto the University the extreme sorrow of being
frustrated of so honorable and so lawful a combat, to which she had been
excited by the Justice of her cause, and by the force of necessity.

Plorauere suis non respondere fauorem Speratum meritis. In the time that the
University imagined she was at some rest, and that the Jesuits did promise
openly they would not undertake any further, and that they would contain
themselves, we feel and perceive, that they oppress us, and that the cuill
hatched long before hand, could not so suddenly be eschewed. To conclude,
contemning the authority of the King (who would have the judgment of their
Letters to depend on your approbation) and that of the Court, (which had
ordained, that the Vniue sitie should first be heard upon her opposition) we
see that they are established, and upon their own authority do instruct
Scholars in the College of Clermont, use all scholastical functions, and by
their witty sleights, they will make us pay interest for our small time of
quiet, (as said the provident Bat of Athens) during the which, we have seen
the weeds to grow up, which we suffered to be sown.

As the University has witnessed again this time to all the world: by her
obedience that she would have slept, referring the best of her interest to the
benefit of Time, so she could not believe, that now any one in the world can
think it strange, that she would desire not to die, and since that her peace
within does depend in making war, night and day, without, and that no other
plaster can be applied unto her grief she was forced to renew the instant
pursuit of this audience, to ad a request, for the restoring of this enterprise
anew: whereunto finding the Court well disposed she has reason to promise
unto her self upon the whole matter as ready a dispatch, as happy, and
favorable.

And because (my Lords) that in my own particular, I acknowledge my forces
disproportionable to so heavy a burden, yea I ingenuously confess my self
to be the least of those of my profession, which could worthily acquit
themselves thereof, favor him I beseech you, with your benign audience, which
speaks by your commandment, nay rather countenance the cause the most
important, which has been pleaded in our memory in that of our ancestors, yea
of all France, the issue, and event whereof will conserve our laws with the
sweetness of our liberty, or make us see our ruin without any more hope, or
remedy; the which I will handle, as succinctlie as I may, and with so much
truth and mildnes, that I hope to leave no subject to accuse ought but the
evil wills, and subtle practices of the Jesuits, against whom the University
contenteth her self to oppose a wisdom truly Christian.

The University of Paris has bin from all antiquity reco^mended for her
singular devotion, and erudition, by means whereof many heresies, and those of
people far remote have been convinced: the Doctors thereof have so insisted
in the ways of the holy spirit in the Catholic Church, that by reason of the
reputation of this sincerty, there have been heretics, which have agreed to
take them for Judges, and according to their advise, have passed condemnation
upon their errors according to the example of the Donatists of Africa, who
although they were proud, and perverse, yet in the cause which concerned one
Caecilianus, in the request which they presented to the Emperor Constantine,
they demanded that the Judges which should be given them, might be Gauls, and
it has been written to her honor by Vern^rus in fasciculo temporu^, that
learning leaving Greece, was come to Rome, and thence to make her abode at
Paris, under the protection of Charles the Great, who founded the same seven
hundred years ago, and that the light of learning being for certain ages
extinguished, was again lightened in the University of Paris; the Popes
Celestine, and Innocent the third in their decretall Episties, have left for a
perpetual blessing unto this University that she had peopled the most part of
the Bishoprics of Christendom. And before them Eugenius the third, taking
notice of the error of Gilbert Porretan, Bishop of Poictiers, would not decree
any thing therein, without the advice of the University of Paris, by reason of
the multitude of learned men, wherewith it was replenished, says Otho
Frisingensis, an Historian of merit, and indeed the Bishop was overcome by the
disputations of M. Adam de petit Pont, a famous doctor of our University.

Let us add consequently unto this recommendation, that of the Popes Honorius
the third, Innocent the fifth, and Urban the sixth, who have said that Paris was
as the never dried source, whence the river of science did flow, which watered
continually the Church of God, and the instruction of all Christendom. And it
is five hundred years ago, that the University of Paris might boast of this
high style of honor, which aduanceth her above all the Schools in the world,
Studium Parisiense fundamentum ecclesiae. What more honorable testimony can
there be, then that which is read in the Registers of the University, that in
the year three hundred, seventy eight, the Church being afflicted with a great
Schism, the sacred College of Cardinals, Apostolica sede vacant, did
solemnlie inuit the University of Paris to contribute to the good of the
Church, for to defend her from intrusion.

In the year four hundred, and ten, another Schism having given occasion of
assembling the Council of Constance, the Doctors of the University of Paris,
and amongst others Mr John Gerson, which was Chancellor thereof, named the
thrice Christian doctor, in honor of the thrice Christian King, which had sent
him, by their learning made known that the University of Paris was the
mother, and Nurse of all good, and holy institution, that she had conserved
the purity of Theology, maintained the Episcopal dignity, had always
opposed her self against strange doctrines, novelties, and superstitions.
Which has made men to conceive so reverent an opinion of the University of
Paris, that from all the quarters of Europe, yea from the Court of Rome it
self, her advise, and resolutions have been sought for, and preferred to that
of other Schools. To conclude, be it spoken to the praise of the Catholic
Church, the University of Paris has made the Church of France to flourish above
all particular Churches of the world; in token whereof the Popes, Clement the
sixth, and Pius the second would solemnly give notice of their elections unto
the University of Paris, and the last of these two witnessed, that at the
pursuit, and authority of the University of Paris, he was moved to defend the
Council of Basil.

So may we say, that the tree of this doctrine planted so long since, has
produced so good fruit, that there is not any one, which has frequented
strange nations, who will not say, but that the devotion of France, and
principally of the City of Paris, surpasses that of all other people, which
it may be is more in outward show, but as different from that of ours, as the
shadow from the substance. As the University of Paris has been religiously
devout, so has she never wanted the respect, and obedience toward our Kings
her protectors, and withal, her power has conserved the royal rights against
all usurpations. Our histories do justify, that the University has always
courageously opposed her self against all attempts upon the power of Kings,
against the abuses, which are committed contrary to the holy decrees, and
constitutions of Counsels, has held great authority in the assemblies of the
Gallicane Church, for to maintain the liberties of the same, witness the
appeal brought by the University of Paris, and maintained in this Court,
against Pope Benedict the cleuenth, who would have leuyed tenths upon the
Clergy of France, whence occasion was taken in a diffamatory libell, which was
then published against the King, and the Clergy of his Realm, to quarrel
particularly with the University, which appeal, the University did reiterate
in the time of Jews the eleventh, from the bulls decreed, concerning benefices
elective. Upon this subject, we see so many oppositions framed by the
University of Paris, against the power, and faculties of the Legates sent into
France, as against that of the Cardinal of S. Peter, ad vincula, and of
Cardinal Ballue, wherein the University did summon Mr Solicitor general
named then de saint Romain to assist her, which made an ancient French author
to write that the University of Paris was the key of Christendom, the most
careful promotresse of the rights of the Gallicane Church.

Also our Kings have especially cherished her, for it is read, that she
accompanied the King returning in triumph from the battle of Bouines, and it
is a thing remarkable, that King Philip the Long, having assembled the estates
of his Realm and the University, all others did swear fidelity unto the King,
as sovereign, only the University did not swear at all, as Mr Giuinner has
observed in the preface to the Pragmaticke sanction, because that by her
instruction, we learn to breath with the air of France, fidelity toward our
Prince, and love to our Country: and who knows not the praise which the
University of Paris bare away from the mouth of Pope Pius the second, having
understood by the Cardinal Bessarion, that she had hindered her scholars,
from being enrolled in the troops of those, This was in the time of Char'es
the 7.
who made the public weal a pretext of their rebellion. Upon this
consideration Dumesnil the King his At^urney general, whose memory can never
die, said that the University of Paris was received to plead in this Court,
not only in her particular causes concerning her privileges, but also in
causes, which concern the public estate of this Realm.

The University of Paris is composed of four facuities, the first is of
Diumity, which bears away the prize and has the advantage above all the
rest: this is that science, which treats of eternal things, which lifts a
man up in spirit unto the heavens, which teaches the salvation of mankind, the
reunion of the creature to his Creator. To the study of the faculty of
Theology of Paris, is attributed the perfect, and divine invention of the
school divinity, held in the Roman Church to be the infallible rule, whereby
to judge of the mysteries of faith, and of religion, the subject for which the
learning of this school is so much admired.

The second faculty is of those, who handle the knowledge of the Laws, who are
to teach that, which Aristotle says, is the most divine thing amongst men,
that is, to give good counsel in affairs, and directions in policies. The
third is of Physicians which have care of the health of the body: the last of
the Arts, which lays open the treasures of humane learning, of the tongues,
and of Philosophy. If that our divinity has had the honor for purity, the
knowledge of the law of not being equalled, our Physic to surpass all
others; the last which is as the seed, and nursery of the former, has the
testimony of the most eloquent Italians of our age, who confess that they
have learned of the Masters of the University of Paris, the purity of the
Latin, and of the other tongues, which yet at this day are not to be found any
other where so perfect. Now as the estate of the Church Universal is secular,
so the University of Paris is secular, the Rector, the Chancellor, the Deane,
the Syndickes, the Censors of the four faculties, the Proctors of the four
Nations, the Deputies, Masters, and Doctors are secular; the Regulars, as are
the Jesuits, were never admitted there into, but by grace and by adoption,
under a double condition, the one to be perpetually excluded from all offices
and dignities, without being able to participate in them, the other not to keep
public schools, but simply and in particular to instruct those of their
order, as it is contained in the first addition of the Capitularies of Charles
the great. Chap. 47. Vt scholae in Monasterio non habeantur nisi eorum qui
oblati sunt; That in Monasteries no Schools should be kept but only for those
who were professed,

These are the prime and supreme laws of the policy of the University who is
subject to the pollitique, and ecclesiastical Magistrate, that is to say, to
the Laws, and equity of the Estate, receives reformations from the royal
ordinances, according to the times, and seasons, motions and necessities of the
Realm: when on the contrary the Regulars do depend and tie themselves to the
rule of their order, which they receive from their superiors, being religious
men, as they are, whom they are bound by their vow to obey, and the Jesuits
above all others, since that they acknowledge in all things their general, as
Jesus Christ vpo^erth: they are so far off from receiving reformation, in their
manners, their rule, or policy, from the Magistrate or Bishops, that they do not
in any sort acknowledge them, and from whose power they hold themselves to be
wholly exe^pted.

This was the reason wherefore in times past the University of Paris opposed
her self against the like enterprise of the Iacobins, which would have kept
public school, and boasted of their great learning, and notable services,
which their Order had done the Catholic Church; notwithstanding the chiefest
men, which then were of the Church, having no preiudicate opinion by reason of
any particular Interest, or design, fearing the confusion of two bodies
altogether separated, did cause these religious Regulars to desist from their
pursuit, and the Magistrates which feared least the University should be
transformed into a Regular estate, did hinder them from being received. And
indeed, what design can be more ordinary unto religious men accustomed to the
greatest simplicity and modesty, then by their example, and instruction to draw
men unto the perfection of their rule, to make them religious men and Monks,
as they are, so that by little and little we should have seen the
Hierarchicall Order of the Church to become subject, and depend of a Regular
Order, and the Common wealth deprived and destitute of her Citizens, herscruice
abandoned, the charges of the estate forsaken, or furnished with those, who,
after their choice, by reason of their order, and religion, would have been
found to be least capable.

And in regard hereof Cardinal Borromeus, whose memory is always to be
reverenced, took away the government of the Colleges which he had established
in the Archbishopricke of Millan, from those of the society of the Jesuits,
saying that the Church had more need of Pastors, then of religious men. In
Spain it self, they could never get license to keep public school, or
read to any other, then to those of their own house in the University of
Salamanca, or in that of Alcala de Henares, which are the two principal
Universities of the Country, but contrariwise having attempted it upon an
occasion, which was evidently favorable unto them, they were not admitted. In
the year 1563. King Philip of Spain, being to establish a Seminary at
Salamanca; for the study of the English, and Imsh, who resorted unto him for
succor, the Jesuits sought to have the government thereof, and had provision,
and permission accordingly, as well by reason of the knowledge, which they had
of the tongue, and of the manners of those who were to be instructed; as for
some other greater enterprise then intended, and also by the recommendation of
the Duke of Medina Cidonia, whose mediation they used; notwithstanding upon
the opposition of the University of Salamanca, they were put from their
purpose, except that the service, which Spain receives of the Jesuits was
able to vanquish the protection due unto the laws, and to the policy of this
University: and the complaint of the Englishmen is not secret; that the Jesuits
having the guiding of the Seminaries established in Flaunders, by the favor
they have, do allure, and violently draw unto them the best wits of their
nation; and during the time that they besieged our University, have not we
felt the same losses, grievous to most of the great families of this Kingdom,
and prejudicial to the Estate.

It is well known to every one, that the Jesuits coming into France, under
the recommendation of Pope Paul the fourth, who was of the house of the
Caraffaes, could not be received, nor approved of by the Church of France, as
they are not yet at this day, and from that time they have had all the Clergy
in maine opposition against them. In the year 1563. they addressed themselves
to the assembly made at Poissi, under the reign of King Charles the ninth,
after that they had begged the favor of the Cardinals of Lorraine, and of
Tournon, personages of great power, as they never fail cunningly to curry
favor with those who are in credit, and authority, and dissembling the
quality, and degrees of their Vow, did hide the secret of their rule, so that
having prayed to be received as simple scholars, it was yielded unto them, by
the Act of that assembly, allowed of in this Court, which is the one, and only
title of their introduction into France. It was then thought that much was
done, and that the inconveniences of this novelty, were surely provided for,
by imposing upon them Conditions of altering their name, and their title of
submitting themselves absolutely, as other Ecclesiastical persons, to the
Jurisdiction and controlement of Bishops, precisely to be bound, that they
should first and foremost expressly renounce the privileges mentioned by their
bulls, without seeking to obtain any others upon pain of loosing the grace
and favor which had been granted unto them.

But this served not to any other end, but to fortify their resolution, and to
give them hope of that which remained, for without any other warrant or
authority, they established themselves in the University, contrary to the
opposition pleaded against them, referred unto Counsel, and not yet decided,
and so remained until the edict, and decree of the year, 1595. by which they
were driven and banished out of the Kingdom. By the letters of
reestablishment, which they have obtained, and which have been verified in
this Court in the beginning of the year six hundred, and four, it is
contained amongst other things, that they shall not have power to erect any
College, nor to make any residence in any other Town or part of the Realm,
but there, where they were then established by appointment of their letters,
without express permission of the King: and particularly within the
jurisdiction of this Parliament, except only in the Towns of Lions, and
Fleche, which they being not willing presently to thwarte, nor openly to band
themselves against the University of Paris, whom they knew to be in the
particular protection of this great parliament, whose Justice the brighter it
shines, the less they dare behold it, they have circumuented the accustomed
weakness and folly of the simple people, upon which foundation they build
their most firm dessignes, and by the establishment of one or two and forty
Colleges which they have in the Towns of this Realm, in stead of twelve or
fourteen, which they had in former times, have imagined, that cutting off,
and diuerting the streams, which run into this great river, they would wholly
dry it up. And there is no doubt, but that the University has thereby felt a
great impayring; and that they had conceived such an opinion of the success,
that they already gave out that men took notice of their worth, and that they
were esteemed necessary, that the University sought them, and offered them the
Colleges of Plessis du Man's, and of Cholets to join them to that of Clermont
they reported under hand, that the City of Paris should come to that pass at
length, that it should give them the College of Navarre, or that any other
should be built them as large as that. But God would that the smoke of these
ostentations should do no hurt, but to the eyes of the Jesuits, and that the
fruit, and contentment of their revenge has fallen out otherwise, then they
expected; for they confess, that the University remaining as it does without
admitting, or receiving them into it, their other Colleges cannot long
continue, and that their designs for the instruction of youth, will be well nigh
fruitless, and to no purpose, whereunto in as much as they are stirred up with
the desire of rule, and by the consideration of that greatness, to which they
aspire, not being able to be withheld by the force of the laws of our
University, by the authority of your decrees, nor the conditions of their
reestablishment, we are constrained to discover one of the mysteries of their
ambition.

Although that the Jesuits greatly wronging learning, do mangle, and
diuersifie the ancient authors, that they are altogether ignorant in the secret
of the tongues, yea that in the Colleges, where they account themselves
settled, and established to continue, as in Italy, and in Sauoy, they do
altogether contemn them, and read no other books, but such as are composed by
those of their own society; notwithstanding the reputation of learning is highly
esteemd, the which they can never usurp nor add unto their trophies, as long
as the University continues without Jesuits. Ammianus Marcellinus writes,
that it was sufficient for the Physicians of his time, in recommendation of
their knowledge, to have studied in Alexandria; so it adds unto the merit of
any man, be he never so learned, to have studied in Paris; the strangers
evidently show it, in seeking the alliance of the University of Paris, to grace
their schools, as that of Pauia, called her self, as Crantzius writes, her
daughter, that of Milan her sister, as witnesses Paulus Iouius in the life of
one of the Galeaces.

Besides this reputation of great importance, which can give, or take from them
the choice of the best wits, they cannot manage the instruction of youth,
according to their mind, any where else, as well as at Paris, the seat of the
Empire, the place, where the royalty resideth, whereon the eyes of France are
set, the residence of the great and sovereign assemblies; no where out of
Paris is there such civility, out of Paris little experience is to be learned
in affairs, elsewher, the course of the world is not known. To conclude, it
is the brain of the body of this estate, if they cannot possess this part,
their hope is half frustrated.

First because that employing for the instruction of the youth of other Cities,
men of little understanding, which had more need to be taught, then to teach,
and being constrained to keep the most able and sufficient they have, to make
show and muster withal, the children do not only not profit by them, but
neither are they able to discharge what they have undertaken; so that the
assurance, which they give out of their lectures failing, the University should
be replenished as she does begin with scholars; which they retain with all
their might.

Secondly instructing the youth out of Paris, usually, and most often the best
wits do leave them, and escape their hand; and then, when having gotten more
knowledge, their judgment is augmented, they are diuerted by a quite contrary
instruction unto theirs, so that their harvest never comes to perfection, for
to confirm and settle their doctrine, and institution, they must always have
their eye upon their scholar, whom they themselves do fashion, and inure to
affairs of the world, so that he takes nothing in hand but by their advise,
direction, and order, and he must yield them an account of what he does; they
never let loose the bridle after they have engaged him in some matter, which
concerns his particular interest, and they have long time had experience,
that by means of the bringing up of the children of those of Paris, they know
the secrets of houses, they govern the hearts, and wills of those, who commit
unto their trust that which they hold most dear: a great augmentation of their
power.

Another reason, yet more weighty, and of greater force is this: The Kingdom
of France has at all times had the College of Sorbonne in singular reverence,
and estimation, founded by our good King Saint Jews, it honoreth her
resolutions, and the consciences of men do willingly submit themselves to her
decrees, the French Church takes great assistance from the authority thereof,
which is so much the more legitimate, by how much the more it is very ancient,
derived by tradition from our fathers unto us, accompanied with all
sufficiency, learning and piety; the Jesuits would have gotten an absolute
victory, if they could have ruinated this fortress of the French Church, and
of our belief, they should be without fear of ever seeing either their
doctrine, or the books of their society condemned, or controlled.

It is not then succor, or aid, which the Jesuits seem to offer the
University, but (to speak properly) they seek her overthrow; and with what
face dare they maintain, that our doctors are defective and faulty? Gamaches,
du Val le Clerk Ysambert Hennequin do instruct so faithfully and plainly,
that by learned lectures the school of the Sorbonne has her exercises
continually replenished with five hundred daily Auditors. For instruction in
humane learning there are as sufficient, as ever there were. Marsille Morel,
Bourbon, Granger, Hardiuiliers, and others, the least of whom has more
knowledge, and understanding in the tongues then all the best Regents of the
Jesuits. Also this is not the utmost of that which they strive for, they have
long since given out, that nothing is well done, which proceeds not from
them, nothing is perfect but their life, their discipline, and their rule: they
want no seed of divisions to cast amongst us, and do lay upon us manifest
aspersions, as they began in the year, 1575. in calumniating the faith of the
University touching the immaculate conception of the holy Virgin, bearing the
holy father in hand, that the only hinderance and let which kept the Council
of Trent from being received in France, was in that the doctrine of the divines
of Paris, maintained the constitution of the Council of Basil. And their
ordinary practices in places where they are established, may make us judge
sufficiently of their intention, in that they receive no doctrine, nor
instruction, but from those of their own society. Master George Englisemnis
would have read Philosophy at Rouen, Master Matthew Gelissemius at Doway would
have professed the same likewise to the English Seminary, but were both
hindered by them: in the Town of Auignion, there being in the Covent of the
Friars Minimes an excellent divine which read lecture to the religious men of
his order, many moved by his learning did frequent his lectures, but they
propounded and prosecuted the matter so earnestly, that none else, besides the
religious men of their own house could be admitted. And not long since Master
Claude Berthin a very excellent scholar, and bacheler in divinity being
desirous to preach at La Fleche, could not be permitted by reason of their
opposition. At this day in all Germany besides the College of Collen, there is
no reader, nor school, but either of Jesuits, or Protestants: the image of
those pernicious extremities, to which they would bring us; and already in
France we see Universities utterly overthrown, Colleges of ancient
foundation quite rooted out by their means agreeable unto the presage, which
Monsieur de Pontac, Bishop of Bazas made of them above forty years ago, do
not they (although it be mistrusted and suspected to be false) make use of the
Bull, which they say they have obtained from pope Sixtus the fifth, by the
which contrary to the Laws, and foundation of the University of Pontamousson
confirmed by Pope Gregory the 13. his immediate predecessor, the dignity of the
Rector-shippe is attributed unto the Jesuits quite excluding all others, and
there do they exercise by this means a perpetual dictatorship. They have not
spared the ancient houses of Religion, for to accommodate themselves, as at
Bourges, they would have taken up the house of the Carmelites, that of the
Iacobins at Orleans, in Moldania and Walachia, they have driven out the
religious men, and appropriated unto themselves their possessions, at Lucerna,
they have driven out the Chartreux, in Bohemia, they had done the like to other
Chartreux, and had taken up their ancient Monastery, if Don Quincana a
Spaniard of that order had not prevented them, who hindered their purpose:
neither do they endeavor to establish themselves in any place in the world,
but by the ruin of others.

They allege, that they teach for nothing, and that it is a great ease to
fathers which are of small ability. Can it be possible, that we should be yet
seduced with so ill and false an opinion, that having had so evident knowledge,
and so clear proof before our Eyes, this imagination can corrupt the truth?
The Jesuits have no Colleges, which are not founded with the substance of
those whom they so teach for nothing, and those of great revenue. It is
strange, that being reestablished but six years ago, they should possess
more wealth in France, then in any other part of Christendom. So do we
cherish our own hurt, recompensing more liberally the harm which they do us,
then our enemies do the service, which they receive from them. To one of their
Colleges alone they have belonging two thousand pound a year rent, and a
hundred thousand Crowns bestowed in building, they have united Abbeyes, Franes
fiess are lands which none but gentlemen may enjoy, and whosoever purchases
them is made noble (as they term it) and therefore the king has a fine for
aliening them, and no man, who is ignoble, may purchase them without his leave.
Priories, and Benefices, and with one blow have disappointed, and frustrated
the founders, Patrons and religious men, they got at one time alone fourteen
thousand Crowns, upon the last sale of the frank fees, and lands, which newly
came to the Crown, whereupon there was an edict made to inhibite them, (we may
see whether we are to thank their modesty) or else they had gone further.
Whether are these the religious men of rare piety, who prayed the great
Emperor Justinian, to employ the liberality which he offered them, to the
maintenance of the poor, and easing of his people? or those dainty Courtiers,
which Ammianus Marcellinus describes: Who, that it might not be objected unto
them, that they had served for naught, or because they would not be measured by
the rule of others. Stipendia sua manu non recipiebant, sed expansa chlamyde.

Of threescore and three Colleges, which are in the University, there is not
one, except the College of the Grassius, which has any foundation, or wages,
for the Regents: the foundation of the College of Navarre has for their wages
in all but four pounds a year at the most, there is not the least servant of
the Jesuits, which has not a better remembrance. Learning is not entertained
without the sweetness of some recompense, our ancestors would leave this to
men's discretion, according to their means, and as the time required,
notwithstanding they appointed some reward for to stir up emulation, the
honest spur of virtue, without any constraint at all; there was never poor
scholar, whose excuse has not been, and is received, and now must the
imagination forsooth, that they will ease us of some small expenses, hinder us
from discerning the shadow from the substance, make us reject, and contemn the
true sciences, which the University does preserve by her own proper merit, (as
Plato said of the Mathematicians) and expel divine, and noblemindes, these
wits of fine gold, for to establish those of iron and lead, and to make them
succeed in their rooms. Let the University be gratified, but with the third
part of an hundred thousand Crowns a year rent, which the Jesuits possess,
all shall be done there freely and we shall see learning flourish more then ever
it did, or rather let the foundation of the College be reduced unto that which
is necessary, and husbanded according to the course of the time, there will be
sufficient and if we will take never so little pain, it were as easy to
establish the good as to know the evil, if we are not so unfortunate, as that
we will disdain our own, for to entertain strangers.

We read in the 22. Chapter of Deuterno. that God did expressly forbid, that a
vineyard should be planted of diverse kinds of plants, to mix woollen, and
linen together, to sow a field with diverse seeds: The nouelty of the
institution of the Jesuits society, their doctrine different from that of the
Church, and from the Theology of our school, the which never swarued, nor
went out of the eclipticke line of truth, yea diameterwise and directly
opposite, and contrary to the authority of free Monarchies has been the
cause, that our ancestors have earnestly withstood the receiving of the
Jesuits, and that the school of Sorbone then furnished with the greatest and
most famous doctors of Christendom, the greatest part whereof were assistant
at the Council of Trent, made that famous decree of the year 1554. which
contains a prophecy of the miseries which were felt sithence, and endured
presages, God for our chastisment has ratified, so that the inevitable
necessity, in which the enterprises, and imprudent passions of the Jesuits do
engage us, the extreme peril which they have brought our Country unto, cannot
but untie our tongue, although we should have been mute and tongue tied, all
our lives, for to perform the same duty again at this present, guided by the
light of those, to whom we would take it for a special grace to be resembled,
either for sufficiency, or honesty, not being able to fail upon this occasion
to discharge our consciences for the honor and preservation of the public
weal, and for the advancement of truth, unless we will be thought more
zealous to our own ruin, then affectionate to our safety.

Wherein, as our intention is, to take the same decree of our school, for the
rule and measure of this demonstration, which the Jesuits could never procure
to be censured at Rome, where our devotion is known, and where it is not yet
out of memory, what opposition was made there, as well as here at the
establishment of the Jesuits, which had prevailed, had it not been in regard
of their fourth vow; so we will begin with the same protestation which the
divines of Paris then made, in which we desire to live, and die, and for the
good of the Catholic Church, and of the holy Sea, would confirm it with our
blood; that we have no desire to enterprise any thing either in thought, word,
or deed, against the authority of our holy fathers the Popes. But contrariwise
all of us in general, and each of us in particular, like obedient children,
do acknowledge the holy father to be the Vicar of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
universal Pastor of the Church, to whom God has given fulness of power
therein, his decrees, and constitutions are to be obeyed, and reverenced, kept,
and observed; and as the University and school of Paris had never other
belief, so now does she openly pronounce it with her heart, and with all
true affection.

Our University together with all Christian people has reason to take offense,
and scandal at the usurpation which the Jesuits have made upon the holy name
of Jesus, in attributing particularly unto themselves this special, and
incommunicable name, which cannot be given for a mark and distinction amongst
Christians, but is a name of effect, and of office, which apportaineth unto
none, but to the Savior of the world, nevertheless, as if the Jesuits in a
kind of analogy or proportion, could do something in the Church like unto
that, they would make men believe, that their society is essentially necessary
for the Catholic religion, that without them, it cannot subsist, they say
that they were chosen by the divine providence, for a rule, and reformation in
these latter times: Ad silentium tumidis magisterijs imponendum, defectus
aliorum corrigendos and supplendos: To suppress and put to silence the haughty
doctors, and to supply and correct the defects of other men: As Ozorius has
written in his second sermon upon the death of father Ignatius, applying unto
their society, the dreams and vain fancies of the Abbot Ioachim condemned by
the Church. Whereupon it follows, that they submit all that which concerns
the honor of God, or the good of the Catholic religion, to the particular
interest of their society, and repute all those for heretics, which do not
follow their devilish opinions, and concur with them in their subtilties, and
cunning practices.

This is the reason that Ribadenera writes, that Ignatius Loiola framed his
religion, by reason that all the rest were defective: whence it proceeds,
that by the Bulls of Pope Pius the fifth and sixth, they have gotten by way of
prevention, all the graces, indulgences, faculties, and privileges, which can
be found ever to have been granted to any, Antehac concessa and concedenda: A
testimony that their ambition is not yet at the point where they will stay. In
their institution they have wholly derogated from the discipline of the Church,
and from all the ancient Canonical constitutions, it may be truly said, as
the decree of the Sorbonne has already pronounced, that they have built, and
raised themselves upon the ruin, and decay of monastical discipline. All the
religious men, which since the time of our Savior Christ, have chosen a kind
of life, special, and different from that which is ordinary and common to all
Christians, have made immutable vows, taken marks, whereby to be discerned
steadfast, immovable, and perpetual rules. The law of God does command, that
that which is dedicated and consecrated unto God by the sanctification of a
solemn vow, should remain for ever assured and settled in that estate, which
is the highest degree of perfection that can be imagined: whence it comes to
pass, that in things inanimate, and without life, we cannot make that which
is sanctified, perseuering in his integrity, to be unhallowed, and loose the
force of his consecration. Far greater reason then is it that a man vowed,
dedicated, and consecrated unto God, should not loose this essential quality,
and inseparable from the subject. Saint Thomas setting down the difference
between a simple Vow, and a solemn vow, as that of entering into religion is,
teaches us, that the solemnity of a vow consists in the consecration of him
which is vowed, Quando per certaeregulae professionem relicto saeculo and
abdicata propria voluntate perfectionis statum assumit: When by taking upon him
the profession of a certain rule or Order, forsaking the world, and renouncing
his own will and affections, he does assume the estate of perfection, which
all the Divines hold cannot be abandoned, nor forsaken without Apostasy. The
Jesuits at the entering into their order, do make a solemn vow between the
hands of their superior, and a solemn profession, to live according to the
rules of their society, the which are of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity;
notwithstanding, by permitting, (as they do) those of their order to change
their form and manner of life to possess goods and riches, to succeed their
ancestors as heirs, and at a need to marry, as many of them have done, they
do pervert the effect of this infinite obligation, and of a most solemn vow
they make a simple one, and give leave unto him, which has promised to observe
their rule, and by consequence that which depends thereupon, to violate the
same, which is so strange, that Nauarrus in his commentaries De Regularibus
tom. 1. says, hoe est nouissimum admirabile, concessum praefatae societati:
This is an admirable novelty, granted unto the aforenamed society. If it had
been any where else but at Rome, he would not have stuck to have said that
this was repugnant to the Divine and Canon law. And although that there be
nothing more natural in all obligations, and bonds, yea the chiefest, and most
precise of all, then to be reciprocal and mutual, that as the people are
bound to yield fidelity, and obedience unto their Prince, so is he bound
likewise to give protection unto his subjects. God himself would not be
exempted, when he says, assemble me the people of the earth, that they may
judge beweene my people, and me, what thing I ought to have done for them and
have not done it: And more apparantin the gospel, which is full of sweetness
and mildnes; whence it proceeds, that there is no religion in the world,
receiving the Vow, and submission of a religious man, which does not bind it
self to keep and maintain him, in his greatest extremities, and infirmities;
they on the contrary as if they were bound to nothing at all, do expel, and
may turn out at their pleasure, yea, though they have been thirty years of
their society, those which are weak and sickly. Whom they either cannot or
will not make use of any longer.

Another thing quite contrary to Ecclesiastical discipline is this: By the
Bulls of Paul the third of the year. 1543. and of Julius the third, in the year
1550. they are permitted to change all their rules, and constitutions, as often
as it shall please their General, and he shall think it to be expedient, for
the good of his company, these are the very words: Et tam hactenus fact as quam
in posterum faciendas constitutiones, ipsas iuxta locorum ac reru^ qualitatem
mutare, alter are, seu in totu^ cassare and alias de nouo condere poss^nt and
valiant: And that they have full power and authority according as the
condition of the places, and the estate of the affairs do require, to change,
alter, or utterly to abolish all constitutions, either heretofore made, or
hereafter to be made, and to make new in their stead. So that as they say
themselves, they are neither regular, nor secular, nor are bound to any rule,
having no other excuse for this dissolution, but the design of the absolute
power, which they continually point at, and that the temporal power, may give
place to the spiritual, for the greater glory of God, as it is said in the
ninth part of their constitutions, the third chapter and ninth article, poterit
in omnibus ad maiorem Dei gloriam, vt senserit, procedere: He may proceed in
all things as he shall see cause, so it be to the greater glory of God. The
end of their fourth vow is the most exact obedience to the Pope, concerning
their missions, which they will make us believe is only in regard of Infidels,
but on the contrary they themselves have written, that this obedience ought to
be measured, and referred unto the motion and will of him, to whom it is
promised: So that at the instant that the Pope shall purpose, that the Bull in
coena Domini, should bind the French men, and that he would leauie that which
they call, and term, sufferance, the Jesuits are obliged by their vow to
execute it, according to his meaning, without any other temper or moderation,
but the will of their General, on whom the estate and the life of all our
Kings by this means shall depend, an effect of their blind obedience for the
perfection whereof they add, Imperfecta est ea obedientia, in qua, praeter
executionem, non est haec eiusdem voluntatis and sententiae, inter eum qui
iubet and eum qui obedit, consensio: That obedience is imperfect, wherein,
besides the execution there is not the self same consent both of will and
opinion in him that commands, and the other who obeieth, having no other
guide, but the meaning, and will of their General which they ought to execute
from point to point, and say that they are bound to effect it without any
knowledge, or discretion, after the manner perchance, as we read in Victor, in
the third book of the persecution of the Vandales, that Hunneric King of the
Vandales, being set on by the persuasion of the Arians, would that all
Catholics should swear to that which was contained in a paper, which was
sealed up, even as the Prouincials of the Jesuits, often times in their
assemblies, do cause the important commands of their General to be executed.

And that which is wondrous strange, to the end that they may make the power of
their company absolute, and the power of their General more ample then that of
the Pope, in that which concerns their vows and missions, is this, that by
the permission of their General they may cause that to be performed by others,
which is enioined them by the Pope, and it may be revoked by their General,
yea without the knowledge, and consent of the Pope, in the ninth part of their
Constitutions. chap. 3. art. 3. And that which tends rather to lay the
foundation of a particular greatness, then to the good of the Vniuiuersall
Church, they have obtained Bulls, wherein all men are forbidden, without
excepting any, no not my Lords, the Cardinals to take upon them any knowledge
in the secrets of their rule, or to sound them, although it were to no other
purpose, but to know the truth thereof, as if that from henceforth the
discourse, and judgment of men were bound to become slaves to their
understanding and direction alone: by the Bull of Gregory the 13. decreed in
the year. 1584. Ne quis cuiuscunque status gradus and praeeminentiae existat,
dictae societatis institutum, constitutiones, vel etiam praesentes, aut quemuis
earum, aut supradictorum omnium articulorum, vel aliud quid supradict a
concernnes, quouisdisputandi, veletiam veritatis indagandae quaesito color
direct vel indirecte impugnare, veleis contradicere audeat, That no man of
what estate, degree or pre-eminence whatsoever, be so bold, as upon any fained
color, either of disputation, or of searching out the truth, directly or
indirectlie to impugn, or contradict the ordinances and constitutions of the
said society, or these presents, or any article of them, or of all the
aforesaid premises, or any other thing which may concern the said premises.
And, that which surpasses all belief, it attributes unto their General only
power to explain and interpret it as he shall think good: which was invented
in favor of them, then when father Claude Matthew showed at Rome the memories
and remembrances for the hastening and advancing of our miseries and troubles:
and they having proceeded so cunningly, that of 37. Bulls which they have
obtained, they never showed any but those which least seemed to favor them,
because they would not discover the great recompenses which they receive for
endeavoring to bring the Papal dignity to this height, that there should be
nothing either in the spiritualty or temporalty, which should not become
subordinate unto it, excepting only their General: for the better effecting
whereof, their Bulls contain in them absolution from all excommunications
which they might incur a iure, vel ab homine, to the end that no respect of
duty, or of any obligation whatsoever, might retain and withhold them in
setting forward this business. And as the Jesuits in excuse of themselves
allege that they were not the first authors of this absolute power, Otho
Frisingensis having observed, that it began under Gregory the 7. upon occasion
of the inuestitures, and was continued under Gregory the 9. so are we to
admire the sage providence of the Almighty, who preserved in the school of
Sorbonne, founded about the same time, the treasure of the truth, contrary unto
that which the Jesuits propose unto us, as the first and chief article of our
faith.

The school of Paris has always taught, that the primacie of Saint Peter and
his successors, Popes of Rome, is by the law divine, in honor and reverence
whereof the Church, antiquity, and the Christian Princes have granted and
attributed unto the holy Sea many great privileges and prerogatives which are
by the law humane; that Jesus Christ immediately after him, and proportionably
sending forth his Disciples and Apostles gave unto them all equally and
indiuidually the power of the keys, and that this mission is a real
conferring of power, and jurisdiction, even as all the members of a natural
body, although they are inequall in dignity, do proceed immediately from
nature; by reason whereof the estate of the Church is Monarchical, tempered
with an Aristocraticall government of Bishops and Priests, as it were a
Senate: the most free and perfect estate, which that can be imagined. Whence it
arises, that the certain, and infallible authority for the resolution of
points of religion, does reside in the whole Church, and not in the head alone,
that by reason hereof, Councels are necessary for the government thereof, the
conclusion of whose decrees, and Canons, by reason of the plurality of voices,
the Pope himself is bound to observe, without being able to dispense
therewithal, but in case, where the Church being assembled in council, would
have given dispensation, namely, where it concerns the good of the universal
Church, and not of particulars, which is the solid foundation, whereon the
liberties of our Church of France are grounded.

Hence it arises likewise, that the decrees, Bulls, censures, and
excommunications of the Popes, yea the Bull in coena Domint, and the counsel
of Trent, as far as they concern the civil government, do no way bind, nor
may be executed before they have been first approved, received, and published
by the Council, and Aristocraticall order of the Ordinaries of the places,
which ought to put them in execution, and cause them to be observed; that the
sacred elections which succeeded the mission and vocation immediately made by
our Savior Christ, do appertain unto the Church both by the law of God and
nature, as it appears in the 1. and 6. Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
by the counsels of Nise, and Basil, and by the ordinances of our King S. Jews,
and Charles the seventh. That the Pope is the dispensator and Steward, and not
Lord of benefices, that he cannot trouble the ordinaries in their functions,
nor deprive them of their benefices, without lawful cause, and without the
Counsel of the Church, according unto that which Saint Gregory has written,
and is inserted in the body of the Canon law, can ecce. did. 99. and S.
Bernard lib. 3. de consideratione. cap. 4. and Gersson in his book of the
Ecclesiastical power consid, 12. and in the treatise which he has made
concerning the Estates of the Church.

Contrartwise the Jesuits teach, that it suffiseth not to believe that the
primacie of Saint Peter is by the law of God, but that for a more accomplished
government of the Church, we must acknowledge a Monarchical, universal,
absolute, and infallible power over all Christians, yea in that which
concerns the temporalty, for to give them laws and directions, yea in Civil
matters no otherwise then does the reasonable soul rule the body, and
affections of man, this is the doctrine of Cardinal Bellarmin in his book de
Rom: Pontifice. of Salmeron in his fourth Tome, and the third part, the fourth
treatise, explaining that place of Saint Matthew: Dabo tibi claues regni
caelorum, I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven. of his
commentaries upon the 13 chapter of the Romans, and in the fourth disputation:
of Ludouicus Molina the 2. treatise de iustitia and iure, the 29. disputation:
of Azorius in the second part of his moral institutions the 4. book and 19.
chapter and of his 21. book the 3. and 5. chapter of Gregorius de Valentia in
his commentaries, of Magallianus in the beginning of his commentaries of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, to which absolute power their principal and most
secret vow, the first foundation, and motion of their institution and Order
being tied, we have small reason to doubt, but that this is the common and
certain received doctrine of all their society.

They add moreover, that Jesus Christ has given the keys with all
Ecclesiastical power to S. Peter alone, and to his successors, for to
distribute the same amongst the Apostles, Bishops, and Priests, according as
they shall think it fit: whence it follows of necessity, that the institution
of Bishops, and Curats is not by the law divine, and that the Church is a pure
sovereignty, which ought to depend on the will of the Pope alone, whereupon the
Jesuits found their great power, to the prejudice of Bishops, Curats, and
Prelates, taking upon them more authority over the flocks of other men then
the Pastors themselves. And indeed by the Bulls of Gregory the 13. of the
year 76. and 84. besides that they are exempted from the jurisdiction of all
Ordinaries as well secular as regular, all command is attributed unto them, and
they are constituted to be as it were superintendents in the Church, whence it
arises, that they usurp upon the charges of all Ecclesiastical persons, be
it either in administering the sacraments, or in any other function whatsoever,
and at this day the Penitentiary of my Lord the Bishop of Paris, although it be
furnished with three most sufficient doctors in divinity, and renowned for
their integrity, yet is it in a manner forsaken and abandoned in respect of the
Oratory of the Jesuits, and the Catholic Church of England being destitute of
Bishops by their monopoly, is deprived of the holy sacrament of confirmation.
Where it is easy to be known, whether those of the Sorbonne of Paris, who
have always maintained hierarchical order, and the dignity of Bishops, have
from the year 1554. rightly coniectured of their design, which is to withdraw
from the ordinaries the obedience and subjection due unto the^, if the Jesuits
may be sent forth as Bishops and Curates and by this fullness of power, have
more authority then the lawful pastors, the Bishops should be but as Vicars
destituable at their pleasur. S. Paul says, that the power was given him not
to destroy but to edify, and made scruple to preach the Gospel where Christ
should have bin already preached, ne superalienu^ fundamentu^ aedificaret. To.
15. and Rupertus interpreting the words of S. John. 4. chap Vt cognouit
Christus, etc. says, that the great Mr. of Humility has taught all the
doctors of the Church and of the household of faith, not to intermeddle with,
nor pester the charges and cures one of another, although that he were the sun
and the light it self, yet he would not manifest himself nor shine there,
where Saint John had first begun to show his borrowed light: can it be
imagined, that it is possible to substitute one in the place of the father of
the family with the same power and authority, as he has, to whom nature has
appointed it, or, as Gerson says, that the ordinary Pastors which are
accountable and answerable before God for their flock, should not have the
guiding and government thereof, to conclude, that a stranger should have more
priuacie with the wife, then the lawful spouse? This is against the advice of
Saint Gregory. Non ego honorem esse puto (says he,) in quo fratres honorem
suum perdere cognosco, meus namque honor est honor vniuersalis Ecclesiae, meus
honor fratrum meorum solidus vigor, tune ego vere honoratus sum, cum singulus
quibusque honor debitus non negatur: I do not think any honor to be done
unto me in that whereby I know that my brethren loose their honor, for my
honor is the honor of the universal Church, my honor is the soliderigour and
courage of my brethren, then am I truly honored, when every one in particular
has not his due honor and respect denied him. Bern. 3. Consid. cap. 5.
And S. Bernard says, honoru^ ac dignitatu^ gradus, and ordines quibusque suos
seruare positi estis no^ inuidere, You are appointed to preserve and maintain
the degrees and orders of eueryone in his particular place and dignity and not
to envy them.

Moreover the Jesuits do teach, propose, and maintain, that the Pope only is
infallible, the celebration of Councels is but for decency only, vt facilius
canones recipiantur: That the Canons may be more willingly received: that the
Synodall resolutions do depend not only of the will of the Pope, but that he
may dispense with them, change and abrogate them when he thinks good, that
the sacred elections are neither from the law of God or nature, and appertain
only to the Pope; Cardinal Bellarmine in the first book De clericis. chap. 8.
and that he may dispose of benefices, yea to the prejudice of the Patrons, and
of those upon whom they are conferred, etiam sine causa, yea without any cause,
the proper terms of Emmanuel Sa in verbo Papa. That the Bulls constitutions,
censures and excommunications, yea the Bull in coena Domini, and the Council
of Trent, in that which concerns the civil Policy do oblige the French men
in conscience although the French Church never gave consent thereunto, nor did
ever receive them. Azorius in the 5. book, the 3. chap. of his moral
institutions. If that the councels do depend entirely of the authority and
approbation of the Pope, as they maintain, and the author of the Catholic
institution persuades, when as in reckoning up those which are legitimate, he
omitteth those of Constance and of Basil, which can be upon no other ground,
but for want of being approved and allowed, by the Popes, as Mariana his
Colleague has written, it follows, (and see the mischief they run
headlong into,) that all the liberties of the French Church founded upon the
authority of the Councels are schismatic, since there is an higher
ascendent then that of the Councels, that the appellations which are interposed
upon this foundation, are gross abuses and are abominable: it follows
moreover that the sacred elections, have not their beginning from the law of
God, that the Primitive Church, and the Church of France, have been in an
error until the concordate King Frances between the first and Leo the fifth,
that you (my Lords) do usurp upon the greatest part of the jurisdiction which
you have, and the justice which you sincerely exercise, which the Council of
Trent attributes to Ecclesiastical persons.

As the doctrine of the Jesuits peruerteth the Hierarchicall order of the
Church, so does it annihilate the authority of Princes and of politic laws,
and drowneth it in the spiritual power, and is herein as opposite and contrary
to that which our Theology does believe as white is unto black, nor the
sensual appetite to reason, and if that calamities past have not wholly bereft
us of our memory, we may think it to be at this time the miraculous hand of
God, which, when we least thought upon it, seemed to lay open this occasion,
not only to make us see, but also feel and touch the cause of our sorrows.

The University of Paris teaches, that the spiritual power is no less
separated from the temporal, then heaven is from earth. The reign of the
son of God and of his Vicar our holy father is not of this world: the Church
ought not to use, (beside the Ecclesiastical censure, and that for lawful
causes and in such form and manner as is prescribed,) any other means, but
persuasion, and not constraint, her proceedings, which ought to draw us to
eternal beatitude, are simply advise and direction, and not force, and rigor,
that it can in no sort appertain unto Ecclesiastical men to meddle in secular
affairs, all their intermedling ought to be tied unto the soul and
conscience, and their jurisdiction unto those actions, which follow and depend
on the administration of the sacraments.

That by the law of God and nature, Kings holding amongst men the highest place
next and immediately under God, have all politic and civil power, and that
they alone have power over all that which concerns the temporalty, and
amongst all Princes of the earth our thrice christian Kings, to whom it
seems, that God has communicated the most lively marks and representation
of his image, who do not auow, nor acknowledge that they hold of any one but
God alone, their scepter, and their crown, which he has had in his special
protection well nigh from the time that the crown of the Savior of the world
has been adored. The King of France I say, who by the testimony of the Greek
and Latin Historiographers, and since their time by the Italian writers and
doctors is amongst other Kings as the glorious star of the day in the
midst of a cloud coming from the South bearing the crown of glory and
liberty.

Contrary unto this, the Jesuits do submit unto the absolute and infallible
Monarchy, which they seek to establish, the temporaltie of all Kings and
Princes, to the end that the spiritual power may reform, rule and correct
them when they abuse their authority, that is to say, when they do not as the
Pope would have them, and behold their sophistry, indeed say they the
spiritual power ought not to meddle directly in secular affairs, provided
that they hinder not, or be no obstacle to the end and design of the
spiritual power, or that they cannot serve, aid, or advance the same, for if
it be so, and that there be any advantage to be gotten, spiritualis potestas
potest and debet coercere temporalem omni ratione, and via, quae ad id
necessaria esse videtur: The spiritual power may and ought to correct the
temporal by any way or means whatsoever shall seem necessary thereunto; the
proper terms of Cardinal Bellarmine in the 5. book, de Romans Pontif. cap. 6.
This is the Universal doctrine of all the Jesuits before cited, and others who
have written, there being scarcely any one that has omitted to handle this
subject, which is the principal scope and end of their instruction.

This is the evil doctrine whose fallacious manner of arguing and contrary to
all the rules of discourse and disputation, hatched the troubles of the year
1584. in which time the books of Cardinal Bellarmin were published, and
preached in all corners of France: a doctrine of correction, which constrained
King Henry the third of happy memory, who had hazarded his life a thousand
times for the zeal of the Catholic religion, to use the remedy which he so
many times found by experience to be mortal and deadly, forced him to revoke
the Edict of peace under which his kingdom and Estate of France did quietly
live, for to cicatrize to his great grief so dangerous a wound.

Let us not any more deceive our selves; the false opinions in religion as they
are diseases of the soul, so ought they to be cured by spiritual remedies,
the substance of souls which is incorporall and invisible, cannot be
constrained to receive or reject any thing by force, and therefore those, who
think to establish religion by force, as the Jesuits, do wholly forsake and
abandon the law and will of God, who would not in the building of the material
Temple of Jerusalem, the figure of his Church, any one stroke should be given
with the hammer, or any other tool of iron: or that the pretext of religion
should drive men into extremities so far different from all religion, let us
not attribute unto civil war the like effect as unto the word of God, which
alone has power to confirm men's hearts in the truth, and to direct them from
the contrary: so has there nothing else arisen from thence, but that the
strong potion of this Circe of civil war made us to forget our selves and
all humanitic.

And although that both by the law of God and nature, and by humane institution
all subjects owe faithful obedience to their Kings and natural Princes,
without that any one of what quality soever, or by reason of any privilege
whatsoever can be freed or exempted. Romans 13 5.
Non solum propter iram, sea propter conscientiam: Not only for fear but for
conscience, as says the Apostle, this being prescribed both by the scriptures,
by the doctrine of the fathers, and by the Canons of the Church: the very bond
and ciment of peace between the two powers, the influence of the perfect and
accomplished harmony of all command and rule here on earth, wherein the best
and first Christians being instructed, have always made it their glory to
serve their Kings cheerfully whatsoever they were, and to accomplish their
commandments in all humble obedience even unto the death: yet notwithstanding
all this upon the doctrine of this absolute authority of correcting the
temporal power, by the spiritual, are founded the excommunications against
Kings, interdictions of their Kingdoms, discharging of their people from the
oath of fidelity and obedience, in case that their natural and liege Princes
should undertake any thing in temporal matters, contrary unto the will of the
Popes: a doctrine adiuged to be schismatic by our Church, the maintainers
thereof condemned by the Magistrates, conformably unto that which the French
Church resolved in the time of Lewis the Debonnaire, upon whom Gregory the
fourth would needs make trial of excommunication, the which resolution was
sustained and vpheld by Hinemarus Archbishop of Reims whose writings are
canonized, and confirmed in the time of Lewis the Gross against Pope Paschal
of King Philip Augustus against Celestine the 3. of Philip the fair against
Boniface the 8. and likewise by the Council of Tours in the time of Lewis the
12.

Notwithstanding the Jesuits have taken no other pretext but this to justify
the usurpation of the Kingdom of Navarre, made by Ferdinand King of Spain
upon John of Albret, for no other occasion, but because he affisted the King
of France, against the will of Julius the 2. whom Master John du Tillet Bishop
of Meaux calls perfidiosus sceleratus, and vecors, perfidious, wicked and
foolish: in stead that Mr. Gilbert Genebrard a Doctor brought up in the school
of the Sorbonne in his Chronology has written: Ferdinandum Hispaniae regem
nullo meliore iure, quam quod sibi vtile and commodum esset, regnum Nauarrae
expulso loanne Albreto occupasse: That Ferdinand King of Spain had no better
right to possess himself of the Kingdom of Navarre by expelling John Albret
but that it was fit and commodious for him.

If the Frenchmen has perseuered in this nourishment they had never sucked
this outlandish poison which afterward was diffused into their veins, we had
not seen the rebellion stirred up against our good King Henry the 3. by this
doctrine, confirmed by the book, whereof Bellarmin was the Author, entitled
Franciscus Romulus, published in the year 88. by which (the minds of the
French men being at that time, as they reported sufficiently disposed and
prepared) it was persuaded, that the taking of arms against a Sovereign
Prince, was lawful we had not seen so many fellowe-Citizens cruelly bent one
to the ruin of the other, the heart of this poor Estate oppressed with so
many calamities, the breast thereof so surcharged with anguish and endurances,
and the skin so dried up, and withered upon the bones, that there was neither
muscle nor sinew of this great body which could discharge his function, and our
Country of France a thousand times as it were at the last gasp.

But more then this it had never entered into the thought of a French man, if
this doctrine had not been, that it was lawful to make any attempt upon the
sacred persons of Kings, and permitted to kill them: for as they have taught,
that Kings may be excommunicated, and deposed, if they failed to submit
themselves unto the will of this absolute power, so they have also said, that
it was meritorious to kill them, and by the one have proved the other, this is
the course they take to prove it. Princes by being excommunicate condemned and
deposed of public persons become private and particular men, without having
either authority, or subjects: and so from being Kings they become tyrants,
usurpers, and perturbers of the common peace and repose. Occupantem tyrannice
potestatem quisque de populo potest occidere, si aliud non sit remedium, est
enim publicus hostis: Emanuel Sa in verbo Tyrannus. Any one of the common
people whatsoever may kill him who tyrannically usurps the authority, if
there be no other remedy, for he is a public enemy. The object of all the
enterprises made by Parricides, upon which ground both Cardinal Bellarmin in
his Apology against the King of England, page 299. and Ioannes Mariana in his
first book de rege and regis institutione, and the Jesuits likewise author of
the book entitled Amphitheatrum honoris, have all after one manner praised
the abominable parricide of our poor Prince, and the Jesuits of Bourdeaux,
have both said and written, that this was the cause of their safety, which
this very doctrine the rashness of Barriere was armed in the year 1593. streng
thened by the Counsel of Varrade Rector of the Jesuits against our invincible
King Henry the fourth. At which time father Commolet did egg him forward by
his outcries, Judge. 3.15.
desiring an Ehud of what quality soever he were, believing that Barriere could
not fail of his enterprise, or, if he did, that he would stir up the mind
of some other to attempt the like.

A great misfortune that France has lost this advantage which in ancient time
was attributed unto her, that she nourished no monsters. But God stirred up
his Hercules, to the end that he might subdue them, of whose hand next after
his bounty he would we should receive this divine work, and the miracle of
the rising again of this Estate.

In this time the Jesuits knew that there rested nothing which could any more
be opposed against the victorious arms of our great King, that he was as
certainly assured of the honor of conquering his Kingdom, as that it justly
appertained unto him, they made show, as if they would take a sweeter and more
pleasing tune, and for to uphold and preserve their society, published the
resolution which they said their General had made at Rome in the end of the
year. 1593. by the which they were expreslie forbidden to intermeddle with any
affairs, they protested to obey the same, and to renounce all factions, to
honor and serve the King as Subjects, whose clemency should more appear in
pardoning them all, then in the remnant and surplus of those who had swarued
and straied from their duty, this is that which then they touched in their
pleading, and by their defense put in print, and it may be, was the only
reason and consideration, that they were not at that time deprived of the Kings
grace and pardon.

The wisdom of the Jesuits consists in gaining time upon such occasions,
their design never dying, they attend the commodity that their seed may bring
forth fruit in season: four or five months after, at the instant that the
King left his army, this Prince, the Pourtrait of valor it self; in the
midst of two hundred gentlemen, in his house of the Louure is wounded by
Chastel, a scholar of the Jesuits, nourished in their doctrine; and hurt in
such sort, that without the manifest providence of God, who loved us, at that
time this Monarchy had been utterly subverted, and we miserable men had
been deprived of the blessings which he afterward obtained for us, by his
incomparable valor, his justice, and piety, no less admired at by all the
world, then his arm and his sword were redoubted.

This miserable monster, in the presence of you, my Lords, said he ought else
but that the King, although he were a Catholic, was yet out of the Church,
that he yet stood excommunicate, that he must be slain: is there any thing
here to be seen differing from their propositions? Barriere had said as much
before, Guignard the Jesuit written it, and after a thousand blasphemies
uttered against his natural Prince, Henry the 3. added this moreover against
the last King. If he cannot be deposed without war, let arms be taken
against him: if that cannot be done; let him be killed.

True enemies of quiet and repose, quite contrary unto the disciples of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who used no other arms but their prayers: and preached
nothing but love, charity, and concord. Your enterprises against our Kings and
their Crowns, by your own confession, deserved a greater condemnation then
that which was pronounced against you by the decrees, what tongue can
sufficiently praise the power and effects of the Justice of this great
Parliament, which in the midst of the greatest tempests, has always
measured her actions by the compass of the good, and honor of this Estate?
notwithstanding all oppositions your glory shall remain immortal.

Plato in his Politickes holds an opinion which has been followed by many
others, that there are ages in the which God in person sits at the Stern of
this Universe, does guide and turn it according to his good pleasure; but that
again there are other times in which God neglects this government, and that
then the world destitute of the conduct of his creator takes a motion contrary
unto that which God gave it: so that the East comes to be the West, and the
North takes the place of the South; and that when this universal conversion
does happen, the generations, fashions, and manners of men, are either extinct
or changed. As Christians we are brought up in a better school, and fully
resolved that the providence of God never abandoneth the guiding and conduct of
the world, and does not in any age permit the Intelligences or Angels which
move the celestial spheres, to depart from the motion and measure which has
been once prescribed them, notwithstanding when calamities reign in the
world, it seems that God sleeps, and that he will meddle no more with
ought, the rebellion of the people accompanied with all kind of vices, with
forgetfulness toward God; and all sorts of miseries and calamities during the
civil war, had taken so deep root: and so strange and marvelous a growth.

On the contrary with the acknowledgement of our King, our Sovereign, and
lawful Prince: with the concord of us who are fellow-Citizens, and his
Subjects; as God more properly made us to see his presence and his government,
so likewise he made us feel his bounty; never was there more affection in each
one to perform his duty; more devotion toward his Prince: more grace in
particular, more hope of future times, it seemed that the souls of all
Frenchmen loosed out of prison, enjoyed such a liberty as never could be
expected or hoped for.

There had been more spent in seeking to dispoile our King of his rightful
inheritance, then ever was in making war against the Turk: nevertheless all
the injuries which he had received from the time of Sixtus the 5. and his
successors until Clement the 8. could not withold him from discharging the
duty of a thrice Christian King, from sacrificing al his passions and just
apprehension of the wrongs he had received to the glory of God, and the good
of his people. Thus our King, whilst he lived exalted above the most renowned
Emperors; richer then ever Prince was in the love of his people, had the good
will of all his subjects equally, and as he was all our hope; so was he the
terror of all our enemies.

And that which made the blessing of God entire, was, that never there were so
good courses taken, and greater success in the conversion of those which were
out of the Church: in private there were such mild communications, such
meetings; and endeavors for the honor of God, and of the Catholic Church: and
so visible an operation of the holy spirit, that those who were not yet
touched, were more astonished then grieved, or displeased thereat. What was the
success of the conference at Fountaine-bleau where the King himself was
moderator, and did give light unto others by his example; as the light in the
midst of the Temple: where that learned Prelate, that most illustrious
Cardinal, that mind enriched with immortal graces, by his Christian temper
did more profit the Catholic religion, then ten thousand Jesuits could ever
do by their preaching of fire and sword? O what victories were there in
public of the greatest wits, from whom the holy Sea and all Christendom has
received most notable services, what in private and particular of those who
wanted rather opportunity then will.

The perfection of a man consists in the contemplation of the truth, there is
nothing which so much tempereth the inconsiderate zeal of those who are in an
error, as to show them, that no other force shall be used upon their
consciences but that of the truth: and as the King did earnestly endeavor it,
having established the Catholic religion, and made the mass to be celebrated
in more then three hundred Towns of his Kingdom, where it had not been said
in five and thirty or forty years before, so did he promise the
accomplishme^t of this holy work in the conversion of the greatest of his
Estate, and of his neighbor Princes, who suffered themselves to be persuaded
both by the force of reason, and by the miracle of his example.

The holy scripture teaches us, that too curious and nice dividing causes
schism, the Church has felt the discommodity thereof; too much uniting is the
other extremity which threatens the like inconvenience: All the body is not
the eye, says the Apostle, for then what should become of the hearing? and the
body is not one member, but many: God having composed the body of such a
temperature that he would have the members to have care perpetually one of
another: that which delaieth the conversion of an infinite company of men
separated from the Church, although they are satisfied in all other points of
the Catholic faith, is this absolute power and authority which they cannot
brook, this is that which augmenteth their distrust, and suspicions and
puts off the reconciliation of many; this is the mean whereby the Jesuits
have overthrown the estate of Hungary, made the Turk master of the better
part thereof, and that the rest is held but at his pleasure, this has troubled
Transiluania, bred disorder and confusion in Polonia and Sweden, without that
any part of the world can be free from this trouble.

These are the profitable services, which the Jesuits do unto the Church; who
for the establishing of this power, and for their particular ambition do make
as small conscience to hurt the best Catholics, as those whom they hold to be
separated from the Church, that they may verify a part of the decree of the
Sorbonne, Multas in populo querelas, multas lites, aemulationes, dissiaia,
contentiones, variaque schismata inducit: That it brings in many quarrels
among the people, much strife, aemulation, discord and contention, and diverse
schisms: not to repeat the example of our last troubles, when they would from
the beginning abridge King Henry the third a Prince most Catholic of his
servants, yea so far forth as to deny them the holy Communion. The school of
Paris has felt their calumny, the Cardinal Bellarmin having written in the
4. book de Romans Pont. chapter 1. and 2. that the opinion of the school of
Paris which does not auow the absolute and infallible power, erat erronea and
haeresi proxima. Nay rather is it not heresy to doubt of the faith of the
school of Paris? It is true, that for proof of his proposition he alleges a
passage of Deuteronomy chap. 17. which (I very much grieve that this occasion
enforces to speak it,) he has corrupted, for whereas it is in all the
editions of the Bibles, yea, in that which was received and imprinted by the
commandment of Pope Sixtus the fifth, according to the text of the tongues
Veniesque ad Sacerdotes Leuitici generis and ad iudicem qui fuerit illo
tempore, quaeresque ab eis, qui indicabunt tibi iudicii veritatem. And thou
shall come unto the Priests of the Leuits, and to the Judge that shall be in
those days: and shall enquire of them, and they shall show thee the truth of
the judgment. He has written ad Sacerdotem, against the express prohibition
of the holy spirit, which forbids us to change or diminish any thing from
the book of life. The self same happened unto the Author of the Catholic
institution the second book 8. chapter, upon the like subject, where citing
the place of Saint Luke, chapt. 22. Ego autem rogaui pro te Petre vt non
deficiat fides tua, and tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. But I
have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not, and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren: he transposeth this word aliquando from one
period unto another, and writes: Ego rogaui prote Petre, vt non aliquando
deficiat fides tua, abusing this word aliquando for nunquam. But they do not
this wrong to the school of Paris alone, there is no Ecclesiastical order nor
Religion which they have not gone about publicly to disgrace, who knows not
what their ambition has cost the Catholic Church of England, which they had
welnigh undone in stead of aiding it? After the decease of Cardinal Alan the
conducting of the English Seminaries was committed unto the Jesuits, presently
they meditated how they might take from the Priests and Ecclesiastical men of
the Country, whose devotion and affection had been proved, the rule and
authority from over their flock, for to attribute it unto themselves, caused
Arch-priests to be made which should yield them a reason of all things, and
would that the contributions and alms of the Country, which are not small,
should be distributed by their hands, which caused more trouble amongst those
poor Catholics, then all their persecution, in the which, before they meddled
with matters, there was never any object of committing treason: yea they came
to such excess that some Ecclesiastical men of England, having passed the Sea
for to advertise his holiness of this disorder Persons the Jesuit made them to
be put in prison, and to be handled as malefactors and schismatikes, and
hindered their appeals from being received.

These poor men thus afflicted found means by the Council of the University
of Paris, to make the justice of their complaint to appear, whereupon came
forth the Breue of Pope Clement the 8. by which the Ecclesiastical men of
England were forbidden to render any account of their administration, unto the
Jesuits, or to their General, nor to communicate their affairs unto them by
letters or otherwise, but to address themselves, directly to his holiness,
with reuocation of that which Cardinal Caietan protector of England, had
decreed in favor of them, principally concerning the distribution of the
alms: and after that, the trouble of that Church ceased, and the peace thereof
had continued longer, had it not been for the negotiations of the Jesuits, in
that which rather concerned the Monarchy of the world, then the Kingdom of
heaven.

Another example without exception, and the carriage whereof was public and
notorious, a testimony of the mediocrity, whereof they boast that they have
gotten the perfection, and of the peace which they procure unto the Church. The
inquisitio^ was placed in the hands of the Dominicans, as well for their great
and excellent knowledge, as for the great services they had done the Catholic
Church, time has not diminished the ancient and first glory of this order. The
Jesuits, whose design tends to the sovereign dignity of the Church,
bethought themselves to stir up against them a dispute which they call de
auxillijs, concerning justification: thinking that by getting some advantage
upon the reputation of these Religious men less cunning then they are, it
would be easy to pull out of their hands this powerful function, although
they never had abused the same. Which Pope Clement understanding forbad the
disputation, notwithstanding the Jesuits published the same: and there is no
man who is ignorant, that this wise and holy Pope desired to abate their
ambition, confessing that he had entered into speech thereof, with Cardinal
Tolet, who preferred toward his latter end the honor and good of the Church,
before the factions of his society; that he had sought means to make the
counsel of Sixtus the fifth to prevail, which was to shut them up, and to
submit their General to the capitular resolutions of the society, and to make
him triennall, from the which that they might secure themselves, they have
obtained a Bull from Pope Gregory the foureteenth, which imports
excommunication to all those who should offer to enterprise the like: but the
Pope being not able to bring it to pass, and Cardinal Tollet being deceased,
he would, under color of reforming their Order, have sent their General into
Spain, which the Jesuits withstood, affirming unto his Holiness, that he
could not do it without prejudice of his health, which made one amongst them to
enquire of a woman which was possessed with an evil spirit, what should be the
success of that voyage, doubting with others of his society, that this was a
mean to diminish the power of Aquauiua which is as great at Rome as that of
the Pope.

The leaven which the Jesuits had left in the Towns where the Kings Edict
touching there banishment was not executed, made them always to increase the
hope of their return, histories the witness of time, the memory of ages
past, the mirror of men, the messenger of all the accidents which declare the
truth, shall faithfully report unto posterity, that they have not omitted ought
which might make for their purpose, and they have not concealed it, in a great
discourse composed of thirty or forty articles which they published, and
supposed it to have been made in the year 1603. by the King, in answer to the
grave remonstrances of his Parliament, which they impose and thrust upon
strange nations as if it were true, having made it to be printed in Latin and
Italian, and lately Gretserus in Germany for their last discharge, and also
Posseuin, do employ it in their Bibliotheca or Chronicle which they have
composed, to the end that this imposture should pass current unto posterity:
who after that they had been so bold as to compare their reestablishment which
was of pure and mere grace, unto the divine and lawful establishment of our
King in his Estate, yet they confess that they obtained it as they might, and
very hardly. As we all acknowledge that the clemency of our King has given
peace to his people, so it was necessary for him to assure the foundations
thereof by justice, in case of so great, so inueterate and pernicious a
corruption, and for the sure establishment of the common weal not to content
himself to command well, but to inhibite the committing of evil. Great King
which have been without comparison more exalted in virtue then in dignity,
above other men, your good servants wounded by the knife which has shortened
your days, shall for ever complain that your unmeasured clemency and
gentleness, has increased the boldness of those who have been to you as
very infidels, as you have been unto them a good and gracious King.

Our heart was sound, our wound recovered and the grief of the University in
particular began to break away, when the Jesuits employed the intercession
of Pope Clement the 8. about their reestablishment in this kingdom. All
Christendom can be witness of the devotion which our King did bear toward
the holy Sea, and of the honor which he gave particularly unto Pope Clement,
for his high, great, and eminent virtues: the bounty of the King more respected
the contentment of the Pope, and the assurance which he gave him, then the
natural apprehension of the injuries and outrages which he had received, so
that after many commandments unto you, my Lords, and many remonstrances by
you, the letters which they had obtained were verified, it being worth the
noting that the conditions added unto their reestablishment, by means whereof
men thought to bring them to the terms of simple religious men, and obedient
Subjects, being consented and agreed unto by the Pope, were not allowed by
their General, by reason that they were different from the principal rules of
their Order, they kept close this secret from us, by the which they thought
themselves to be dispensed with, from all that which was required of them, and
from that which they promised, not being able to be bound without the consent,
and will of the General, they being more bound unto him then unto God; the
Church, or Pope, or to all the world beside. They were reestablished in the
month of January 1604. and a little before, their brethren of Doway had
managed the enterprise upon the person of Duke Maurice, and had sent their
Purueior named Pan to execute it. And a short time after was discovered
another design of their good intentions, to wit the conspiracy of the which
three of their fathers Tesmond, Gerard and Garnet, had the managing against the
King of England, and all the Estates and Magistrates of the country, the most
prodigious that ever could enter into the heart of man, and which surpasses
and confounds all the excess and villainy of former times. The Estates of
England were summoned, the place and day appointed, and the ouerture prepared:
the conspirators had found means to fill the vault under the room where the
assembly should have been, with such a quantity of gunpowder, hidden and
covered with wood, that with the least artifice, from as far off as they
listed, they could have blown up and ouerthrown a whole kingdom at one instant:
they themselves have thus described it, and part of those which were guilty,
have confessed it: It is not the mean to establish the Catholic Religion, to
fill an Estate with murders and horrible combustion, it is rather the way to
give cause unto heretics, stiffly to bend themselves against proceedings so
contrary to moderation and mildnes, which God has left as a mark of his
light, and to make that the Christian verity never return more thither from
whence it has been expelled, and that it come to pass, that infidelity and
paganism shall rather succeed heresy, then that ever there should be any
amendment or restoring of that which is better.

From this establishing of the spiritual power above the temporal, proceeds
this other proposition of the doctrine of the Jesuits, to wit, that
Ecclesiastical men are neither subjects, nor under the jurisdiction of any
Prince, but of the Pope alone, yea in that which concerns temporal matters,
that living in the Estate of any one whatsoever, they are not bound by the
laws nor policies, be they fundamental and most supreme: and therefore
Bellarmine in his treatise de Clericis from the 28. chapter to the 30. Emmanuel
Sa in his Confessionary upon the word Clericus, Gretserus in his writings
against the commonwealth of Venice, do concur, together with all the rest
of their society, that although Ecclesiastical men should conspire against the
Estate or person of the Prince, yet they cannot encurre the danger of Treason,
because he is neither King nor Prince as to them, neither are they subjects in
respect of him.

The school of Paris on the contrary has always held and taught, that
Ecclesiastical men as natural subjects of the Princes and commonwealths, in
the which it has pleased God they should be borne, are bound in the self same
manner as other men are to obey the laws of direction, and constraint, and are
exempt only in regard of that which concerns Gods divine service, and the
competent maintenance of the Ecclesiastical Estate: and as to this point the
Jesuits dispute fallaciously, going from the declaration of a very special and
particular exemption to an entire general and absolute immunity, contrary unto
the doctrine of the Church, who teaches us that as the fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom, so the fear of the Magistrate is the beginning of
discretion, that as this life is the shadow of the life eternal, so the laws
of Princes and Kingdoms are a figure of the eternal law: so that he that
loves not the figure shows that he loves yet less the thing figured.

This exemption continuing it is not to be doubted but that Ecclesiastical
men, should be as it were so many garrisons of strangers in an Estate: and if
the Prince or magistrate would constrain them to any thing for the good of
his Estate, it arises from the same learning, that in as much as they are not
his subjects, he should be a tyrant and an usurper, which might be deposed and
killed by any one whosoever: This was the foundation of the trouble which we
have seen stirred up against the commonwealth of Venice, ever most
Catholic, and devoted to the holy Sea, which cannot be attributed to any
but the Jesuits, whom the Senate of that commonwealth, in honor of the
Catholic religion had carefully cherished fifty or threescore years in such
sort that four or five years before, they had bestowed a great Palace upon
them for their College, where they had above three hundred scholars, children
of the best houses of Venice, and possessed in this Estate twelve or fifteen
thousand crowns a year revenues. During the Papacy of Pope Clement the
Venicians had published an ordinance by the which Ecclesiastical men were
inhibited from acquiring any immoueables, this holy father knew it well enough
without taking offense thereat. And how could he take it in evil part since that
in the Estate of Milan there was the like prohibitio^ strictly observed, and
that the Pope that now is upon his first coming unto the Popedom, had
forbidden the house of Loretta to purchase any more immoueables: the Jesuits
being desirous nevertheless to purchase a Palace of pleasure upon the river
of Brent near unto the City, were hindered by this law, so as the gentlewoman
which was owner thereof drew back, and said, that she had been seduced by her
Confessor. This nourished in their minds an evil will toward the State: so
that two Ecclesiastical men of Vincence being imprisoned for most horrible
crimes, the Jesuits, taking their time, gave advertisement unto the Pope, that
these were enterprises upon his authority, and of those who depended
immediately on him; that the Venetians had no power to make laws, which should
concern Ecclesiastical men, although they were necessary for their Estate and
conservation, without the will and consent of the Pope, neither to decree any
thing without making him first acquainted therewithal; thus doing, they took
from them all sovereignty, they persuaded the excommunication with all
earnestness, whereunto Cardinal Zapata, protector of Spain subscribing, for
confirmation of their counsel said, that this action done for the greatness of
the Church, merited a statue of gold, dedicated to immortality. This first
breach gave apprehension of great calamities to ensue, so that the Pope
naturally desirous of mild and gentle courses, and inclined thereunto by the
counsel of the Princes of Christendom, and specially of that of our great
King, was again exasperated by the Jesuits, and by letters which they wrote
unto their General, who has no show of a religious man besides his habit,
and behaueth himself in all his actions as one who would raise some great
Empire: they promised that the Senate would be divided, and that the people
would rise, that the scholars which they had were as so many prisoners, and
assurances of their promises, that the excommunication should have the like
effect at Venice as at Ferrara: and upon this was the interdict published.

The commonwealth of Venice contented it self in this occurrence, to forbid
all Ecclesiastical men to trouble the state of men's consciences, and to take
from them all occasion of excuse, gave the religious men choice to stay, or to
retire themselves, the Jesuits made answer, that they would conform
themselves to the ordinances of the commonwealth: in the mean time they
secretly send father Posseuin to Rome to their General, and under hand labor to
suborne other Ecclesiastical men, and to hinder their obedience due unto their
Sovereign.

There fell out an action very memorable of a good religious man accustomed to
plain honest dealing, which had no other end but the love of God, and not the
care of worldly affairs, or of rule and government: the Provincial of the
Capuchins, a man of singular integrity, and of a holy life, who wrote unto all
the Couents of his Order, that if the Prince and commonwealth should command
any thing contrary unto the twelve Articles of the Creed, they were rather to
suffer a thousand deaths, then to obey it: but that in whatsoever thing else
should be commanded them, they should discharge the duty of good subjects
without any scruple of conscience, upon pain of his indignation, the which
they ought to fear as much as death it self. True holiness without
dissimulation or ambition, which shall crown the glory of this obedience with
immortality, which, in despite of these new doctrines, the wind of truth shall
blow into all corners of the Christian world.

There passed not many days before that there were fathers and husbands which
complained that their wives and children made a doubt whether they should yield
them the love and obedience due unto them, being afrighted by the Jesuits who
preached that they were excommunicate and damned: and notwithstanding that at
their departure from Venice, they had burned a great quantity of their papers,
fearing least they should be seen, nevertheless there were found some bearing
wirnesse, that they kept a register of the confessions of men of quality, and
that they had sent a great mass of money unto Rome, and carried away all the
ornaments which had been given to their Churches, and at Padua and Bresse
where they were surprised and had not leisure to dispose of their papers, nor
to burn them, there were found so many enquiries and searches of the
disposition of the Estate, and of all the families in particular, that it was a
most infallible token that they had some great design in hand, to the
execution whereof was required so painful a curiosity.

It is another secret very remarkable: that they stirred up this trouble in
the Estate of Venice, then when the Count de Fuentes had an army on foot in
Italy for the King of Spain, and had caused two great forts to be built which
are held impregnable, for to hinder the passage of the Switzers and the
Grisons; by means whereof they thought assuredly in them selves, that these
forces and their directio^s meeting, they might have transferred that Estate,
as they did that of Portugal, first by the vanity wherewith they knew how to
puff up the mind of the King, Don Sebastian to his ruin and utter overthrow,
who had suffered them to bear authority in his Estate: then by withdrawing the
affection of King Henry the Cardinal his successor from John Duke of Bragance
husband unto Catherine his niece, and daughter of Edward his brother, which had
excluded Isabel from whom the King of Spain was descended, to make use of it
in his behalf, and in strengthening his pretention, and likewise by the war
which they kindled against Don Antonio acknowledged to be their natural and
lawful Prince, in the which they spared not the blood of two thousand good
Religious men, loyal unto their King, by reason whereof there was obtained a
Bull of special absolution.

For beside that the stock and race of him who was the founder of the Jesuits
is Spanish, and their Generals of the same nation, or of some other country
subject unto the King of Spain, which inspireth into them a particular
affection unto that Estate: they aiming at no other mark, but the absolute
establishment of the spiritual power wherewith they promise readily to crush
and beat down heresies, have more need of force then persuasion, and do
rather choose to make use of the material sword then the spiritual: now the
King of Spain being he who most applies himself unto this design, they
seek to exalt him above all other Princes: and indeed they have written that
the Emperor Charles the sift and King Philip did well conform themselves unto
this resolution, but that they were hindered by the Kings of France, without
whom heresy had been quite rooted out: they say that King Frances the first
made alliance with the Turk, that Henry the second defended the Protestants,
whom the Emperor would have destroyed, that Henry the 3. made alliance with the
Queen of England, Germans, and Switzers: that Spain has received the
Council of Trent, and caused the inquisition to the strictly observed.

Great ingratitude! are there any Princes in the world that have so much
exalted the Catholic Religion as the Kings of France, and which have more
augmented the holy Sea? the Donations of Pepin and Charlemaine falsely
attributed unto Constantine, the arms of France so often tra^sported into the
holy land, those of king Lewis the 12. and of his successors employed in
recovering the Popes estate which was usurped on, all this is nothing to those
who prefer their novelties before any other consideration, and are bound to
take it in evil part, that the thrice christian Kings of France for the
conservation of their Estate have maintained themselves against Charles the
fist, and never blame the alliance which he bought with King Henry the 8. of
England, for to ruinate and subvert us.

And for proof of this their affection conspiring against us, those which have
gone from amongst them do report, that they observe this order, that in every
house there are two which keep registers, and have the charge of matters of
Estate, to whom the rest do confess themselves, and are bound to report what
they learn; this is carried by the Visiters unto their General, (and he must
be a Neapolitane, Sicilian, or Spaniarde,) to give advise thereon.

And in the year 1604 there being discovered a co^fraternity of Jesuits
associated, (as they say) that a whole Town may be Iesuited) who made their
assembly in the house of the Jesuits in the City of Genua, in the which those
of the brotherhood had sworn not to give their voices for the election of
Magistrates and public officers, to any but those of their fraternity, the
Commonwealth having greatly contested against such a monopoly and being
resolved to have expelled the Jesuits, they said that they had done it,
because some of the Town had intelligence with the Frenchmen, and seemed to
affect and favor them.

But the Commonwealth of Venice has not admitted any excuses for their
enterprises, nor like unwise men stayed from digging and making hollow their
wels until they were ready to die for thirst: for after that they had been
informed of their carriage, of their sermons which they made in the Towns
adioining unto their Estate, and of the calumnies and slanders which they spread
against the Duke Leonardo Donato, whose innocence and piety are known and
renowned as well as his wisdom, made a decree whereby the Jesuits were
perpetually and irreuocably banished out of their Estate, not leaving them any
hope ever to deliberate or think of their establishment.

And God being so pleased, that our great King should be the author of peace in
the South as well as in the North, the Jesuits only were excluded from the
benefit of this universal reconciliation, this sage Commonwealth so well knew
how to relish and make use of the deliverance from the danger it was fallen
into, that it would rather have chosen war, then to have made peace admitting
the Jesuits.

Oh! would to God we had not been so credulous, that we had been as severe
within our selves, as strong and puissant abroad, that for to refresh the liver
we had not cooled and taken away the heat of our stomachs, we should not have
been the discourse of all nations of the Earth, the subject of their pity and
commiseration, the proof of what they said, to wit, that the Jesuits compass
great and weighty enterprises by taking hold of small advantages, and unlikely
to do hurt; we had then been ignorant of their rare doctrines which they have
both preached and published, as that it was more meritorious to pay tribute and
impositions, then to give alms, that a man may blaspheme without committing
mortal sin, that Ladies may lawfully paint and farde themselves, yea for to
please the world, that usury is lawful, and by the same rule theft should be
tolerable, so it were to bestow in alms; that it is no simony to give money for
benefices; Modoid fiat non tanquam pretium, sed tanquam motiuum ad resignandum,
vel tanquam motiuum aliquod gratuitum: So it be given not as a price, but as a
motive to resign, or some motive of free will and of gratuitie: the proper
terms of Gregorius de Valentia upon the Sum of Saint Thomas Tome 3. disput.
4. question 16. page 3. fol. 2039. we had never learned to recompense good
with evil, nor the form of ambulatory co^fessions, being all but superficial
cures of vices, things unbeseeming true religious men.

We had not scene in these our days (horrible things) interrogatories framed
for to learn of her, which was said to be possessed with an evil spirit, the
truth of the doctrine, and difficult places of scripture, ill curiosities
forbidden in the 18 chapter of Deuteronomy, and also by a Council held at
Narbonne upon pain of excommunication: and Sozomene in the third book 5.
chap. reports, that a Deacon of the Primitive Church was deposed for bauing
been transported with the like curiosity: and Gregory of Tours for the same
occasion blames a son of Gontran, because he had sent to ask questions of a
Pythonisse, so he calls a woman which had an evil spirit and Saint Thomas
says: Non licet Daemones adiurare per modum deprecationis, quia id ad
beneuolentiam pertinet, qua non licet ad Daemones vti, ne socij Daemonum
fiamus: licet tamen per virtutem diuini numinis eos adiurando eijcere, ne
noceant, non autem vt aliquid per eos discamus aut consequamur: It is not
lawful to adjure the devils by way of deprecation, or request, because that is
a token of good will, which we may not bear unto them, least we become
companions of devils: but it is lawful by the virtue of God his divine power
by adiuration to cast them out, that they do no hurt, but not to learn or
attain any thing by them.

And that which is most heinous and capital by all laws, to enquire of the
health of the Prince, and of the secrets of Estate, these were the very
terms: Quid circa sanitatem regis, quid circa compositionem armorum inter
regem, and magnates subditos, quid circa vrbes obsidionales, quid circa bellum
cum Hispanis, vel cum haereticis: How long the King should live, what should
come to pass as concerning the composition between the King and his Nobles,
what of the garrison Towns, what concerning the war with the Spaniards, or
with the Heretics. Tertullian says, that it appertains not to any man to
enquire concerning the life of the Prince, but those who have some enterprise
upon his person, or who lay the foundation of some great hope upon his death:
and he which instructed a Mathematician, forbad him expressly to meddle with the
life of Kings, or with the Estate of Common wealths. Non enim oportet vt de
statu reipub. aliquid nefaria curiositate discamus: For we ought not, neither
is it lawful for us by wicked curiosity to learn any thing concerning the
Estate of the commonwealth. Kings to whom God has given the government of the
Earth, to whom all power and dignities are subject, participating immediately
of the greatness of God do not depend on the course of the Planets, and ought
not to fall into the curiosity of men. It is reserved to God alone how long the
life of a great King, or the peace and prosperity of his Estate shall endure.

As little had we understood the proposition and resolution of Ioannes de
Salas Castelanus Gumeliensis in his commentaries which he has made in primam
secundam of Saint Thomas, dedicated to Aquauiua their father General tractat.
8. disput. vnica sect. 5. near the end, which is more dangerous for the setting
wide open of Monasteries, then the doctrine of heretics; for making this
question. Vtrum semper sequi liceat opinionem, quaeagenti probabilior aut aeque
probabilis apparet, behold his resolution: Religiosus autem efficacissima debet
habere motiua, vt probabiliter opinaretur, veramesse, reuelationem, qua secum
dispensaret Deus, vt matrimonium contraheret, contra communem legem: hactenus
enim Deus nunquam dispensauit: Si tamen veram probabilitatem haberet, posset ad
euitanda magna incommoda, vti dispensatione dubia, and tantum probabili, quod
etiam in dispensationibus quorundam praelatorum obseruatum est. Whether it be
lawful to follow always the opinion which seems unto the undertaker more
probable or as probable as any other, behold his resolution. That a Religious
man ought to have most powerful motives, that he may probably conjecture that
the revelation is true whereby God would dispense with him to marry contrary
unto the common law of marriage; for God never yet dispensed with any one: But
if he has had any true probability he may, for avoiding of greater
inconveniences use a dispensation though it be doubtful and only probable,
which has been also observed in dispensing with certain Prelates. From
henceforth fastings, orisons and prayers will become unprofitable to preserve
chastity, every one will abuse his revelation, for to put in ure the evil
passions of his soul.

And indeed the precept was not long without an example: Menas the Jesuit
committed so scandalous an incest that he was called in question for it in the
inquisition of Spain; those of his company by faining a miracle freed him from
his punishment, which lighted upon the officers at Valladolid, who were
displaced for that piece of service: the scandale hereof is redoubled in the
writings of Sanches and of Chetora, who are of the same society, the only
imagination whereof is sufficient to make a man loose the knowledge of himself
and to become worse then a beast.

And like unto this is that which is common in every man's hand set forth some
four months ago, to wit the sermons made upon the beatification of their
father Ignacius, by the which the name of Ignacius is not only equalled with
that of our Savior and placed in parallel with it: but surrogated in his
place: the miracles done in the name of the Almighty for exalting of his
glory, and the confusion of Infidels, which we believe as an article of our
faith, abased, diminished, and distrusted. For to extol those of father
Ignacius, I say not uncertain, but altogether untrue, and which never were, as
they themselves confess, since that Pibadenera in the fifth book of his life
says thus of him, eius sanctitatem minus testatam miraculis: that his
sanctity was not so much testified by miracles, and as if they had commerce
and negotiation with heretics, from making him Gods Vicar, applying unto him
that of S. Paul: fungimur legatione pro Christo, we are employed in the
message of Christ, from calling him the ministerial head of the Church, they
make him successor unto Jesus Christ himself, striking at his holy
resurrection, and the eternity of his reign in the Church.

O learned, o sweet, o free antiquity how thou art fair with all thy wrinkles,
with the lineaments of thy countenance defaced and hardly to be discerned, O
holy school of Sorbonne, how perfect is the virtue of your mediocrity, inspire
into thy successors the truth of the prophecy of thy decree verified in the
year 1554. these are the words thereof, Societas haec periculosa in negotio
fidei: This society is dangerous in matter of faith, in this age corrupted
with passion, and adulation let this truth find one mouth exempt from this
contagion: neither have they failed; there censure and testimony constant and
loyal unto the truth shall ever be seen, and appear notwithstanding,
the-threats, and inuectiues of the Jesuits full of bitterness, being as so
manybels of the Coribantes which serve to no other purpose but to trouble and
disquiet the heads of those who are least stayed and settled.

Let us add hereunto the invention of their equivocations, and dissimulations,
of their homonymies, which are deceipts of similitude and appearance in stead of
the thing it self, changing the substance without changing the name: which
they confess that they make use of, when they are to answer unto Kings and
Magistrates, and other persons bearing office in the commonwealth, whose
subjects they do not believe they are, nor that they are iusticiable by them,
their words and their answers are like the images of Dedalus which deceived the
sense, changing their visage and countenance, as often as a man did cast his
eyes upon them. This invention of aequiuocation reduced into an art, and
recommended by Nauarrus in favor of this society, not only like unto the
artifice practiced by Arrius, who after he had subscribed unto the Council of
Nice, swear unto another confession of faith which he had written in his
bosom, altogether different from that: but also unto that law of the
Manichees, which permitted them to answer quite contrary unto that which was
true indeed, and that which they perfectly knew, noted by Lucas Siculus in the
time of the Emperor Basil, and which he reports, setting it down in these
words: Iura periura sceretum prodere noli.

By reason whereof, for to confirm their evil doctrines, then when there is
any danger to be avoided or advantage to be taken, it is both lawful and
honorable to use this invention, yea boldly to gainesay that which they are
most assured of: witness that which they have done by the writing of Richeome,
who making answer to an interrogatory ministered unto them which was thus: what
they would do in case there should be a Pope which after the example of Julius
the 2. should iniustly display his censures against France? being urged, he
answered, That their society would do that which good Frenchmen then did, who
defending their rights did not give over the respect due unto the holy Sea, did
acknowledge the Pope to be the head only in spiritual matters, approving the
Council of Tours of the year 1510. held for the defense of the rights of Lewis
the 12. Cardinal Bell. in the treatise which he has made against the divines
of Venice, says, that the meaning of Richeome was only to show, that good
French men ought to obey the Pope without debating the matter, and counsel the
King to come to agreement with him, and not to resist him by arms.

This is the reason that all their declarations are conceived in defective and
incertaine words, to the end that they may disaduow, revoke or otherwise
interpret them, when they shall think good: and that which is most
intolerable, yea most unchristianlike, they ground these cauillations and
dissimulations upon textes of scripture, which they corrupt most licentiously,
as if God the father of truth, had taught the contrary to truth. And as it
falls out ordinarily, that the worst gets mastery of that which is better:
the usage of their dissimulations and cauillations does insensibly creep in,
and men leaving simplicity and innocence, for to learn their shifts and
euasions, do receive the corruption thereof both in general and in particular.

And to the end that it may not be thought a particular vice of some one among
them; but a precept general to all their society, Ribadenera in the life of
father Ignacius the 3. book and 11. chapter entitled, De prudentia rerum
agendarum, has written thus, Dicebat quibus artibus diabolus ad perniciem
hominum vteretur, ijsdem nobis vtendum ad salutem: nam vt ille cuiusque naturam
explorans, and animi propensionem pertentans, ad eam se attemperat, vt
ambitiosis splendida, vtilia cupidis, voluptuosis luptuosis iucunda, piis
quaespeciem habent pietatis proponit, and non irrumpit subito, sed sensim
irrepit, and in animaese familiaritatem insinuat, penitusque tandem immergit:
sic spiritualis, ac peritus artifex, vniuscuiusque naturae conuenienter se
debet gerere, and in principio multa dissimulare, in multis conniuere, deinceps
parta beneuolentia ipsos quibuscum agit ipsorum armis expugnare: He said that
those arts which the Devil would use for men's destruction, the same must we use
for their safety: for as he searching out the nature of every man, and
thoroughly considering the inclination of the mind, does apply himself
thereunto, so that he proposes unto sensual and voluptuous men pleasant
things, to the ambitious those things which seem glorious, to godly men such
things as have a show of piety, and does not suddenly break in, but steals
on, by little and little, and does insinuate himself into the familiarity of
the soul, and at last does wholly diue into it: so he that is a cunning and
spiritual craftsmaster ought to carry himself agreeablie to the nature of
every one, and at the beginning to dissemble many things and to wink at the^,
and afterward he has gotten their good will to conquer those whom he has in
hand with their own weapons.

We have already showed how by the doctrine of the spiritual Monarchy,
absolute and infallible, which teaches Kings to obey, and to which the Jesuits
attribute the correction of Princes, that they are obliged to follow the
Council of the Pope in the government of temporal matters, and that in case
of resistance they may be deposed, and after public judgment, that it is
lawful for any man to attempt upon their lives, and to kill them. By this
word, of public judgment, they mean the Pope, as sovereign over all
Commonwealths, and of all Christian powers. Behold their proof by the saying
of Azorius, whom they confess to be one of the most modest amongst them, in
the second party, the 11 book 5. chapter of his moral institution; after that
he has confirmed the power that the Pope has to depose Kings, and sought to
answer the objection of those who say that it cannot be done contrary unto the
will of the people, he adds further in these terms: Tertio obiicitur,
populo invito non potest Rex auferri aut dari: respondeo a Romano Pontifice
Regem auferri, vel dari justice de causis, and tunc populus Romano Pontifici
tanquam superiori parere debet: Thirdly it is objected that a King cannot be
given nor taken away against the will of the people: to this I answer, that he
may upon just cause, and then the people ought to obey the Pope of Rome as
their superior.

Whence it ensues that if a Prince does enterprise any thing in this Estate
against the will of the Pope, if he contradict this public judgment, if he
come to square with any of the articles of the Bull In caena Domini, without
desisting from it, that he is presently a Tyrant, an usurper and schismaticke,
and as such a one may be meritoriously slain. By the articles of this Bull it
is contained amongst other things, that all persons who who have secret or
public alliance with heretics, have commerce with them, or do support and
protect them, are ipso facto excommunicated, although they are not particularly
designed, named nor specified in the Bull, which is published at Rome every
Thursday before Easter, and then the Jesuits teach, and their doctrine is
uniform, that no other proceeding, nor no other judgment is to be expected.
According whereunto Suares the most renowned of their society in the fourth
Tome of his works, and his treatise of censures, which he made expressly
against our King, disput. 5. sect. 6. says, that subjects upon a moral
certitude, which they shall have that their Prince will do any thing contrary
unto the Catholic religion, may without attending any judgment or other
censure of the Pope, rebel and take arms against him: these are his very
words: Si subditi timeant ex eorum principatu maximum periculum fidei and
religionis imminere: tunc enimiure defensionis possunt eos repellere, and
obedientiam ac fidelitatem negare, quod facere possint, etsi non essent
excommunicati, nec per Ecclesiam essent illis aliae poenaeimpositae, solum ob
praedictum periculum. If the subjects fear that by their rule and government
faith and religion is like to incur any danger: then they may in defense
thereof repel them and deny them obedience and fidelity, which they may do
although they were not excommunicated, nor had any other punishment inflicted
upon them by the Church, only for fear of the aforesaid danger. Molina in his
treatise de iustitia and iure. Lessius in the 2. book De iustitia and iure 9.
chapter dubit. 4. say the like, and that it is lawful to attempt upon the life
of those Princes whom they call Tyrants, upon the tacit will and intention or
presumption of the commonwealth: Men's oppressae Reipub. est, vt a quouis
etiam, qui non est pars Reip. defendatur, fi aliter liberari non possit. It is
the mind and opinion of the commonwealth which is oppressed, that it may be
defended of any man, though he be no member thereof, if it cannot otherwise be
freed. That which they call men's Reipub. the motion of Parricides, Mariana
terms, proceeding as it seems with more aduisednesse, the counsel of grave
and learned men: Viri eruditi and graves in consilium adhibeantur: Let the advice and counsel of wise and grauemen be used. It is not to be doubted, whom
he intends, this is as evident to his understanding as the Sun at midday unto
our eyes, for his book bears the privilege and allowance of their
Provincial deputed by their General: and behold the reason why they are
necessarily designed and no others: It is there in as much as the establishment
of the absolute power above all Princes is their principal vow and desire,
they must have the directing and executing of all enterprises which serve to
this end: so that in those places where the inquisition is not received, the
Jesuits exercise the office, and have the secret charge thereof, and their
General the direction: whence it proceeds, that all their advise, counsel
and directions do make a part of this public judgment: so that in stead of
spiritual ministers, moved with another spirit then that whereof they make
show, these are Officers serving against Princes, for to overthrow their power
and to subrogate that of the Pope in the temporalty and the matter standing
thus, he that desires to be instructed in this learning, cannot address
himself to any but those who handle it, and best understand it, as they cannot
deny, but that this is the sole and only intellect which animateth the whole
Universe of their society.

And indeed they alone have touched it in their sermons: lightnings which went
before, and were unto our eyes presages of the tempests, wherewithal we all
thought we should have been utterly confounded. A cursed doctrine, which
whether it be written or spoken in public or secret, there is not any one
touch thereof, which has not been as the point of a dagger at our heart.

The King by his wars, labors, and victories had reestablished with France
all Christendom, had obliged all Princes and people, the two third parts of
the world had the Lilies graven in their hearts, and thought themselves
interessed in his prosperity. France being in flourishing estate, never saw her
self in better case to succor her friends, her Prince was of immortal
valor, of an admirably strong complexion, whose felicity did dazell the eyes
of all his enemies: when the Princes of Germany most strictly allied unto this
crown did instantly desire her help, and protection against the oppression of
the house of Austria, to which the Jesuits are most devoted: our King had not
omitted any exhortation or persuasion whatsoever, to remove the war, and to
cause that the matter in question should be handled and decided in any other
manner: knowing better then any other, that necessity alone can justify the
arms of Christians against Christians: and being not believed, he prepared for
the liberty of Germany such succors, as his conscience, his honor, and his
duty could not have denied.

But willing before his departure to give unto France and unto all the world
the contentment of the coronation of the Queen, a Princess crowned and
adorned with all virtues, in the very height of our best estate, of our
greatest content, Extrema gaudij luctus occupat, joy and sorrow lead one
another by the hand: the King passing through the midst of his most
affectionate City, amongst his most faithful servants, glorious in majesty,
was stroke in the side with a knife of the same temper that those of Clement,
Barriere, and Chastell were of, his heart was presently in a swound, stifled in
his blood, what? are there to be found any minds so unnatural, so diabolical
as to conspire, as to attempt the death of a Prince so behouefull, so amiable,
unto his subjects, so equitable unto his neighbors, so necessary for all
Christendom? There was not time enough to bring him back to the Louure,
before his eyes were settled in his head, his lips pulled up within his flesh,
his blood clotted like ice in his beard: can we think on it a quarter of an
hour without pulling out our heart? he which filled all with his power, this
soul of the world, this masterpeece and wonder of nature, this valiant warlike
hand, falls, and is taken from us without any other war then that of this
doctrine, by the hand of the most hideous, most cruel, and most fearful
monster that ever was upon the earth, by a more then hellish and infernal
fury.

Let any man read the confessions of Barriere and of Chastel, let them be
confronted with the answers of this execrable parricide, there is not any
difference at all between them: the marks of this doctrine do visibly
appear therein; That the King was a tyrant and favored heretics against the
will of the Pope, who was God upon earth, that the Preachers had sufficiently
explained the cause which had moved him to do it. Stupide and blockish fellow,
it is true, and why should it be dissembled? in all other points concerning
this subject he had subtilties and euasions, and was very cunning therein, you
have heretofore understood as much, Master John Fillesac a worthy Curate of the
Parish of Saint John: Master Philip de Gamache the Kings Professor in divinity
another Israelite, Coeffeteau heretofore Prior of the Iacobines, all divines of
great merit can witness it, and he of their own company, who confessed
him, better then any other, who put him in mind of his conscience, and bad him
take heed of accusing those who were innocent.

Alas! you were a thousand times more secure, you Emperors and Kings enemies of
Christians, who amongst the greatest persecutions which the Church endured, in
the midst of the great and frequent martyrs which suffered by your authority
and commandment have seen no other weapon nor defense, then that of prayer,
of orisons, of praise and thanksgiving, but that of tears, as Gregory
Nazianzene witnesses, without that any of those who truly adored Jesus Christ,
yea, in the hottest of all their torments and persecutions, once thought either
in word or deed, I do not say to make any attempt upon your persons, but to be
the cause of the least trouble, or least commotion of your Estate. O Gospel of
peace, doctrine of sweetness and charity, to what use are you employed? what
advantage is given to Infidels and miscreants to continue their hate against
the Church, in stead of loving it, what coals of Gods divine vengeance do you
pull upon your heads?

O France, how far different was the censure of your innocent school the
years immediately precedent, when your King Henry the 2 upon the self same
subject, and to deliver Germany from the usurpation which Charles the fifth
would have made under color of religion, did lead sixty thousand French men
all Catholics even unto the Rhene, and so far, that he made him give over
his booty: can we learn out of the history of any one Divine in those days,
or one subject which thought himself less obliged unto his Prince, or which
bare him less affection for that cause? And yet 6. years before our very
doctors of Sorbonne had framed articles for the condemnation of the heresy of
the Lutherances inserted into the body of our ordinances, and upon the which
the Council of Trent laid the principal foundation of the resolutions
concerning that doctrine: but the school of the Jesuits had not yet taught nor
published, that Kings might be deposed upon any secret intention, or
presumption. He whom God had most visibly exalted, who did obscure the memory
of the most fortunate and happy Monarchs, the most precious and sacred person
of all Christendom, to whom the holy Sea was beholding for the tranquillity,
it enjoys, the holy father for his quiet and repose: he who had renounced the
safety of his own, to endeare you unto him, who made the clemency of his
justice to triumph in favor of you, received so ill a recompense for his
bounty and goodness, by your doctrine: a doctor of the Church said that it was
in the power of God to pardon a Virgin defiled, but not to restore her to her
virginity: even so fares it with your fidelity and allegiance toward Princes
after you have once made your vows unto your General.

The inspirations and visions with which these undertakers say the are
possessed, are they not the inventions and subtilties of this doctrine, for to
corrupt and pervert the minds of men, and to transform the dispositions of
their understanding and will, to the end that the fantasy and apprehension
which they have taken, may the more easily be so imprinted in their
imagination, that they may never receive any other? The letter of William
Criton the Jesuit, used by Richeome, in his Apologeticall complaint, for to
cover the doctrine of this society, by the which it is maintained, that it is
lawful for particular men to kill those whom they call Tyrants, says, that
this is not permitted, if those private men have no revelation or vision, which
persuades them thereunto: who shall be witness of this vision or revelation
but himself? and so by this means he may take permission both to kill and
justify the murder from himself.

It is reported in the histories of Assasins and murderers, that they were so
corrupted, and Gregory of Tours toward the end of his fourth book speaking of
those who killed King Sigisbert, says, that they were inueagled, and
inchaunted, maleficiati: and S. Augustine in the epistle 165. unto Generosus
says, that the Donatists, most dangerous heretics, did induce their followers
to many villainies by visions, and continuing his discourse in the epistle 168.
reports the example of a young man, who by the counsel of the like vision had
killed his mother. The mind of a man is like unto a looking glass, which does
usually represent that which is showed unto it, specially when it is directed
unto the most sensible part which is the conscience: let us add moreover that
beside these fantasies and inspirations which serve to transport the
feebleness of these minds beyond all discretion, they give to these
conspirators crowns of martyrdom: and to prove this, Bellarmine has highly
commended James Clement for this quality, Mariana calls him Galliae decus
aeternum, they do the like by Guignard and Garnet, falsely attributing miracles
unto them.

Call to mind, My Lords, if you please that which has passed before your eyes,
and the memory whereof it seems is not yet buried: one named Charles Ridicoue
a religious Iacobin of Gaunt, stirred up by the preaching of the Jesuits, who
commended James Clement ordinarily as a Saint, and Chastel as a Martyr, having
at unawares given out speeches whereby he testified that he had been tickled
with the like desire, presently his Provincial was commanded to bring him to
Brussels, where he was promised wonders, both for the discharge of his
conscience, (for he had some remorce to attempt upon the person of a most
Catholic King, which held good correspondencie with the Pope,) and also in
regard of recompense both to himself, his mother, and brother; he was visited
by father Hodume the Jesuit, who gave advise whether he were of stature, of
strength, and resolution sufficient to execute such a business, in the end all
fitting to the purpose, he had instruction to change his name, to alter his
apparel, to learn to ride, dance and fence, that he might be the more ready,
and the sooner have admittance, these are the confessions made in this
Parliament, by himself who came thrice into France, with this purpose and
intention. He could give you no reason why he contemned the grace and pardon
that was at the first offered him, nor why he came the second time having been
formerly suspected, nor why he perseuered in his villainous design, but that if
the Jesuits had perceived or mistrusted that he had disclosed the secret of
his enterprise, they would never have forgiven him, as they never reveal the
confessions of such people, be it any enterprise whatsoever, or come what
evil soever by it. At the very time of the last apprehension and execution of
this Ridicoue ordained by your decree of the month of April 1599. was
published and imprinted the book of Mariana; for to show how constant the
effects of their doctrine are, they prepare and fasten together jointly both
the doctrine and the effects; and notwithstanding one of them in his Apology,
has written, that it had been to be wished that the last parricide had read
it well over, because it is conformable unto the doctrine of the Sorbonne,
which has condemned the book of Mariana, and holds it to be abominable,
together with the imposture of the Apology: so bold and impudent are they to
circumuent the truth with falsehood and deceit.

Great and inimitable King, the wisdom of whose counsels and diligence in
executing them, whose soundness of judgment more then humane, we have all
equally admired, receive in token of our affection, and for a sure pledge of
our faithful service, our tears, our lamentations, our sorrows, our sighs,
and perpetual mourning, which we offer up unto your glory. Happy soul made
Citizen of heaven, and placed in the rank of Angels in eternal rest, far
from the care of wars, your royal qualities and perfections shall be ever
written in our hearts, your name shall be for ever in our mouths, and although
that our cries are imperfect, that our voice interrupted with sighs cannot
utter it self, that sorrow bereaueth us of our souls, and that there
remains no strength in us, but only to feel our grief, we will die rather
then corrupt the holy law of your Estate, under whose Sun since we live, we
will for ever love the light and brightness thereof.

With the same tears and voice half dead, we humbly beseech the holy father,
to enter into compassion of Christendom, torn in pieces by this doctrine, and
to remember what danger there is in taking from the spirituality the true honor
and glory, by meddling with the temporal and civil government, these are
things which God would have to be wholly separated and distinct: that he will
be pleased to remember the wholesome advertisement of Saint Bernard concerning
this absolute power, which was then endeavored to be brought into the Church,
in his 2. book de consid. chapter 6. I ergo tu and tibivsurpare aude, aut
dominans apostolatum aut apostolicus dominatum, plane ab alterutro prohiberis,
si vtrumque simul habere voles, perdes vtrumque: Go then and usurp if thou
dare, being a public Magistrate, the office of an Apostle, or being an
Apostle the authority of the Magistrate, thou shall plainly be prohibited
from enjoying either, if thou will have both together thou shall loose both.
God has provided for the conservation and augmentation of his Church, by other
remedies, and raised up Bishops, Doctors, and Pastors from time to time: yet
again once more to bethink himself in this declining age of the world, how
pernicious this excess is; we have seen two of our Catholic Kings able to
have opposed their armies against those of the Turk, to preserve the Church
and the rest of the world from the invasion of Barbarous people and Infidels,
brought unto an untimely death by reason of this doctrine, this great Estate
the cheifest of Christendom in danger of ruin: that he will protect the
Church and us from those furious Empiriques, which hazard their violent
remedies indifferently upon all sorts of men, without regarding the Estate of
their bodies; that he will purge and rid the world for ever of these so
tragical examples: France is nourished and trained up in a singular devotion
toward your holiness, toward the holy Sea, she can never fail therein, the
profession of our school remains always entire and inviolable to the
Christian says, and to the obedience due unto the holy Sea: and as his
succession in the Popedom is not far distant in time from that of Pope
Clement the 8. so let it succeed it in representing his mildness and prudence,
and that he will be pleased to cast his eye upon this society, which, under the
pretext of the good of the Church, does point at it one particular greatness, to
the which in the end it will unite that of the Church, and they already are
not far from it.

These are the reasons of the opposition which the University proposes against
the letters obtained by the Jesuits, founded upon the soueraign authority
engraven from all antiquity in the brass of the fundamental laws of the
French monarchy, upon her particular policy, upon your decrees and upon her
holy and constant doctrine, which fasteneth the crown to the head of kings,
contrary unto that of the Jesuits, who attribute unto the Pope a like
superiority over our kings, as over the least Priests, or his most inferior
Officers and vicars, yea far greater; makes Kings to be but at will, subject to
be deposed and killed fou^nded moreover upon so many miserable examples which
gall us, and make us feel the smart so particularly that there is not any man
who loves the Estate, or Religion, which has not had a feeling and
apprehension thereof. The instruction of youth is not a matter of small
importance, in ancient time men had a special care thereof next immediately
after that of Religion: children owe their sife unto their parents, but that
they live well, they owe that unto those who instruct them: and he does no
less profit the Commonwealth who frames and fashioneth men well affected to
the Estate, who nourishes them under the hope of honors and dignities, with
reverence unto the laws of the Country, then he who serves in greater place
with duty and fidelity: The University of Paris has hereof, loyally and
worthily acquitted and discharged her self these 8. hundred years, never bound
her self to any thing whatsoever, but to the honor of God, of her King, and to
the good of the Church; Ill doctrine is easily persuaded, and that which is
false, conformable unto the darkness which enuironneth us in our corruption:
there is (says the wise man,) store of gold and pearls, but lips that
preserve knowledge, that is a rare moveable. What father is there which had not
rather loose his life, honor, goods, and whatsoever he has else most dear in
this world, then to nourish one who shall be a monster to his Country? Have we
not had intelligence within these three weeks of the conference held at Toul
in Lorraine amongst men impoisoned with this doctrine, disclosed by an Hermit,
wherein after declaration of their evil mind toward all Catholic Princes,
it was agreed as granted amongst them, that the Jesuits had by their doctrine
so cleared these maxims, that they ought to be held for ratified, and
confirmed, in stead that they ought to be condemned, and punished not only in
the effects, but in the very deepest and most profound thoughts.

They offer to submit themselves unto the Orders of the University, and demand
to be incorporated: from the year 564. they have done as much, and they are
yet to begin, they promised to renounce their vows, faculties, Privileges,
yea themselves, we have seen our selves clean frustrated of this expectation,
and to be the example of their power, and attempts contrary unto public
Order: in the year 1591. they promised not to meddle any more with affairs of
Estate, it was then that they were most busily employed in them, and embraced
the world most greedily: they know well how to boast of this science, since
that they have written in French, that their lay brethren could read lectures
therein to the Chancellor and greatest of Spain, God knows whether in
Spain (if it be true that the sermons were made there) they have forgotten to
enter into comparison with our greatest magistrates: there is not any one
condition of their reestablishment which they have not already transgressed and
broken, by breues and letters obtained by tricks and upon advantages: it would
be a strange folly in us, nay rather a great crime, to be the first always
who are surprised, and the last to free our selves, to be so often abused and
mocked by those who bear two hearts in one breast, who for to make their
doctrine to be received, are so audacious as to impose and lay imputations upon
the Apostles themselves, and to impute unto them that lewd vice of cosinage and
dissimulation which they use ordinarily; for Bellarmine in his treatise
concerning the exemption of Ecclesiastical men chap. 30. says that Saint
Peter and the Apostles have preached obedience to the politic magistrate, and
that every soul should be subject unto the Prince, only for to establish
themselves and to give the Gospel passage: they will promise and swear to all
conditions, since that by their own proper constitutions they can be bound by
nothing, to the end that they may make those to be received which they would
impose, by reason of the Pope his absolute authority, without the which their
society cannot subsist.

France after the death of her King, has placed her hope in the Queen, it is
she that gives her life and nourishment: a Princess whom strangers admire,
and the subject honoreth, you have found all the Princes furnished with great
virtues, tied with the same band of affection to the good and greatness of
this Estate. This magnificent Court of Peers, the Dial of France, which has
always showed his Meridionall line, and the Officers of the Crown, ready to
do their duty, and to follow the high way of honor, the Nobility and gentry,
the Towns and people ready to sacrifice themselves, for to perform your
commands: continue on by your bounty and justice, in making it appear, that
these were the Counsels of our late King your husband, which governed his
Monarchy, and to cause this lively picture to be adored in his death, that the
laws of the Estate of the King your son, may remain by your wisdom so
ordered, that every one may therein find his goods, his life, his honor, his
conscience in safety and repose; so may the Counsel and prudence of the two
great eyes of this Estate always watch over the affairs: persevere in this
belief, that division and civil war is the only desolation of this great
Empire: there is nothing which can disturb it but these extractors and
Alchymists, which have found out the means to dissolve all piety, and the most
strong and natural bands of affection: they easily can do it with their
seeds and dewes of sermons, and confessions, and by the precepts of their
learning, by means whereof they can pervert the course of nature altering our
essence, and reaching the evil, which afterward men fall into unawares: they
say that our soil is soft, that in one year they have taken notice of all our
humors, that they have already procured of their side the unadvised weakness
of woman and children, that we are men little speculitiue, who will be
quickly carried away, that we are ready and easy to be moved, that they need
not but a little to begin, and set their affairs on foot, that afterward
they roll of themselves, and fly on, as fast as they can, to the very height
of all excess.

Homer says, that a sword once unsheathed draws men on by some secret
instinct to designs not thought of, and seldom is guided by the discourse of
wisdom and discretion: this is a crisis, upon the which all Christendom does
set her eyes. Needs there any greater proof or confirmation of this which
we have said, then the treatise newly composed by Cardinal Bellarmine,
presently after the absence of our Sun, by the which lifting up his disguise,
he uses no longer the term of correction, it is not for heresy or crime
that he maintains that the Pope may excommunicate and depose Kings, but upon
whatsoever subject it pleases him if he see that the good of the Church
require it, de principe facere non principem: of a prince to make him no
prince, and that he has this power not only over Kingdoms, but over all that
which apperteineth unto either Christians, heretics, schismatikes, or
scandalous people in what sort soever, if they will not yield and submit
the^selus unto his propositio^s, which being granted their conclusions are
inevitable. Do they not write that there is a new sect of Catholics Royal,
as if to love the King and to be a good Catholic were things contrary one to
the other and incompatible: he particularly repents that for modesty sake he
has sometime auowed, that Ecclesiastical men as subjects, owe obedience unto
Princes, now he confidently affirms; Clericos principibus Ethnicis solo facto
nullo iure fuisse subditos: That Ecclesiastical men were subject unto heathen
Princes, only in fact and not of right.

To conclude, this doctrine is the open destruction of the authority of Kings
and of their power, the subversion of all the Estates of Christendom, the
cipher and strange character wherewith they hold correspondence with all that
which is either corrupted or corruptible.

In the estate we now stand, the Jesuits cannot have a greater obstacle then
to be bound, strictly to observe the conditions of their reestablishment, and
to bring them thereunto, to make them subject unto Magistrates, and ordinary
powers as other Religious men are, without suffering their enterprises; to
maintain and keep the Bishops, Prelates and Curates in their dignities,
against whom they set themselves, as they do against all other Ecclesiastical
persons: not to permit them to have the instruction of youth, to the end that
institution and learning come not under their monopoly, and that henceforward
it strengthen it self in such sort that a man must leave to be a Frenchman for
to become a Jesuit: and principally to have a care, that men do not abandon,
nor forsake the authority of our doctrine, which is the foundation of love and
fidelity to the Royal dignity, for to receive the instructions of this new
divinity framed and composed for the interest and respect of their particular
greatness, and authority, wherewithal they would add to our belief this 13.
article of faith, that all Crowns do depend of the Pope, and are held of him,
who may depose Kings at his pleasure, and above all the French Kings, so that
our King should by this means find his Crown worse then it was left him, and
receive this prejudice during his minority.

Our King, who growing up and prospering, shall learn the noble and valiant
deeds of his father, his virtues, being the ornament and honor of Kings, whose
glory ought to begin and end with the praise of his name, he shall inherit
his prowesses, and being come young to this active art of managing a Kingdom,
instructed by the sage counsels of his mother, shall be reverenced as Solomon
for his wisdom, and serve for a new miracle to all the world, and to France.

God for our sins not having permitted that our great King, of whom we were
not worthy, should continue amongst us his years shining with all virtues,
nor peaceably end the course of his life which remained; let us all wish and
desire with our heart and with affection, that it would please the divine
bounty to confirm according to his deserts, and as it is greatly behoofefull
and expedient for France, the assurance of this our greatest happiness,
consisting in the perpetual continuance of his royal progeny, for the
conservation, greatness and authority whereof, the University of Paris, from
the Temple of the Muses, where this great Hercules does now make his abode,
does the third time advertise you of the tempest, wherewith the Jesuits threaten
the calm of France: and if it happen, which God forbid, that our presages
and aduertisements be yet contemned, we shall have this contentment, and
testimony in allsucceeding ages, that with the truth of the holy doctrine,
wherein we have always continued, we have not failed to perform the duty and
affection we owe unto our King and Country.

The University concludes, humbly praying, that the Jesuits now demandants be
denied the effect and allowance of their letters, and consequently, that they
be prohibited from reading, teaching, or using any other cholasticall function
in the University.

The Order mean before judgment, upon the arguments of both parties.
THe Court upon the allowance of the letters does order that the Counsel of
both parties shall amend their pleadings, and add whatsoever they shall think
fit within 8. days, they shall plead in Bar, or reply within the time
appointed by the order for the hearing of judgment: does order that the
Prouincia, and those of his company demandants, shall forthwith subscribe the
submission made by their Provincial, to conform themselves to the doctrine of
the school of the Sorbonne, and principally in that which concerns the
conservation of the sacred persons of Kings, the maintenance of their regal
authority, and the liberties of the French Church, from all time and antiquity
kept and observed in this Realm, and that all shall be viewed and communicated
unto the King his solliciter general, and annexed unto the determination and
decree of the Court. In the mean time has inhibited, and does inhibite and
forbid the demandants to make any innovation, or to do or enterprise any
thing contrary unto the letters of their reestablishment, and in prejudice of
them, and of the decree verifying the same, or to intermeddle by themselves, or
any other persons in their behalf, with the instruction of youth in this City
of Paris in any sort whatsoever, or there to use any scholasticall function,
or exercise, upon pain of loosing the benefit of their reestablishment, which
has been assented unto, reserving costs. Made in Parliament the 22. of
December. 1611.

FINIS.

