A Brief Relation by the Commoners in Lincolnshire, of their Legal Interest,
and that nothing of Interest the Undertakers have in Law.
The owners and Commoners in the Fenns, between Bourn and Kyme Fae in the
County of Lincoln, by reason of their Seniories, Resiances, and Inhabitants in
the Towns, there, have time out of mind, without memory of man, taken all
manner of profits arising out of the said Fenns and Commons, both for
sustentation of their persons and Common of Pasture for their Cattle, (as
appurtenant to their Seniores and Resiances, and are, and ever have been (by
Custom) charged by reason of their Seniories, with the repairing of many
Draines, Watercourses, Banks, Sleuces, and Goats, for the bettering and making
them so useful for them, and for watering several grounds in many of the said
Townships, which they have been much interrupted in by several undertakers
this twenty years in making of new works, a design continued at Court to
deprive us of our ancient Rights, contrary and against the known Laws of the
Land.

1. By the 9. H. 3. cap. 15. no Freeman shall be distreined to make Banks,
Magna Charta.
but such as were of old time and of right have been accustomed to make them in
the time of K. H. our Grandfather.

2. Also in the 16. Chap the same year provides that no Bancks shall be
defended from (...) forth, but such as were in defense in the t^m^ of (...) our
G^a^dfather, by the same places and bounds as they were in his t^me.

By the 15. and 16 Chapters the U^dertaker shall not tax me for any ground to
make new Banks that before were not in charge.

This is manifested to be the true meaning of Magna Charta by the succeeding
Statute (viz.) the 25. and 45. Edw. 3. 21. R. 2. 1. H. 4. and especially the
12. of Edw. 4.

By the 23. H. 8. chap. 5. the works and words mentioned in the 6. and 7.
Chapters of the 12. Edw. 4. were united and knit up in one standing Commission,
commonly called a Commission of S^wers, and all those words and works are
subject to the Survey of the Commissioners mentioned in that Statute of 23. H.
8. But thereby the works and words mentioned in the 6. chap. 12. E. 4 are to
be pursued as proper to the 6 H. 6. chap. 5. and the faults and words mentioned
in the 7. chap. Edw. 4. are to be pursued according as is set forth in the 7
Chapter; for it is commanded by the said 23. H. 8. that the Justices shall do
therein as to the Kings Justices appertains, after the Laws and Statutes of
our Realm, which includes the said 6 and 7. chap. E. 4.

Observe the Undertakers proceeded not by Jury, but by directions of the Kings
Letters.
The practice is, and ought to be by Jury thus; is there a Delinquent found by
Inquisition upon the substance of the 6 chap. of Edw 4? Let the Commissioners
proceed against him for the repair, or making new that which is so found to be
hurtful in his default They laid uncertain tax: upon no body: of purpose it
might not be paid.
by a tax, assesse, distress, or sale.

Is there a Delinquent found by Inquisition upon the nuisance mentioned in the
7. chap. of Edw 4? Let them proceed against them by giving them by scire
facies, half a years time to remove or correct the said nuisance as the
Justices appoint upon pain of 100 Mark to be estreated.

Thus you see the power of Commissioners by the 23. H. 8. chap. 5. is limited
in matter of fact by the former intentions of the 6. and 7. chap. of E. 4. and
they are limited in matter of form by the words of the 23. H. 5. which
restraines them to do as belongs to the Kings Justices according to the Laws,
Customs, and Statutes of this Kingdom.

Now if Commissioners of Sewers be tied to this matter of f^^t and form,
examine how the Undertakers by their new Law can take our Inheritance, without
our consent and li^ing, to make new Draines, Banks, and Goats, for the
satisfying their own covetous desires, notwithstanding these limitations the
innovating Undertakers would shelter themselves by wo^ds in the said 23. H. 8.
viz. according to your discretions, and according to the Laws of Rumney-Marsh
in that Statute expressed, implying by the word discretion, that they may do
what they please; which gloss confounds the text, for such discretion is
absolute and apparent indiscretion, not supportable by that Statute, nor any
other Law, their discretions being to be guided by Law and Custom, as formerly
expressed.

And as concerning their imaginary proceedings according to the Laws of
Rumney-Marsh, that is most ridiculous; for I pray you observe the Charter
granted the 36. year of H. 3. to the men of Rumney-Marsh, and you will find
that nothing is granted, but what was time out of mind in use (excepting a
restraint to the Shiriffe for meddling with distresses.)

Hereby ye see Custom time out of mind begets a Rule, and was the ground of
this Charter, which Charter was the ground of the Commission of 42. H. 3. to
Hen. Bathama, to survey the Walls and Water Courses, and to cause them to be
repaired by these that are bound and charged with the reparation of them; here
is nihil novi, but de novo, as accustomed to be repaired or new made, agreeing
to Magna Charta above specified.

Thus you see the projects of drayning has no foot hold or congruency with
Custom, use, or any Law or word of Statute before recited, but is a meare
Arbitrary proceeding against those Laws.

They plead that they have laid out vast sums of Money.

To this I hear some mak^ (...), Note that before the 43 Eliz. there was no
general Act for drayning. Tyndalls, 4. Jac. was a particular Act, and there
are some other particular grounds, whereby it is most certain that without a
special direction by Statute, or without the power of the said 43. Eliz. no
person is authorized by the 33. H. 8. chap. 5. or any other Statute to
undertake that design, for if otherwise the said 43. Eliz. Tyndalls, 4. Jac.
and some other Statutes for Pl^^^steed Marsh, 23. Eliz. were to be judged Acts
to no purpose made.


caveat Empt^r, and that it is improper for him to expect a Parliament succor
herein, when as he has utterly waved and rejected the Parliament direction,
which appears to be given him by the words of 43. Eliz. chap. 11. wherein all
draynings are graciously provided for, both to the content of the Parties
interessed, and also for the due and fit recompense to the Undertaker, he has
thus spurred against a Parliamentall course, why should he now hope for a
Parliament redress to maintain his Arbitrary Course, which will reach Hills
and Mountains, when we have no more low Grounds left to satisfy their
covetous desires.

That abuses to the Persons, Goods, Lands, Draynes, Goats and Banks, I leave to
the Expression of the several Petitions exhibited by them that are grieved and
oppressed by the Undertakers.

FINIS.

