Commun^ Consilium tentum in Camera Guild Hall Civitatis London, undecimo die
Julii, Anno Dom. 1612. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Jacobi, Dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hibernia Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. viz. Angliae,
Franciae, and Hiberniae decimo; and Scotiaequadragesimo quinto: Coram J^co^o
Pemberton Milite, Majore Civitatis London, Henrico MountagueMilite, Recordatore
ejusdem Civitatis, Thoma LeweMilite, Thoma Cambell Milite, Gulielmo Craven
Milite, Clemens Scudemore Milite, Johanne J^lles Milite, Galfrido Ehres,
Georgio Bolles, Gulielmo Cockain, Ri^hardo Pyot, Edward^ R^theram, Alexandro
Pre^^^t,dict^e Civitatis Aldermanis, ac Edwardo Barkham,Aldermano, and uno
Vicecomite Civitatis pr^^dictae; necnon majore part Comm. dictae Civitatis de
Comm. Concilio ejusdem Civitatis existentis ass^mblat, etc.
WHereas the Company of Painter-Stainers have been an ancient Brotherhood in
this City, and for the better Exercise of the^r Ar^ and Government of those
that use the same Art of Painting of latter times have been Incorporated, the
better to enable them for the Exercising and Ordering of that Trade, and
performance thereof by Men of Skill and Cunning. But of late years, by reason
that diverse Freemen of this City do daily practice, use, and exercise Painting
in and about the same; neither have been brought up as Apprentices to the said
Art, nor being free of the Company of Painter-Stainers, but of sundry other
Companies of this City: which Freemen of other Companies using Painting as
aforesaid, have taken upon them, and daily do, to have and keep more number of
Apprentices, than the Freemen of the said Company of Painter-Stainers, using
the said Art of Painting, by the Ordinances of their said Tompany lawfully may
or can do, to the pestring and filling of this City with Men of that Faculty
and Profession, and to the great prejudice and hindrance of the Freemen of the
Company of Painter-Stainers: by reason whereof much bad and deceitful
Workmanship is daily practiced and used within this City, which arises
principally by reason those Freemen of other Companies are not subject to the
Search and Ordinances of the said Company of Painter-Stainers, so that their
Defaults and Abuses cannot be discovered, espied, or amended; nor the Offenders
punished according to their Demerits, as they should be, in case they were
subject to the said Company of Painter-Stainers. For Remedy and Reformation
whereof, and to the intent that all Freemen of this City, practicing and using
the Art of Painting within this City, may be in time reduced, and brought to be
free of the Company of Painter-Stainers; and that the Master and Wardens of the
said Company for the time being, may hereafter have a more free and absolute
Survey and Search, and Correction and Punishment of all Freemen of this City,
using their Art within the same City and Liberties thereof, (of what Company
soever they be) than heretofore they have had, whereby Frauds and Of^ences may
come to be discovered, and Offenders punished, according to the ancient Customs
of this City in like Cases used: Be it Enacted, Ordained, and Established by
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen his Brethren, and the Commons
in this Common Council assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all
Persons free of this City, (of what Company soever they be) using the said Art
of Painter-Stainers within this City and Liberties thereof, and making gain
thereby, shall from henceforth be under the Survey and Search of the Master and
Wardens of the said Company of Painter-Stainers for the time being; and shall
from time to time be subject to the Ordinances of the said Company, touching
the Exercise of the said Art of Painting only. And be it further Enacted, by
the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or Persons whatsoever, being Free of
any Company of this City whatsoever, (other than of the said Company of
Painter-Stainers,) which does or shall use or practice the said Art of
Painters, within this City and Liberties thereof, and shall make gain thereby,
shall from henceforth take and bind any Apprentice or Apprentices to him, or
themselves, but within one month after the taking of such Apprentice, and
before the binding of such Appretice or Apprentices, shall first present him or
them before the Master and Wardens of the said Company of Painter-Stainers, at
the Common Hall of the said Tompany; and upon such Presentation of any
Apprentice or Apprentices at the Place aforesaid, the same Apprentice or
Apprentices shall become bound by Indenture to the Master or one of the Wardens
of the said Company, for the time being, for the Term and number of Years
agreed upon between the said Master and Apprentice or Apprentices, and the
Party so presenting him or them: And that after the binding of such Apprentice
or Apprentices in form before declared, the said Apprentice or Apprentices
shall at the Charges of the Master so presenting the same Apprentice, be by the
Party to whom he was bound set over before the Chamberlain of the said City of
London for the time being, to the Party by whom he shall be so presented, and
him shall serve the residue of his Term, to the intent that at the expiration
of the said Term, the said Apprentice or Apprentices may be made free of the
said Company of Painter-Stainers. And be it further Enacted, by the Authority
aforesaid, That if any Person or Persons using the Art of Painting within this
City or Liberties thereof, and not being free of the said Company of
Painter-Stainers, shall at any time or times hereafter take any Apprentice or
Apprentices bound unto himself, or in any other manner than is before declared,
he or they shall forfeit for every Apprentice so bound the Sum of Twenty Pounds
of lawful Money of England, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, or Plaint,
to be commenced and presented in the Name of the Chamberlain of the said City
of London for the time being, in the King's Majesty's Court to be holden in the
Chamber of the Guild Hall of the said City, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the said City, wherein no Essoign or Wager of Law shall be admitted or
allowed for the Defendant: And that the Chamberlain of the said City for the
time being, in all Suits to be prosecuted by virtue of this present Act against
any Offender, shall recover the Ordinary Costs of Suit to be expended in and
about the prosecution of the same. And be it further Enacted, by the Authority
aforesaid, That one Moiety of all Forfeitures to be recovered by virtue of this
Act, (the Charges of Suit for recovery of them being deducted and allowed)
after the recovery and receipt thereof, shall be paid and delivered to the
Chamberlain of the said City for the time being, to the Use of the Mayor, and
Commonalty, and the Citizens of the same City: And the other Moiety of the same
Forfeitures (the Charges of Suit deducted as aforesaid) to be paid and
delivered over to the Master and Wardens of the said Company of
Painter-Stainers for the time being, to the Use of their said Company, to the
intent that the said Master and Wardens of the said Company for the time being,
may be the more careful to prosecute Suit against the Offenders in this behalf,
in the Name of the Chamberlain of this City for the time being.


