To all and every the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Side- men, within the
City, Suburbs, and Diocese of London.
WHereas I am daily advertised by the relations of many honest and Religious
persons, of a general misbehauiour in most Churches in, and about the City of
London, in time of divine Service; Men and Boys sitting then covered with
their hats on their heads, without all show of reverence or respect, either of
that holy place or action, the one being the House of Almighty God, the other
a continued vicissitude (as it were) of speech between God and his people. The
due consideration whereof might easily induce any well disposed Christian, to
use such outward posture and gesture of his body as becomes that sacred
place, and the great Majesty of that God, to whom they come at that time
professedly to perform a divine worship. I have therefore thought it my duty,
instantly to recommend to you the Ministers, Churchwardens, and Sidemen, the
reformation of this profane abuse, scandalous to our Religion, against an
express Law in that case provided, and condemned by the contrary practice of
all Christians in all ages in their like Solemnities and Assemblies; Praying
and requiring you to join together your utmost and best endeavors to effect
the same, for which purpose it shall be necessary for you the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, during the time of divine Service, diligently to look about the
Church, and where you see any covered, if boys, or of the younger sort, these
to shame openly by pulling off their hats, and chastise with such discipline,
as you have bin laudably accustomed to inflict upon such rude and unmannerly
fellows. If of the elder or better sort (though I well hope that none of that
condition out of their own judgment will hereafter offend in this kind) those
to admonish gravely of their duty, representing unto them the inconveniences
of this their ill example, and how directly repugnant it is to the Apostles
rule of decency in the Church, thus to celebrate divine Service, and to
perform a professed and religious worship of Almighty God. After which your
admonition, if any shall obstinately refuse to uncover his, or their heads in
Service time, you shall then present them to me or my Chancellor, to the end,
that they by the severity of Censures may be amended, by whom brotherly and
gentle persuasions have been contemned.

Moreover also I am certainly informed, that the public service of Almighty
God in the Churches is much omitted, and thereby come to neglect, and almost
scorned, forasmuch as the Ministers read not Divine Service, the first and
second service, before their sermons according to the order of our Church
Liturgy, and the Cannon, in that case provided, I do therefore hereby require
all the Parsons, Vicars, and Curates in my Diocese, to take care that they
offend not in this kind, strictly likewise requiring you the Churchwardens and
Sidemen that according to your oaths, you present to me or my Chancellor,
those Ministers that shall be faulty in this kind, and that you admit no man to
preach in your several Churches, who is not licenced thereunto, and his
license to appear, to you the Ministers and Churchwardens, and that he write
his name with the day of the month when he preaches; and by whom he was
licenced to preach, in a book by you provided for that purpose, which book is
to remain in the chest of your Parish Churches, that so I may be able to make
answer if enquiry be made of any such Preachers after their Sermons. And these
instructions I do require the Ministers of the diocese of London, to publish
in their several Churches, and that a copy of them be affixed to some eminent
place in every of your Churches, that they may be seen and read of all men,
that so no man may pretend ignorance of his duty in that; whereof both the
Laws of God, and the King require a careful, and religious performance.

GEO: LONDON.


