The CASE of the Company of Merchants Trading into FRANCE.
THat upon Encouragement of His Majesty's Declaration the 22 of March last,
whereby License was granted for Trading, they did Export considerable
quantities of our English Manufactures into several Ports of the French Kings
Dominions, and upon apprehension of their Condition in point of the War, in
order to draw off the proceed of the said Goods, did in the Months of
September and October last freight several Free Ships at extraordinary Rates,
which were all laden, and the most part of them come to Sea before his
Majesty's late Proclamation; but by bad Weather, and contrary Winds, they could
not make their Ports before the said Proclamation took Place, which they could
neither foresee nor prevent the proceedings of the said Ships, all which being
many Days past arrived into several of His Majesty's Ports in England, and
lying at excessive Charge, leak^dge and d^mourage as also being remidiless;
where else to send them for disposal, both as Goods improper for another
Market, together with the evident danger of falling into the Hands of our
Enemies; the said Merchants do therefore most humbly implore the Favor of this
Honorable House of Parliament, that they would please to interceed with His
Majesty on their Behalf, That His Majesty would please to give them leave to
Land their said Effects; By which their Honors will not only prevent the utter
Ruin of so many of His Majesty's Faithful Subjects: But shall also bring near
20000 l Benefit to His Majesty's in His Customs, and if otherwise, they should
be forced to transport their said Effects for another Market, and thereby
suffer a total Loss; Neither the French King, or any of his Subjects would
suffer the least Detriment or Prejudice by the same.


