OH Almighty God and heavenly Father, which by thy great wisdom and power,
have created and made heaven and earth, the Sea, and all things contained
therein, and have made man thy most principal and excellent creature, and
given him wisdom to rule and govern all other Creatures, with commandment
to serve and honor thee, and to do such works as are most acceptable to thy
godly will. And of thine abundant grace have endewed thy servant, a good
brother of our Company with that pitiful mind to consider his poor and needy
brethren, and to be the donor of this blessed Charity, whereby both I, and
others poor and needy aged, are daily relieved. And as I do acknowledge the
same to proceed of thy grace, so I give thee most high and hearty thanks
therefore, and with my whole heart, I humbly beseech thee, to bless the true
Catholic Church here in Earth, and in it this Church of England, and long to
preserve our noble Queen, with her honorable Counsel, and to prosper our
Company, the Marchanttaylors in general, and every particular member of the
same, and to assist them with thy continual favor, to show more such deeds
of mercy and pity, for relief of the poor distressed, for the which thou
have promised, of thy mercy special reward, by the mouth of Jesus Christ our
Savior. And likewise I beseech thee. Oh Lord to keep and preserve this noble
City of London, and to prosper it with thy blessings of health, and wealth,
under our most godly and peaceable Prince, and to give unto all the Companies,
and members of the same, thy grace to show themselves always thankful, in
doing such works as are best pleasing to thy divine Majesty. Grant this Oh
Father, for Jesus Christ thy dear Sons sake, to whom with the holy Ghost the
Comforter, three persons in one eternal godhead, be all hononr, dominion,
power, and glory, both now and for evermore. Amen.


