^ERTAYN AND true good nues, from the syege ^f the Isle Malta, with the goodly
vyctorie, wyche the Christenmen, by the favor of God, have there latlye
obtained, against the Turks, before the forteres of saint Elmo.

Translat out of French in to Englysh.

printer's or publisher's device

And nuli prented in Gaunt, the 27. of August.

M.ccccc.Lxv.

The copy of a letter written, by the right honoroble lord, brother john
valet, great master and Comander of the Rodes, now Malta, to the right noble
and worthke Capitayn, don Garcia of Toledo Capitayn general to the king of
spayn. Containing the late nues last com from Malta, with the horrible and
pytiful assautes made by the Turks upon the said fortressis, and the fayer
victori, wych the Christians had before saint Elmo, the xv. and xvj. day of
June last past.
SYNS I sent unto your honor the vertuus knight saluage, I wrat twyes, and sent
the letters to Gozzo, God grant they may surely pass, and afterward we sent
fourth alyght boot with owers, cauled a fregat, wych making all diligence to
goo and co^, were browght to such necesiti, being about.ij. leagues out in the
sea, that they were fayn to take flight to save the^ self, for as much as they
were chased by thenimies, and they cast their lettres in to the sea, and so
retournyng recovered again the la^d of Malta, by the grace of God. After the
siege of Marzo Sirocco was removed, and I forseyng to be right necessari to
advertise your honor, that the haven is not year so near enclosed with
thenimie, I caused to be browght from the land a brigantin, or small ship, to
Marzo scala, because the syege of owr enemies lies on the other side, I hoope
the same shall come wythowt any stop (wyche God grant) and that to aduertyse
your honor that the.xv. day of June, toward euenyng, the hwole army or syege
with all their shyps passed by here, that they were easili perceived of owrs
from the haven, so that the night hyndered us nothyhg, for the great noise wych
the shyps and galleis made, wyche were al dysarmed, and ill appointed, having
left their hole, and good shyps at Marzo muscheto, and one part of the^ at
saynct Giorgis. Why the syege of Marzo Musche to is raised, the cause thereof
is lack of fresh watter, and yt may be for the great fear they have of the
army of your lordshyp, for as we understand they be aduertysed how there are
in a reddines at Messina 150. galleis and other shyps, therefore they dare not
co^ so fer as saint Pawles stayers, but lie as near to their army (wych is a
land) as they possible may, nevertheless albeyt that this place lies so nigh,
year is yt not so sure, if they were in have, they might hardli co^ to their
shyps, as thowgh they were ferder of, on the side of Marzo Sirocco is not one
man to be seen, for they have left yt up, and set fyar on the howsis of saint
Catharins, and saint Ihons, now they begone from the said Marzo toward their
syege, wych is always before saint Elmo, we se playnli that almyghti God
purposes to defend the said place of saint Elmo, for as much as yeasterday in
the morning owr me^ resysted more by miracle, then other wise, one assault
during.iiij. howrs long, wyche thenimies did make in diverse placis, speciali at
a bridge that was bwylt by the^, with the masts and decks of.iiij. galeis, on
the side of Marzo muscheto, wyche assault they made.iiij. times, and so
furiusli that at every time they browght fresh men, and at eueri time were
repulst, and bet back with great loss of their men, and not without loss of
owrs, for of owr side remained ded two hundred, and. 150. hurt and Capitan
mirande was stayn wych was great gryef unto us, and of turks were slain about
2000. and as many hurt, and they were left the most part in the dyches of saint
Elmo, with this victori owr men be so encorraged and made hardye, that I trust
to keape this place u^tyl the comi^g of your lordshyps exelence, not
wythstanding owr enemies be much refreshed, and more fyers and desperate, the^
before, as I have not seen the like, for they have shot within.xv. days.xiij.
M shot of artilarie, nevertheless if I may flynd soccours (as I hoop to do) by
means of owr galleis I dowbt not a whyt, but to keape this place, for the saff
garding of the wych, I have almost spent all that I have, goods and men, and we
are resolved and vtterli determined apo^ this point, to dye toguyther, hooping
and looking affter aid, and soccours from your exelence. Considering and seeing
in what dangier we may co^ in, thorowgh long tarians and delays, we beseke
your exele^ce, not to fail to give us some asystance, at lest with some number
of valiant men, wyche is easy to be don, by that good means I have certified
you, seying the syege is retired from Marzo syrocco they may la^d in the same
side cauled pietra nigra, all owr comfort and hoope, next God, is in your
exelence, to the wyche I comme^d and submyt my self hwolye, prayng the God
almyghti for good adventure, and prosperiti. From Malta the xviij. day of June
1565.

Subscribed By me I. Vallet.

Relation made by ORLANDO MAGRO pilot to the chyff galley of the great master
coma^der of the Rhodes, now Malta the wyche aryued at Messina the.xxvij. day of
June 1565. And says:
HOW THAT HE PARTED from Malta the sunday.xvij. day of the month, about half an
owr after son, and.iiij. companions with him with asmal fregat of iiij. ewers,
having letters of the great master of Malta to don Garcia, and says that the
turks having shot against the fortres of saint Elmo. xviij days toguyther,
with.xxiiij. peacis of great artillari and assaulted yt sondrye times, at the
fyrstasault got the vttmost fortres without the dychis, named saint Ruelino the
second time they went with 2000. men and ladders prepared to enter, and last,
wych was friday.xv. day of this month, they having made a bridge with the masts
and d^cks of iiij galleis, and so coming in to the trenchis, right over
against where they had made the barterie, hoping and thinking by this mean,
easli to enter, but they fownd them self deceyned, for they wythyn defended
the^ so valiantli, and the bridge wych the Turks had made, burnt with gone
powlder and artificial fire, and beat the^ in such sort that there remained
ded. 800. Turks, and 600. hurt, and owr men took.ij. ensygnes one of the wyche
was, of the general Capitan by land named Prali, and the other was of Dragut, in
this assault were mounted up. 30. Turks an hye over the bulwark and they of the
castle of saint Angelo shot to stryk these. 30 turks, and stroke ded eight of
owr own men, and afterward charged, and shot again, and stroke these. 30. Turks
lykwise ded all saving one, among the wyche there were vj. of the hows of the
rays, and one was capitan general of the Rhodes, whose name was Portuch hali,
and the other dragut wyche remained only alive.

This assault dured five hours toguyther, so much that the Turks were forced
to retyar back against there will with great loss of theyt men. In this asault
dyed of owrs about. 200. and 150. hurt and wonded, and of the Turks were stayn
about. 2000. and. 2000 hurt, of wych the more part were left within the
trenchis and dychis of saint Elmo. Item, that Dragut upon sunday the.xvij. day
of the month set fyar in the bulwark, or bastilion, wych they had made. In the
market place of Marzo mulcheto, where they had.iiij. great peacis of artilati.
Ite^ that after the last asault, the most part of the syege, returned by night
toward the galleis, and are remained a land only about 3000. Turks, to guard the
artillari, and they shot now with no mo then syx piecis, and that they have
shot in all about. 13000. stroks or shot. Item, that.ij. days before their
last assault their syege was retyered from Marzo Sirocco, having brent the
fortres wych they had mad there, and retyered toward the valey of saint Paul,
where this pylot leaft them at his departing thence. Item, that certain
Christiens taken by the Turks and escaped again affirm, that they said in the
Turks army, that don Garcia had a hundred and fyuetie shyps and galeys to
guyther to recounter with them, and that the Turks had great fear, and therefore
they went the most part of the^ by night to their shyps Item, that the great
master writes how they had fownd a quyckspryng of fresh water within the town
named Burgo, wych wathowght as a miracle.

Item the master of the posts of Mes^ina wrat that the galley of portuch hali
wyche was slain in the assault was bowged and sonck by owr artilarie Item that
the bassa taking the muster of his sowdyowrs and navy, fownd four galleys
lackyng, of his number.

Item, we understand by other letters, that when owr enymies came to offer to
let this bridge wych they had made vearie artificiali owr men wyche were within
were in great dowbt and fear, in so much that they were ons determined to
render the place, but thorowgh good inspiration and the grace of God, and by
the hardines of one valiant knight having a two handed swerd in his hand,
saying that he would dye for the Cristian faith, gave to all the rest such
cutrage, that they obtained at last the victori. Item that the great master was
veari sorrowful for the death of Capitayn mirande.

FINIS.

