

The true Effigies of ye Alkaid, (or Lord) Jaurar Ben Abdella, Ambassador from
ye high and mighty Mully Mahamed Shegue, Emperourr of Morocco, King of Fess and
Suss, etc.

G: Glouer fe:

THE Arrival and Intertainements of the Ambassador, Alkaid Jaurar Ben Abdella,
with his Associate, Mr. Robert Blake. From the High and Mighty Prince, Mulley
Mahamed Sheque, Emperor of Morocco, King of Fesse, and Suss.

With the Ambassadors good and applauded commendations of his royal and noble
entertainments in the Court and the City. Also a Description of some Rites,
Customs, and Laws of those Affrican Nations.

Likewise Gods exceeding Mercy, and our Kings especial grace and favor
manifested in the happy Redemption of three hundred and two of his Majesty's
poor subjects, who had been long in miserable slavery at Salley in Barbary.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks dwelling in little Saint Bartholmewes. 1637.

(...) with the commodities of another: For though every Country does not
yield every commodity, yet by the means of Merchandise and transportation,
almost every Country in particular, enioyes the fruition of all things
needful in general. Thirdly, it conserves, and makes peace, love, and amity
with Princes, and Potentates, though they are far remote from each other in
Religions, Realms, Regions, and Territories; yet they are conjoined in leagues
and friendship together, and by the means of Negotiation, may, and do send
Letters, Ambassadors, Messuages, and rich gifts, Magnificent presents, Aides of
Armies, and Navies, by Land and Sea, for the expression of their greatness and
supportation of peace and unity one with another. Fourthly, it is the strength
of Kings and Kingdoms, in the increase of Shipping and Mariners, whereby
either in peace or war they are furnished upon all occasions: And what thing
is there more in the World so great, or so to be esteemed, whereunto love will
not stir, and animate the minds of mortal men. Lastly, it acquaints each
Nation with the Language, Manners, Behavior, Customs, and carriage of one
another; so that by these means men are made capable of understanding and
knowledge; and therefore prefer knowledge before wealth and riches, for the
one soon fades, the other abides for ever: for amongst all Natural and
Terrestrial things, only wisdom is immortalll; and for that maine reason
knowledge and understanding ought to be embraced before ignorance; and
especially for that in all other things which are odious, yet there is some
profit to be found: but ignorance only is ever noisome and hurtful to the
ignorant, and does make them bare the pain of those offenses which they
commit, by their imbecility and want of knowledge. Therefore study for
knowledge whilst thou have time and leisure to learn, and and be diligent to
give care to those that are wise and learned; for by this means thou shall
easily obtain understanding and knowledge of that, which others have invented
with great labor and difficulty.

But to the matter in hand, concerning this Alkaid (or Lord) Ambassador; for
the word Alkaid, is Lord in the language of the Morocco, the Larbies, or
Barbary. I only mean to relate his arivall in England, his abode and
entertainment, with his coming up from Gravesend to London, the manner of his
receiving into the City, and how he was conducted to his house, his manner of
riding to the Court at White Hall, where he had royal entertainment and
audience; his magnificent and rich Presents, his return from the Court, his
estate and condition, and lastly a short description of the Emperor of Morocco
and his Empire, with his Kingdom of Fez, or Fesse, and his Kingdom of Sus,
and other his Dominions, with something of old and new Salla, or Sallie, with
the late proceedings there.

The Ambassador is by birth a Portugal, a Gentleman borne in a Town called
Mondego, who was taken Captive in his Childhood at the age of almost eight
years; he was (as the misery and fortune of Captives is) bought and sold, and
by command (as the manner of those barbarous Nations is) he distesticled, or
Eunuch'd, and as he grew in years he by his acceptable services, was daily
more and more in favor with the Emperor of Morocco, insomuch, that his Majesty
was pleased to take him into his especial grace, making him his chiefest
favorite, and trusty councellor of State, dignified him with the high style or
title of Alkaid, or Lord, than which, there is not a degree higher under the
Emperor; endowed with Lands and revenewes fit and correspondent for so eminent
a calling, gave him the two most honorable places of Lord great Chamberlain,
and Lord Privy Seal, and to his prudent care and honorable mature wisdom
was committed the maine charge and management of the most important affairs of
his whole Empire, and in suffering him to make Laws and Edicts: And he which
is in an Office or place of command, and makes Laws for other men, ought
(...) appointment, Sir John Finnet Knight, Master of the Ceremonies, was sent
down to Gravesend, to conduct the Ambassadors to London.

They had no sooner taken their Barges, and were launched, but an expression of
Love and Welcome flew in thundering manner out of the mouths of the great
Ordnance, from both the Block-houses of Gravesend, and on Essex side, and the
Tide being reasonable calm, they pleasantly past to Woolwich, where they saw
his Majesty's new great Ship (the Eighth Wonder of the World) with pleasing and
much contenting Admiration. After which they past to Greenewitch, where they
landed, and stayed at the Rose and Crown four Hours, because the Kings Barge
with the Lord Kenwell, and 12. Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber, and
other were appointed to come to Greenewitch, to bring them to the Tower-wharfe
in State as was fitting and honorable.

So they took Barges at Greenewitch, almost an hour before Night, with their
Trumpets sounding before them all the way: And after an Hours Rowing they
landed at the Tower, where they were attended by Thousands, and ten Thousands
of Spectators, and welcomed and conveyed with his Majesty's Coach, and at the
least 100. Coaches more, and the chiefest of the Citizens, and
Barbary-Merchants bravely mounted on Horseback, all richly apparrelled, every
man having a Chain of Gold about him; with the Sheriffs and Aldermen of
London in their Scarlet Gowns, with such abundance of Torches and Links, that
though it were Night, yet the Streets were almost as light as Day. And in this
brave and noble way the Ambassador with his Associate Mr. Blake, were
accompanied from the Tower-wharfe to their Lodgings in Wood-streete, at the
House that was Sir Martin Lumley's, Knight, and Alderman of the City of
London, and where he kept his Honorable Office of Maioralty in the year 1623.

The Alkaid, having reasonable, well recovered him of his Health, after he had
taken rest fifteen or sixteen days, till Sunday the fifth Day of November,
our Kings Majesty's Physicians all this while (by his Majesty's Command)
attending, and using their approved best skill, whose pains and industrious
Knowledge took such good effect for his Health, that on the said forenamed
Sunday, his Majesty was graciously pleased to give them Audience, at his Palace
or Manor of White Hall, and to that intent these preparations following were
ordered for the Accommodation of so Royal and Honorable a Design.

The Orders that were observed upon Sunday, the 5. of November, 1637. by such
Honorable and Worshipful persons, and others that were appointed to conduct
the Ambassadors to their Audience.
FIrst, the Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury was in the Privy Chamber
at White Hall, at one of the Clock in the Afternoon, and twelve Gentlemen of
his Majesty's Privy Chamber were there at the same Hour, and according as it
was commanded, it was accomplished.

Secondly, the EarIes Coach (with as many other as was held to be fitting)
waited, and were ready at the Court-gate, to carry his Lordship and the
Gentlemen privately to the Ambassadors Lodging, or House in Wood-streete.

Thirdly, the Four Horses which were sent as Presents from the Emperor of
Morocco, to the King of Great Britain, did stand ready at the Ambassadors
House at the Hour aforesaid, and all the Horses of those that came from the
Court for the same Service, were ready at the said House the same hour.

Fourthly, a good Guard of Officers, and other men with Halbards, Bills, and
lavelins, were at Wood-streete end in Cheap Side, and the like was in
Wood-streete below the Ambassadors House, to keep the passage clear from the
press of people.

(...) now it follows, that I relate somewhat of the greatness of the Emperor
of Morocco that sent tham, and some Causes why they were sent, with some just
and true Remembrances of the good services that Mr. Robert Blake (Associate
with the Alkaid) has done for his captive and distressed Contrymen, our
Kings Subjects, English, Scottish, Irish, and of the Isles of Garnsey, and
Jarsey, and of other places of his Majesty's Dominions: besides his goodness
in relieving and helping of many Christians of sundry Nations, both with his
Word and Purse, when they were in miserable thraldom and slavery; he never
ceased to do his best to comfort them.

This Mighty and Potent Prince Mulley Mahamed Sheque, is Emperor of Morocco,
King of Fez, or Fesse, or Sus, or Susa, with many other Dominions of large
extent; some part of his Territories butting Northward upon the Mid-land or
Mediterranean Sea, over against part of Spain, and some large bounds of
hundreds of Leagues South and West upon the Atlantic Ocean: as also his
Empire extends it self many hundred Miles upland Southward into Africa.

The City of Morocco, (which is the Metropolis of his Empire) as Atlas relates
in his History of Africa, has been one of the greatest Cities in the world,
being once of that huge circuit, that it had 100000. houses within it, most
strong and defencibly walled, with 24 Gates to issue diverse ways out and in
at, but within these 100. years past, what with foreign Wars and
domestical seditions, the City is much ruined, and abated of its ancient
greatness; yet by the Maiestick Valor and Prudency of this Emperor it begins
to re-flourish, and may reassume the former Magnitude which once it had.

The Kingdoms of Fesse and Sus are vaste in extention, and rich in diverse
Commodities, as Chamelots, Grograines, and many other Stuffes made of the hair
of Cammels, and other Beasts: besides, the best Gold is found there in plenty,
with Oils, Sugars, and many other sorts of Merchandise, for which our Barbary
Merchants do traffic into those parts, with our Iron, Tin, Lead, and other
commodities which are vendible there. As concerning any further Description of
those Countries, I am no Geographer, and whosoever will know more of them, let
them look in Pliny his Natural History, or in Mr. Purchase his Pilgrimage, or
in Atlas, (a compendious Work, well Translated lately) or in Lithgows
Travailes, and there they may have more ample and satisfactory Relations; there
shall they find that in these Dominions of Mauritania, the great Battle of
Alcazer was fought in the year of our Lord 1578. on the fourth Day of August,
when Don Sebastian, King of Portugal, came into Barbary with a great Army, in
a wrong quarrel to aid an usurping Rebel against the true Heir to the
Empire of Morocco, for the which Aid the Rebel had promised to Sebastian, to
give him the Kingdom of Fesse: But in that fatal Battle King Sebastian
seeking after the shadow, lost the substance; and instead of obtaining Fesse,
he was slain that Day, and there lost both his Life, and Kingdom of
Portugal; by which means the King of Spain got it, and holds it; and in the
same Fight was slain the lawful King of Fesse, and the Usurper, with our
Countryman Thomas Stukeley, to whom the Pope had largely promised the Kingdom
of Ireland; so that 3. Kings fell in that one Battle.

This Emperor now Reigning, is the Son of Xeriffe Mulley Cidan, (deceased)
who was a valiant and victorious Prince, and his Grandfather was Xeriffe Mulley
Hamet, a Prince that held good League and Amity with Queen Elizabeth, (of
blessed and most famous memory) and this Emperor as soon as he came to the
Crown, he most lovingly desired the Friendship and Royal Amity of our
Gracious King Charles: He is a white man, of a goodly proportion, and a
Maiesticall Aspect; he is not above 18. years of age, and yet of such
surpassing strength, that he has taken a new Horse-shooe, and with both his
hands has writhed and (...) enforced* through extremity and want to retire the
Army, without any design accomplished: And indeed it prooved no otherwise, but
still Laishi held Friendship with our General, and made many shot out of the
Town of old Sally into new Sally, so that they were sore distressed in the
Town, with Famine, and the battering of our great Ordnance from our Ships by
Sea, which did sink and tear their Shipping, and beat their houses about
their ears; as also Laishi beat upon them on the Land-side, that by Sea and
Land they had lost so many men, that they began to talk of yielding.

The Emperor hearing of the perfidious dealing of Laishi toward him, (for
Laishi still stands out, and holds Old Sally from the Emperor) he sent his
Alkaid and Mr. Robert Blake his Associate, in Commission with him, to command
them of New Sally to surrender to him the Town, and deliver the Captives that
were the King of Great Britains Subjects.

But before the Alkaid and Mr. Blake came, the Town, being unable to hold out
longer against the force of our English Ships, that they were in a manner near
yielded before the Ambassador came thither: so that (under God) our Ships were
the means to reduce Sally to the obedience of the Emperor, the right Lord and
owner thereof, and also to redeem all the poor Captives that were there,
Christians. So on the 28. day of July the Alkaid, with Master Blake, went into
the Town, and in the Emperors name did place there their old Governor, and
all the Captives were sent a board the King of Englands ships: those that list
to have a more ample Relation of the surrendering of this Town, with the other
passages that happened there, they may read a Journall written by Master John
Duntons Direction, who was the Master of the Admirall-ship the Leopard, who, as
it is thought, has described it truly; but he is here and there wronged by
the Writer, in misplacing some things unorderly.

(...) were in number 302, English, Scottish, and Irish; amongst whom there
were 11 Women: Also there were 27. French men, which wisely ran away from their
keepers; and there were likewise set at Liberty 8. Dutchmen, and 11.
Spaniards: all these great Mercies of God to these poor captived Christians,
ought never (by them) to be forgotten, but with praise, Thankesgiving, and
amendment of life to be had in perpetual Remembrance: and we and they are all
bound to love, honor, and obey Our most Gracious King, whose piety and pity
was so great, as to take the Affliction of his poor Subjects so far into his
most Princely consideration, as to send his Ships under such wise and able
Commanders for their Redemption. And it is a most Remarkable Note of the
Almighties Mercy, in that he stirred up and ordained Master Robert Blake to be
the Agent and Instrument to move the Emperor of Morocco, to be so well affected
for their enlargement.

Their slavery ( for the time) was worse than the Egyptian Bondage under
Pharaoh; for imagine ( Good Reader) what misery can be more, than for a man or
woman to be bought and sold like a Beast, for a Christian to be servile to an
Infidel, in the most base and contemptible drudgeries; to eat the Bread of
sorrow, and drink the water of affliction; to have the Head shaven, the body
pined and beaten, to grind in Mills, to dig and dress Vineyards, to draw
Ploughes, to be laborers daily, and all their wages to be hard fare, hard
blows, hard lodging, and (more hard than those) never to hope to be freed till
Death; but hardest and worst of all, to be urged, enforced, and enticed to
forsake their Faith, and turn Miscreants; or (at the best) to be ever debarred
the exercise of the Freedom of their Religion and Conscience. Now the Learned
do say, That all kind of Servitude is miserable, but that especially is
intolerable, when a Man is enforced to serve one that is dishonest and
vicious: And therefore (as a wise man says) it is better to live free with a
little fear, than to be in servitude with much and great abundance; for
Liberty is sweet, and worthy to be regarded.

These, and more than these were the insupportable calamities of our poor
distressed Contrymen, with 46. of other Nations, who are now by Gods
especial mercy and providence at liberty, some of them having endured 30.
years slavery, and some fewer; but all too much, and too many.

In February last, 1635, Mr. Robert Blake being a Merchant, and trading to
Morocco, by his good conversation and carriage there, the Emperor cast an eye
of Regard and Favor upon him, insomuch that he caused him to leave his
Merchandise and Traffic in trust to his servants and Factors, and himself to
be near attendant to his Person in the Court, where his Majesty taking
especial notice of his good diligence and Integrity, entertained a liking to
him and his Services every day more and more, so that in short space he
purchased the Office of Farmer of all his Ports and Customs, (which place he
still retains.) There were then in the Emperors Court 33. English Captives,
whom he and his Father had formerly bought from Argeir and Tunnis, and some of
them had been in Captivity 25. years, some 20. years, some 14, some fewer,
but each of them thought that the time was too long.

And although these men's miseries were not altogether so great, nor their
Captivity so heavy in the Court at Morocco, as it was at Tunnis, Argeir, or
Sally, yet was their Thraldom so irksome to them, that they had a desire to
see their own Countries; their minds ran upon their Parents, Kindred, Friends,
and Acquaintance, from whom they had been long unfortunately separated: so
that their best mirth was but forced, and a kind of mourning, and all their
joys were too much mixed with care and sadness, which Mr. Blake (with great
grief of heart) did note in them daily; and his most sorrow for them was, that
he supposed he could not help them, and therefore he did often see them with
an eye of Christian compassion and pity, and in his mind (like a true
Englishman) had a Sympathy or brotherly feeling of his (...) with houses for
so large a circuit: It has three Castles, two of them to the Land-ward, and
one to the Sea-ward, with other strong Cassamats and Platformes, well furnished
with great Artillery. From Sally to Saffee is near fifty Leagues more to the
Southward, and there the Ambassador took shipping, as is before-said.

And although I have written before in this Relation, that I have no skill in
Geography, or Description of Countries and Climates, yet for the satisfaction
of many, such as will not, or cannot be at the charge to buy larger Relations,
it is not impertinent that I write somewhat of Africa, and consequently of
Barbary, Morocco, Fesse, Sus, and other of those Dominions, with their
Religions, manners, Rites, Laws, and Cermonies.

For their Religion, they are strict observers of the Law of Mahomet; they say
Christ was a great Prophet, borne to be a Savior of the World, (but not
incarnate) that he was the Breath of God, that he was borne of a Virgin, and
that the Jews should have believed in him, but would not; and therefore
because they went about to murder and crucify him, he left them, and ascended
from them into Heaven, and that then they put another man to Death instead of
him, whom they tormented, and cruelly Crucified. Therefore these Mahometans do
hold and esteem the Jews as the worst of men, and very slaves to all Nations
of the World.

The one and only Book of their Religion is called their Alcaron, devised by
their false Prophet Mahomet, who was of their Nation, (a Larbee:) They may not
use any other Book for Devotion, nor on pain of loss of life, no part of it
do they dare to examine or question; but if any be diffident, or any point or
Sentence be intricate and hard to be understood by any of them, then it is
lawful to ask the meaning of the Talby, which is a poor weak learned Priest:
They are all Circumciz'd, and they use a kind of Baptism, but not in their
Churches, but at home in their houses.

Their Lent is much about the time as it is with us, which they do hold but
30. days; and they neither eat nor drink all that time on any of those
days, betwixt the dawning and the twilight, but when once the Stars do
show themselves, then (for their Day Fast) they feed fast all Night. That
Priest or Talby that cannot Read over the Book of the Alcaron (or Mahomets
Law) all over on their Good Friday at night, is held unworthy of his place and
Function: they say their prayers six times every day and night, and they do
wash themselves all over very often: they have no Bells to toll them to Church,
but he that is the Clarke, or Sexton, has a deep base great voice, and goes
to the top of the Steeple, and there roares out a warning for the people to
come to their Devotions. No man does enter their Churches with his shoes on;
their Talbies or Priests each one of them are allowed a Wife, or Wives if they
will: The Laymen may have Captive women, but they must not lie with them in
the nightime, for that belongs to the Wives by turn, and if any wife be
beguiled of her turn, she may complain for satisfaction to the Magistrate: he
that has four wives must be a Rich man; a poor man is allowed as many, but
his means are too short to keep them, therefore one or two must serve his
turn. The Bride and Bridegroom do never see each other before the
Wedding-night that they are going to bed, where if he find her a Maid, all is
well; if otherwise, he may turn her away, and give her no part of the portion
she brought him.

As concerning their Burials, if any one does dye, they do wash the Corpse all
over, and (by reason the Country is extreme hot, they cannot keep them above
ground) with all speed they send for the Friends or Kindred of the party
deceased, and carry the dead out of their Towns or Cities, to a place
appointed for that use, (for none are buried in their Churches, or Synagogues,
or within their Towns) and there the Talby says a short Prayer, and then the
Corpse is interred. They have a custom to speak in praise of virtuous persons
departed, to encourage and animate (...) taken with false weights or measures,
does lose all his Ware in his house to the use of the poor, and is a defamed
person, and cruelly whipped. Their Execution for life and death is, that commonly
the person adjudged to die, has his throat cut by the Executioner. And these
are part of the Religion, Laws, and Manners of the people of Morocco, Fesse,
and Sus, and I do wish they were all inspired with Holiness from God; for I
am sure they do surpass many Christians in Righteousness and just dealing
toward men.

In Africa there are many Nations, Kingdoms, and Provinces, many parts whereof
are inhabited by Christians, as Spaniards and Portugalls. Aethiopia is a great
tract of Land in the South part of Affricke, it has many Kingdoms in it, over
whom (as Chief Ruler) is Prester John: He is Emperor of Aethiopia, or of the
Abassines; he is a Christian, and so are his people, but withal they are all
Circumcised: The Eunuch whom Philip the Evangelist converted, was Governor of
Aethiopia, and chief Treasurer under Candaces the Queen then Reigning there,
Acts 8.

Egypt (now under the Turk) is another part of Africa; in that Land the
Israelites were in bondage, whom God delivered by the hand of Moses: it is
bounded on the East with the Red Sea, wherein Pharaoh and all his Host were
drowned. Also the Kingdoms of Gaogan, Nubia, Dangaly, Doba, Gansila, Dasila,
Barnagasso, Doara, Balli, Angola, Numidia, Guiney or Binney, Bizarchus,
Triptoletana, Mauritaunia Cesariensis, Mauritaunia Sitiphensis, Tingitania,
Congo, (far to the South) Carthage, near where Tunis stands, (famous for Dido
and Hanniball) Hippon more famous for being the the Bishops Sea of the renowned
and blessed Lamp of light and Learning, Saint Augustine, and Utica, where the
admired Roman Cato Uticensis did enrich them with his Venerable bones.

And in some parts of Africa the people do use to eat three whole days
together, and are in all things obedient to their Wives or Concubines:
Moreover, they never suffer any of their Daughters to be married, except she or
they have first slain with her own hand by Policy one of their Enemies: this
they do observe from the Tartarians.

In other parts of this Country they do honor their Women more than their
men, and they take their Sur-names of their Mother, and not of their Father:
and they leave their Daughters to be their Heirs and inheritors of their
Lands, and not their sons.

And in some places many have been punished, and some banished, because they
have kissed their Wives in the presence of their Children or Daughters; but at
the least they have been fined to their Governor many Ducats for this
offense.

Their Laws command, that men accustomed to wickedness and viciousness,
should be cut off, without being spared or concealed: and that they which were
attainted, and convinced as guilty of any crime, should never escape without
some punishment or other.

Africa is that part of the World that does produce most Wonders, Monsters,
strange Beasts, Fowls, and Serpents.

For Monsters, it is said that there are a people called Aramaspians, with one
eye in the Forehead; some with their Feet naturally growing backward, some
with heads like Dogs, some with long tails, some with but one leg, that
do hop very swift, and are called Sciopedi, who with the shadow of the foot
(as they lie on their backs) do defend their whole bodies from the violent
heat of the Sun; some without Heads, with Eyes in their shoulders; some
Satyrs, (half men and half Goats) some with no Noses, but flat-fac'd, with
holes to breath at: some with legs as limber and pliable as Lamparnes,
(without bones) who do creep and crawle. Some with ears so great that they
cover the whole body; and that in Aethiopia there are some men that are 8.
Cubits, or 4. Yards high; let the Reader believe as much of this as he list:
but I am persuaded, that many of these things are true, or else so many Grave
and approved Authors would never have written of them, and divulged them to the
World.

Also in Africa are store of Elephants, Tigers, Lions, Buffles, Panthers,
Leopards, Cammells, Rhinoceros, Lynces, Musk kats, Onces, Elkes, Porcupines,
Dragons, Serpents, Crocodiles, Ichneumons, the Hiena Vipers, the Basiliske, the
Chamelion, the Sallamander, Tarentalaes, and Scollapendraes, Vultures, Eagles,
Ostriches, Osprayes, the Bird of Paradise, (that is almost all tail) with many
other, too long to recite: so that those parts of the World do breed and
produce more venomous Beasts and vermin, and strange Rarities of Nature, than
all Europe, Asia, and America.

And thus having briefly related the Religions, Manners, Rites, Laws, and
Ceremonies of some of the Dominions of Africa, as Barbary, Morocco, Fesse, and
Sus, I hope it will satisfy any indifferent Reader: To name all were too
tedious, and impossible; and therefore those that will have more ample
Description, let them get the credit to borrow, or the Ability to buy larger
Volumes.

Imprimatur

Sa. Baker,
November. 27. 1637.
FINIS.

