THE LAMENTABLE DESTRVCTION of Mulheim, a Protestant Town in Germany. Done by
the Inhabitants of Cologne the 30. of September last 1615. at three of the
Clock in the Morning. Printed according to the Dutch Original.

LONDON, Printed by G. Eld for Richard Lea, and are to be sold at his shop at
the North entry of the Royal Exchange, and in Paul's Church yard by Edward
Merchant. 1615.

The pitiful destruction of the Town of Mulheim extracted out of certain
letters bearing date in Cullen the first of October in the evening. 1615.
Upon the nine and twenty day of September last past, there was an
extraordinary Council and secret meeting holden in the city of Cullen: which
done, in the afternoon, it being S. Michaels day, (which is to be noted) all
the Masons, Bricklayers, Carpenters and Slaters, were called and assembled
together, before the Magistrates, by whom they were told and willed to make
them selves ready, with pickaxes, shouels, and other tools, the night ensuing
about three of the clock in the morning, therewith utterly to raze and break
down the town of Muhleim, upon pain of being put from their trades of
living, if they refused so to do. This unexpected warnjng put the workmen
into no little fear, and perplexity, so that at the first they utterly refused
and denied to do it, saying that it behooved them to set better soldiers a
work, in that piece of service, then they were, alleging that they feared and
greatly doubted that the stones thereof might and would then, or in time to
come, break their, or their childrens Shins: whereunto the Magistrates made
answer that they would be their warrant and protectors against all men for
doing it. Whereupon the work men fully resolved, that if the Burgo-Master and
the Magistrates of the city, would go before them and be their guides, they
would follow them: which they promised to do. While this matter was in
determination, the gates of the city were kept shut, that no man in the mean
time should go out, to make report thereof abroad, and that the towns men of
Mulheim might not have intelligence of their pretense, to save them selves by
flight. At the same time there was a rumor spread abroad, that in the new
market place, in the city of Cullen, there was a murder committed, and that
search was then to be made for the murderer: under this pretense in the night
time, about 3. of the clock, which was the pretended time and hour appointed:
John Bowlant the Burgermaster, and others of the Magistrates, went out of the
gates; with such a number of cressets, fackles, linkes, and lanternes, that the
night seemed to be as light as day, and after them the towns men followed to
the number of 800. at the least, besides straglers, having 200. soldiers, with
pipes and drums, marching before them, to defend the work men: before they
fell to work, there was a commission red unto them to show and certify them,
that it was not only the Emperors and the Dukes pleasure, to have it done, but
also the new-Burgers and the Magistrates of Cullens will, who had sought and
procured the same, for the good and welfare of the city of Cullen, and the
preservation of the citizens thereof: which done they fell to work, first
breaking down the greatest houses, and so continued the spoil the whole
night, and all the next day until the first of October in the evening, whereby
not a stone thereof is left standing one upon the other. The bricks, free
stones, lead, and iron, and that which would serve for any thing, was given
unto the Capucins, and all the ruins of the great Church. The French Church,
with all the ruins thereof, was given to the Fulldoers, which they themselves
brake down. The great deep cellers and vaults, which could not well be broken
in have, they took order that they should be blown up with gunpouder, and
that then the new houses that had bin built in old Mulheim within the space of
four years, should be thrown down. No man therein had any warning given him
of the destruction thereof, nor any time permitted them to escape away: all the
women (were they never so great with child, or lying in child bed) children,
and men, were straightly charged and forbidden not to go into Cologne, so that
no man knows whether they fled to save them selves, for that, all thereabouts
in some pesants houses, and also in old Mulheim there lay many Wallons, that
had more desire to spoil and destroy the poor distressed people running away,
then to save and harbor them. This heavy and sorrowful night, raised a great
cry, pitiful noise, woe and clamor in the town of Mulheim, specially among
poor women and children, for that most part of the Merchants of the Town were
then at Fanckfort Mart, and those that dealt in wines, were gone up into the
country, to buy wine. To conclude, in this unexpected and cruel action, all
the favor showed them was, that they murdered not the poor distressed men,
whose woeful cries clime up and pierce into heaven, and make complaint unto the
great revenger of all injuries, and oppressed people, that with devout prayer
recommend themselves unto him.

FINIS.

