A PROCLAMATION OF THE LORDS THE General States, of the united Provinces,
whereby the Spaniards and all their goods are declared to be lawful prize: As
also containing a strickt defense or restraint of sending any goods, wares, or
Merchandises to the Spaniards or their adherents, enemies to the Netherlandes.

Faithfully translated out of the Dutch copy Printed at S. Graven Haghe by
Aelbercht Heyndrickson, Printer to the General States.

printer's device bearing the initials "I. W.".

Imprinted at London by John Wolf, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, near Exchange. 1599.

A Proclamation, of the Lords the general States of the united Provinces,
whereby the Spaniards and all their goods are declared to be lawful Prize. As
also containing a strict defense or restraint of sending any goods wares, or
Merchandises to the Spaniards or their adherents, enemies to the Netherlands.
THe General States of the united provinces. To all such as shall see or hear
these presents, make known: that whereas it is every day more then other most
apparent and manifest, that the enterprises of the Spanish nation, with their
conjoined adherents, has not been only pretended to reduce these Netherlands
by their deceitful practices, and the uttermost violence and force, under
their wilful and superbious dominion and tyrannical government, both over
consciences, bodies, and goods: But also that in the years past, they have
attempted, with their usual violent complots, to reduce the realms of England
and France, under their power. Which they not being able (according to their
desires to perform) now openly and by maine force, assault the neighbor
countries of the Electors and Princes, and other Neutrall places of the Empire,
not refusing to ouer-run the Cities and Fortresses, with all manner of
violence, batter them with pieces, ransomming them, and filling them with their
soldiers, destroying the flat land, rauishing and deflowring of women and
maids, pilling, robbing, murdering and burning, not favoring the house or
Castles of Princes, Earls or Gentlemen, nor yet their persons, as sufficiently
appears by their barbarous dealings in the bishopric of Collen. the
Dukedomes of Cleue and Bergh, and the Bishopric of Munster, and other
bordering countries. The ministers of this spanish tyranny boasting, that
according to their own pleasures they will proccede in their begun actions,
especially in these places, until such time as they shall have reduced the
whole (besides these Netherlandes) under their Spanish yoke, and wholly rooted
out the exercise of the true Christian religion. To which end they have
publicly in diverse places of the Empire, altered the religion and policy of
the same, by force, threats, and other indecent dealings. Moreover, vaunting to
be glad, that in the behalf of the Princes Electors and others, the arms be
taken up, for that they shall (as they say) the better attain the purpose.
Moreover, that the new king of Spain, the Infanta, and the Spanish Counsel,
as well in Spain as in the Low countries, deceitfully and forcibly, hinder and
disturb al nauigations, dealings, traffic, and trade, so with inhabitants of
the Netherlands, as with those of other kingdoms, countries, and cities, in
most barbarous and tyrannical sort, misvsing the persons, attaching their
ships, and violating their granted promises by water and land, all under the
pretense and color, because that we have hitherto jointly resisted their false
and deceitful dealings and have not been moved to yield and subvert the
united Netherlands, and the good inhabitants thereof, under these barbarous
tyranny, and imperious dominion. And since that by gods mighty power, the
assistance of her most excellent M. of England, and other kings, Princes, and
Commonweals, together with our patience and good endeavors, we have for these
many years withstood these tyrannical enterprises, (which they have bent
against al Christendom) and hope further, with Gods help and assistance (as
aforesaid) to withstand, and there in are resolved. Also to visit the Spaniards
in the kingdoms and lands by them occupied, not only to hinder their aforesaid
tyranous pretense, but also to recover our losses and damages sustained by
them, as well with our ships of war, as by such as are allowed by our order,
hoping assuredly yt his divine Majesty will bless our rightful and needful
enterprises, and once wholly free and deliver the Netherlands from the aforesaid
tyranny of the Spaniards and their adherents. And also will move and incite
the neighbor Kings, Princes, Electors, Earls Barrons, and Commonwealths,
that upon good consideration, they may take and use Arms, to assure their
perrillous estate, and to that end, to drive out the Spaniards and their
accomplices, from the Emperors territories, and so out of the Netherlands: as
also we find to be most expedient and necessary for the accomplishment of so
Christian like, rightful, and needful common cause, against the said
Spaniards and their conjoined adherents, to be with all deep insight looked
into, that there be not any Ships, goods or Marchandizes, sent them by water,
land, or otherwise, the same being not only permitted by the common people,
but also the imperial rights and custom of all Kings, Princes, and
Commonweals, being in war or controversy, besides that the same has
been made known by many firm orders and Proclaimations. As well by the above
named the Queens Majesty of England, (with whom we are in sure alliance) as
also of these countries. And we therefore intend not to permit that any person
of the united lands, using traffic or fishing at sea, or on the waters within
the land, shall suffer himself to be deceived, seduced, and endamaged, by any
deceitful pasports, safegardes, or safe conducts of the said common enemy, as
we understand heretofore (against our good meanings) by some has been done.
So it is, that we upon ripe and profound deliberation, and by the advice of
the illustrious Prince and Lord Maur^ce, borne Prince of Orange, Count of
Nassou, Marquess^ of de Vere, Flushing, etc. Governor and Captain general of
Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht, Ouerysel, etc. as Admiral general,
have declared, and declare by these presents, for good and lawful prize, all
persons and goods, under the dominion of the Spanish king, in all places where
they shall or may be got, have furthermore again of new, stricktly defended,
forbidden, and respectively notified: defend, forbid, and notify by these
presents, all and every one, of what condition, realm, or land soever, none
excepted, not to lade, ship, bring, or transport by water or land, directly or
indirectly, under what color or pretense soever, any ships, goods, wares, or
merchandises, for, or to any haven, city, or place of the enemy, in the
kingdoms of Spain, Portugal, or other places of Europe, under the dominion,
subjection, or command of the new king of Spain, the Archduke Albertus of
Austria, or the Infanta of Spain, upon pain of confiscation of the same
goods, wares, or merchandises, together with the ships, wagons, carts, and
horses, wherein, or whereon thy same shall be laden, and all such further
punishment as hereafter shall be declared.

And to prevent all frauds, subtle practices, and deceits, which might in
these united Netherlands be pretended by any, of what country, condition, or
quallitie so ever, against these our orders and defenses. We ordain and
command stricktly by these presents, all Conuoy-maisters, Controulers,
Searchers, and all other our Deputies in all Havens, Cities, and places of the
same lands, upon the oathe whereby they are bound to their country upon
privation of their offices and arbitrall correction: We authorize likewise all
others, dwelling in the aforesaid united Netherlands, or frequenting the same:
dilligentlye to enquire, and to take sharp regard, if this our order be by
any one, of what country, condition or quality soever, violated or broken.

And if in the aforesaid Havens, Cities, or places, any goods be laden,
shipped, or carred, which being found, we will and ordain them to be ceazed
and (...) without common course or (...) which shall be found to have been to
laden together with the ships, wagons, Carts, and horses, to be confiscated,
the one third part to the use of the accuser, be he an officer, or otherwise in
service of the land or no, and the other two third parts, to the use of the
common causes, wherout the officer who shall follow the matter in law shall be
contented. Ordaining moreover, that the proprietaries, or owners of the said
goods, as also masters of the said ships, waine men, or carmen, in whose
ships, or upon whose waines or carts they shall be found to be laden in the
forbidden Havens, Cities, and places, to be apprehended, and stayed until
such time as they shall have paid and accomplished al such further pennalties
and corrections, wherein according to the nature of their trespass (by the
arbitrements of the judge) they shall be condemned, which may not be less (for
so much as touches the Merchants) then a thousand pounds. And for each of the
Shippers or masters of Ships, five hundredth pounds of forty pence in the
pound. And to the end that the foresaid orders may the better be followed, and
all frauds punished: We mean that within a year after the aforesaid
trespass, all such which shall be found to have violated or broken the same,
it shall and may be lawful, by all officers of the said lands, and before
competent Judges, to arrest and condemn them for the value of the said goods
and ships, wagons, carts, and horses, together with the above named
penalties and corrections. The sentence whereof by provision shall be executed,
all appellations and prouocations notwithstanding. And if any in the aforesaid
united Provinces desired to ship or lade any goods, to transport the same to
the neighbor countries or friends: the same shall not be permitted unto him,
unless he have leave and license thereto from us, the said Lord Admiral
general, or from those which thereunto by us shall be appointed, and that by
the ships which shall lade the same, sufficient sureties shall be set for the
value of their ships, that the said laden goods shall not be carried to any
other place but to the havens, cities, and places of our said friends and
allies, and that within a certain prefixed reasonable time named in their
pasports, according to the distance of the haven, to yield sufficient
certification and proof thereof; or else their bond shall be executed upon
the sureties, for the aforesaid value, to the use of the common causes. And
further, we charge all Admirals, Vice Admirals Captains, and Commissioners for
sea. All Chieftaines, Generals of horses, Captains, and officers of men of war
by land, to take sharp regard, that all such of what land or condition
soever, as shall have any goods, wares, or merchandises in their ships, upon
their waines, Carts, Horses, or otherwise laden, being bound for the said
realms, countries and cities, held and occupied by the enemies, may be
pursued, overtaken, and brought back to the colleges of the Admiraltie, and
other justices aforesaid, to be punished according to the tenor of these
presents. And we being resolved to keep a good and sure order for the defense
of the ships of trade and fishing, using at sea, against all foreign invasions
and robbings of the enemy, as also against the exorbitant ransomes which the
common enemies use in the pilling and ransoming of the same. We have therefore
forbidden and interdicted, forbid and interdicte by these presents, all
inhabitants of the united lands, as well Merchants Ships, Pilots, as other, using
traffic or fishing, at Sea or on the Rivers within the land, or transporting
any goods beyond the seas, to take or procure any pasports or safegards of the
enemies, in no manner of sort, upon confiscation of the ships and goods of such
as shall be found to have taken any, with further arbitrall correction.
Ordaining that the giuers of the said pasports, safegardes, or safe conductes
of the common enemy, shall be for example of other, punished by loss of
life, and confiscation of their goods, as ayders of the enemy. And if in case
any of the ships or Pilots be by the enemy taken, and over and above the order
by us thereto established, be ransomed and endamaged, we will and ordain that
the same unreasonable ransomes and damages shall be recovered vp^on the
Officers, Justices, and subjects of the vilages of Bra^ant, Flaunders, and
others, remaining under the enem^^^ dominion, besides what they shall pay to
the comm^ or for ransom, charging and authorizing the deputed counse^ of the
States of the respective Provinces, whose subjects against these our orders
shall be by the common enemy by exorbitant and unreasonable ransomes or
otherways endammaged, to take notice thereof, and to recover and remburst them
as before, by such proceedings and means of execution, as in like matter is
commonly used. And to the end no man pretend ignorance hereof, we signify and
command our beloved, the States, Lieutenants, and appointed Counsailors of the
States, and deputed States of the respective Provinces of Gelderland, Holland,
Zealand, Verecht, Vriesland, Oueryssel, Grooning, and Omlanden, and all other
Justices, and Officers unto whom it does belong: to cause this our will and
ordinance to be every where published and proclaimed, in the places where the
public Proclimations are usually proclaimed, we charge likewise the
Chauncelor, Presidents, and provincial Counsailours, Advocates, Fiscals, and
general Atturneys: and all other Officers, Judges and Justices of the
aforesaid Countries, together with all Cheefetaines, Coronels, Admirals,
Vice-admirals, Generals of Horses, Captains, Officers and Commanders, to
follow and ensue these our ordinances, and to cause them to be followed and
ensued, proceeding and causing to be proceeded against the transgressors
thereof, without grace, favor, dissimulation or delay, as we have found the
same for the Lands welfare to be most needful. Given in S. Graven Haghe, the
second of April. 1599.

I. van oldenbarnevelt v. By the order of the aforesaid Lords the General
States.
C. Aerssen,


