THREE GREAT OVERTHROVVES ONE In the Palatinate, against Monsieur Tilley, the
Duke of Bauaria's General: Given by the King of Bohemia himself, being in
Person in the same Battle, with Sir Horatio Vere, but not Count Mansfield, as
is reported, he being at the same time in Spiers. THE OTHER Before Haggenaw,
against Leopaldus Forces, the Emperors Brother, by Count Mansfields Garrisons,
left in the same City. THE LAST In Languedock in France, against the Kings
Forces, since Soubizes Defeat by his Brother the Duke of Rohan, who has taken
Memorancy the Admiral Prisoner. Collected out of two Letters, the one sent
from Heydelburgh, the other from Mainhime, by an express Post, that arrived
here on May day at Night.

And now published this third of May, MDCXXII.

MATTERS CONCERNING THE PALATINATE, WITH THE DEFEAT of Monsieur Tilley in the
Palatinate, and the Duke of Memorancy in France.
THere are two sorts of men in the world, compared to tame and wild beasts,
and these are flatterers and detractors, and that worthily: For what vice may
he predominant in a Prince, or Common wealth, which a flatterer cannot guild
over with the fair appearance and colors of virtue: and what business can
present it self on the stage of this world, but a detractor will calumniate
and desire it; which is more apparent at this instant in the combustions of
Europe, then ever was heard of in many ages: for how many be there that sooth
up the humor of some kings (besides the Jesuits, whose profession is blind
ignorance, and superstitious zeal, even to set forward impiety) to stand upon
terms of sovereignty and imperiousness, as is great reason in Monarchies,
though the subjects be slaughtered, the country deuasted, the people mangled,
the peace dilacerated, the Churches abandoned, religion defaced, and God
blasphemed: and how many be there that discredit the cause of distressed
Princes, and the thriuing of religious businesses, although the finger of God
does point it out that fairer days shall follow stormy weather, which is most
apparent concerning the Bohemian affairs, and the Palatinates recovery,
wherein both flatterer and detractor step on the stage of this world to act
their Scenes with deceitful hurts and malicious intents. The flatterer carried
away with outward shows of the Papacy, and Catholic Princes, will not
apprehend, that there can be any determination of their greatness, but cry out
with Nabuchadnezer to worship the golden image of their Monarchy. The detractor
shaking his head, and biting his lip at any success shall happen, and deriding
the business, as if the Giants attempted to fight against heaven. Thus have
they magnified the house of Austria and the proceedings of the Empire: thus
have they discredited the King of Bohemias attempts, and set strange characters
on his actions.

But as in all disputations there is a Moderator: so would I might now meet
with such men, as will stand Neuters, and neither preuaricate judgment, nor
overthrow verity: and if the higher matters are too transcendent for their
capacity, yet let them give way to true relations, and honest reports, without
scorns, or cachinations: but because I shall never have my expectation
satisfied in this kind in regard of the multiplicy of humors in a common
wealth, I leave them all to be deceived themselves, or deceive others, and
only apply my self in this discourse to such men, who out of civil honesty
entertain good news with joy, and welcome bad with commiseration and pity,
making this use of both, that God is the manifester of his own judgments and
mercy to all the world. And so to the business in hand, and to tell you what
has happened of late in the Palatinate, since the King of Bohemia came there,
and chanced in other places as the cause has thriued, and men have had their
minds stirred up with good affections.

Know then, that the fifteenth of our April, and the five and twentieth Stilo
nouo, 1622. there came letters from Stuchgaret, that a thousand horse, and
four thousand foot of Duke Weymers of Saxony arrived at Laffen over the
Neckar, who brought word that the next day there will be also 3000. at
Rottenburg for the Marquess of Baden, who comes in person to set forward the
Bohemian cause. But the same day there was a mixture with as bad news: for
they will have it that General Tilley came to nether Gemunds a pretty great
town, and as he served the peasants in the villages, so he used the people in
this place, killing all the soldiers, slaughtring most part of the Burghers,
torturing the preachers, and sparing neither Captain nor officers, nay the
very scholars were subject to his fury, so that it seemed he was either blind
with ignorant zeal, or mad with intemperate rage.

A little before Leopaldus had sent down a 1000. soldiers into his country,
who had passage even by permission of the people and some town garrisond with
Mansfields men to march over the bridge toward Haggenaw, and I must confess,
that though Leopaldus has been much disappointed in his exspectation for
diverse troops out of Italy, and money from Spain, yet came their soldiers
daily from Austria, and certain companies of Swiss are ready to marshall a
pretty army in Alsatia, had not the the garrison of Haggenaw made a fearful
salley upon some scattered troops, killed diverse soldiers, and brought eight
Captains of horse into the town, which when the rest understood, whom
Mansfield had placed in the villages, and loath to be behind their fellows in
glorious exploytes and profitable booty, they likewise drew to a head of three
thousand, and approached a village in which were fifteen-hundred of Leopaldus
men, whom they not only frighted with an alarm, but discomfited with a great
slaughter, taking some prisoners, and many arms: but you must know in these
disasters it is far better here then with Monsieur Tilley, because the
soldiers have an ordinary ransom, and upon surprisals, there is an ordinary
delivery, wherein and whereby Count Mansfield has gotten such a reputation for
the fair sparings of all people that submit, or yield him contribution, that
the better sort commended his discretion and military customs, and inferiors
pray for his success and augmentation of honor, especially clap their hands
for joy, when they hear him cry out for the Cospell, and the King of Bohemia.
Yea I will be bold to say that these wars have made more true hearted
Protestants, then all the flatteries of Peace, and wantonness of prosperity
could ever do.

Much about this time (and here I pray you pardon me for precedencie of Days,
or Actions; for I would be loath to tie you or my self to such searches: it is
sufficient, that you shall receive the Relations fully, honestly, and truly,
as they chanced) And so I say, much about this time Count Mansfield came to
Germishem with three Regiments, whither also repaired Monsieur Rauillau, to
treat with him about matter of great importance, especially a Truce: but he
now answered, that he could not determine of any thing, until the King of
Bohemia were settled, who should dispose of Business at his own pleasure.

Upon the neck of this, as we say, there came assurance of the Marquess of
Badens preparation to the War: who sent word, that his Army was in a
readiness, but he would willingly have a Camp at Durmishem, as being able to
keep the Field himself, having levied Soldiers, and trained Bands, to the
number of ten thousand, besides Wagons and Munition, Carriages and Pioners,
with all other Furniture belonging to a great Captain: Nay, his Customs were
so Religious, that in the midst of his Troops he observed the Sabbath, and
commanded both Prayer and Fasting for one Meal in the same, whenever he
determined any Attempt, or set himself a-worke for befitting Enterprises. To
this you may add the Arrival of Palatine Lodowick Phillips at Germersteme,
and many Friends in other places, as true forerunners of the King of Bohemia's
coming indeed.

Monsieur Tilley all this while ranged up and down, and sometimes showed his
Horse in the Fields before Ladenberg, and sometimes came with his Foot to give
Alarums to Heydelberg, and sometimes terrified the Towns with diverse Outrages,
and at all times watched opportunity, to be revenged on Count Mansfield, or at
least to take him at advantage in some Expedition, that he might acknowledge
he had a Soldier to his Adversary, and as great a deseruer of Renown as
himself: In which courses he continued, to the affrighting both of Towns,
Villages, People, and the whole Army, till the King of Bohemia came indeed;
by whose occasion, the second Battle, which is promised you, chanced, as you
shall hear hereafter; though for my part I could be contented with the Title
of a Skirmish. The denomination of Battle carries too much terror with it,
and too much curiosity of distinction, as being the highest part of Military
Discipline: in which, many circumstances are to be considered, as mutual
Agreement, a Day appointed, the Trenches cast open, the maine Forces
vnobscured, the Troops orderly marshalled, the Cannon placed, and in a word, a
preparation made to Death and Slaughter, as you see a Feast appointed to
entertain some great Prince.

Now came the time, the long-wished time of the arrival of the King into the
Palatinate, about which there is some disparitie of reports. For some will have
his Army to meet him after his Conuoy from the Duke of Bulloigne: Some say,
he took Wagon, for the ease and accommodating his Person; and some say, he
out-stripped the Army, and came only with three Post-horse to Gernshem, from
whence, he spent three several days in visiting Mainhem, Franckendale, and
Heydelberg: in all which places, according to the common acclamations in
welcomming their Princes, as their Joy exceeded, their Ceremonies augmented;
and the Prince saw plainly, it was no common custom of the peoples welcomming
their Princes, whosoever they be, but a hearty desire to show their love and
obedience unto him, who had ventured his life to come amongst them, and would
never desist, till they were recompensed for their losses.

But it was too soon to begin so effectually, and so there passed at this time
a reciprocal thankfulness and ceremony between them: yet in my conscience it
lacked some feruency, because the ignorant people imputed some unkindness unto
him, in regard that by his forsaking of them, they were compelled to forsake
their houses, and inheritances, to leave them to a strangers usurpation. But
this aspersion was quickly wiped away with a gentle hand of observation, and a
present entertaining of new joy, especially that they now hoped, that these
strange Harpies which devoured their plenty, should either be expulsed by the
valor of Zetes and Culines, or enforced to a composition, which might deliver
every one his portion again: which although it seemed now a little diminished,
yet they well hoped, time and good husbandry would reduce to her pristinate
fullness and handsomeness: To which they were the rather induced, because the
Marquess of Baden has much augmented Count Mansfields Army, by uniting their
Forces together, and visiting King Frederick, who cannot be saluted otherwise,
nor receive any Character, then the King of Bohemia.

When these Princes were thus solemnly met, and that a Council of War had
resolved on some things worthy their presence, and so great an Army; Monsieur
Rauille was discharged, and sent home without an answer: For they were resolved
to have no Peace, but to make way to new fortunes by sharp Swords.

In the mean while that these things passed in the Palatinate, Bauaria
suspecting the worst, had raised more Forces of his own, and had more sent him
by the Emperor: so that there departed from Vppenhem over the Bridge eleven
Troops of Horse into the Lantgraue of Darmstadts Country, to join with
Tilley at Simpen.

And thus nothing was expected, but Mischief, and Revenge on all sides: For no
body durst look out of Laudenberg, by reason of the Horsemen of Heydelberg,
which watched them continually; nor was there now any thing thought upon, but
watching one another, to take advantage for their own ends and purposes.

And in this manner stood the Business of the Palatinate at this hour; and so
must rest a while, till you hear the news of Silesia.

The Duke of Saxony somewhat troubled, that Lusatia was denied him by the
Emperor, remained rather discontented then pleased, and so gave way to the
Princes of Silesia to call a Diet because of the vprores. For the soldiers had
mustred themselves to assault Glatz: but were repulsed by the young Earl of
Thorn, who slew many of them, and made them retire with great loss, whereupon
to prevent the worst, he entertained 150. soldiers more, who came from
Wittingham, by which occasion they are so strengthened and hartned, that they
have protested to defend themselves to the last man. In like manner the other
Protestants are much incensed against the Bishops, and every where there is
crying out upon the Catholics tyranny, and wicked Jesuits: whereupon the
Bishop of News will take from them of Cuntele the use of their Churches,
prohibit their assemblies, deny the reading of the Scriptures, and as ill as
Julian the Apostate, debar the intercourse of Christians: now Cuntele is
three mile distant from Meuse, and was ever a privileged place, whither they
of the religion resort, and were proud again to be reputed Protestants. For
although in these places there was some disparity between the Caluinists and
Lutherans, which bred some scandal to the professors: yet were they all glad
of the general title of Protestants, as you see at this hour, the Papists
generally rejoice at the name of Catholic: from the Bishops example many
Priests and officialls performed the like, but the people unaccustomed to such
indignities, from murmuring fell to opposition, and so stood upon a guard of
defense, and began some slender oppositions in many places, resorting to the
Princes and Lords of the Province both in town and villages, desiring them to
let them have the freedom of their souls, how ever the Emperor or Duke of
Saxony under him would seem to command their bodies, and obedience to
extraordinary contributions: upon this there is great mustring of soldiers
round about and the Emperor sent a new messenger to the Duke of Saxony to be
careful of the government. For he knew the loss of Bohemia depended upon the
absolute revolt of Silesia: But the truth is, they were affrayde of the
Marquess of Ieggendorff every where, who for all the Parliament of Hungary,
and the great assembly there to rectify the disorders of the Commonwealth,
grew strong with new forces, and was reputed twenty thousand, and feared to
come against them presently: For the country grew mutinous, and every man
suspected one another, considering the Emperor was reputed weak, and would
gladly have a peace, if he knew which way to obtain it with his honor: to
which I am the rather induced, because new Soldiers must have money and good
entertainment, and the old were worn out with many and diverse difficulties;
especially slaughter, hunger and sickness; besides the Countries lay wasted
where they quartered, and the Inhabitants did not husband nor till their
grounds as they were wont in former times: and this was the general cause
almost throughout all Germany, at which the people every where were very much
moved, because troubles arose not for Religion or the Gospels sake as the
maine point of the same: but for ambitious titles, and matters of State and
government, of which there is neither time nor occasion to dispute here: and
thus much for the remoter places.

Now we may draw near home, and come to that you desire, the second Skirmish
I promised you, which was against Monsieur Tilley in the Palatinate, and
concerning which there are diverse reports: but this Letter is come from
Crutsnach, wherein the Spaniards lie in Garrison, and therefore I am persuaded
they would make the best of a business against them, and be as sparing as
they could to discredit their own affairs, and so they tell the tale in this
manner.

Although the Report of the King of Bohemias coming into the Palatinate was
quickly divulged, and made known to all the Garrisons, especially Openhem and
Crutsnach, where the Spaniards lay, and had lain ever since their coming into
the Country: so that now they were very well fortified and entrenched: yet as
they had been quiet all this Winter, they were now likewise never startled by
the rumor, so that it was then supposed, that they had some private or secret
directions so to do, or knew there was some capitulation about their removing
and rendition of the place: notwithstanding Bauaria would not be so answered,
but as the Emperor had given him the Country, he would maintain the Title,
and also justify the possession: but as you heard in many places, there came
interpositions, and no doubt would prove him an intruder. Besides, when it was
objected unto him, that although the Emperor as exasperated against the Prince
Frederick, had done this for the present, and made his indignation an example
of revenge: yet either it could not last, or time would work a reconciliation:
but as for him, it must needs be a perpetual cause of displeasure, and their
posterity in the remembrance would hunt one another into the fields of
slaughter and war. To this Bauaria replied, let hereafter times look to
themselves, he would not go about to prevent destiny, he had now for himself
his limitation, and therefore regarded no more, then the present, his own
glory, and the Emperors dignity, which in his failing now must needs be made a
scorn to all nations: whereupon he proceeded (as you have diverse times heard)
and was indeed the only supportation which his Imperial Majesty trusted
unto, as affecting the revolt of Prague, opposing the enemies of Bohemia and
Morauia, repulsing the soldiers which had begun in Austria, and now
maintaining an army in the Palatinate, of which he made Monsieur Tilley
General, who had no question deserved well of fame and report for many sundry
actions, wherein both himself and his Master had attained the reputation of
good soldiers.

In this course did they continue all this winter, repining at nothing more
then the proceedings of Count Mansfield, who was now the only bar and
hindrance of their fortunes, wherefore they watched all opportunities to oppose
him, but he grew too strong for them, and as I may say too proud: for he left
them in scorn to a hard winter, and made way for his own glory, even through
the Palaces of Bishops, and countries of Catholics, which neither Bauaria
nor Tilley could prevent. Yea, when he had done what he listed, he came back
again amongst them with greater fury and more impetuous violence, like the
Ram, which fighting with his adversary, retireth by little and little, but
not for fear or dastardlinesse, but to return with greater courage and force:
thus in the mean time comes the King of Bohemia, as I said, into the
Palatinate again, and found Bauaria and Tilley springing with the spring to
new vigor and luster, insomuch that at two several times Tilley had surprised
some part of his carriages, and slain some few of the rear of his army: yea
he continued with that bravery, that he did show himself most when the King
was strongest especially after the King of Bohemia was come into the
Palatinate: for then he bestirred himself indeed, and not only spoiled the
villages, but threatened Heydelberg, who had many alarums by his means, and
many reports of her besieging: not thus contented, he braued the camp
himself, and came out in fury to set upon the King in an audacious manner, and
so a skirmish began, which a little rebated his fury, but yet not eclipsed his
glory.

Here gentle Reader I know not what to say unto thee, because rumor is spread
into streams concerning this matter: but in regard my Letter comes from
Crutsnach, from the Spaniards, and that all Letters tend to one purpose, that
there was such a defeat, I will follow my Copy, let other men please
themselves as they list, and so they tell the tale thus.

The King after he had joined his force that Mansfield had sent unto him with
Sir Horatio Vere, having occasion to remove his army, was pursued, or if you
will, attended upon by Monsieur Tilley, who marched along with all his forces
to ouerlooke the proceedings, which was orderly performed, until the King came
to a bridge, where for the time he made a stand, as indeed not thinking it
convenient to pass over, considering Tilley was so near, and in a valley
beside him.

Tilley again coniecturing that he made this stay for fear of him, came the
bolder forward, and pressed so fast toward him, that he was compelled to
break through a battle of his own pikes with his horse, which must needs
disorder his foot, and which was iudiciously discovered by the King: insomuch
that being well prepared, he took the advantage, sending some horse to
entertain these, who came so forward, and advancing with the rest against the
disranked pikes that could not so easily be brought into form and fashion
again, and so without dwelling long on the business, because they continued
not long in the skirmish, Tilleyes battle was overthrown, and he himself had
much ado to escape: then followed a strange slaughter: for there were perished
and taken prisoners between 5. or 6. thousand men, but most of them slain,
and last of all it ended with spoil, for the soldiers took away their arms,
and stripped their bodies, leaving them naked to the fowls of the air. Thus
is Tilley escaped, and therefore we can say no more of him: yet only Count
Mansfield is now a subject to talk of, and no question will run in some
violent course of glory, if the Emperor do not speedily send more forces, and
raise a greater army: for in my conscience this victory has elated him more
then all his former proceedings in the Bishopric of Spires or Leopaldus
country: to which I have a fair way of belief, in regard that heretofore
Mansfield was willing to hearken to a parley, and entertained the Emperors
messages, and Letters about a peace: but now he gave it out, it was only to
win time, and to compass his ends, which were to serve the King of Bohemia,
and his coming into the Palatinate, by whom he would be both directed, and
commanded, and without whose permission he would not so much as consent to a
truce or cessation of arms.

At last (as you have heard) the Palatine comes unto him, and is welcomed in
every place and applauded of all the people, so that it is doubted, he will
stand upon the higher terms, because he has the stronger force: as for the
Spanish Garrisons, they are firm and well provided, yet I see no reason for
their continuance, except Bauaria be supplied, and a new order taken to renew
the war: For whether war or peace, I am resolved, that Prince Frederick
will not suffer us thus to remain in his country, and be as thorns in his
sides.

To this effect was the Letter from Crutsnach, written by one of the Garrison,
and therefore I am persuaded it was impartial, and according to the Business:
so that there is hope for the general Cause to thrive, and the particular
Business of the Palatinate to cheer us with a new recovery. And thus much
for those Affairs.

Here is also another Letter come secretly from Paris, concerning the Kings
Forces in Languedock, which I suppose is very convenient to be published,
according to the probability of the matter, and the fearfulness of the Time.
It is not my purpose to dispute of the Actions of Princes, but to lament the
poor estate of Protestants. It cannot be hid from the ears of the World,
that is not hid from the eyes of the People; and so, as rumor has told us of
the distresses of the Protestants of France, good thoughts have instructed us
to wish the pacification of their Troubles, and pray for the diuersion of the
Kings anger against them, with the cessation of the War. But it will not be:
And therefore, for my part, I refer the Business to God, who can cure the
wounds of his Church, and comfort the hearts of his People, which have of late,
especially in France, been more sadded then ever before; in regard there is a
Book published in Paris of Monsieur Subizes defeat going to Rochel, whom the
King followed in person, and slew many of his company: this Relation filled
their souls with grief, and their eyes with tears; and in such a manner the
sorrow for the same increased, that they would not admit of recovery, and joy,
although they presently heard, that Monsieur Duke de Rohan, Subizes Brother,
being in the field for the Protestants in Languedock, had given Duke Memorancy,
the Admiral of France, a great Overthrow, which is thus confirmed.

After the Jesuits had prevailed with the French King to go against Rochel,
and prosecute the Business of Montalbon, the Soldiers were mustered in every
place, and the General of the Army proclaimed nothing but War and
Destruction; yet was there Oppositions against them: and the Protestants of
Province and Languedock well hoped, that Monsieur Desguiers would take their
Cause in hand, and defend their Religion; which whether he will or no, is yet
doubtful, and so hangs in suspense.

But Monsieur de Rohan would not tarry for his resolution, and raised such
Forces as he could, to supply Mountabon, and defend the Country: against whom
was sent Duke Memorancy, as General of the Kings Army, with other Lords and
Gentlemen of quality; who came forward with a goodly Army, and too goodly (if
it had pleased God otherwise) because it was against their Brethren. But Kings
command, and subjects must obey: Mountmorancy comes forward apace, and
Mountaban was afraid of a new obsession: but it proved otherwise. For Rohan was
courageous, and presumed on the Cause, though it were against his Prince: so in
plain terms (as they say) they fell to a Battle; in which, all things were
ordered belonging to Martial Discipline, but that the Lord of Battles did
disorder the Business. For coming to blows, and joining with fury,
Memorancy gave way, and Rohan took the advantage: yet the fight continued
long, and till the maine Rout was too too apparent, there seemed no difference.
But at last, as no extremity can last, the Victory fell to the Protestants,
and the Admiral was taken prisoner, with two Brothers of his Blood; but one of
them died of his wounds, and many other were slain outright: The Letter says
five thousand, the Rumor more, but the Religious heart says there were too
many of these, considering the Business was between Friends and Kindred,
Countrymen and of one Nation, Christians and Neighbors, and not between
Strangers and Enemies to the Kingdom.

This is that we receive from foreign Parts, and this is that we hearken
after in our own Country: every one wishing well to the King of Bohemia's
proceedings, every one praying truly for the afflicted Churches abroad; yea,
cursing the Jesuits for such a Doctrine, that bellows out nothing but War
and Death, Slaughter and Revenge, Cruelty and Spoil, when yet the Savior of
the World bad Peter put up his Sword, and feed his Flock; rode with Hosanna
and Palms to Jerusalem, and not with Armies and Triumph; submitted to Scorns
and Buffetting, and did not revenge himself: And yet these men dare seduce the
Princes of the World, and blaspheme the God of Heaven, who laughes them to
scorn for the present, and will in time to come cast them in a Bed of
Affliction with the Whore of Babylon.

FINIS.

