News from the PALATINATE.

A true and comfortable Relation of the wonderful proceedings of Count
MANSFIELD, from his first coming into the PALATINATE, until this present
Month.

Wherein to his eternal memory he has set out Gods glory, and enlarged his
own renown, by being honest to the King of BOHEMIA, and a constant maintainer
of the Gospel of Christ.

Likewise relating the true and admirable manner of raising of the fiege of
Fr^^ckendale by Sir HORATIO VERE, with the rest of his proceedings, until this
present.

Faithfully Translated and extracted out of a Dutch Letter sent from
Franckendale, by a great Commander, who has been an eyewitness of the same.

Printed at the Hage. 1622.

Repetunt proprios quaeque recursus,
Redituque suo singula gaudent.
Nec manet vlli traditus ordo,
Nisi quod fini iunxerit ortum,
Stabilemque sui fecerit orbem.
Boethius Metro. 2. lib 3. THE VVONDERFVLL PROCEEDINGS AND progresses of Count
Mansfield in the PALATINATE, etc.
I Must needs now remember the return of the explorators of the Land of
Canaan, who terrified the people, with a report of Enachims and Giants, iron
gates, and high Towers, strong walls, and impregnable Bulwarks, great Armies,
and formidable Soldiers, only Caleb and Joshua opposed themselves with a
contrary discovery of a plentiful Country, and large inheritance; for which
the people had like to have stoned them. Thus have they dealt with the King of
Bohemia, ever since the loss of Prague, and Spinola's entering into the
Palatinate, geering and deriding his attempts, as if it were impossible to
prosecute any enterprise against the House of Austria, and withstand the King
of Spaines Armies, with such auxiliary Princes, as depend upon his Sovereignty:
whereupon they have not only scorned his Election, but taught their tongues a
lesson of defamation, and their hands a cunning of deciphering his weakness
and temerity, in many calumnious Pictures, and scandalous reports, never
remembering Ahabs little cloud, and what an inundation of rain it grew unto,
nor the childrens of Israel making of Brick in the Land of Goshen, and what a
glorious Nation they came unto, nor the deridings of Sanbolet and Tobias, when
they re-edified the Temple, and how they prevailed in despite of opposition:
nor in a word, how the Church of God for all the watchings of the Dragon in
the Wilderness, has been still delinered like that woman, and flourished in
the end for all her hard beginnings, and outrageous adversaries; and why may
not time bring forth the like birth for the happy deliverance of the
Palatinate, and her Master, for all this thick hanging cloud over her head,
threatening a tempest of utter destruction, and desolation.

But my meaning is, not to trouble you with repititions, or unbind the fardell
of tumor, concerning former matters; wherein you shall find her garment
be-painted with many tongues on the outside, and as many hearts on the inside,
to intimate thus much, that men will be talking according to the disposition of
their hearts: some like Papists, some like Polliticians, some like irreligious
Neuters, some like Hispaniolized instruments, some like true Protestants, and
every one as their fancy induces: Nay, I will not speak a word of former
preparations, nor how the Duke of Bauaria proved so good a Seruitour to the
Emperor, that upon his coming into the Palatinate, the Papists about Vdenhem,
in the upper part of the Bishopric of Spires, made a Comedy of the lost King
of Bohemia, as they termed him, and used many unseemly speeches against him
in that Interlude, with such vndecencies, that England it self escaped not
their scandalous minortiues: but it passed not away with that succesfull
jollity as they pretended, for the coming down of Count Mansfield quickly
stopped all their mouths, and quenched the heat of these burning reproaches; as
for those unsavory untruths of making composition of agreement with the
Emperor, or Duke of Bauaria: there never was such a thought, nor motive,
either of revolt from the King of Bohemia, or reconciliation to them, and
therefore of him only and his proceedings, according to the Poet: Arma
virumque vno, I will now speak, and show you by Gods grace the success of his
affairs, and then judge your selves what possibility he stands in, and whether
fairer days may come in the stead of tempestuous weather, yea, I make no
question (according to another Poet:)

Saepe premente Deo fert Deus alter opem. The 14 of October 1621. his
Excellency, for so we must style him: or General, with his whole Army came out
of the upper Palatinate toward H^^delberg, being eight Regiments of foot,
containing 108. Companies, and 56. Cornets of Horse, somewhat weak, and
wearyed with long Marches, yet were they 10000. strong by Pole: but hearing of
the siege of Franckendale, they stayed not long there, as resolving to raise
it, and relieve the Country, to which they were the rather animated, because
that General Vere sent Colonel Ouertrant out of Mainhem, with fix Cornets of
Horse, four Demi Cannons, and two Pieces of six pound bullets unto him, who
were welcomed accordingly, and so his Excellency with 2000. in his own
Regiment. Colonel Mersen with 1200. Colonel Waldmans Hawsen with 2000. and
part of a new Regiment under Colonel Bandshaw, being 1000. with four Pieces
more: besides those which Colonel Ouertrant brought, marched presently to
Franckendale; but the Enemy hearing of his approach, disbandied themselves, and
left the siege, retiring toward Worms: yet first possessing the Bridge, they
had made right over against Steine.

But this was not so covertly done, but they of Franckendale had notice of the
same, and made a brave Salley, wherein the English, whom General Vere had left
in Garrison, there performed their parts like honest men, and worthy Soldiers,
for there were forty of the Enemy slain, an Italian Captain with ^n Ensign
taken prisoners, and many others overtaken in the flight; by which occasion
they were freed of the siege, and delivered from the fear of utter
destruction: For although the Town was well fortified and had many Bulwarks
and Trenches, which General Vere before his departure had ouerseene, and
prepared: yet were they not so perfected and warrantable, but such an Army, as
the Spaniard had of 9000. at least, might in time either batter, or enforce,
considering the Garrison decayed, and provision failed: but God was their
protector, and as you have heard, sent this supply to put new life into their
courages, and relieve their distresses.

Now the siege of Franckendale was in this manner; the Enemy taking advantage
of General Veres retiring to Mainhem, came with 9000. before it, and for four
weeks continually battered the Bulwarks; but by reason he had not taken in any
of the Sconses, nor dismantled the principal outworks, he could not endamage
the Town it self. Nay: when he had valiantly and fortunately got into the
Counterscarfe, he was forced out again with the loss of 100. men, and taught
to know, that a stronger arm puts out the strong man: yet not altogether
disheartened, as resolved, that Honor works upon difficult attempts, he
obtained a half Moon, from whence he was also fiered, and repulsed with the
like loss: For when we perceived, that they were Masters of the same, and in
possession of the Trenches, we presently made a Mine, which prospered so well,
that we blew them into the air: For the Town having a passage at the back of
the half Moon after the fashion of rauelings, we did the better effect our
purpose, though the work it self was quite defaced. There was also another
half Moon somewhat less made upon the ditches, which likewise the Enemy
attempted; but belike hearing of the failing of the former, they desisted,
although they had made many brauadoes to assault even the ditches themselves,
wherein they might have endangered their whole Army: For they were so well
defended, that 3000. men could not surprise them, then had they the wall to
come to, which must have endangered them a great deal more: nay, if they had
obtained the wall, which must be done with the like loss: there were many
Scafferies behind, and a new wall begun to be made, which also would have much
endamaged them: so that by the judgment of experienced Soldiers, and the
success of that, wherein they had been engaged, considering they could not
bring the Cannon to batter for the out-workes, this Army would questionless
have been consumed in obtaining this one place, and yet they might have failed
to. For in three weeks they lost 3000. men, and diverse persons of account,
besides great Officers and Captains, whose bodies were embalmed and sent to
Stein: but (God be thanked) to prevent our further fear, and vain supposes of
what might have been done on both sides, the coming of Count Mansfield
prevented all our accounts, and the Enemy departed within four days toward
Worms, so that the General came not to Franckendale at all, but presently
followed the Enemy to Worms, and there encamped himself round about the 18.
of October, whether repaired General Vere, and some English Captains, having
leisure to treat of their affairs, and send to Heidelberg, and other places
both to comfort and supply them: But the truth is, we determined to set upon
the Enemy at his Bridge, had we not found many inconveniences in the same.

For as he lay between the Rhein and a Marsh, well entrenched and insconsed by
Stein, we could not come at him, or if you will, durst not set upon him,
because men were precious unto us, and many wants came upon us, besides the
time of year which threatened us with unseasonable weather, the Country was
also forraged, and the wars had looked upon this flourishing Province, with
as angry a countenance, as when she threatened to depopulate, and destroy a
Country indeed: For both the Enemy and our selves must be here, and now
supplied: Whereupon his Excellency about the 22. of October resolved to retire,
and dispierce his Army, and so some went to Franckendale: some returned with
General Vere to Mainhem: both the Colonels Mersen, Bandsh^w went to
Heidelberg, and his Excellency himself departed to Mainhem, but tarried not
long, by reason of many inconveniences: so he obscured his time, and passed
over the Bridge into the Bishopric of Spires, taking all places he came at,
and ransacking every Town, wherein he determined not to recide except Vdenhem:
from thence understanding of the slender guard of other places, he divided his
Army, sending some forces to Benshem, some to Heppenhem, and some to Weinhem,
all which he quickly surprised, taking the spoil for his Soldiers, and as
quickly forsook, when the Enemy approached, who indeed watched him very
narrowly: Yet Colonel Tilley passed most industriously to Badenberg, and there
made a Bridge over the Necker, and raised a Sconse right against Neckerhausen,
where he quartred himself, as his Excellency had done in other places, to the
refreshing of his Soldiers, and enriching his Army.

Till this the Bauarians were at variance with the Spaniards, and some
unkindness arose about Precedence of places: For the Spanish General Don
Cordona would not give place to the Bauarians, which Colonel Tilley
challenged, as lying nearest the Enemy, and skirmishing often with his
Excellency, whereupon they fell to blows, and that at last divided them
assunder: so the Bauarians going over Odenwald, took Mosbach, and Ederback on
the Necker, and also Steinbach, and Schonam, which he might do with ease,
considering Count Mansfield returned once again to Mainhem about the 13. of
November, and so was this Bishopric of Spieres tossed as it were between two
Seas, and ready to be swallowed of either: For both the Armies were needy, and
the belly having no ears, nor eyes to discern parties, called for meat, and
entertained all that came.

But what with the necessity of his affairs, and the stirringnes of his
spirit, his Excellency could not rest long in a place, and so the 15 of Nouem
went over the Bridge again, taking in Dieteshen, which after 8. Cannon shot
yielded without resistance, wherein Duke Saxon Lowanbord stayed with his
Regiment. From thence the 16. of November, his Excellency took Keichweild
Town, and a Castle standing in a marsh by composition: for it should seem
both Captain and Soldiers (though for the most part Subjects of the
Bishopric of Spires) were well addicted to his Excellency, and so yielded
without battery, making intercession to serve him, and so they were
entertained, and remained amongst us, and the rather, because the Enemy was
strong in these parts and places, as lodging the chief Lieutenant Colonel
Lipp, under Grave Rheinhart van Solmes, with his Regiment, and 2000. Horse
under the Saxon Lowanbord, who were all dispiersed, for maintenance in the
Country, and lay thus upon advantage to set forward the service.

The 18. of November we marched toward Lunterbord, taking both the Castle and
the Town without resistance. For the Inhabitants hearing of our approach,
abandoned their dwellings, except 10. Burgers, and the Secretary of the State,
who submitted themselves, and admitted of our prevailing: the rest of the
people fled some hour before we came, whereby we found much Household Stuff,
apparel, and linen; all which fell to the Soldiers, by his Excellencies
appointment, who desiring rather money, then to be encombred with such
vnportable stuff, sold that for a Florine, which was worth ten: for when
peace and safe conduct was proclaimed to all, that would return, and
repossesse their houses, many came back again and redeemed their furniture at
easy rates: so his Excellency made his chief quarter here, and grew so
strong, that the Towns both of Worms and Spiers, desired his Protection, and
paid great sums of money, the one was granted, the other received; by whose
example other Towns condiscended likewise to contribution: For Landaw and
Weisenburg, both rickes Towns; disbursed great sums: Haggenaw paid 5000. ricks
dollers, and has yielded her self with the tender of all service, and the
supply of his Excellencies wants, especially to send him Prouant and Munition,
if he went to Lanterburg, yea all the places and people submitted themselves,
and applauded his fidelity and endurances.

Inso much, that from the 18. of November, to the 25. there assembled so great
a number of Earls, Barons, Colonels, Captains, and Gentlemen, besides the
wonderful concurse of people, that as it is one way incredible, so is it
another way remarkable, that either the person or the cause should thrive so
suddenly, and against all expectation: every man offering his service to his
Excellency, and every thing giving way to his fortunes, and the success of
his enterprises, Don Court, a Baron of Loraine, has mustred 600. Horse: Grave
Cassimire van Lowestein 1000. Colonel Carleston 600. Horse, and to make the
Companies complete both with Foot and Horse, Commissions were granted about the
end of November, to raise 6000. Foot more, whereof the most part are come
already: so that in my conscience, if multitudes of men will perform any
exploit, here are men enough to overrun a Kingdom; or if those men they
have may be paid and kept together, here are spirits, that propose great
matters to themselves, and as great service to their General. The Duke of
Bulloigne proportioneth 4000. Foot, and 1000. Horse. The Prince of Wittenberg
with diverse great States, and other Ricks Towns promise fair, and send his
Excellency word, they have already 8000. in Arms, and at the Spring will make
them up 15000. for the defense of the Palatinate; and as it should seem, all
the Princes of the Union, somewhat ashamed of their former retraction, will
reassume new courages, and make a trial of new fortunes: so that by this
computation, if we may flatter our selves with the hopes of promises, and
coadiutements of men, such as the Romans were wont to Auxiliary forces, and
Presidiary Colonies, the King of Bohemia reckoning his own helps, may presume
of 60000. men: but yet far be it from presumption, because God works many
times with lesser number greater works, then either the recovery of the
Palatinate, or Kingdom of Bohemia.

To this we may add that Army which is already under the commands of John
George Marquess of Iaggendorpe, and the Earl of Thorn, being at the least
16000. strong in Bohemia, and the Provinces of Silesia and Morauia, for all the
threatenings of the Duke of Saxony, and inconstancy of the Citizens of Prague,
and why may I not name the Hungarians, and Transiluanians under Bethelem Gabor,
who questionless will not deal ingenerously with the King of Bohemia, but
step in as a sharer in this recovery, and keep all the contracts in despite
of rumor, that will have him at peace with the Emperor, or at least at truce
in this time of his absence from Vienna, as is reported, that he is gone toward
Italy about a marriage: But whether it be so or no, such be the Letters, such
is the report, and every man stands gazing on these preparations, as if they
were to behold some prodigious comet, falling only into the scruple of
conjecture, what should be the issue of both. For my part I leave all to the
unsearchable providence of God, and return to the business in hand, which
turns me over to a new work.

By the occasion of these wars, and dilacerating the peace and plenty of
Countries, this goodly Province of the Palatinate had come into the hands of
cruel usurpers, and unnatural strangers, who have respected nothing, but the
present time, and supplying of wants, not caring what became of her hereafter,
nor how deformed they made her for to welcome her own parents: For they cut
down her Woods, even before Franckendale, and other places, to prevent
annoyance from the Enemy, who kept in the same as under shelter, and from
thence made many sallyes upon the people, and lay as it were in Ambuscado to
surprise the Soldiers: they ouer-trampled her Vines, and made the hoofes of
their Horses speak cruelly to the roots: they dug up her fields for
Trenches and Bulwarks: they pulled down their houses round about their Towns
to raise rauelings and counterscarps, they oppressed the people, suffering no
man to enjoy his own, nor to give it away to whom they pleased: so that they
which before in a manner lived securely without walls, and fortifications, are
not now safe within walls, trenches, and the mounting of Cannons: and this is
the misery of discention, and the rage of Princes, who will not be pacified
without mischief and revenge, as is apparent all over Bohemia, and those
Countries, where the Enemies have come in with the sound of hostility: so that
if any demand, why Count Mansfield, being so strong, so well provided, and
befriended, does not return into the Palatinate, and either contriue the
rendition, or prosecute the Enemies expulsion. I answer plainly: 1. The
Soldiers love the spoil better then pay, and so are kept together with the
hopes of reward, and enriching themselves. 2. Secondly, the Palatinate being
thus forraged, will not supply the wants of so great an Army. 3. Thirdly, they
must be consumed against fortified trenches and Sconses: For they will not come
to a maine battle except they list. 4. Fourthly, treasure being wasted, he is
not sure always to pay them, and it is a rule in Martial discipline, not to
let the Soldier want, while he lies in the field. 5. For all his Excellency
be thus forward, yet is he subject to direction, and expects more friends. 6.
Last of all, to expulse the Spaniard and Bauarian by force out of the
Palatinate, must cost a great effusion of blood, and Princes that are good,
would spare the lives of their Subjects, yea, of Christian Enemies as much as
may be. But to return where we left.

About the 21. of November, the Enemy approached Dieteshen with 8000. horse and
foot, and four Pieces of Ordnance, notwithstanding Captain Banbierg desisted
from opposing or fighting with him, as pretending he had no such Commission,
but only to stay for his Excellencies coming, who was resolved to encounter
with him indeed, but the Enemy tarried in no place, but rather retired back,
and so there was no hunting him in a depopulated Country. The 25. of Nouemb,
his Excellency left Landerberg, leaving but one Company, as a Garrison therein,
and marched with all his forces toward Gernsham, and the next day toward
Dieteshen, with four Pieces of Ordnance of 15. pound bullet, where the Enemy
and he skirmished: for though they retired about the 22. of Nouemb. yet they
still houered here about, and resolved upon any advantage or opportunity to
besiege the Town, by which occasion when we found them here, we came to
blows: but their maine forces lay entrenched by a Marsh, and kept the
fastness, so that we could neither enforce them, nor fight any set battle:
wherefore his Excellency loath to loose time in the evening, retired to
Bernshem again, whereby the Enemy had leisure to besiege Dieteshen, and so
with nine days battery, and the loss of 200. men, he took it by composition,
after we (as I said) had skirmished with them the 26. and 27. many times.

The 29. of Nouemb, the Burgomaster Nonnelts of Spiers was sent unto his
Excellency with gratification and assurance, that they would take up 1000. men,
and give them three months pay, and so send them well furnished to his
Excellency, by which example the Towns of Landaw, Weisenburch, and Hagenaw
have done the like, according to proportion of Inhabitants: but Strasbourg has
beat up the Drums for 4000. with her Villages, who are ready to come unto us:
so that we increase daily, and find the Protestants to their power, willing to
supply us with men, money, and munition; whereupon we returned to Dieteshen
again, and repossessed the place, putting the Enemy out, and so left 300. men
as a Garrison in the same, which was done the 12. of December. we did the like to
Fridelshem, but that fell into the Enemies hand, as soon as we departed: For
you must know, that these places are neither fortified, nor walled, but as the
stronger forces possess them, and make them serviceable to their uses.

The 16. of December we marched from Bernshen to Hagenaw, and so to Wantzenaw
by Strasburch, and at last took Elsaz-sauoren without any great hurt; but most
chiefly we forraged the whole Bishopric to the supplying our wants, and
enriching the Soldiers. For when Strasburg understood what was done, and that
we were going away with the spoils; they sent unto us, and redeemed the same
with the disbursing of 200000. Ricks dollers; whereby our Soldiers full of
money and courage, cried out for the Rhine, and the river of Maine: For we now
mustered 16000. foot, and 6000. Horse, having honest and probable certificate,
that the Bauarians and Spaniards were not 14000. and so stood in fear of his
Excellencies coming upon them, which no question he would have done, like
thunder, if they would any manner of way had endured the trial, but they had
learnt the trick of entrenching, and so expected the good hour of supplying
their Armies both from Sauoy and Italy.

The 6. of January Monsieur Bonni Court, a Baron of Loraine, came to Hagenaw to
his Excellency with 600. horse and the Baron Bouo with 4000. foot, so that it
should seem his Excellency is much feared in Loraine: For many of his
Companies have already tasted the fruits of the Country, and with reciprocal
gentleness been welcomed amongst them, yea, it is certain, that France her
self suspects his approach, and the Protestants every where pray for his
success, and coming amongst them, because it is rumoured, that the King of
France has taken the Sacrament to overrun them all.

Thus is the mustring of Soldiers, and taking up of men on all sides: for as
his Excellency increases his Company with the inhabitants of Loraine, who
willingly suffer his Muster-masters among them, and has at least 1000.
subjects of Spiers likewise to attend his service: so do the Bauarians and
Spaniards seek daily to augment their troops, and besides great hopes out of
Italy and Sauoy, have the help and assistants of the Catholic Bishops,
Princes, Gentlemen, and Towns: so that the Earl George van Lowesten has
taken up a Regiment of foot, and 600. horse, who all lie in and about Landaw.
Colonel Tilley quartereth with 500. men by and in Landeburg, and has his
other troops dispiersed in several places: For some 14. days since, he took
Wimphen, and as we heard many of Heidelberg retired themselves to Mainhem,
being full of fear, that in the absence of Count Mansfield, the Bauarians
would come back again to Heidelberg it self, but we hope it is too strong
and well peopled for them, and they dare not as yet leave the other places
wherein they abide, naked and abandoned: besides, Count Mansfield is not
retired so far, but he can come again upon them to prevent further
mischief: for Captain Cheuit lying in Dielsberg about the end of December,
took in a little Town by the means of a playing Petard, and slew many of the
Bauarians, spoiling and burning the place: yet did yet belong to our Colonel
Landshat, who is a native of that Country.

In this manner are all these Countries turmoyled, and the people in Arms, so
that his excellency grows stronger and stronger, and the Palatinate is much
comforted, and expects a fair recovery: For in Heidelberg lies Colonel
Mersen as Governor, and has four Companies in his Regiment; with him is
joined Colonel Landshat with four Companies, and two English Companies, who
are well appointed, and the General Vere is very careful and industrious,
that the Bauarians take him not at any advantage; whereupon Franckendale was
also newly relieved, so that there are now in it 12. Companies, besides, the
Burgers and many hundreds of Pesants, who serve for Pyoners, and to set forward
the works: nay, they are so strong and cheerful, that they sent a conuoy
with diverse Gentlemen, and well appointed Companies of foot to conduct the
Palsgraue Corn and Wine out of Attenbergs: Schonauer and Niewhausen hoof, with
other places, which belonged to his Royalties, to bring all safe to
Franckendale: but they of Worms denied us passage, and shut their gates,
keeping their Sconses against us, because they pretended a treaty and
capitulation with the Bauarians, and either durst not yield to our requests, or
were indeed disaffected to us in their hearts: whereupon General Vere not
thinking it meet to endure such neutrality, or give way to affronts, which
might disparage his Honor; sent us Commission to maleprise all the
commodities, and Merchandise, that came from Worms, and intercept the Wagons
of all sorts, that passed and repassed too and from them; whereby we quickly
took 100. Fats of Wine, much Corn, Horses, and many other commodities,
teaching them a better lesson of friendlinesse and constancy: so that ever
since they have agreed, and bound themselves to be more serviceable, and at
that time bought out their Corn and Wine again at reasonable rates, though
with great loss to the Merchant, who in the bargain disbursed 1000. Dollers
extraordinary, which were divided amongst the Soldiers, who brought themselves
and that they went for quietly to Franckendale.

After this, we grew bolder and bolder, and made diverse out-roades and
in-roades into the Bishopric of Spiers, where we obtained good booty, and faw
the misery of these places, which were preyed upon on all sides, and made
subject to the usurpation of strangers, who were not dainty to disrobe her of
her best ornaments: For as I said before even at Franckendale it self, we were
enforced to cut down the goodly Woods round about it, and many thousand trees
in other places, because they served only as a shelter for the Spaniards to lie
in Ambuscado, and so break upon us unawares; or if you will lie continually
shooting at us to our great loss and hinderance, without any endemnity to
themselves: but now God be thanked it is otherwise, though to the Countries
damage and defacing, and we are preparing for to raise outworks, and cast
rafts and trenches, which will questionless put the Enemy to great loss and
trouble to win, and demolish, before he can come near our Towns: and in
this estate stands the Palatinate it self at this hour, both our selves and
the Enemy well fortified in every place, and resolved, that if they come not to
an orderly rendition, it will be now a matter of great difficulty, to put the
possessors out of their holds and fortifications, especially if the Soldiers
be well paid, and take notice of the Officers care to supply their wants: For
although the Country be much forraged, yet for money provision will come on
all sides, and the rivers can send down their Boats and Punts from remoter
places, with corn, cattle, wine, and other necessaries, as occasion shall
serve.

While we thus busied our selves in the Palatinate, and lay watching one
another to prevent the mischiefs, which might be taken upon advantages, his
Excellency grew stronger and stronger, and had planted himself as it were in a
new Country: whereupon the spirituality of Mentz, and the confines of Loraine,
yea some say of Metts likewise, desired with one consent a truce for two
months, either expecting relief, which I know not from whence it should come,
or resolving to buy out their peace, which is that Count Mansfield desired, as
knowing money to be the very sinews of his strength, and binding cords to
keep all strongly together, or fearing his forces and protestations: For
concerning the one, they saw apparently, that as the Scriptures said of Iehu,
he came or marched furiously: so did this Champion of Honor, whirle up and
down their Countries with violence, and added forces to forces to firm
himself the stronger. Concerning the other, seeing the Spaniards and Bauarians
had led him the way, and taught him a lesson of intrusion, and usurping another
man's right; why should not he do the like, paying them with their own money,
and prizing the balances with their own weights? nay, if they were so ready
to rob and spoil the Protestants in the Palatinate? why should not he be as
willing and propence to forage the Papists, wheresoever they recided, or he
could find them. These considerations made the Bishops and other Clergy men
suspect their estates, and resolve to compound for their quietness: For as I
said, they saw no forces ready either to oppose or expel the Mansfildians, as
I may call them, nor could indeed conjecture, what would be the success of
these affairs, or whether this glorious Army would march, much less in what
attempts it might be prosperous. For they saw plainly the Bishopric of Spiers
was spoiled, and that the Town it self had agreed with him, and in a manner
promised, not to entertain any Spanish Catisons, though Don Cordona and
Monsieur Tilley importuned the same: yet for all this did the Bishop retire
with certain Cornets of Horse to Idenheim, where Monsieur Tilley was resident,
and his Excellency perceiving the Papists only to temporise, was the
vnwillinger to come to any composition with them, but would rather adventure on
the spoil: but at last his resolution was to be contented with so much money
ready paid.

You have heard before, that there was some controversy between the Spaniards
and Bauarians about points of honor, or (if you will) tumors of vainglory
and ambition, which now burst out again: For about the 7. of January, while
the Bauarians were resolved to attempt some places: Don Cordoua against all
expectation would endure the field no longer, nor hazard his Soldiers in the
extremity of Winter, which now came upon them, and so retired himself to
Winter his troops in better lodging; whereby we had the more leisure to
surprise such Merchandise, as passed to and fro the Country: yea, his
Excellency commanded the Rhine at Germshem, and had diverse Ships and Boats
ready either to make a Bridge over the same, or to transport his Army and
Provision to such places, as he determined to lodge in: but he went presently
as you heard into the Bishopric of Mentz, and they of Strasburg gave liberty
to his Captains to muster men, and take up Soldiers in his name, though the
Archduke Leopoldus had sent an Ambassador to diverse Towns by way of
countermaund and prohibition: But alas! Ambassies will do no good, where men
are Masters of the field, and Armies lie ready to prosecute any tyranny
contradicted, or in the heat of fury and revenge: For such was the success of
Earl Mansfields affairs, that he took up men in all places, and so went
directly to Elsas, a Town of great expectation: for although some two months
before he had possession of the same, as he thought, having received some
Soldiers into the Town, whereby it was confidently given out, that Elsas, or
Elsas Saueren was his own, being a fortified place, subject to the Archduke
Leopaldus, who is Lord of that Country they call Alsatia, lying between
Switzerland and Mentz, arriving by the Bishopric of Spiers, and the
Palatinate, full of Rivers, and extraordinary commodities, and every way
convenient for his Excellencies affairs: yet they revolted again, and put out
all his garrisons, standing firm for their own Lord the Archduke Leopoldus: so
that much exasperated against them, about the 17. of January, he sent most part
of his Army either to besiege or surprise it, who in the march took all the
Bishops Booers, with their Horses and Wagons, and made good booty.

But before I proceed any further, you must consider, that in all your Dutch
Currantoes, this word Elsas is taken for the whole Country of Leopoldus, as
much as for the Town it self, and therefore may bring confusion to the
Reader, that he supposes sometimes the Country is taken, when it is but the
Town, and the Town is taken, when he is only marching in the Country.
Another error arises from these Currantoes in confusion of time, by stilo
nouo, yea by many antidates, and postdates, so that they place that first,
which should be last, and that last, which had a passage of former time.
Thirdly, that they build too much upon heare-sayes and reports, and so trusting
unto various opinions, huddle all news together, because they would be thought
to know something. Last of all, your Dutch Letters have a strange custom of
partiality to set out the glory, and renown of their own Contrymen, and
scarce to mention either the English, or any other Nation, who are indeed the
best Actors in such services: As for example, in the description of the fiege
of Fran^kendale, not an Englishman in any Curranto, or Dutch Letter is named:
but only Captain Ouertrant, and such like, when yet the English deserved
better then any Nation. Again: in the government of Heidelberg, only the
Dutch Governor is commended, but the English are sparingly past over, with
naming of two English Companies in the Town: Nay, in the description of
Mainhem it self, the General Vere is slightly charactered, when yet by
commission from the King of Bohemia, he is the great Commander of the whole
Country; and Count Mansfield himself, while he is resident there, must
acknowledge his authority. These things I thought good to certify you of by
way of transition, that you be not altogether transported with Dutch news,
and partiality, nor confounded with transmutation of time and names, nor
affrighted with any relation, which shall seem to darken the glory of these
affairs, or the hope of better success in the Palatinate business. But to
avoid all doubts, questions and oppositions, I have (gentle Reader) for your
sake composed this discourse, and in a plain phrase, that you may rely upon
one truth, and teach your hearts a song of thanksgiving to the God of truth,
and battles, that has thus begun to bring matters about, against all
expectation: and so to our business again.

In Lotringhem the Spaniards Commissaries, as well as Earl Mansfields, met to
take up men, and muster Soldiers, and were very jealous one of another, who
should prevail in their greater numbers, how they sped I cannot tell, but we
were pleased in our accounts: For although diverse went to Elnshisem to serve
Duke Leopoldus, with assurance that more would follow: yet we made a strong
party, and marched forward with 16. pieces of Ordinance, and leaving 300. men
in Germersheim, took our way to Lanterbergh, where we had a great skirmish,
and lost some men, not without reciprocal damage to the Enemy: but before we
passed from hence, news came of the Spaniards coming to Germersheim, with
resolution to make a ship Bridge there, and that 600. Bauarian Soldiers were
gone out upon booty, whom we watched narrowly to catch in their return, but we
failed at this time, and were crossed again with a new report, that the Town
of Spiers had entertained 1000. Soldiers to defend the same, as suspecting we
might come thither, and take them at some advantage: and thus were the
Catholic Bishops likewise standing on their guards, and neither went abroad
without a conuoy, nor slept in their Palaces without Courts of guard; nay, the
alarm went as far as Cullein, and all places prepared to delend themselves:
for the Papists perceived that Count Mansfield resolved to draw the war from
the Palatinate, into the Bishops Countries, and were in great fear, that the
young Duke of Brunswick with diverse Lords, in the behalf of the King of
Bohemia, would make a strong party on the other side of the Rhine, as well as
Count Mansfield had done on this side toward Loraine, and the borders of France.

The 20. of January, we took in the Town and freedom of Hagenaw, resolving
to quarter our selves there, and so remained quiet a while, till his Excellency
resolved to prosecute the fiege of Elsas Saberen more thoroughly, supposing
that, as the Archduke Deopoldus kept there his Court of Chancery, he had also
been there in person, but the truth was, he had not long since retired
himself into the Valtolina. In brief: after we had disarmed all the Soldiers
that were in the Towns, we took, spoiled the jews, and forraged the
Countries, as turning our selves round about without any certain passage
forward, or backward. Count Mansfield sent Colonel Ouertrant as General of
this new Army, with 3000. foot, and 1000. Horse, seven pieces of Cannon, some
Petards, and many Pyoners and Workmen, who seated themselves before the Town,
making large quarters, and yet fortifying themselves after the custom of
trenched Camps: the first thing they do, was the summoning the place to the
use of Count Mansfield; the next thing they attempted, was the threatening of
the same, as far as demolition, if they did not orderly surrender and
compound for their quietness. They of the Town demanded three days respite:
they of the Camp murmured at the delay, whereupon Onertrant sent a messenger
to his Excellency to know his resolution; who remembering former grieuances, and
exasperated for their first revolt, sent 1000. men more with a severe
imposition, not to allow them three hours by way of disputing, except they
determined at the time prefixed to yield indeed: for have it he would,
whatsoever it cost him. In the mean while all the Bishoprics were spoiled,
and the Papists had not now so great a cause of joy and triumph, as at the
beginning their ostentation showed.

So that I will be bold to say, never was such an alteration: For though
Prague is in possession of the Emperor, who has wracked his rage upon such he
named Traitors, and the Palatinate is thus sorraged by the Bauarians and our
Soldiers. Yet mark what followed, even in a manner the deuastation of all
Germany, and the Papists every where are set upon by the Protestants, and our
Enemies opposed with as great Armies and forces: For how the Duke of Saxony is
turmoiled in Silesia, and his own Country is apparent, so that in my
conscience he wishes an end of the War. The Hungarians forage even Silesia
it self, and spare none, who have been opposite to the King of Bohemia.
Bethelem Gabor takes it ill, that the Emperor will raise Soldiers out of
Poland to disturb his friends, and so procured the Turk to send a Chause unto
him, to certify his pleasure of misliking the same; and withal watches
Morauis, and those parts. General Ieggendorff follows Don Baltaser at the
heels, and sent word to Count Mrnsfield, that if he would return into
Austria, now the Emperor was gone to Inspurg, they would order the matter so
to intercept his returning to Vienna. The young Duke of Brunswick has played
also his Masters prise against the Bishop of Haluerstat, who has forsaken his
Country to look for shelter in other places: so that the Elector of Montz was
compelled to fortify Amenburg, and put a Bauarian Garrison in the same: yea,
such is the turmoile of these Countries, that no place is free of of
disturbance, nor person assured of his estate: For the Prince ELectors are so
jealous of these affairs, that as far as they durst, they called the (...)
of Hess in question, for permitting the Duke of Brunswick to come so far and
peaceably into his Country vnrefisted, and sought withal: but he neither
denied it, nor they durst prosecute the matter. To conclude Prague it self,
the Emperor having banished all the Procostant Ministers, and proclaimed them
Traitors, who shall any way affist them, is ready to muteny, and the Garrisons
that keep them in awe, suspect one another, and the revolt of the place, if
ever there come an Army before it.

While these things have their several passages in the remoter places, Count
Mansfield prosecuteth his determination against Elsas Saueren, and the whole
Country of the Archduke Leopaldus, so that diverse Swiss have offered him their
service, and the Archduke is much molested to see such a fire raised against
him: whereupon by the Bishop of Strasburgs inticement, he sent three persons of
reputation by the way of an Ambassie, that if he would leave the Diocese of
Strasburg, and his Country vnmolested, he would restore the Veltolina again,
and make a perfect peace with the Hesuetians. Count Mansfield replied, he must
have other composition, ere he desisted what was his own, or knew he could
make his own, he would keep until the Palatinate were restored, and the
Bauarians and Spaniards departed, he would either divert the War to other
places, or enrich his Army out of other men's purses: as for the name of peace,
it had an ill accent in these times, confidering their own examples: For what
did he any more then was taught him, and could he do less, then set on foot
some revenge. If the Spaniards and Bauarians under the color of the Emperors
service, had set upon the Palatinate, and Protestants there, the ancient
inheritance of a religious Prince, and Elector of the Empire: why might not he
for the service of the King of Bohemia i^se^ other Countries, who were
irreligious Papists, and held those Diabolical positions of murdering, and
deposing of Princes.

This answer was much displeasing to Leopoldus, but he saw no remedy. For to
add unto his coffeehouse, the Switzers resolved not to admit of his
government, and so sent word to the Duke of Millane of the same, who could do
nothing without the King of Spaines resolutions: but they would not tarry his
answer, but sought all the means they could to free themselves, and assist the
Grizons for the recovery of the Valtolina again: whereupon they certified
Count Mansfield of all their affairs, who resolved to follow Leopoldus whether
soever he went, and to press him to make an end of the War, and that
intrusion.

In the mean while, the Town of Elsas is now befieged, and the three days
they demanded, expired, so they reso lued to fight it out, and sent word to
the Castle of He genbart, standing upon a very high rock, to annoy the Army as
they could, which they did night and day: For the Mansfildians lay within shot,
and the Town thought upon nothing but rescue: but neither did the Artillery
do any great harm to the Army, nor could Leopoldus prevent the mischief
which followed: For about the 27. of January, the Army gave a brave affault
upon the Town, and with diverse batteries, and the loss of 400. men, with two
principal Captains, they took the same, as also Mours Menster, where were
slain 300: but in both they found sufficient riches, with 300. Tun of Wine,
and many thousand measures of Corn, but neither spoil, not rapes were
committed: For upon small payments their houses stood with their
Household Stuff and Vtensels unstirred, and none were ransommed, but the honest
Papists: For the Abbot and diverse others, were feign to fly, and dispierce
themselves into Lotteringhen, and sundry places of security: yet could not
prevent great disbursements of money, nor in a manner ransomming themselves: For
the Markgraue of Tourlack took his Excellencies part, and got many people and
Soldiers to be retained in his Excellencies Army, which was mustred anew, and
so he marched back again toward Loraine with all the Pieces, which he had at
Hagenaw, who were feign to disburse 10000. ricks dollers, to buy out their
peace; yea, the Duke of Lottinghem himself came to a composition of 100000.
ricks dollers, that he would paffe quietly without forraging his dominions,
which order he observes with all the places, that do quietly surrender; as
for those that oppose against him, either Village or Town he leaves to the
spoil of the Soldier, and when they have no spoil, he pays them out of his
treasury.

Now you must consider, that how ever Elsas Saueren was taken, yet there was a
composition made, and conditions of agreement ratified between them for the
payment of 300000. Ricks dollers, which were demanded the first of February,
and for want of disbursing, much unkindness and threatening followed: yet had
they fine days longer respite: in which interim Count Mansfield retiring
himself to Hagenaw, gave the Army leave to visit the Country, and such
places where they might imagine any booty was to be gotten, or Enemy to be met
withal: and so about the third of February 9. Cornets of Horfe passed
Strasburag Bridge to intercept the Bauarians, who were gone upon some design
to Swatwood: And upon the fourth of-February many Companies went out another
way, and burned four of the Bishops Villages, watching the Markets, and taking
many Bauarians prisoners, who lie upon the Country; as well as themselves, and
take one another at advantage, as opportunity feiues their turns. The fifth of
February the speech was, that the whole Army would rise and march forward to
Hemses Heim, Brifac, and Friburg: but hearing that the Bauarians were going to
new lodging, they desisted for that time, and did not mean to stir, till
they were assured where the Enemy would dispose of himself.

While these things were shown on the Stage of Variety, and all Christiandome
stood looking on to behold, what scenes these servants of Bellona would act:
Letters both of gratification and direction came from the King of Denmark, and
all that favored the cause of the Palatinate, wherein he had particular
intelligence, that the Protestant Princes were resolved upon an Army of their
own, that is to say, to be paid at their own charges, under the command of
the Earl of Tourlach, and to that purpose Murterbergh takes up 3000. Foot,
and 500. Horse: the Barrons Messairs de Bounoies, and Frandecount, two
Regiments, the Marc^graue of Baden, and Duke Weymaren 3000. Foot, and 500.
Horse, Duke Magnus 1000. foot, and 400. horse, Hemsteder 3000 foot, the Rheien
Graf Oue 500. horse, Fleckensteine 600. horse, and Golstein 3000. foot, and
400. horse: all which with diverse others shall march under the standard of the
Princes of the Union: For although they understand of great preparations from
Sauoy, Naples, Millaine, Spain, Poland, Austria, and the Princes combined unto
the Emperor and his service: yet they are assured that the Switzers have
leagued themselves, both Protestants and Papists to cast off the yoke of the
Spanish government, and to move in their own free Orbs, as they did before:
yea, Leopald^^ himself does much repine at the Spaniards intrusion into the
Valtolina, or any territories of the Grizons for the government, did ever
belong unto a younger house of Austria, and one of the Archdukes in former
times lost his life about the same, and with much ado it was obtained.

And thus much of Earl Mansfields proceedings, to the 12. of February last,
whose coming down into the Palatinate, besides the running away so
fortunately with his own actions, has made the passage the casier for
General Veres care and diligence to fortify such principal places, as lay
open before to the daring approches of a strong Enemy, and the fearful
batteries of a Cannon, or other stratagems of War: but now Heidelberg with
many other Towns are well fortified, the passages have Sconses: the confines
are garrisond, the rivers have Bridges, which they can take away at their
pleasure, and the very Boores, though laboring like Pyoners, return to their
Villages with the reputation of a Soldier: so that in my conscience, if
Spinola himself were now to take possession into this Country, he would find
it more difficult, then he did, and whosoever may conceit by the same argument,
that therefore the Bauarian and Spaniard, being now fortified, will hardly be
compulsed out without rendition, or composition. I answer plainly, I think so
to: For so I am assured the behalf of the Bauarians, that they will hardly get
any further places of account, then they have: but if the War be diuerted to
other Countries, as you saw, how the Romans dealt with Anniball, to draw him
to defend Carthage, that had been 17. years in Italy, and could not be
startled from thence by force, or policy, then it may be these intruders will
be glad to go home again to keep their Country from the cruel Arms of
deuastation: or if some thundering troops come upon them, with a well
disciplined and governed Army, then may the stronger arm put out the strong
man.

As for their objection, that would commend the piety of the Enemy, in not
ouer-running the Country at his first entrance into it. What has he done
better then Count Mansfield has done in many Countries? but I will answer more
particularly; peradventure he could not, after the Noble Vere came to intercept
his forwardnes: peradventure he was willing to taste of the Grapes and fruits
many days, and then it had been folly to have made an untimely Vintage, and
devoured all in one day. Peradventure he was loath to go too far, for
loosing himself in a Wood, or hazard his return when he would, if such came
behind him, as would make him leap over their Pikes, or peradventure he had
limitation, least by proving too cruel, he might stop up the gap of all piety
and commiseration, if ever the wheel of Fortune would turn about, and leave
the triumpher himself in the hands of compassion, as in all ages and chances
of War has happened, where many a time the Son has been stabbed for his
Fathers cruelty, and the General reconciled, by finda noble adversary. But
here me thinks I am answered with peremptorinesse, that these Countries have
such mighty adversaries, that there is no possibility of extenuating their
greatness, much less of bringing them to the bar of a new examination.

Be not too presumptuous, nor run away so fast with ouer-confidence of any
worldly stability: remember rather what Mordecay said to Hester: That if she
did not go in to the King for the preservation of her people, God would raise
some help another way to bring his purposes to pass: so say I of the
Palatinate, when we run away with an opinion of invincible Armados, and for
euitable Armies: the winds and weather may discipate the one, and very weak
opposition, overthrow the other. For the God of winds and battles, has a
trick to humble us with hard beginnings at the first; that prosperity may be
the better welcome, when it is hammered out (as it were) on the Anuill of
toil, travail, wants, disgrace, contempt, and other fearful endurances.

FINIS.

