AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COURT OF PARLIAMENT OF PARIS, made the 26. and
executed the 27. of JUNE. 1614.

Against a Book printed at Cologne this present year, entitled FRANCISCI
SVARES Granatensis e SOCIETATE IESV Doctoris Theologi, Defensio fidei
Catholicae and Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores: containing
diverse Principles and Propositions repugnant to the sovereign power of Kings,
ordained and established by God, the safety of their Persons, and the peace
and tranquillity of their States.

Translated out of the French Copy, printed at Paris, by F. MOREL and PETER
METTAYER, the Kings Printers and Stationers in Ordinary, with his Majesty's
privilege, 1614.



LONDON: Printed for John Barnes, and are to be sold at his Shop, under the
sign of the Cardinals-hat without Newgate, 1614.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THou have here (gentle Reader) an Edict and Censure, published by the State of
France, against the Book of FRANCIS SVARES, intended for answer to his
MAJESTY; which as it is not the first taste they have given to the world of
their mislike of sundry Positions maintained and defended by the Jesuits; so
neither is this the first borne of my Labors, which thy courteous acceptance
has entreated from me, of exposing to thy view in thy native language, sundry
narrations and learned Treatises set forth in French. The printed Copy hereof
as it came to my hands, I have subioyned; that thou may see this Spanish
Goliath, or Popish Champion, inuading the King of England, Armado-like, brought
to confusion before he comes to grapple with his enemy. This is he who
neither daunted to see LESSIVS beaten, nor BECANVS cast into the fire of
Purgatory, lifts up his arm against the Lords Anointed.

Now to thee, Romish-affected whosoever thou art, behold your SVARES, Sidus
Hispanicum, imo and Iesuiticum; The Load-starre of Spain, and glory of his
Order, censured, not for his private opinion, but for a common tenent of the
Jesuits: some there are, who through favor to the Man and his Order, have not
feared to incur the displeasure of his Majesty, censure of our State, and
danger of the Laws and Statutes of this Land, in maintaining the doctrine of
this Book: but of the meliora spero, I am better conceited: assuring my self
that seeing these and the like Doctrines find no better entertainment with
these learned Frenchmen (as zealous for the Catholic Faith as thy self)
neither the report of their learning, the high commendations of their zeal and
gravity, nor the usurped title of the Catholic Faith, shall henceforth lull
thee asleep to forget thy duty to thy King and Country; but reddere quae sunt
Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo, teach thee to give unto Caesar those
things which are Caesar's, and unto God those things which are Gods: and stop
thine ears against the Circean Language of this late-sprung-vp Imposters; And
in admiration as heretofore some certain Catholics have done, cry out, Good
God, that such a Society of men, after so many scandals and foul deserts of
theirs in FRANCE, and elsewhere, for PRINCE-KILLING SEDITION, etc. can thus be
of credit in ENGLAND? A. C. to his dis-Iesuited Kinsman, page 72. And so I
leave this and the rest, commended to thy best acceptance.

Farewell. Thine I. B.

AN ACT OR DECREE OF THE COURT OF Parliament of PARIS, made the 26. and
executed the 27. of June. 1614.
THE Court of the great Chamber, Tournelle, and of the Edict assembled, having
viewed the Book printed at Cologne this present year, entitled, FRANCISCI
SVARES Granatensis, e Societate IESV, Doctoris Theologi, Defensio Fidei
Catholicae and Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae sectae errores, containing in
the third Book, Chapter 23. pages 376. 79. 80. 82. Chapter 29. pages 410. 11.
12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Chapt. 6. page 834. Chapt. 8. page 484. and
in other places, many Propositions contrary to the sovereign power of Kings,
ordained and established by GOD, the peace and tranquillity of their States;
and that it is lawful for their Subjects, and Strangers, to attempt against
their Persons.

Conclusions of the Kings Attorney General. The whole duly considered,
THE said Court has declared, and does declare, the Propositions and
Principles contained in the said Book, to be scandalous and sedicious, tending
to the subversion of States, and to induce the Subjects of Kings, and
Sovereign Princes, and others, to attempt against their sacred persons: and
the speeches mentioning the Kings Chlowis and Phillip the fair, to be false
and slanderous: has also ordained, and does ordain, that the said Book of
Suares be burned in the Court of the Palace, by the Executioner of high
Justice.

Furthermore, it has and does inhibite and forbid all sellers of Books and
Printers, to print, sell, or disperse any of the said books: as also, all
other persons of whatsoever calling or condition, to transcribe, have, to write
out, or to retain, or to teach in Schools or elsewhere; or else to dispute
upon the said Principles or Propositions.

It also ordains according to the decree of the 8. of June 1610. that the
Decree of the faculty of Divinity, made upon the fourth of June in the same
year, concerning the renewing of the doctrinall censure of the said faculty,
bearing date the year 1408. and confirmed by the Council of Constance,
together with this present Act, as also those of the years 1578. and 95. shall
yearly be read the fourth day of June, as well in the said faculty, as in the
College of the Priests and Scholars of the College of Clermont, and of the
four Orders of begging Friars. Also, that at the request of the Kings Attorney
General, Informations shall be taken of the contrauentions against the said
Decrees, and Prohibitions made against writing, having or detayning the like
Books. Given in Parliament the twenty sixth day of June, 1614.

Signed Voisin.

FVrthermore, it is decreed that the Fathers, Ignace Armand, Rector in this
City, Cotton, Fronton, and Sirmund, shall be summoned the first day to this
Court, and to them shall be showed, that contrary to their declaration and the
Decree of their General of the year 1610. the Book of Suares has been
printed and brought into this City, a Book impugning the authority of the
King, and the safety of his Person and State: and they shall be enjoined to
cause their General to renew the said Decree; and to publish it, and to bring
in an Act thereof within these six Months, and to provide that no such
damnable and pernicious Propositions be made or published by any of their
Company: as also, they shall be enjoined in their Sermons to exhort the people
to the doctrine contrary to the said Propositions; otherwise the Court will
proceed against the transgressors, as men guilty of Treason and disturbers of
the public quietness.

This aboue-said Decree, and the decreed, were pronounced in the presence of
the Fathers Ignace Armand, Charles de la Tour, in the absence of Peter Cotton,
Fronton du Duc, and James Sirmund. And the Decree was put in execution before
the great Stayres of the Palace, the 27. of June. 1614.

FINIS.

