I JOHN PENRY DO HEAR AS I SHALL ANSWER BEFORE THE LORD MY GOD IN that great
day of Judgment set down sumarily the Whole truth and nothing but the truth
which I hold and profess at this hour either in regard of my faith toward my
God and Dread Sovereign Queen Elizabeth unto whom only of all the potentas
In the world I owe all reuerente, duty and submission in the Lord.

FIrst / because my allegiance unto her Majesty's: is chiefly called In
question / that I am not at this day / nor yet ever was in all my life either
guilty or privy in any purpose / consultation or intent of any sedition
against or disturbance of her Majesty's Royal state and peaceable government.
And if I were privy unto any such godlese wicked and undutiful actions or
purposes as might any ways impair or disquiet the peaceaeble state of my
native prince and country I would reveal disclose / and withstand the same to
the utmost of my power in all persons both foraigne and domestical of what
prossession or religion soever they be.

Her supreance authorite within her realms and dominions I acknowledge to be
such over all persons in all causes / as no person either civil or
ecclesiastical / may exempt himself or his cause from the power and censure of
her laws and sword. I do also acknowledge that her Majesty has full
authorite from the Lord by her Royal power to establishe and enact all laws
both ecclesiastical and civil among her subjects: In the making whereof the
Lord requires that her eclesiasticall be warented by his written word / which
expressly conteyneth whatsoever belongs to his worship: and her civil to be
gronded upon the rules of common justice and equity / the which bounds are so
far from diminishing from the authority of kings and princes / as they are
the only inexpugnable ways thereof. This sovereign prerogative authority of
her hignes I am most willingly reddy to deffend and maintain / against all the
estates / persons / and creatures under heaven to the loss of my life te^ne
tousandes times if it should be neefull. And I take the lord to record that /
that day to my knowledge has not passed over my head I a^ sure since the first
that the lord under her gracious reign brought me to the knowledge of the truth
/ wherein I have not or do not pray for the blessings of my God both outoward
and inward to be powered with afull horn upon her right excellent Majesty's
Throne Regiment and dominions for ever and ever: And that he would either
convert / or spedily overthrowe In his wrath all his and her ennaemies with
their entreprises whether they be home or foraigne Hereof I call the searcher of
hearts as In wittnes of truth against my own soul if either I di^sse^ble / or
forge in the premises. Secondly touching my faith / I do beleve with my heart
and co^fess* with my tongue that there is no God but the true God only which
that written word reaches to be one in substance and three in person / the
father / the son / and the holy ghost three distinct persons of one and the
self same substance. This most high God who also is my God in Christ Jesus I
veleeve to be the creator / preserver maintainner sovereign Lord and supreme
commander of all creatures In heaven and in earth men and Angels both good and
bad. I do believe that nothing does or can comme to (...) / but by the fore
anointed and determinate will / purpose / (...) only by grace the sufferings
and reghteousnes of Christ Jesus apprehended by true faith.

Christ Jesus In regard of his natures I beleve to be God and man / even God
alone blessed for ever more: And in respect of his offices to be the only king
/ Priest And Prophet of his Church / the which offices he so fully
acco^p^isshed In the days of us flesh by the manifesting of the wholle will of
his father thorough his preaching and teaching the full redemption of his
Church / by his death and resurr^ction: and rec^aving full absolute power in
heaven and in earth from his father / in such sort as he is not to retain a
successor in any of these his offices / but is consecrated alone to them all
for ever more.

True faith / I believe to be the persuasion of the heart where by the soul is
truly assured of remission of sins and Imputation of righteo^snes thorough
Christ.

This true faith belongs only to Gods elect / and has perseverance unto the
end* with this true faith also / is unseparably joined (as the frut thereof) a
dying unto sin: and a living unto righteousness in such sort as the members
of Christ have a continual battle in them against sin. the which by the power
of Christ's death is so wounded and in some measure decays more and more in
them / until at l^ngth it shall be utterly consumed when the bodies and souls
be separated / and not before.

By the quickninge power of Christ / (I do beeleeue) that his here upon earth
are drawn more and more to like his blessed will and to practice the same /
yea to give their lives rather then to dishonor their God in the will and
voluntary denial of his truth / and the breach of his laws and will / in any
point revealed unto them.

His revealed will I believe to be perfet^y contained in the written word of
the old and new testament given by the holy ghost for Instruction and comfort
of his pore church as long as the same is a pilgrim here upon the earth.

This Church I believe to be a company of those whom the word calls saints
which do not only profess in word that they know God / but also are subject
unto his laws and ordinance in deed: with this Church I do beleev^ that the
Lord God of is mere favor has entered into covenant that he will be their God
/ and they shall be his people the seals of this his convenant are only two /
Baptism and the Lord supper.

The Church here upon earth / I do believe not to be perfect / although in
regard of the order which the Lord has appointed for the same it be most
absolute / but to have many blemishes and wa^tes in it / yet I assuredly
believe that all the true me^ders thereof shall at the day of judgment receive
their perfect consumation by Jesus Christ and be crowned in him with eternal
glory of his mere grace / end not for any merit of theirs.

Thorough the mercies of my God / and therefore I am wilingly content to
undergo my trouble in this life for his name sake / who be glorified of my
soul and body and of his saints for ever more. Amen.

I detest all heresies / sects schimes / and errors wether new or old by
whom soever they have be^ inverted as puritinisme / donatism^ Anabatisterie
Libertinisme Brounisme and all the dreams and dotages of the family of one
but especially all popery that most dreadful religion of Antichrist: the great
ennemie of the Lord Jesus and the most pestilent adversary of all the thrones
of kings and princes. So that I abhor from my soul that whole body and every
part of that Romish religion called the son of perdition by the Spirit of God
/ because the Lord has determined vterly to consume it by his appearinge in
the brightness of his gospel before his second cominge.

I detest that proud superiority of this man of sin whereby as the Apostle
spoke he has exalted him self in his members and power to bear rule over the
truth and members of Christeve^ over all that is caled holy: wholly opposes
himself as most blodie adversary a against all truths and servants of the Lord
which will not suffer him with his sard infernal power toreigne over them
instead of Christ in his blessed ordinances.

I detest in regard of their offices (I speak not of the means persons
touching the Lords election) the head of that body the Pope his cursed triple
crown / his usurped Iuridiction of either of both swords.

I det^st the limbs of that body / their spiritual power / as Cardinals /
Archbishop a Lord bishops / Sufraganes / Abbots / Fryors / Deanes / Archdeacons
/ Commissaries / Chancelers / Officials / Munkfryers / Cannons / prebend
Priests.

I detest their invented manners of calling / whereby they are placed in their
cursed offices / their devised works wherein they are jmployed by reason of
their offices / as the false doctrines and false worship of that kingdom with
the livings and maintenances whereby they are maintained in their offices. And
forasmuch as the members of Christ cannot have any communion or fellowshipe
with any of those cursed jnuentions in so much as they can have no lawful use
or spiritual communion of / or with any of these offices / callings / works
and maintenances / in so much as they cannot lawfully be subject unto any
part of the ecclesiastical power of these offices: Therefore it is that I dare
not participat^ in these assemblies over which any of these officers b^are
rule / or ecclesiasticallie jntermedle with the holy things of God / and where
any of these devised callings and non else / works and maintenances are to be
found: for I am forbidden to have any communion with these vnfructfull works
of darkness though it be upon pr^te^ce of mining the truth and sacraments of
Christ / upon pain of everlasting formente day and night for evermore.

Ad if I may not be subject to the ceremonies of Moses / as Circoncision which
were sometimes the Lords own sacred ordinances: how dare I or any other
creature be in bondage unto those inue^tions of Antichrist the great enemy of
the Lord Jesus / whereof neither the saints of God can / neither yet could
have any sanctified use.

The truth of doctrine touching the trinity and touching the natures and
offices of Christ / Justifying faith / Sacraments / externaly established by
her Majesty / professed by her self / there H. H. and such as have knowledge
in the asse^blies of this la^d: I acknowledge from my heart to be such as if I
maintained not the unity and held not the communion of the same doctrine with
the^ in those points I could not possibly be saved / for out of that communion
of the true profession which her Miestye has established in these and the like
rules / there is no hop of salvation: but to join not with standing with the
public worship of these assemblies of the land / I dare not for the same
reasons.

I more over willingly confess that both of the teachers and also of the
professors within these assemblyes of the land / have so embraced this truth
doctrine established and professed in this land / that the Lord in his infinite
goodness has granted the^ the favor to show out / wherein regard of Gods
election I protest before men and Angels that I judge the^ members of the body
whereof the son of God Jesus Christ is the head / only herein the Lord be
merciful unto the^ as unto my self in regard of my sins / that they are not
ordered in that outward order which Christ Jesus left in his Church but instead
thereof are first subject unto those forenamed offices / secondly / have
communion with there false manner of callings unto their offices: Thirdly
participate with a great part of their devised works wherein these officers
are employed: fourthlie with the false maintenance and livings fiftlie are
mingled with the known profane / ignorant and disordered persons which are
joint members with them in their assemblies.

This is the sum of my faith / and allegiance to my God and my Prince / here
is the so^me of the wholle difference which is between me and the clergy of
this land / and the sum of the whole cause for the which I and diverse other
of my poor brethren are judged to be schismatikes / felons / heretics: If
this may come to the Royal hands of my souueraygne and to the veiwe of their
H. H. they will be soon induced that neither I nor any other that hold the
same with me deserve the shortning of our days by her Majesty's sword for
these things

And here is all that ever we hold. As towching that error / concerning the
repeating of the Lords praye^r / wherewith we are charged / far be it even far
be it that we should deny the same or any the like scripture / to be an holy
forine of prayer which conteyneth not only an e^quisite pattern of doctrine
which a Christian soul may not only lawfully say / but also with great
comfort have the use of the same: In deed we rather hold it for a doctrine
then prayer / the abuse in the often repeating of it / we condemn and this I
am sure was the judgment in this point of those holy servants of God who now
rest from their labors. The good which this land getreth outwardite by these
false offices afornamed and the livings belonging unto them is / the traitors
(as Iesuistes and Seminary Priests are drawn by that hope they have of
possessing this Babilonish gould / to become the unnatural betrayers of their
natural Prince and Contrye into the hands of strangers: whereas if these
offices and livings were by public authority once removed and converted to
her Maiestyes use / the Pope would have no occasion to send over these locastes
/ they would be no baytes to alluer them hither and the home Papists would be
utterly void of hope to see their expected day / so that the maintayning of
these offices and livings / their devised works and callings would fall: with
them is joined that there is no small danger of her Maiesticall person and the
whole state of this land / I do point but at the inconveniences which in
conscience toward her Majesty and my contrie / I am bond to show / they that
are wiser will think of the cause with seriousnes / and would not I hope
think me worthy to be smitten for this showing the danger.

Whatsoever I hold in these points controverted I hold the same of mere
conscience toward God / of that mere destetation which in conscience I am
bound to have of all the inve^tions of men or Angels in religion / and of that
care which I ought to have of the salvation and safegarde of her Majesty whom
the Lord preserve for ever more and of my contrie. I have for my warrant not
only the written word which is sufficient / but also in the points of greatest
moment / the doctrine of the Church of England established by her Majesty and
their Honors together with the writtings / testimonies and blood of the famous
servants and Martyrs of Christ viz. M. whickleff. M. Brute. M. Ashly. M. Parvy.
M. Charch and many other holy witnesses of the Lord in former times M. Tindall
M. Lambert. M. Latymer. M. Bale the famous servantes of God in this later age
together with the witnesses of the reformed Churches at this day / in the
points I say of special weight / my soul is so evinced by the word of God in
all them as I am ready to give my life by the aid of my God for the truth of
this testimony and the testimonies of the fornamed servants of God and holy
Churches of Christ: yet if any man can see by the written word of God that I
err in any thing / I will most willingly reform my judgment / crave pardon
ernesthe for any oversight: yea and be most willing to suffer due punishment
for my temeritie: But if on the other side I testify nothing but verity in
these points I am undoubtedly persuaded of: I most humbly crave that the
percing edge of that sword may not in heat be turned against me and my brethren
which was never professedlie violent against the open and sworn enemies of
their native Prince and contrie.

Death / I thank God I fear not in this cause especially / for I know that
the sting of death is taken away and that they are blessed which die in the
Lord for witnessing against the former corruptions Reu. 14.9.13. Life I desire
not if I be guilty of sedition / of defaming and disturbing the quiet state of
her Majesty peceable government.

Lastly / I most humbly and earnestly beseech their Honors and worships in
whose hands this writting of mine shall come to consider that it is to no
purpose that her Maiestyes subjects should bestow their time in learning in
study and meditation of th^^ word, in reading the writtings and doings of
learned men and of the holy martirs which have been in former ages, especially
the writings published by her Majesty's authority, they may not without danger
proffesse and hold those truths as which they learn out of th^^ and that in
such sort as they are able to convince all the world that will stand against
th^^ by noe other weapons then by the word of God. I beseech them also to
consider what a lamentable cause it is that we may hold fellowship with the
Romish Church in the inue^tions thereof without al danger and cannot without
extreme peril be permited in Judgment and practice to dissent from the same
where it swerueth from the true way, and as they find the things to be of
especial moment in religion, I beseech them in the bowels of Jesus Christ to
be a means unto her Majesty and their H. Hs. that my cause may be waighed in
even balance, imprisonments, Indightments arainme^ts yea death it self are no
meet weapons to convince the conscience grounded upon the word of God and
accompanied with so many witnesses of his famous servants and Churches.

The Lord bless her right excellent Majesty my most gracious sovereign
bless their H. Hs this whole land and all his saints even for his great names
sake. Amen.
Subscribed with heart and hand by me John penry now in straight bonds for the
former testimony of Christ's truth.

TO THE DISTRESSED FAITHFVLL CONGREGATION OF CHRIST IN LONDON, AND ALL THE
Members thereof, wither in bonds or at liberty these be delivered.
BELOVED
let us think out lot and portion more then blessed that now are vouchsaffed
the favor not only to know and to profess, but also to suffer for the
sincerity of the Gospel: and let us remember, that great is our reward in
heaven; if we endure unto the end. I testify unto you for mine one part as I
shall answer before Jesus Christ and his elect Angels that I never saw any
truth more clear and undoubted then this witness wherein we stand, 1 against
false offices. 2 the callings. 3 the works. 4. the maintenance left and
retained in this land by and from Popery: 5. against the obedience which
spiritually either in soul or in body is yealded, and the comunion that is had
with these inventions of darkness. 6, the mingling of all sorts in these
assemblies. 7. the worship done but scant in one of the three parts of the
commission given by our savior Scant done I say in one of the three parts of
the commission, by the best teachers of this la^d, And I thank my God I am not
only ready to be bound and banished but eve^ to die in this cause by his
strength yea my brethren I greatly long in regard of my self to be disolued,
and to live in the blessed kingdom of heaven with Jesus (...) Christ and his
Angels, with Adam Henoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Iobe. David, Jeremy, Daniel,
Paul the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and with the rest of the holy, saints
both men and women, with the glorious kings, Prophets and martyrs, and
witnesses of Jesus Christ that have bine from the beginning of the world,
particulerly with my twoe dear brethren master Henry Barrowe and master John
Greenwoode which have last of all yealded their blood for this precious
testimony: Confessing unto you my btethren and sisters that if I might live
upon this earth the days of Methushelach twyse told and that in noe less
comfort then Peter James, and John were in the mount, and after this life
might be sure of the knigdo^e of heaven that yet to gain all this I durst not
go from the former testimony. Where fore my brethren I beseech you be of like
mind herein with me, I doubt, not but you have the same precious faith with me
and are pertakers also of farte more glorious comfort, then my barren. and
sinful soul cane be, strive for me and with me, that the Lord our God, may
make me and us all able to end our course with joy and patience: Strive also
that he may stay his blessed hand [if it be his good pleasure] and not make
any farther breach in his Church by the taking away of any more of us as yet
to the discouraging of the weak and the lifting up of the horn of our
adversaries. I would indeed if it be his good pleasure live yet with you, to
help you to bear that greueous and hard yoke which yet ye are like to
sustain either here or in a strange land. And my good brethren seeing
banishement with loss of goods is likely to betyde you all. preparcy our
selves for this hard entreatie and rejoice that you are made worthy for CHRIST
cause to suffer and bear al these things: And I beseech you in the bowels of
Jesus Christ, that none of you in this case look upon his particular estate
but regard the general state of the Church of God that the same may go and be
kept together whethersoeuer it shall please God to send you. Oh the blessinge
will be great that shall ensue this care, whereas if you go every man to prouid
for his own house, and to look for his own family. First neglecting pore
Sion, the Lord will set his face against you and scatter you from the one end
of heaven to the other, neither shall you find a resting place for the soles
of your feet or a blesing upon any thing you take in hand.

The Lord my brethren and sisters. has not forgotten to be gracious unto Sion
you shall yet find days of peace and of rest if you continue faith full: This
Stampeing and treading of us under his feet this subuerting of our cause, and
right in judgment is done by him to the end that we shoul search and try our
ways, and repent us of our carelessnes profannes and rebellion in his sight,
but he will yet maintain the cause of our souls and redeem our lives, if we
return to him yea he will be with us in fire and water and will not forsakevs if
our hearts be only and especially of the building of Sion whethersoeuer we go.
Let not those of you then that either have stocks in your hands, or some likly
trades to live by dispose of your selves where it may be most commodious for
your outward estate and in the mean time suffer the poor ones that have no
such means, either to bear the whole work upon their weak shoulders, or to
end their days in sorrow and morning* for want of outward and inward co^forts
in the land of strangers for the Lord will be an auenger of all such dealings.
But cousult with the whole Church, yea with the brethten of other places, how
the church may be kept together and built whethersoeuer they go, let not the
poor and the freendlesse be forced to stay behind here and to break a good
conscience for want of your support and kindness unto them that they may go
with you, and here I humbly beseech you, not in any outward regard, as I shall
answer before my God. that you would take my pore and desolate widow and my
mess of fatherless and freindlesse orphaines with you into exile whether
soever you go, and you shall find I doubt not that the blessed promesses of
my God made unto me and mine will accompany them, and even the whole Church
for their fakes for this also is the Lords promise unto the holy seed) as you
shall not need much to demand, what they shall eat, or wherewith they shall be
clothed, and in short time I doubt not but they will be found helpful and not
burdensome to the Church only I beseech you (...) I and, where they must be
enforced, to go again unto Egypt. and my God will bless you even with a
joyful return unto your own country for it. there are of you, who I doubt
not will be careful of the performance of the will of your dead brother in this
point, who may yet live to show this kindness unto youres, I will say noe
more. Be kind louinge and tender hearted, the one of you toward the other,
labor every way to increase love and to show the duties of love one of you
toward an other, by visitinge, comfortinge and releeuing one the other even
for the reproach of the heathen that are round about us (as the Lord says.) Be
watching in prayer especially remember those of out brethren that are
especially endaungered, perticulerly those our twoe brethren M. Studley and
Robert Boule whom our God has strengthened now to stand in the forefront of
the battle. I fear me that our carelesnes was over great to sue unto our God
for the lives of these towe so notable lights of his Church who now rest with
him, and that he took them away for many respects seeming good to his wisdom,
so also that we might learn to be more careful in prayer in all such causes,
pray for them then my brethren and for our brother M. Fran: John's: and for me,
who am likely to end my days either with them or before them that our God may
spare us unto his church if it be his God pleasure, or give us exceeding
faythfullnes and be every way comfortable unto the sister and wife of the dead

I mean unto my beloved M. Barrowe and M. Greenwoode whom I most hartly
salute, and desire much to be comforted in their God who by his blessings
from above, will counteruayle unto them, the want of so notable a broher and
husband. I would wish you earnestly to write, yea to send if you may to
comfort the brethren in the west, and North countries, that they faint not in
these troubles, and, that also you may have of their advise and they of youres
what to do in these desolate times. and if you think it any thing for their
further comfort and direction send them conveniently a copy of this my letter,
and of the declaration of my faith, and alegiance wishinge them before
whomsoever they be called that their own mouths, be not had a witness
against them in any thnge: yea I would wish you and them to be together if you
may whethersoeuer you shall be banished and to this purpose to bethink you
before hand where to be, yea to send some who may be meet to prepare you some
resting place, and be al of you assured that he who is your god in England,
will be your God in any land under the whole heaven for the earth, and the fulness
thereof are his, and blessed are they that for his cause are bereaved of any
part of the same! Finally my brethren the eternal God bless you, and youres,
that I may meet with you all unto my comfort in the blessed kingdom of
heaven, Thus haujng from my heart and, with tears performed (it may be) my
last duetje toward you in this life I salute you all in the Lord both men
and women, even those who I have not named, as hartelie as those whose names I
have mentioned, [for all your names I know not] And remember to stand
steedfast, and faithful in Jesus Christ, as you have received him unto your
immortality: And he conferme and establish you to the end for the praise of
his glory. Amen.

The 24 the of the 4 month April. 1593. Your louinge brother in the patience
and sufferinges of the gospel John Penry, a witness of Christ in this life
and a pertaker of the glory that shall be revealed.


