THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES, Of certain Moderate Divines of the CHURCH of
England, (greatly mis-understood) Truly Represented and Defended; Wherein (by
the way) Some Controversies, of no mean Importance, are succinctly discussed:
IN A Free Discourse between two Intimate Friends.

In III Parts.

Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men. LONDON, Printed for
Lodowick Lloyd, at the Crown in Duck Lane, MDCLXX.

To the Reader.
READER,
WHat may be the Fate of this Book, I cannot Divine, nor will I be solicitous
concerning it: But I expect, and also claim at thine hands so much Candor, as
that, how meanly soever thou may think of it, thou will not judge
uncharitably of the Author's Design in writing it. I (that may best know it) am
able to assure thee, that it was not to gratify those Persons (he wishes he
may not rather offend them) whom he therein gives a true account of; but to
serve a more noble Interest: Nor is it his desire, that their Adversaries would
entertain a more favorable opinion of them, upon their reading the following
Lines, but only in order to their being reconciled to their Spirit and
Principles.

This is an Age wherein plain and open-hearted Dealing will be by no means
endured, and must look for no better thanks from the generality, than Calumnies
and downright Railing. But I am very sure that no man can be easily provoked
by any thing in this Dialogue, but he that accounts Moderation a great Crime;
and is conscious to himself, that he is, in the way it has pleased him to
espouse, a hot spirited and violent Zealot. For neither Theophilus nor
Philalethes, have taken a course to exasperate any one of the contesting
Parties, but only (and much alike too) the high and fierce men of each Party.
And as for such, they could not persuade themselves to be over-careful not to
displease them; as too well knowing that it would signify nothing so to be;
they being a Generation of people whose waspish and testy (not to add proud)
Spirits, can by no means brook a Dissenter, scarcely in the smallest, and most
trivial matters. Whereas Theophilus, as he passes along, does engage himself
in the Confutation of certain Opinions, I desire thee to take notice, that he
is, notwithstanding, so far from a disputing or contradicting Genius, that I
know no man more averse than himself thereto: And he thinks time infinitely
better spent in the serious practice of true Piety, than in disputing or
studying Controversies: and that there is no such life, when all is done, as
that which is chiefly employed in mortifying Corruptions, and making our selves
more and more like to God, and fit for the enjoyment of him. And, indeed, if
all our Professors of Christianity did sincerely love God; and made it their
great business to keep Consciences void of offense toward him and men; it
would be scarcely worth the while to concern our selves much about curing them
of any of their mistakes: For so long as they are careful to exercise
themselves in so doing, to be sure they cannot possibly be such as would so far
injure them, as to render them incapable of Eternal Blessedness. But seeing
there are several Opinions, very highly cried up among us, which do apparently
make many of the Embracers of them much worse, and have an extremely bad
influence upon their Lives, and therefore much more upon their Souls, it must
needs be a work of great Charity to endeavor to undeceive those that hold
them. And they are such Doctrines alone, as Theophilus is assured are of very
bad consequence, that he has much troubled himself about, in this Discourse.
As for the last Opinion, that he spends any considerable time in endeavoring
to show the falsity of, it was at first his intention to take no notice of it:
But (to deal freely with thee) he could not, upon second thoughts, gain leave
of his Conscience to let it pass: for that told him that he would show but
little love to his infinitely Good God, or concernment for his Honor, should
he not take advantage of so fit and proper an occasion as was then offered him
to vindicate him from the most unworthy Representation that Doctrine gives of
him. And he solemnly professes that he would have said nothing of it, were he
not constrained to do otherwise by his Love to God, and the Souls of Men: And
by his earnest desire to give his Testimony against the abuse that is thereby
put upon the best of Beeings, and also to contribute his little Mite toward
the utter silencing of that Plea for Carelessness and Irreligion, that very many
(if not most) men from thence make. Whoever they be that shall take offense at
that Person for freely speaking his own mind, because it has the ill hap not
to jump with theirs, I would fain know of them why he may not be as much out of
humor (though he is resolved he will not) with them again: For surely he does
not more differ from them, than they do from him.

Well, Reader, it is high time to be reconciled to Moderation and Sobriety, to
lay aside our uncharitable and (therefore) unchristian heats against each
other: And to labor to preserve the Unity of the Spirit (if it be not already
quite lost) in the bond of Peace, and throw water upon those Flames that
threaten our destruction, (and but for God's Infinite Mercy would have effected
it before now) instead of adding more fuel to them. And that is the great
Design (as thou will easily perceive) of the ensuing Discourse.

Moreover, I most humbly entreat thee to consider, that as God was not in the
Whirlwind, but in the still Voice; So Divine Truth is far more unlikely to be
found among men of violent and boisterous Passions, than among those that are
soberly and sedately considerative. Passion does cloud and darken the
understanding, it casts a thick mist before the eye of the Soul, and makes it
altogether unapt to discern a difference betwixt Truth, and the error that is
nearest to it; and to distinguish it from one of the extremes which it lies
between.

I have another Request to make to thee, viz. If thou shall vouchsafe to cast
an eye upon this Discourse, that thou would not only read here and there
some part of it, but take the small pains to run it through: For by this means
thou may understand the Authors sense in several Passages, which otherwise
thou will be liable to be mistaken concerning: And also to go away with a false
notion (in some Particulars) of the Persons therein represented. Whom, should
they judge it an over-bold attempt to give the World, without their own
consent or knowledge, a Character of them, he knows to be Masters of so great
ingenuity as will easily incline them to put up such faults (how great soever
they may seem in themselves) as are mitigated by the Circumstance of
well-meaning.

The Author is aware that the matters discoursed might have been digested into
a more accurate Method; but yet he is not like to apologize for it, till thou
can convince him, that the neglect of Formalities, and curious exactness of
any kind, in Discourses between Friends, is blame worthy. Nor yet will he plead
excuse for the plainness of his Style, till he has reason to believe that the
Vulgar (whose benefit is here principally intended) are capable of
understanding higher Language.

I shall detain thee no longer, than till I have told thee, that he says, may
this trifle be instrumental to beget in but any one a more free, ingenuous, and
amicable Temper, he shall not think he has cause to repent his permitting it
to be exposed to public Censure.

The Contents.
The First Part, Page 1.

I. THE entrance into the Discourse Ibid. ii. The hateful Character given by
some to certain Friends of Theophilus and Philalethes, 7 iii. An Argument of
their being greatly abused in that Character, 12 iv. That Character due to the
Broachers of Hobbian Doctrine, 13 v. But that Doctrine by none better confuted
than by these men, 14 vi. That Preaching some of their Adversaries Doctrines,
might render them too well deserving that Character, in the Judgment of
over-critical Persons, ibid. vii. Another Argument that they are abused, 18
viii. Theophilus undertaketh impartially to Represent them, 20 ix. Of their
Practices, 22 x. Of their Conformity to the Ecclesiastical Laws, 23 xi. The
unreasonableness of Censuring Men upon the account of their Conformity, 24 xii.
Of their Conversation, 37 xiii. Of their Preaching, 40 xiv. Of their Preaching
the Reasonableness of the Christian Precepts, 42 xv. Of the Use of Reason in
Matters of Religion, ibid. xvi. 1 Cor. 2. 14. considered, 43 xvii. One
advantage that is gotten by demonstrating the Reasonableness of Christian
Duties, 49 xviii. The consideration of the goodness of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, necessary to accompany that of Miracles to prove its Divine Authority,
ibid. xix. Of the Testimony of the Spirit to the Truth of Scripture, 54 xx.
Theophilus his Opinion concerning the inward Testimony of the Spirit, 56 xxi.
The believing of Divine Things, a Divine Faith, whatever the Motives thereunto
are, 58 xxii. Of Moral Certainty, 61 xxiii. Of the Scripture bearing Testimony
to it self, 64 xxiv. A second Advantage gotten by demonstrating the
Reasonableness of the Precepts of the Gospel, 66 xxv. In what sense the
Precepts of the Gospel are highly reasonable, 69 xxvi. A Description of Reason,
70 xxvii. The first Proposition, showing in what sense the Precepts of the
Gospel are reasonable, with a brief Demonstration that they are so, 71 xxviii.
The Design of the Christian Religion, 72 xxix. The Second Proposition, ibid.
xxx. A more particular demonstration of the Reasonableness of the Gospel
Precepts, 75 xxxi. Almost all the Duties enjoined in the Gospel, commended by
Heathens, 80 xxxii. Those vindicated from making the Gospel but a little better
than a mere Natural Religion, that assert that Reason alone is able to prompt
to us most of the Duties therein enjoined, 86 xxxiii. Wherein the Gospel
excels all other Religions, 88 xxxiv. To say that what the Gospel requires,
is most suitable to Reason, is highly to commend it, etc. 91 xxxv. Of their
Preaching the Reasonableness of the Points of mere belief, 93 xxxvi. All the
Points of mere belief to be consistent with Reason sometimes proved by them, 94
xxxvii. That they do not endeavor to level all such Points with men's
Capacities, 95 xxxviii. That they acknowledge incomprehensible Mysteries in the
Christian Religion, ibid. xxxix. That they prove the Consistency of such Points
with Reason, as they are delivered in the Scripture only, 97 xl. That they
assert many Speculative Points to be also suitable to the Dictates of Reason,
ibid. xli. An Argument drawn from Notions of the Heathens, to prove the most
weighty Points of Faith suitable to the Dictates of Reason, 98 xlii. Of their
Style in Preaching, 104 xliii. Of their making Doctrines intelligible, 105
xliv. A sort of men that are Obscurers of the Gospel, ibid. xlv. Another sort
of such, 106 xlvi. Of the Perspicuity of Scripture, 108 xlvii. Their Opinion of
powerful Preaching, 112 xlviii. Of Carnal and Spiritual Reason, 113 xlix. A
farther account of their Preaching, 114 l. Of their being accused of Preaching
up only a Moral Righteousness, 117 li. In what sense they do not so, and in
what sense they do, ibid. and 118 lii. No difference betwixt Evangelical
Righteousness, and that which is the best sense Moral, 119 liii. To work in us
such a Moral Righteousness, the Design of the Gospel, 120 live. A Righteousness
in no sense Moral a Contradiction, 124 lv. Of Imputative Righteousness, and in
what sense they believe and Preach it, 126 lvi. Their notion of Christ's
imputed Righteousness, ibid. lvii. A false notion of it, 128 lviii. The first
Mistake in that Notion, 129 lix. The second Mistake, ibid. lx. A false
definition of Faith they Confute in their Preaching, 130 lxi. Christ's imputed
Righteousness no Scripture Phrase, 133 lxii. Some Verses in the fourth to the
Romans considered, ibid. lxiii. St. James 2. 23. considered, 135 lxiv.
Philippians 3. 9. considered, 137 lxv. As high a favor to be dealt with, as if
we were perfectly Righteous as to be so esteemed, 139 lxvi. The dangerous
consequence of the Antinomian Doctrine about Imputed Righteousness, 141 lxvii.
The Antinomians Opinion of Sin, 143 lxviii. Theophilus his Charity for some
Antinomians, 146 lxix. A Defective Definition of Faith that those Divines
Preach against, and the ill consequence of it, 148 lxx. A full Definition of
Faith ill applied to the business of Justifying, 154 lxxi. A full and plain
Definition of Faith used by those Preachers, 157 lxxii. Of that Doctrine of
those Preachers; that Faith justifyeth, as it implies Obedience, 159 lxxiii.
An Argument to prove that Faith justifies as it receives Christ qua Lord, as
well as qua Savior, 160 lxxiv. The Act of receiving Christ qua Lord to go
before that of receiving him qua Priest, 161 lxxv. How Faith is distinguished
from Repentance, and other virtues in the business of Justification, 162 lxxvi.
Why Justification is mostly ascribed to Faith, 164 lxxvii. Two Acceptations of
the Word Faith, ibid. lxxviii. The virtue of Faith variously expressed in
Scripture, ibid. lxxix. How Faith justifies, 165 lxxx. The Covenant of Grace
conditional, 167 lxxxi. Hebrews 8. 10. considered, 168 lxxxii. Men not without
all power to cooperate with with God's Grace in their Conversion, 174 lxxxiii.
A middle way to be taken in giving account of Men's Conversion, 175 lxxxiv.
Faith the Condition of the New Covenant, ibid. lxxxv. Of their being accused
for the foregoing Doctrine, as holding Justification by Works, and Enemies to
God's Grace, 176 lxxxvi. A Digression concerning censuring men upon the account
of their Opinions, ibid. lxxxvii. A vindication of the foregoing account of
Faith justifying from being opposite to free Grace, 180 lxxxviii. A vindication
of that Doctrine, from asserting Justification by Works in St. Paul's sense,
186 lxxxix. By Works, when opposed to Grace or Faith, New Obedience never
meant, 188 xc. No Crime to hold Justification by Works in St. James his sense,
ibid. xci. St. Paul's Language not to be preferred before St. James his, 189
The Second Part. 190

i. A more distinct Account of their Opinions, ibid. ii. Of their Judgment in
Doctrinals, 191 iii. In what sense the Church of England imposes Subscription
to the 39 Articles, ibid. iv. The Lord Primate of Ireland his Testimony, ibid.
v. What Doctrines they most endeavor to Confute, 192 vi. Philalethes his
Representation of Gods Nature, 193 vii. Consequences of Opinions not to be
charged on all those that hold them, 198 viii. That they set themselves against
the Doctrine of Gods absolute decreeing Men's Sin and Misery, 199 ix. That those
two are not to be separated, 200 x. That those Doctrines make their Defenders
assert two Wills in God; and the one contrary to the other, by which means
other sad Consequences also follow, 202 xi. Of opposing Gods Secret to his
Revealed Will, 206 xii. That we must resolve to believe nothing at all, if we
may believe nothing against which we cannot answer all Objections, 210 xiii.
That the forementioned Doctrine evidently contradicts our natural Notions, 213
xiv. Which is the safest course in reconciling seemingly contradictory
Scriptures, 216 xv. Theophilus can believe no sense of Scripture that does
evidently contradict self-evident Notions, 217 xvi. Of that Opinion, That
whatsoever God does, is therefore good and just because He does it, 218 xvii.
What is the Motive inducing the good men of that Persuasion to go that way, 223
xviii. Those Divines middle way between the Calvinists and Remonstrants, 228
xix. This way proposed by Catharinus at the Council of Trent, 231 xx. How it
comes to pass that this way for some Ages had fewest Friends, 232 xxi. This
Way, a great ease to Theophilus his Mind, 233 xxii. Philalethes no less
beholden to it: which causes Theophilus to ask him some Questions, 236 xxiii.
Of Free Will. 239 xxiv. Of the State of the Heathens, 249 xxv. That God has
ways, though they may be perfectly unknown to us, to clear the Justice and
Goodness of his Dealings with all Mankind, 254 xxvi. Whether what must be
acknowledged to defend that middle Way, tends to encourage security, etc. 256
xxvii. That the Doctrine discoursed against does a world of mischief, 257
xxviii. The Test by which Theophilus examines Controverted Points, 260 xxix. Of
the great obscurity of St. Paul's Style in many places, and the causes of it,
261 xxx. A Paraphrase upon several Verses, of the ninth to the Romans, 263
xxxi. How God is said to harden sinners, 275 xxxii. Philalethes offers
another Interpretation of the 19 th and 20 th Verses, 284 xxxiii. That the most
Ancient Fathers were Enemies to absolute Reprobation, with its Concomitants,
288 xxxiv. That the old Gnostics were great Friends to it, 291 xxxv. Mr.
Joseph Mede's Judgment concerning this Point, 293 xxxvi. The Church of England
no favourer of it, 294 xxxvii. The Moderation of those Divines in other Matters
of Controversy, which Theophilus has not time to insist upon, very
remarkable, 295 xxxviii. None more disliked by them, than the Monopolizers of
Truth to a Party, 296 xxxix. Infallibility in the best of Men or Churches,
denied by them, 297 xl. Of the Infallibility of the Church, and those
Protestants that seem to be sticklers for it, 298 xli. Of Acquiescing in the
four first Occumenical Councils, 300 xlii. What Respect due to Councils, 302
xliii. The Church of Englands sense of General Councils, 304 xliv. The
Determinations of our own Church, not to be opposed in Matters disputable, 305
xlv. An Argument that Christ intended us no Infallible Judge of Controversies,
306 xlvi. Private Christians promised Infallibility in the same sense that the
Church Representative has the promise of it, 307 xlvii. Of Disputacity, 308
xlviii. Of Friendly Disputes, ibid. xlix. The way to Peace, ibid. l. The
mischief of contending for an Infallible Judge, 309 li. Forcing others to be of
our mind Tyrannical, ibid. lii. To condemn men for dissenting from us
unwarrantable, 310 liii. Of those Divines Candor toward dissenters from them,
313 live. Of Mr. Chillingworth's Book, 315 lv. Of their Opinion concerning
Fundamentals, and that they are not forward to give a Catalogue of them, 316
lvi. The use of the foregoing Principles, 317 lvii. That those Divines procure
to themselves Enemies of diverse sorts by their endeavors to propagate those
Principles, 319
The Third Part. 322

i. Their Judgment in Matters of Discipline, ibid. ii. That they prefer
Episcopacy to all other Forms of Church Government, 323 iii. How much essential
to Episcopacy, ibid. iv. That they unchurch not those Churches that will not
admit it, though they think it desirable that all would, 324 v. Their Opinion
of the Power of the Civil Magistrate in Sacred Affairs, 325 vi. That the Civil
Magistrate has a Power both Legislative and Judiciary in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, ibid. vii. Their Opinion of the Authority of the Church, 327 viii.
That they believe Magistrates are to be obeyed, when they command things
inconvenient, if lawful, 329 ix. That they judge it unlawful for the People to
take Arms against their Prince, etc. on any pretense, 331 x. That they are for
showing favor to Dissenters out of Conscience, 332 xi. Whom they conceive are
not to be dealt with as men of tender Consciences, 333 xii. Theophilus presumes
that they would be glad, if some things that most offend were removed, etc. 334
xiii. Philalethes his Opinion upon the whole Account, 336 xiv. Why the Bigots
of the several Parties are mostly their Enemies, 337 xv. That it is pity there
should be any distinction of Name between Them, and the Moderate Men of some
Parties, 339 xvi. What Name they only desire to be known by, 340 xvii. That
their Temper and Free Principles are of no late standing, etc. 341 xviii. Why
the Pharisees could not endure our Savior, ibid. xix. When the Temper and
Spirit that has been described, began to decay in the Christian World, 343 xx.
The Pope beholden to the Decay thereof for his Power, 344 xxi. That it is much
revived in the Protestant Churches, though the Generality are still greatly
defective in it, 345 xxii. If the Invisible Antichrist were once fallen, the
Visible one would quickly follow, ibid. xxiii. The Conclusion, 346
Theophilus, a Lover of God. Philalethes, a Lover of Truth.

ERRATA.
Page 27. line 13, read (...). p. 165. l. 13. r. Make. p. 289. l. 24. r. 100.

A FREE DISCOURSE BETWEEN Two Intimate Friends, etc. Part I.

Philalethes. MY dearest Theophilus, I. The entrance into the Discourse
the observation I have for some time made of the great change in your
countenance, from that spriteful and cheerful air I was wont with pleasure
there to behold, to a melancholy pensiveness and deep dejection, has made me
not a little solicitous concerning the cause: nor can I but entertain a great
suspicion, that it is no ordinary Misfortune that has made such an alteration
in so well-composed, and excellently tempered a mind, as yours is.


Theophilus. I am much obliged to you, my best Friend, for the good opinion you
have conceived of me; which must be imputed not in the least to mine own merit,
but wholly to your goodness: for I assure you, my temper is as obnoxious to
troublesome impressions as other men's, how sedate soever you are pleased to
think it.


Philal. None doubtless may pretend, so well as your self, to understand it:
but if it be so impressible as you say, I have known you far better able to
hide your infirmity then I perceive you now are.


Theoph. I say, Philalethes, no man can with less reason boast of Stoicism,
then my self: but were my soul the most unconcerned of any mortals, and as free
from all disturbing Passions, as is in this state possible; that discomposure
of thoughts you read in my looks, you will not at all wonder at, when you have
once understood the occasion. But I shall defer the satisfaction of your desire
in acquainting you therewith, till I have informed you, that I have taken
notice of as little serenity of late, in your aspect; as Critical as you are in
observing mine: and have several times seen so thick a Cloud there, as made me
conclude the distemper of my mind to be no whit greater than that of yours.


Philal. I see then that I am no less to seek in the Art of Dissembling then
your self; and you shall presently acknowledge, that of us two, I am the more
open-breasted: for though you have kept me hitherto in suspense, and delayed to
let me learn the ground of your trouble; you shall not wait one minute for the
knowledge of the true cause of mine. It is not to be attributed, Theophilus, to
any personal evil, or of a private concern; but to a very quick sense of the
most deplorable State of this our Church. It pains me to the heart, when I
consider to what a prodigious height, about matters of Religion, our feuds are
grown; and how utterly averse the too many Sects and Parties we are crumbled
into are, to entertain thoughts of peace and accommodation. When I well weigh
in my mind, what a rare Engine the Gospel is, for the effecting the most
hearty agreement and friendship among men imaginable, (wherein, I persuade my
self, it fails not of happy success, where it is sincerely entertained) and
then observe what a Makebate it has notwithstanding proved, among the
generality of our professors of it; and occasions, through their own most
wretched folly and naughtiness, the sharpest Contests, and most bitter and
irreconcilable Enmities: I find I have more than enough to do, to govern my
self as I am sensible I ought, and to keep the inferior faculties of my soul
in subordination to its superior, as becomes a Man and Christian, in the
resentment of it.


Theoph. Had you not the ambition, Philalethes, to be now beforehand with me in
Friendship, and first to unbosome your self to me; you had by this time
received the very same account of that Melancholy that in me you spyed.


Philal. Though I could never give credit to the Pythagorean Doctrine of the
Transmigration of souls into diverse bodies, yet I could be almost tempted to
fancy what is more strange, namely, that our two bodies are at once informed
by one and the same soul.


Theoph. This is not a thing so wonderful, as to incline me once to dream of
such an Hypothesis, were it much less incredible than it is, to enable me to
give an account of it: for though, sure enough, our souls are as distinct as
other folks; yet they being conjoined by the same principles and interest, I
can much better understand how this you so admire at should be, than how it
came to pass, that Hippocrates his Twins laughed and cried, lived and died
together. But, my good Philalethes, has it not increased the disquiet of your
mind, to think what usage some worthy Friends of ours (whom I know you have
much heard of, though I suppose you are not so well acquainted with them as my
self) meet with from our hot and contentious Christians? and how ill they are
recompensed by the several litigating and sharply-contesting Parties, for their
industrious endeavors to make peace between them?


Philal. Yes, Theophilus, that it has; and to my great trouble I have often
observed, that the Fierce men (as much at odds as they are among themselves) can
too well agree in heaping Calumnies on these Gentlemen, and in giving them the
worst of Characters: In which dealing of theirs with them, they have imitated
that of the Heathens with some of the Primitive Christians; who first dressed
them in Bears skins and then baited them. The world is not so depraved, nor do
I think ever can be, as to reproach good men under that notion: that therefore
these persons may be cried down with the greater show of zeal, and that it may
be looked upon as the interest of Religion to cast an odium on them; II. The
hateful character given by some to certain Friends of Theophilus and
Philalethes.
I have heard them represented as a Generation of people that have revived the
abominable principles of the old Gnostics; and that they are of those long
since extirpated Heretics the natural and genuine offspring.


Theoph. You say very right, for they are represented as such for all the
world; we being told with much confidence, by those that think themselves
greatly affronted, if whatsoever drops from their mouths be not received as a
Sacred Oracle, that they are a company of men that are prepared for the
embracing of any Religion, and to renounce or subscribe to any Doctrine, rather
then incur the hazard of Persecution; and that they esteem him the only
Heretic that refuses to be of that Religion the King or State professes; or,
at least, this the most dangerous Heresy, that Suffering is to be preferred
before Sinning. They are characterized as people, whose only Religion it is to
temporize, and transform themselves into any Shape for their Secular interests;
and that judge no Doctrine so Saving, as that which obliges to so complying
and condescending a humor, as to become all things to all men, that so by any
means they may gain something: as I heard one once jear a most worthy person
that is one of them, as he thought, no doubt, very wittily.


Philal. Have you not heard the Choleric Gentlemen distinguish these persons,
by a long Nickname; which they have taught their tongues to pronounce as
roundly, as if it were shorter then it is, by four or five syllables?


Theoph. Yes, Philalethes, oftener, I presume, then you have: for though we are
both Countrymen, and wonted more then most to a solitary life; yet my
occasions call me abroad, and into variety of companies, more frequently then
yours do you: where I hear, ever and anon, the word of a foot and half long
sounded out with a great grace; and that not only at Fires and Tables, but
sometimes from Pulpits too: nay, and it accompanied good store of other
Bumbasts, and little Witticisms, in seasoning, not long since, the stately
Oxonian Theater.


Philal. I am not so little skilled in the language of the Beast, as to be
ignorant of the derivation of that Long name: but I pray, Theophilus, what do
those that so please themselves with it mean by it?


Theoph. That I can tell you from their own mouths: for I have heard them give
a description of their Latitudinarian; and it is this short one, He is a
Gentleman of a wide swallow.


Philal. Very good! It seems then his Conscience is the Seat of his Latitude,
and that this name includes the forementioned Lovely Character.


Theoph. It does so. And thus as we have seen children make an ugly picture
upon a wall, and then spit at it; or dress up a Puppet, and then make sport
with it: so those, whom one might expect should be better employed, make a
deformed and misshapen Beast, and then worry their own creature. But if to be
highly charged be a sufficient evidence of Guilt, who can accuse the enemies of
the Primitive Christians of barbarity in their carriage toward them? For it is
well known that the imputations they lay under, were no better then those of
Atheism, the most beastly Incest, and bloody Cruelty.


Phil. Nay, how can we then blame even our blessed Savior's Judges, for
pronouncing that Sentence they did against him, seeing the Crimes he was
charged with, were of the foulest nature, and no less then Sorcery, Treason and
Blasphemy? But as confidently as these men are thus highly accused, and that by
those that pretend to be of all others best affected to that Religion, that is
no less peaceable than it is pure, and that engages its professors not easily
to think, as well as not to speak ill of any; the little knowledge that I have
of them makes me conclude, that it is no hard matter to prove, that their
Accusers, in being so, declare themselves to have the wide swallows they
condemn their Brethren for; and that so wide, as glibly to down with Camels, as
much as one sort of them may seem to strain at Gnats.


Theoph. You say well; III. An Argument of their being greatly abused in that
Character.
there is indeed no difficulty in proving it: For what unprejudiced person can
easily persuade himself to judge so very hardly of these men, that considers,
that there are not any that have better than they, (I had almost said, so well)
demonstrated and improved that Principle, which is the Foundation of all
Religion, viz. That Moral good and evil are not only such, because God
commands the one, and forbids the other; but because the things themselves are
so essentially and unalterably. That there is an eternal Reason, why that which
is good should be so and required, and why that which is evil should be so and
forbidden; which depends not so much on the divine will as the divine nature.


Philal. This is to me a demonstration that they are most injuriously
represented. I must confess, IV. That Character due to the broachers of Hobbian
Doctrine.
had they broached such Doctrine as the Hobbists propagate, viz. That all Moral
righteousness is founded in the law of the Civil Magistrate: That the holy
Scriptures are obliging by virtue only of a Civil Sanction: That whatsoever
Magistrates command, their Subjects are bound to submit to, notwithstanding
contrary to Divine Moral laws: I say, had they published such Doctrine, I
should then my self most freely subscribe to the worst that has been said of
them.


Theoph. And so should I too; but those accursed Principles (for I can give
them no better Epithet) were never more solidly confuted, V. But that doctrine
by none better confuted then by these men.
than by these men. Nay, they might have rendered themselves too liable to the
hardest Censures of men, more judicious and critical, than ingenuous and
charitable; VI. That preaching some of their adversaries doctrines might render
them too well deserving that character in the judgment of over-critical persons.
had they preached those doctrines, that not a few of those very people that
make the loudest outcries against them have formerly, and I have cause to fear
do still instruct their credulous disciples in: whom yet neither I nor they
dare pass an hard sentence against, upon that account; because we hope, and
believe also, that they do not discern the natural consequences of their
Principles. But I for my own part must needs confess, that should I think as
they profess to do in several points, I should be in no small danger of being,
in their hateful sense, a man of Latitude. I shall only instance in one of
those Doctrines, that pass for current among many of these severe Censurers;
viz. That which is opposite to that I said those persons have so rarely well
demonstrated. You know that not a few of their Adversaries do make the will of
God the only measure of good and evil; and will by no means admit that
distinction, Some things are good because commanded, other things are commanded
because good; and so on the contrary.


Philal. No, I know they will not. I was my self once told by a too hot Divine,
that yet was in some things more sober than many of them, when I delivered that
distinction, and expressed my approbation of it, that I spoke blasphemy.


Theoph. It Is very likely; I have also, and that more than once, been shent
with great gravity upon the very same account. However, Philalethes, God forbid
that we should so far imitate the weakness of the men we blame, as to say that
holding the forementioned Principle, they must all of them of necessity be of
that Dutch Gentleman Zeglovius his mind, who has impudently told the world in
Print, that God may please, out of the absolute Sovereignty of his will, to
command all that wickedness he has forbidden, and forbid all that holiness he
has commanded. Nor dare I say, or yet suspect, that they believe that we can
have no assurance, that God will perform either his threatenings or promises;
and that he does not will to deceive his creatures in making the one and the
other; which deception, if he wills it, must needs be good: nor that when they
say that God is of a holy nature, they mean no more, than that he cannot abide
to be disobeyed; which is but a slender commendation: yet who sees not, that
will but give himself leave to think at all freely, that these are consequences
inevitably following from that their Doctrine? which as I said, have the men
they look upon as such Debauchies, diverse of them most excellently discovered
the falsity of; and most convincingly proved the unchangeable natures, and
eternal laws and differences of good and evil: and that it is the most horrid
Contradiction to assert, that God can will that his creatures should not be
just and righteous, good and holy; and, those of them that I know, take
occasion frequently, to declare their abhorrence of that opinion, with all that
are derived from it, or of kin to it. Now, Philalethes, what can their design,
think you, be in thus doing? can they manage any other than that of convincing
men of the indispensable obligation that lies upon them, to love and prosecute
all goodness, and to shun and abominate all sin? what other end can they serve
by this means, besides rendering the Religion of Christ Jesus most amiable, and
effectual as to its great intent?


Philal. For my part, VII. Another Argument that they are abused.
I am not able to imagine, how they can propose to themselves any other: And
what you said last, brings to my remembrance another Argument that will
convince any candid person, that it is, at least, most highly probable, that
they are, in being represented as was said, very unjustly dealt with, viz. That
none have with more strength of reason demonstrated, that the grand design of
the Gospel is to make men good: not to intoxicate their brains with notions, or
furnish their heads with a systeme of opinions; but to reform men's lives, and
purify their natures: which noble principle together with the former, does
utterly overthrow that Latitudinarianism they are accused of, as he must be
blind, or shut his eyes, that does not see it: And if it were well minded and
improved by our angry men, it would, no question, turn the edge of their zeal
quite another way; and convince them, that there are too many things they lay a
heavier stress upon, than they can ever bear.


Theoph. This was excellently well observed of you; and as you say, if the
design of the Gospel were well understood, and as well considered by those
men, they would think their precious time may be much more profitably spent,
than in contending about mere speculations, or such practices as neither serve
nor disserve that design; and have no influence either into the bettering or
depraving the souls of men.


Philal. But, Theophilus, I could be glad to know more distinctly than I do,
how it comes to pass, that it is the ill fate of those our Friends, to have the
worst character given them, by the Rigid men of all Persuasions: what unluckie
stars are they born under, that, of all others, they should meet with the worst
usage, and foulest play; if they have given no occasion to those people to
think and speak so ill of them; nor by any default of their own, have exposed
and laid themselves open to their censures?


Theoph. I shall willingly gratify you in this request; VIII. Theophilus
undertaketh impartially to represent them
which I will do in giving you an impartial representation of them; wherein by
the way, as we pass along, you will clearly perceive, what you are already, I
know, inclined to believe; that some things, at least, not blameworthy, and
others very highly deserving praise, have made them the objects of so much
spite; and that it is occasioned by none but such things.


Philal. The account in general, that from men worthy to be credited I have had
of them, and particularly that they are persons of great Moderation, has
prepared me, were you a perfect stranger, not to question your veracity, let
the character be never so good you shall give of them.


Theoph. I assure you, Philalethes, I am under no temptation, to tell you a
tittle more than I know to be true concerning them: nor do I think it can be my
interest to tell, at any time, a lie for God himself.


Philal. You might have reserved this, for one to whom you are less known, than
you are to me; and therefore, I pray proceed: but if you please, I will make so
bold as to set you your Method; and desire you first to give an account of
their Practices, and then of their Opinions.


Theoph. You may, if you will, call this freedom, which I acknowledge a great
favor, but by no means boldness: And the Order you prescribe I shall as
willingly proceed in, as if it had been mine own choice; but I will not promise
you to keep my self over-exactly to it, and never to confound these two.


Philal. I do not expect you should.


Theoph. Well then, Philalethes, IX. Of their Practices.
as to their Practices; the familiarity that diverse of them have honored me
with, assures me, that there are none among whom more true goodness is to be
found, than is in them observable. Nor have their aspersers, as I can learn,
ever convicted any of them, as persons offensive in their behavior either
toward God or men: nor can I tell, that any of those that are most maligned,
have been so much as accused of such actions in particular, as are plain and
undoubted transgressions of the first or second Table.


Philal. I perceive you put an Emphasis upon undoubted; and that therefore they
are charged with those things, that their Adversaries judge Transgressions of
the one or the other Table.


Theoph. The reason of that Emphasis you have well guessed at; for they are
accused of some such things as diverse look upon as breaches of the first Table,
and particularly of the second Commandment; which are by others esteemed not
only not so, but in certain cases to be so far from being prohibited, that
they are their duty. In short, the grand fault that is found by some in their
practice, X. Of their Conformity to the Ecclesiastical Laws.
is their Conformity to the present Ecclesiastical Laws; which enjoin some
Rites in the Worship of God, which there is no express warrant from the
Scriptures for. But whether this be well or ill done of them, I must not now
stand to determine.


Philal. Nor will I desire you; it being a Controversy that will take up too
much time; and besides, the driest and most unpleasant that ever I engaged in.


Theoph. I have the same opinion of it; and therefore you shall not hire me to
consent to the spending of any part of the time we have together upon such an
Argument. All that need be done now, will be to consider whether the persons we
are discoursing of, can possibly be guilty of so great an offense in their
Conformity, as may not admit a charitable interpretation. XI. The
unreasonableness of censuring men upon the account of their Conformity.
For none can think, except such as are grossly silly, that it is indisputable
that the matters now enjoined are unlawful.


Philal. Those must be very ignorant that so judge; when as men, as famous both
for Learning and Piety as the Church of England has ever been blessed with,
have both by their own Conformity declared their allowance of them, and also
defended their Lawfulness, against those of a contrary persuasion.


Theoph. Nay more than so, Philalethes, you know that diverse of the most
eminent Protestant Divines of the best Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, such
as Calvin, Beza, Zanchy, and others, have declared their judgments for
Conformity to them; and some of them, their earnest desire, that the Ministers
of this Church would comply with the will of their Governors in observing
them, while they shall think it fit to impose them.


Philal. I am not ignorant of it: And methinks the Authority of those men, who
were our great Champions in the Anti-Romane Cause, should be of no small
account with us all; but much less contemned by any of us.


Theoph. Methinks it should not; there being this moreover to say for their
being competent judges in the case, that they were not only men of great
Learning and Godliness, but also uninterested; and therefore under no
Temptation of being biased in their judgments in this particular. So that I
say, It is a most reasonable postulatum, that Conformity to the present
enjoined Rites, may be by those that oppose it, acknowledged not to be so
plainly, at least, condemned, but that very wise and good men may not see it so
to be: and therefore may judge it not only lawful to conform, but also their
duty so long as they persist in that opinion.


Philal. I think it a very clear case, that the Conformists Adversaries have
sufficient reason to desire, and take kindly the same favorable thoughts of
their Nonconformity; they well knowing how obnoxious it has been to an ill
construction, and hard censures: Nor can they be ignorant what a black and
odious character is by some men given themselves; wherein those have paid diverse
of them in their own coin, and measured to them with the same measure,
wherewith they have meted, to those our Friends we are speaking of, in an
especial manner, and more than to any other Conformable persons.


Theoph. What you say is most true; but yet I must tell you, that these friends
of ours, (and I thank you for giving me this occasion) though, as you said,
most provoked, are not in the number of those Warm Gentlemen of the other
extreme; but, as I have often observed, they express great candor toward them.


Philal. I am glad to hear it; and that they are so wise men, and good
Christians, as not to return censures for censures, and evil for evil. Nor can
I well conceive how any ingenuously-minded person can admit so much as an hard
thought of any, merely upon the account of their not being of his mind, in
matters that have been controverted, as these things have been, between men of
confessedly-great worth and goodness. I declare for my part, and I care not who
knows it, that I love with my heart a sober and peaceably minded Nonconformist,
as much Conformist as I am my self.


Theoph. Gods blessing on your heart for that, Philalethes, and I also do
freely declare the same, and that I think him never the worse man that is so,
supposing I perceive him conscientious in other matters; and particularly that
he is not of a censorious, seditious, and tumultuous spirit; but yet such I
would not hate neither, but pity and pray for them. But now, do you not think
it unaccountably strange, that those our Friends, upon the score of their
Conformity, should not be so much censured as erroneous and mistaken as men of
no conscience; as if it were as plainly prohibited as Murder, Adultery, and
the grossest sins?


Philal. I cannot think otherwise; but yet it is not more strange then it is
true, as I my self also well know. For I happened but the other day upon a Book
written by a Divine, that is of a Separated party, and looking into it, chanced
to light upon an opposition of the Conformists to the three children; and These
being commended for their Heroic resolution, rather to be thrown into the
fiery furnace than to serve the Kings Gods, and worship the Image which he had
set up; he next falls bewailing Those, in these words: How many in this hour of
temptation, are caught in this ensnaring trial! What say some? Come, let us
rather conform to the Ceremonies, than lose our Liberties; rather let us bow at
the name of Jesus, than lose all for the sake of Jesus; it is better to baptize
with the Cross, than to bear the cross; and to wear a Surplice, than to pinch
our carcass. Thus many (it is to be feared) destroy their consciences to keep
their places. And so he goes on talking after that rate. And though he
qualifieth his Censure with an [ it is to be feared] yet he plainly supposes,
that to use the Ceremonies of our Church is as unquestionably sinful, as to
worship false Gods, and fall down to graven images: and therefore, not
withstanding that Parenthesis, he endeavors to make his Readers conclude
rather than fear, that Conformists destroy their Consciences, (that is, those
of them that he thinks had ever any) to keep their Places. Nay, three or four
lines after, as he does also before, without mincing the matter, he positively
asserts as much, in these words: Alas poor souls, how are they fallen in the
hour of temptation!


Theoph. You have, I perceive, a very happy memory: for I my self some days
since met also with the same Book and passage; and I dare say, you have been so
faithful as to quote it word for word. But whether thus to judge be consistent
with the ingenuity of a Christian; I leave to that Gentleman and his Brethren,
in their cool blood to consider. But I am sure if this be not a most manifest
transgression of the law of Charity, it is no easy matter to transgress it.
But let these men print or preach what they list, I am shrewdly tempted much to
question, whether they so much declare their own thoughts, as what they would
have their people think; it being their great interest, that themselves should
be reputed the only men, that have not shipwrackt faith and a good conscience.


Philal. This sounds like such an uncharitable Censure, as you blame them for.


Theoph. I expected that reply; but there is too good reason thus to fear: for
I profess it cannot enter into my head, that those of them, that are men of
competent Learning and Parts, should suffer their tongues and pens so to lash
out, if there were not more of cunning than any thing else in it. For they must
needs know as well as any body can tell them, let them make their Admirers
believe what they will, that it is no easy matter to make it good, that the
things upon the account of which they so asperse their Brethren, are against
any Law of God: but yet the people must be born in hand, that they are so
plainly sinful, that he must needs shut his eyes against the light, that is not
convinced they are so: or rather, that all knowing men, can not but suspect
them at least, so to be; but most have so little of their self-denial, and zeal
for Gods honor, as rather to yield to them than lose their Livings, and expose
themselves to sufferings.


Philal. You have sufficiently vindicated your self from uncharitable
Censuring; for surely that cannot deserve so ill a name, which is grounded upon
so good a reason as you have given.


Theoph. And I thank you, my Friend, that you gave me this occasion of purging
my self from so foul and unchristian a crime.


Philal. And you have done it, as I said, very satisfactorily: for Prudence, no
question, is a necessary ingredient in every virtue; nor could I ever think
blind charity to be more truly so, than blind zeal.


Theoph. But to proceed where we brake off. Is it not greatly to be wondered
at, Philalethes, that these men will not afford those that differ in their
practice from them, in disputable matters, any more favorable Title, than that
of people of prostituted Consciences; let them live never so exactly according
to all the notices of Gods will clearly expressed in his Word? which, as I
said, those Friends of ours are so far from living in contradiction to, that I
hear of no clamours against them upon that account; which I am confident I
should with both ears, if any thing of immorality did discover it self in their
conversations.


Philal. But now I think of it, don't you believe that there are those
Conformable persons, that have given too good cause for such a severe Censure?


Theoph. I don't think that any have done so, by their bare Conformity: but
whereas there are those that in all our Changes, have been observed to be
zealous still, for that which was most countenanced by the Authority that bare
the sway; and have been taken notice of to leap out of one extreme into
another; that is, from the hight of Fanaticism to that of Conformity; these, I
confess, may thank themselves for the hard words that are heapt upon them; but
they did not merit them, or gave occasion for them, by their mere Conforming:
their former actings might have rendered their Honesty too liable to suspicion,
though they had never Conformed; nor may their doing what is now enjoined,
considered as such, add to the suspicion; but only considered as
diametrically opposite to former actings. And now I have this occasion, I must
tell you, that I know none of our Friends in the number of those, that have
merited the opprobrious name of Turncoats. But under the late Usurpers, they
did so behave themselves, as that some of them were great Sufferers for his
Majesty and the Church; and the rest of those I was acquainted with, though
they were so prudent as to keep as much as they could out of harms way, and not
to expose themselves to needless sufferings, and such of which there could come
no good; yet were they no less conscientious, and had a care to preserve
themselves unspotted from the guilt of the then wild extravagances.


Philal. You have told me no more, than I have often before heard; but I am
glad of its confirmation from your mouth. I pray pardon my occasioning so many
digressions from the main business, and be pleased now again to return to it.


Theoph. You shall not have my pardon, but thanks, for the digressions you have
occasioned; they being none of them, I think, impertinent. To go on then: XII.
Of their Conversation.
They are not only not scandalous, but very lovely also in their behavior,
and greatly obliging. I never in any one sort of men observed so much of
openheartedness and ingenuity, freedom, sociableness, and affability, as in
these generally. They have nothing of that Crabbed austerity, foolish
affectation, or sullen gravity that render too many of their Censurers to wise
men not a little contemptible. But as the Pharisees bare our Savior a grudge,
upon the account of his being contrary to their humor in this very particular;
so I have reason to believe, that by this means, these persons do not a little
distaste diverse of their Adversaries, because they look so unlike them, and
condemn those their follies, by a quite contrary carriage. But with any
Sarcastical smartness to perstringe those fooleries, which some of them have
done, is looked on as an expression of a profane spirit: as if to dislike that
which makes Religion ridiculous, were to be an enemy to Religion it self.


Philal. Nay, I have thought, that there is too much cause to suspect, that
what they themselves cannot but acknowledge very commendable in those our
Friends, is a great motive to them, so much the more to traduce them; as being
jealous that they may thereby gain with many too great esteem. For there was
one, some time since, that took occasion to commend a Reverend and most worthy
person that is called by the Long name, to an eminent Pastor of a Separated
Congregation in London, from whom he received this answer; That Jesus Christ
has not in this Nation a greater enemy; and that the goodness of his life was
that which put him into a capacity of doing so much the more mischief.


Theoph. The story you have told me, I should have looked upon as not
incredible, had a less faithworthy person related it than your self. For I have
often observed that Scandalous Ministers, of which there are too many, the more
is the pity (though the number of them is computed by those that gladly take
all advantages to bespatter and fling dirt in the faces of their Civil and
Ecclesiastical Governors, to be far greater than I am verily persuaded it is)
I say, I have often observed, that scandalous Ministers have the good luck
better to escape the tongues of our Carping people, than the most painful and
conscientious.


Philal. Any man may, if he will, make this observation: And truly I have too
good reason to fear, that not a few of those men are more sorry that all
Conforming Ministers are not persons of debauched lives, than that any are so:
for if they hear but an ugly tale of any one of them, they never stand to
examine whether it be true or false, but with great greediness catch at it, and
send it flying.


Theoph. Would you have me, in the next place, XIII. Of their Preaching.
to inform you, how those Divines in their Pulpits demean themselves; I dare
affirm, that if our Separating people would be but persuaded to make their own
ears judges, and for some time deign to be their Auditors, if they could also
leave all prejudice behind them, they would confess that they cannot in any of
their private Meetings, at least better spend their time. I am sure it must be
their own fault, if their experience does not convince them, that there are no
Preachers by whom they may gain more real profit. For none can give their
hearers better instructions, or back them on with more cogent and effectual
motives and arguments than they do. I have my self been as constant a hearer of
them (before I betook my self to this solitary way of living) as any man: but
never was my judgment more convinced, my will persuaded, nor my affections
more powerfully wrought upon, by any Sermons than by theirs. I found that in
their Discourses generally, they handled those subjects that are of weightiest
and most necessary importance: I mean such as have the greatest influence into
the reformation of men's lives, and purification of their souls: Nor had I ever
so lovely an idaea of the divine nature, which is the most powerful incentive
to obedience to the divine will, nor so clear a sense of the excellency of the
Christian Religion, the Reasonableness of its precepts, the nobleness and
generosity of its design, and its admirable fitness for the accomplishment of
it; as, through the blessing of God, I have gained by the hearing of these men.


Philal. You say, XIV. Of their preaching the Reasonableness of the Christian
precepts.
Theophilus, that you have gained by these men a clearer sense of the
Reasonableness of the Gospel-precepts; there are many nowadays that will con
a Preacher little thanks, for insisting on that Topic: for they tell us very
weakly, that only Faith is to be set on work in matters of Religion, not
Reason.


Theoph. Very weakly indeed: XV. Of the use of Reason in matters of Religion.
it seems those men would have us believe our Religion we know not why; and so
we shall be wise believers in the mean time. Were I of their opinion, I doubt I
should be shrewdly tempted to prefer no one Religion before another; and to
think none so absurd, as that I should need to stick, upon that account, at
entertaining it.


Philal. I greatly fear that Mahometanism it self would bid as fair for my
belief, as Christianity, did I think as they do. But I am so far from imagining
that Reason has nothing to do in Religion, that I am most assured, that it is
nowhere to so good purpose employed as it is there. But how do you understand
that place, XVI. 1 Cor. 2. 14. considered.
which these enemies of Reason, I think, lay the greatest stress on, in their
cavils against it, viz. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. Where, by the (...), which is (I know not why)
translated the natural man, they understand the Rational; or as some of them
love to word it, the Souly man, but mean the same thing.


Theoph. Those words of S. Paul are strangely misunderstood by them; nor is
there any thing in them, that, with the least show of probability, tends to
serve those men's absurd Hypothesis. For the word (...) does properly signify
Animalis; and this word never signifies a Souly man in their sense, but in the
quite contrary. For an Animal man is such a one, as gives himself up to the
government of his inferior Faculties; or a carnal sensual man: so that he is
so far from being a man of Reason, that he is most irrational. It Is such a man
as this, that the Apostle says, receives not the things of the Spirit of God;
he being drowned in sensuality, can have no gusto of, cannot relish such
things; that is, while he remains so. They are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them; he can have no right understanding, no clear perception of
them; and they sound in his ears like very odd things also. And it is to be
imputed to this, that he understands by his Affections more than by his Reason;
like the Wolf in the Fable, that went to School to learn to Spell, whatsoever
letters were told him, because he minded nothing but his belly, he could never
make any thing but Agnus of them. He cannot know them, because they are
spiritually discerned; that is, by virtue of a higher principle than that which
is predominant in this man; who is, as was said, a mere fleshly wretch. So that
this place is so far from condemning the use of Reason in the matters of our
Faith, that the necessity thereof in those things is rather to be concluded
from it; and that men cannot receive the things of Gods Spirit, till by the
Assistance thereof, their Reason has regained its authority, and be able to
keep under their brutish affections.


Philal. But they say, that we must believe the Scriptures, not because Reason
tells us they are true, but because they are Gods Word.


Theoph. I perceive you are hard put to it, to retain your wonted gravity in
propounding this Objection; but however, I will very gravely answer you. If we
must believe the Scriptures because they are Gods Word, then I trow there is a
reason on which we are to found our Faith, and that a good one too. But again,
why must we believe what God says to be true? must we believe this because we
believe it? None sure will speak so absurdly: but whatsoever answer these men
will give to that Question, it is apparent that this is grounded upon a
principle of Reason also, than which there is none more evident, viz. That God
cannot lie.


Philal. I presume that they themselves would give that answer.


Theoph. Then they would give another Reason, and so still contradict their own
Doctrine.


Philal. But they will tell you, that all is at last resolved into Gods mere
testimony: for we must believe that he cannot lie, because he himself has said
so.


Theoph. And what if he had never said so? what they would do I will not
undertake to conjecture; but I should not therefore have one jot the less
believed it. For Gods saying that he cannot lie, cannot be a sufficient
argument to me to believe it, if I did not know that to lie is unworthy of God,
and dis-becoming him: for how else could I tell, but that he designed to
deceive me in that very saying that he cannot lie? This therefore is the reason
why I doubt not of that great truth, because the reason of my mind tells me,
that God must be a Being absolutely perfect, or he cannot be God; and being so,
it tells me that he cannot be without any moral, no more than physical
perfections; and to lie, the same Reason of my mind assures me, is a moral
imperfection.


Philal. This no man can once doubt, that has to any purpose employed his
considerative faculty. But to personate these stiff opposers of Reason a little
farther. To what purpose is it to go about to demonstrate the Reasonableness of
the Christian precepts, when it is once taken for granted, that they are
divine? For nothing is more undoubted, than that whatsoever God commands, is
therefore to be done, because he commands it.


Theoph. That is a truth beyond all dispute; and, by the way, let me tell you
it is so, because nothing is more highly reasonable, than that God must be
obeyed in all things. But however, I would have these men know, that to
demonstrate the Reasonableness of the duties of Christianity, is to do
excellent service to the Christian Religion: for, XVII. One advantage that is
gotten by demonstrating the Reasonableness of Christian duties.
First, it is no small confirmation of our Faith in the truth thereof, to
understand the Reasonableness of what is therein enjoined. I remember a good
saying of Origin to this purpose; says he to Celsus, in his third Book against
him, See whether or no the agreeableness of the precepts of our Faith with the
common notions of humane nature, be not that which has caused them to to be so
readily entertained, by the ingenuous hearers of them. XVIII. The consideration
of the goodness of the doctrine of the Gospel necessary to accompany that of
Miracles, to prove its divine authority.
And I must profess to you, Philalethes, that I lay no less weight upon the
goodness that my Reason apprehends in the Doctrine the Gospel contains,
than upon the Miracles whereby 'twas confirmed. Nor do I believe the Miracles
unaccompanied with that other consideration, a sufficiently-satisfying Argument
that our Savior was sent from God, as infinitely wonderful as they were: but
both these together most fully demonstrate to us that Proposition, and neither
singly and abstracted from each other.


Philal. I have, in this particular, thought as you do, ever since I well
considered the three or four first verses of the 13th Chapter of Deuteronomy;
where God, by Moses, says thus to the children of Israel: If there arise among
you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams; and gives thee a sign or a wonder; and
the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let
us go after other gods, and let us serve them: thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God proves
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with
all your soul, etc.


Theoph. That place is to very good purpose quoted by you; and these two things
are plainly to be gathered from it:

First, That we are to consider the Doctrine it self, before we believe it to
be of God, as well as the means of its confirmation.

Secondly, That God, for certain Reasons, may suffer wonders to be wrought,
that is, such things as no man can give account how they should be effected by
natural means, for the confirmation of a false Doctrine. And you have from
thence rationally concluded what I now said, viz. That the goodness of the
Doctrine is necessary to go along with the consideration of the Miracles
whereby it was confirmed, to make them such an Argument as we may reasonably
desire to induce us to entertain it as coming from God, and to receive him as
Gods Son that brings it.

By the goodness of the Doctrine I mean at least its negative goodness; and
say, that we ought to see that there be nothing in it, that is plainly unworthy
of God to revele, or that contains a manifest contradiction to any of his
Attributes: but when positive goodness is also therein observable; that is, a
high congruity and agreeableness with the Divine perfections; such Doctrines
make Miracles a more abundantly strong argument, that the Preacher of them is
no Impostor, but that he came from heaven upon Gods Message.


Philal. But there are Learned men, that, distinguishing betwixt Miracles and
Wonders, assert that the former are sufficient motives of Credibility, though
not the latter.


Theoph. Though these two ought to be distinguished, yet I conceive, that
distinction will signify very little when applied to this matter. For I cannot
question, but that it may lie within the compass of Evil Spirits power, to play
such Feats as no mortal man, though they should be but Wonders, can be
sagacious and quick-sighted enough to discern them from real Miracles. But when
a person does not only perform most marveilous works, but also delivers the
most excellent doctrine, we have the greatest assurance that can be from both
together, that he came on Gods errand, and that the Religion he brought with
him has the Majesty of Heaven for its Author. We have reason to be no less
assured of it, than that God is good: it being utterly unconceivable, that he
should lay before us such an invincible Temptation to believe a Cheat and
Falsity.


Philal. But there are those, you know, that seem by their discourse to lay no
weight either upon the Miracles, or excellency of the Doctrine; and are heard
to cry up only the Testimony of the Spirit, as an Argument of the truth of
Christianity, XIX. Of the testimony of the Spirit to the truth of Scripture.
and of the divine Authority of those Books that contain it.


Theoph. There are so, Philalethes; but why do they distinguish between
Miracles, and the Testimony of the Spirit? They are one and the same, without
all doubt: for were they not performed by the power of the Holy Ghost? And
therefore they were his Testimony or attestation to the truth of the Gospel.


Philal. But they mean an internal Testimony, or a secret powerful persuasion
wrought immediately, in the souls of men, by the Holy Ghost.


Theoph. But those that say, that Credit cannot be given to the truth of the
Gospel without this, make the Devils greater Unbelievers than we are from
Scripture assured they are. And moreover, they seem to me to assert that Christ
and his Apostles might have spared their mighty works: for who will deny that
the Spirits immediate testimony is alone abundantly sufficient for that
purpose? But besides, those that talk thus, do apparently run in as gross a
Circle, as that we accuse the Papists of. For as they prove the Scriptures by
their Church, and their Church by the Scriptures; so these prove the Scriptures
by this Testimony of the Holy Ghost, but then cannot prove so much as that
there is any such person, but by the Scriptures. And once more, if there be any
truth in this opinion, there is nothing to be done for the conviction of
Infidels; for this internal Testimony can be an Argument to none but those that
have it.


Philal. This I once urged to a certain Divine, who stiffly maintained that
Conceit, and was angry with those that went about to prove the Authority of the
Scriptures the other way; and he readily replied, that he knew no means to be
used for the conviction of unbelievers, but praying for them.


Theoph. I commend that Gentleman's ingenuity in that concession; but nothing
could be said more dishonorable to our excellent Religion, or that tends more
to expose it to the scorn and contempt of those that bear no good will to it.


Philal. But, Theophilus, do you think then, that there is no such thing as
this inward Testimony?


Theoph. All I think as to this matter, XX. Theophilus his opinion concerning
the inward testimony of the Spirit.
I will briefly tell you. I say that the external and rational Motives of
Credibility are as sufficient to give unprejudiced persons an undoubted belief
of the truth of our Religion; as any rational Arguments are to persuade a man
of the truth of any thing, he desires satisfaction concerning: But yet because
our Grand Adversary uses all Arts to make it as much suspected as may be, and
to shake our faith therein; and we are moreover in regard of the Contrariety of
our Religion to our carnal and fleshly interests very apt to be strongly
prejudiced against it, (and we are not easily brought fully to believe what we
would not have true) God is ready without all question, to assist our weakness
by his grace and Spirit, in this as well as other particulars, when humbly
sought to: but we have no reason to think that he does this ordinarily in an
immediate manner, but by blessing the use of means, i. e. the consideration of
the motives he has given us to believe: And that he confirms our Faith, by
giving us to see such strongly-convincing demonstration in those Arguments, and
by so closely applying the evidence of them to our understandings, as that they
come to be even perfectly overpowered, and against all opposition to have full
assent, and such as has a powerful influence upon our practice, as it were,
even forced from them. But if all the external motives will not make one
sufficient Argument to persuade to assent, how could they render the
unbelieving Jews inexcusable, as our Savior several times assured them they
would? Nay, how then could he marvail (as we read he did) at their unbelief?


Philal. But they will tell you, that to assent to the truth of the Scriptures
from the forementioned motives, is no divine Faith.


Theoph. But I dare tell them, XXI. The believing of divine things a divine
Faith, whatever the motives thereunto are.
that the believing of Divine things is a divine Faith, let the motives
inducing thereunto be what they will; and that it is no unusual thing for the
Act to receive its denomination from its Object. But with a divine Faith in
their sense also, we no less than they, believe what is contained in the
Scriptures true, viz. because God that cannot lie has reveled it: but that he
has indeed reveled it, the Miracles, as was said, whereby this is confirmed,
and the goodness of the Doctrine, (to which I may add also, the completion of
Prophecies, as being of no less consideration than the Miracles) do assure us.
And again, that such Miracles as are recorded, were really wrought for the
confirmation of the Gospel, and likewise that the Doctrine contained in our
Books, is that Gospel that was confirmed by them; we may be convinced by as
undeniable Arguments, as any matters of fact men have not seen with their own
eyes can be proved by; and so undeniable, that he must needs be a most
unreasonable person, that requires better. Nay, he must resolve, if he will be
consistent with himself, to believe nothing he has not himself seen. I will
add too, that whoever he be that is dissatisfied as to this matter, he does
undoubtedly believe hundreds of things, and thinks he should be unwise in
questioning them, that have not the quarter part of the evidence that this
has; nay, I may say, not the twentieth part. If they please, Philalethes, to
call it a humane faith to believe matters of fact upon the account of
Tradition, I will not contend with them, but tell them plainly, that I like it
never a jot the worse for being so; nor can I understand how any wise man
should. But yet take notice too, that such a degree of faith concerning these
matters of fact also, as has a powerful operation upon our lives and souls, is
imputed by us, no less than by them, to the grace of God, and his Holy Spirit;
though not as operating in us in an immediate manner, as I said, ordinarily;
but in making the means effectual; and I hope they will acknowledge this, in
the best of senses, a Divine faith.


Philal. But they say, XXII. Of moral certainty.
that only a moral certainty can result from the evidence that is in the most
uninterrupted and universal Tradition; and therefore how closely soever you
tell us the Spirit of God applies that evidence, this way of yours tends to
make men no better than morally certain of the truth of our Religion.


Theoph. What a fault that is ^ our certainty thereof may be perfectly
undoubted, as moral as it is. And I fear not to declare, that I do not desire
to be more undoubtedly assured that there were such persons as our Savior and
his Apostles, that they performed such works, and preached such Doctrines as we
have on Record; and that the Books we call Canonical, were written by those
whose names they bear, See the Learned Dr. Stilling fleets excellent Answer to
the Lo. Archbp of Canterbury's Adversary, p. 206.
than I have cause to be and am that there were such great Conquerors as
Alexander and Julius Caesar, which yet lived before our Savior; or that those
which pass for Tully's Orations were really (for the substance of them at
least) his, which yet are elder than the Gospel: but for all that my certainty
of these things can be no more than moral; yet I do notwithstanding no more
doubt of them, than I do of those things that are plainly objected to my
Senses; for I do not at all doubt of them; and I should be laughed at as an
arrant fool, if I did; but should I deny them, I should be thought a madman by
all wise people. And yet let me tell you, that we have from Tradition a greater
certainty, in some respect, of most of those particulars, than we have of
these: for it has been the interest of many that those should be false, but so
has it not been of any that these should be so. But the greatest enemies of
the Christian Religion have not so much as attempted to disprove those, nay
have taken all for granted, except one or two Miracles.


Philal. I have but a Moral assurance that there is such a City as Rome or
Venice; or that there were such persons as Queen Elizabeth and King James: yet
I should be a Brute, did I more question, whether there are such Cities, or
were such persons, than I do, whether there be such a place as London or
Bristol, where I have several times been, or whether there are such men as
Theophilus and Philalethes.


Theoph. To be sure, so you would. Well, I wish that those men would show us a
more certain way of conviction concerning this matter of weightiest importance;
and then see whether we would not, with great thanks, leave ours for it. But I
fear me, in stead of so doing, should we give up our selves to their conduct,
they would most sadly bewilder us; and in stead of settled and unshaken
believers, make mere Scepticks of us, or what is worse.


Philal. There are others, XXIII. Of the Scriptures bearing testimony to it
self.
Theophilus, that say that the Scripture is sufficiently able to convince men
of its Divine authority, by the witness it can give to it self; or, to use
their own Metaphorical expression, by the resplendency of its own light. So
that he does enough in order to his believing it to be Gods Word, that does but
acquaint himself with the contents thereof; which I think follows from that
opinion.


Theoph. If these understand what they say, there is no difference betwixt them
and us: for the Miracles and Goodness of the Doctrine, we prove the Scriptures
Authority by, we fetch only out of the Scriptures themselves. And therefore,
supposing we believe the matters of fact therein written, we say as they do,
that we need no Argument to prove them Divine, but what is therein included.
But if their meaning be, (as by their manner of expressing themselves one would
think it should) that there is such a light in Scripture, as immediately
operates upon men's minds, as proper light does on the Optic nerves, there can
be nothing said more inconsiderately. For men's understandings cannot discern
the truth of things by immediate intuition, but only in a discursive manner;
that is, by such reasons and arguments as persuade to assent. And besides, if
that be true, not only what you concluded from thence is so also, viz. that
it is enough, in order to our believing it, to acquaint our selves with the
contents thereof; but likewise that it is altogether impossible, that any man
should read the Scriptures, and not believe them, supposing he be compos
mentis, and understands what he reads. But to convince us that this is not so,
I fear there are very many sad instances, and have too good ground for my fears.

Well, Philalethes, it is time to have done with the First Advantage, that I
told you is gotten, by having the Reasonableness of the precepts of the Gospel
demonstrated to us, viz. That it is no small confirmation of our faith in the
truth thereof.

Secondly, XXIV. A second Advantage gotten by demonstrating the reasonableness
of the precepts of the Gospel.
Another Advantage we get hereby is, that by this means we learn the
incomparable excellency of our Saviors Religion; not to say above the Heathen
Gods impositions on their worshippers, (their Religion being, for a great part,
not only most ridiculous, but also full of unnatural villainy and filthiness,
such as a modest tongue would find it difficult to utter, and chaste ears to
hear: Witness the Rites of Cybele, the Feasts of Bacchus, Flora, Venus and
Priapus; and likewise 'twas full of Cruelty and bloody Tyranny) I say, passing
by the Religion of the Heathens, as not worthy to be named on the same day with
that of the Gospel; we do by this means understand the incomparable excellency
of our Saviors Religion, even above that given by God himself to his own
people the Israelites, under the Mosaical dispensation. For, we know, it
consisted of almost innumerable Injunctions, the reason of which is not at all
obvious. We may see our way before us, in obeying Gospel-Precepts; they are
enjoined because good, whereas these were good only because enjoined. And
though we may guess at reasons for Gods giving those people such a kind of
Religion in the general, yet we can say nothing for most of the particular
instances of obedience, but that it was the divine will to make choice of them.
They were in themselves of a perfectly-indifferent nature, and neither good nor
evil; nor had they any thing, I say, that we know of, to commend them, and set
them off, but the mere Legislators pleasure. Now except we understand the vast
difference betwixt the Law and the Gospel; and how greatly the later,
especially in this point of Reasonableness, excels the former; we shall be
insensible of that much larger share we have in the Goodness of God, than the
Jews had, and so want a most exciting motive to cheerful obedience to him, in
the present notices of his will we are under the obligation of.


Philal. What you say, is too evident to be denied, or so much as disputed: but
I pray inform me more particularly, what you mean, when you say that the
Precepts of the Gospel are highly reasonable.


Theoph. You have less need, XXV. In what sense the precepts of the Gospel are
highly reasonable.
Philalethes, than most I know, to ask me that Question; but yet because I am
gotten into a vein of talking, I will satisfy you, for discourse sake, in that
demand. I mean, that they are such, as our Reason tells us are highly fitting,
and becoming us; considering what kind of creatures we are, and the
Circumstances and Relations we stand in, to God, our selves, and each other.
Nay, they are so becoming us, that our Reason will also assure us, that the
contrary are no less unworthy of us.


Philal. But before you proceed farther, give me leave so far to interrupt you,
as to desire a clear description of Reason from you. Whatever I do, I can
scarcely think that the great Decryers of it, do distinctly understand what it
is.


Theoph. If they did, I cannot imagine what should incline them to such
extravagant and strange prattle, as is heard from them. But to your Question:
Reason is that power, XXVI. A description of Reason.
whereby men are enabled to draw clear Inferences from evident Principles. And
therefore when the Preachers we are discoursing of, and others, demonstrate the
reasonableness of the Precepts of the Gospel; they prove that there are those
self-evident Principles, from whence what the Gospel requires may be inferred
to be our duty, although God had never declared his mind concerning them.


Philal. But surely they cannot think, that there are no precepts in the
Christian Religion, but what are such: what say you to those that enjoin the
two Sacraments?


Theoph. I will, in short, tell you all that, I think, is necessary to be said
in this matter, in these two Propositions.

First, All those things, wherein does consist the substance of the Christian
Religion, XXVII. The first Proposition, showing in what sense the precepts of
the Gospel are reasonable: with a brief demonstration that they are so.
are good, and necessary in themselves to be done; and the contrary evil, and
necessary in themselves to be avoided. Those are such, as it would be a
contradiction to suppose them not our duty; considering, as was said, what
creatures we are, and our several Circumstances and Relations; and so would it
be to suppose these not disbecoming us, and unworthy of us. Our Savior, you
know, sums up our whole duty in the love of God, and our Neighbor; the
substance of which, (as is easy to be shown by enumerating particulars) is
reducible to these two Heads; nay to the former, namely the love of God. And
there is no Principle we do more naturally assent to, than that he, in whom we
live, move, and have our being; from whom we receive all we enjoy, and expect
all that we can hope for of good; should be beloved by us, nay, and made also
the object of our chief love. And an imitation of all Gods imitable
perfections, is a necessary consequent of such a love of God; such as his
Holiness, Justice, Goodness. (...), etc. p 22.
Hierocles has told us, that whom a man loves, he will as much as lies in him
imitate; and that therefore it is necessary, that there should be not only
(...), the knowledge of Gods nature and essence; but also (...), All possible
likeness thereunto. Now the imitation of the Divine Nature, XXVIII. The design
of the Christian Religion.
is the whole design of the Christian Religion; (which St. Gregory Nyssen
makes to be its very definition) as no one that consideratively reads the Books
wherein it is contained, can at all doubt.

Secondly: XXIX. The second Proposition.
The other duties of the Gospel, which are but few, are imposed as helps to the
performance of those forementioned. They are not required for themselves, but
for the sake of the great Essentials of Religion. And it may be easily made
good, that there are none of them of a merely positive nature, except the two
Sacraments: which yet are appointed for very great ends and purposes; and are
most excellent helps to the attaining of true holiness, and that wherein the
power and life of Religion consists; and not only trials of obedience.
Meditation, Prayer, Reading and Hearing Gods Word, the observation of the Lords
day, good Conference, etc. are in themselves helps; and Baptism, and the Lords
Supper are so, through the divine ordination. And indeed, to speak properly,
they are no less our privilege than our duty; as being Seals of Gods Covenant,
and Pledges to assure us of the divine grace; for which we are no less obliged
to him, than we are for his gracious Promises.


Philal. But what think you of believing in Christ Jesus for the Remission of
Sins? could Reason ever have prompted this, as men's duty?


Theoph. Yes, as soon as any thing enjoined in the Gospel, when once it was
demonstrated, that him has God exalted to be our Prince and Savior. Men would
have, of themselves, concluded Faith in him their duty, when they were convinced
of that truth, though there had been no precept to make it so. Which is so
plain, that I shall disparage your intellectuals in using more words to clear
it to you.


Philal. It is indeed so plain, that I am ashamed I asked the Question.


Theoph. But if you please, Philalethes, I will more particularly, and
distinctly, though very briefly, demonstrate that the duties of the Gospel are
such, as Reason (would we consult it) would prompt to us.


Philal. You cannot show the strength of your own Reason upon a nobler Subject.


Theoph. A very small pittance of it, that is, so little as I am master of, is
sufficient to enable any one with ease to perform this successfully. Now then,
XXX. A more particular demonstration of the Reasonableness of the
Gospel-precepts.
as our Savior refers our whole duty to two Heads, viz. the love of God,
and our Neighbor: so does the Apostle to three; Sobriety, Righteousness, and
Godliness. Now for Godliness, which contains all our duty immediately relating
to God; all the instances thereof, which the Gospel enjoins, may be learnt by
improving but that one natural Principle of Gods existence; and that thus.
There being a God, he must necessarily be absolutely perfect: He, being
absolutely perfect, is to be acknowledged the Creator, Preserver, Benefactor,
and Governor of the whole world: for it is unreasonable to attribute our
Creation, preservation, etc. to any besides such a Being. And then, God having
all perfections in himself, and being so related to us; this will necessarily
follow, that we ought to make him the object of our highest Admiration, our
greatest love; we ought to offer up Sacrifices of Prayer and Praises to him, to
trust in him, and depend upon him, in all our ways to acknowledge him;
cheerfully to do what he commands, patiently to submit to his dispose, etc. And
there is no duty immediately relating to God, but is in those included; setting
aside that of doing what he commands; for that alone takes in our whole duty in
reference, not only to God, but also to our Neighbor and our Selves. God being
such a one in himself, and to the world, as you heard; this must be eternally
true, that it is the duty of all Reasonable creatures, to carry themselves
toward him as was shown. There is so close a connection, between those
Premises, and these Conclusions; that a man cannot believe the one, and (except
he were stark mad) doubt the other. We cannot more easily apprehend this
Argument to be necessarily true, viz. This Figure is a Circle, therefore all
its parts are equally distant from the Center; than this, God is our Creator,
Preserver. etc. therefore we ought so as was now said, to behave our selves
toward him. Nay, we can hardly think of that premiss, but this conclusion will
come into our minds whether we will or no.

And then for Righteousness, which implies our duty to our Neighbor; that
Rule of our Savior, What ye would that men should do to you, that do ye to
them; (which Severus expresses in Negative terms, Quod tibi fieri non vis,
alt^^^ ne feceris) it is as self-evident (...) Principle, as any is to be found
in Morals. And this will teach us to be just, most severely just to every body;
and to be kind and merciful to those that are in need: Now these two include
all that the Gospel requires in reference to one another.

And then for Sobriety, that comprehends our whole duty to our selves. The
mere principle of Self-love will teach a man, that he may not be intemperate in
any kind; he by this means abusing himself. And the very knowledge of our
selves, and what excellent creatures we are, will convince us that we ought not
to set our heart upon, or place our happiness in any earthly thing. Therefore,
this was one Rule, among the several excellent ones in the Pythagoraean Golden
Verses; -- (...)*
Above all things Revere thy self.
There is no man but does or may know, that his soul is too Noble a creature to
glut it self with base Corporeal Pleasures; and that his understanding is too
sublime a faculty to subject it self to his brutish appetite: And that God, as
the Philosopher speaks, endued him with that, to be (...), A Prince and Ruler
within him; and with this, to be (...), A Subject and Ruled; to be the Servant,
not Master of his Mind. There is no man but feels his soul too big for these
terrestrial things, and that they are never able to fill its vast capacities.
Now what are we enjoined in the Christian Religion, as relating to our selves,
but is to be reduced to one of these, nay to this one head of inordinate
affection? And in short, (for I am sensible that we have protracted our
discourse upon this Subject to too great a length) I know no duties enjoined in
the Gospel, besides that of Faith in Christ, and the two Sacraments, but may be
found, as to the substance of them, at least commended as noble perfections,
XXXI. Almost all the duties enjoined in the Gospel commended by Heathens.
in some one or other of the Heathenish writings; as may be particularly shown,
but that it will take up too much time.


Philal. What say you to meek bearing, and putting up affronts; but especially,
to loving malicious enemies, and rendering good for evil?


Theoph. Both these may be found in them; if not under the notion of
indispensable duties, yet as greatly becoming us, most highly commendable, and
significations of a bravely generous and virtuous Mind. The instances of the
former, are so many, that you cannot be a stranger to them; nor any that have
read but that little Book (that is worn out in Schoolboys hands) Tully's
Offices. Nay, Plato brings in Socrates speaking of it, as that to which all men
are absolutely obliged. Injury, says he, is to be done by no means, vely by no
means, nor may it be repayed to him that does an injury, as the vulgar think,
for that it is to be committed upon no pretense. And what think you of that
speech of Cato: If an Ass kicks me, shall I again kick him? He thereby
intimated, that it was unworthy of him to be revengeful; at least toward some
sort of people. And as to the later, I remember that Origin in his eighth Book
against Celsus gives two notable instances of it: the one of Lycurgus, and the
other of Zeno. One being delivered into the hands of Lycurgus, that had put out
one of his eyes, he was so far from revenging the injury, as very great as it
was, that he never left giving him wholesome Counsel, till he had made him in
love with Philosophy. And he brings in Zeno making this Reply to his enemy,
that said, Let me perish if I do thee not a mischief; viz. And let me perish if
I do not reconcile thee to me. Both these show sufficiently what those Heathens
thought of returning good for evil.


Philal. But have you observed, that the Heathens give Rules for the regulation
of men's thoughts and affections, as well as words and actions?


Theoph. Why do you ask me that Question? For you very well know that they
abound with them, as ignorant as you are pleased to make your self.


Philal. I was (I confess) guilty of great inconsiderateness in putting that
Question to you.


Theoph. And you are not to learn that diverse of them lead men to good ends in
their virtuous actions. And that, placing man's supreme happiness in the
enjoyment of God, they teach us to make that our great design.


Philal. I have much observed it, and especially in the Writings of the
Platonists. And moreover, that in their Moral discourses they tell us that it
is our duty to perform good actions out of love to Goodness; and condemn base
ends, and particularly some of them even that of applause, and a great Name, as
much as some others allow of it, and commend it too. But have you found that
any of them teach men to act our of Love to God, and to make his Glory their
last end?


Theoph. These two you ought not to have distinguished from each other. Now
though I do not remember the later in any of them, as you word it, yet the
former I do. The forementioned Hierocles speaking of Piety or Love to God,
(...), etc. p. 26.
has this saying* With this every thing is pleasing to God, but without this
nothing. And he brings in Apollo speaking thus, to one that offered an Hecatomb
to him, but with no pious mind; (...)
Thine hundred Oxen I less kindly take
Than Poor but Pious Hermions Barley-cake.


But I need not trouble you with instances to this purpose; for there is
nothing more plainly agreeable to Reason, than that we ought to act principally
out of love to God; our obligations to him being beyond all expression and
conception great. Any man may see this, that has not lost all sense of
Gratitude; which Principle how any should quite extirpate out of their souls, I
cannot understand; it being, I think, not much less deeply rooted there, than
that of self-love; and observable in Brutes as well as men.


Philal. But yet I conceive that to act out of love to God, and out of love to
Goodness, are much the same.


Theoph. Materially they are; Goodness being the very nature of God. But it is
certain that nothing argues a man to be so like to God, as does doing
virtuously from this principle of love to Goodness.


Philal. Nor do the holy Scriptures seem to me, to make any nice distinction
between designing the enjoyment of God as our supreme happiness, and making his
glory our last End.


Theoph. No, surely, they do not; and I wish that no good people were more
Critical in so doing, than the Scriptures are; by this means would many free
themselves from a great deal of needless trouble they are apt to cast themselves
down with.


Philal. I have sometimes wondered greatly, how Heathens should come by such
excellent notions, in matters of Religion; but I should now be tempted to
account it matter of Admiration, should they all have been ignorant of them.


Theoph. Truly, Philalethes, I do really think, that it is so far from being
difficult to conceive, how those that never law the Bible should have such
conceptions; that it would be rather so, how those of them that, through the
goodness of God, were emerged out of those gross notions of the Deity, into
which the generality of Mankind were sunk, and that made use of their
intellectuals, and were considerative, should not have them.


Philal. XXXII. Those vindicated from making the Gospel but little better than
a mere natural Religion, that assert that Reason alone is able to prompt to us
most of the duties therein enjoined.
But does not what has been said tend to disparage the Gospel, and make it the
very same, excepting in two or three precepts, with a mere Natural Religion?


Theoph. I would rather impose an eternal silence upon my tongue, and pluck it
out by the roots too, than once utter a syllable to such a mischievous purpose
But I am so far from being conscious to my self that what has been said does
tend to the debasing of the Christian Religion, that, I know, it highly
conduces to its commendation.

But whereas you asked, whether to assert that there are scarcely any duties
therein enjoined, but what men's Reason alone, were it well consulted* might
suggest so to be, be not to make it a mere Natural Religion: To that I answer,
that you did not consider, that the Gospel is not made up altogether of agenda,
or things to be done; whereas these, you know, are but a part of it: There are,
besides, relations of matters of fact, and many things to be known, and points
of mere belief, which yet have an influence upon practice too: There are
abundance of Promises as well as Precepts; and stupendous expressions of Gods
love to Mankind therein declared; all which we are beholden to Revelation
alone for the knowledge of. But, in short, I assert these two things concerning
the Gospel, which do highly tend to the magnifying of it infinitely above any
Religion that was ever embraced by the sons of men.

First, XXXIII. Wherein the Gospel excelieth all other Religions.
That it contains all those excellent Precepts, that are scattered here and
there very thinly among much Trash and Rubbish in other Books, some in one, and
some in another; and moreover, that there is found therein whatsoever may be
discovered by Reason to be becoming and worthy of Mankind; which are all there
expressed, one where or other, in a most plain and intelligible manner. And
were there no more in the Gospel than this, we should be infinitely obliged to
God for it: in that, what the Heathens took pains for, and by the exercise of
their discursive faculty were, or might have been acquainted with; we have laid
before our eyes, and the knowledge thereof need cost us no more pains, than
Reading the Scriptures will put us to. Lest we should either be too slothful to
acquire the knowledge of our whole duty, by drawing inferences from premises,
and gathering one thing from another; or any of us too weak headed to do this
successfully; God has out of his abundant kindness, assured us thereof from
his own mouth; which we have all great cause to esteem, as a most exceedingly
great Privilege. But this is but little in comparison of what is next to be
said.

Secondly, The Gospel gives far greater helps to the performance of our duty;
and enforces its precepts with infinitely stronger, and more persuasive
Motives and Arguments, than were ever before made known. Such as the
unconceivable love of God in giving his only begotten Son to take the humane
nature, and to be an Expiatory Sacrifice for Lost Sinners; his excellent
Example here among us; his declarations of Free pardon to the vilest of Sinners
upon their Repentance, and Faith in his Gospel. His proffers of grace to assist
us in well-doing, and his readiness to work in us by his Spirit an inward
living principle of holiness, if we will not resist and quench it; his promises
of the most transcendently-glorious reward in the life to come, to sincere
Believers, and threatenings of the most dismal punishment to those that shall
persist in impenitence and unbelief, etc.


Philal. You need say no more, than you have done, to make the Christian a most
incomparable Religion: but did you not say too much under the former Head, in
affirming that therein is contained our whole duty, so as that we need do no
more than read the Gospel, to come to the knowledge of it? For there are very
many Moral cases, wherein men are forced to use their Reason to the utmost, and
also to call in the assistance of other men's, for the understanding of their
duty in them.


Theoph. Surely, Philalethes, you could not think me so extremely weak, as to
mean by what I said, that the Scriptures descend minutely to determine all
possible cases in particular; for this cannot be done in Books; they being
infinite, and varying with men's innumerable circumstances. But this was my
meaning, that the particular duties men are constantly obliged to, are all
plainly there reveled, and in the most express terms: And I add, that there
are also general Rules laid down, whereby all emergent cases may be determined,
and such as ordinarily occur, at least, for the most part, with the greatest
ease.

But to go on: XXXIV. To say that what the Gospel requires is most suitable to
Reason, is highly to commend it, etc.
To say that there is nothing required but what is most suitable to our Rational
faculties, tends as much to magnify Gods goodness to us, and to commend the
Gospel, as any thing that can be said: And should it consist much, of perfectly
new Precepts, which the world could never before so much as once have dreamt
of, or of any thing like to them; and the reasonableness of which could not be
at all, or not without great difficulty apprehended, it would be exceedingly
less easy to believe it to be a Religion sent from God, than now it is. This
also makes it a Religion as easy to be practiced by Mankind as can be: for
all the Duties, wherein consists the substance of it, must have continued to
oblige us, whether they were therein expressed or no. From what has been said,
it is most manifest, that while we continue to be men, they cannot cease to be
our duty: and therefore whatsoever other precepts the Gospel might have
consisted of, they would have been an addition to our Burden. And we may be
hereby convinced that Gods design in giving us the Gospel is purely our own
good, seeing the impositions, wherein (as I said) consists the substance of it,
are but just so many as obedience to which is absolutely necessary in themselves
considered, much more then to the qualifying of us for the full enjoyment of
himself in blessedness; and the rest are enjoined only as helps to enable us
to obey them.


Philal. XXXV. Of their preaching the Reasonableness of the points of mere
belief.
But do those Preachers content themselves to show that the duties of the Gospel
are very reasonable? I have been informed, that they rise higher in this
attempt, and that sometimes they undertake to demonstrate that the points of
mere belief, and even the most mysterious too, are so; and endeavor to level
them with men's shallow Capacities.


Theoph. This, Philalethes, is partly true, and partly as false: It is in a
sense true, that they have proved sometimes that all the points of mere belief
are reasonable; that is, consistent with Reason, so that we can have no
temptation to dis-believe any, XXXVI. All the points of mere belief to be
consistent with Reason, sometimes proved by them.
upon the account of their contrariety to the innate and natural notions of our
minds. They (some of them at least) endeavor to convince their Auditors, that
our Savior has not imposed upon our Faculties, in requiring our assent to
Contradictions; that he puts not his disciples, as his pretended Vicegerent
does his proselytes, upon offering violence to their understandings, in any
thing as a matter of Faith proposed by him.


Philal. This is no more, in my opinion, than is necessary for men to know: For
though our best Reason could never have proved to us diverse Gospel Truths, had
they not been reveled; yet they being reveled, there is nothing, surely, in
them, that rightly understood, sounds so harshly, but that our Reason may admit
of it, and close with it. But do they not (as I said I have heard) go about to
bring down all such points to men's capacities? XXXVII That they do not
endeavor to level all such points with men's capacities.



Theoph. That, be you assured, is a notorious Calumny; for they only say, that
the Doctrines of the Gospel are all such as we may be able to make sense of;
and that there is nothing in them that is opposite to our Reason. XXXviii That
they acknowledge incomprehensible Mysteries in the Christian Religion.
But they most freely acknowledge, that there are such Mysteries, as are so
sublime as much to exceed our apprehensions; and that can by no means be
comprehended by the most rational persons. And this acknowledgement, they have
well proved, is no disparagement to our Saviors Religion; but rather procures
to it the greater veneration: there being no wise man but will willingly
confess, that there are even in Nature innumerable things which he knows to be,
but yet is not able to imagine how they are; and that his very Senses do assure
him of many such things as no faculty of his can give him a satisfactory
account of.


Philal. I have often thought it to be very fit, that there should be some such
Points in our Religion, as are not comprehensible and adaequate objects of our
Understandings; that so, as we are to take occasion from the consideration of
those Doctrines that God has made facile, and adapted to our understandings,
to admire his gracious condescension; so from the consideration of those, which
we find surpass our reach, we may no less adore his wisdom. But, Theophilus,
do those Divines ever undertake to demonstrate the consistency of some
Mysterious points with our Reason, as they are by the Schoolmen, and other
over- subtle Gentlemen made out?


Theoph. No, I hope you think them wiser men than to adventure upon a Task so
desperate. They consider those Points as they are delivered in the Scriptures;
XXXIX. That they prove the consistency of such points with reason, as they are
delivered in Scripture only.
and not as dressed up with the Metaphysical Subtilties of Wanton Wits: who
have been so far from doing service to those Doctrines, that they have rendered
them much more doubtful to many inquisitive persons, and such as are not easily
imposed upon, by confident Sayings, and great Names.


Philal. But now it comes to my mind, XL. That they assert many speculative
points to be also suitable to the dictates of Reason.
I am confident I have been told by some of their good Friends, that they
assert more concerning the reasonableness of the Speculative Doctrines of
Christianity, than that they are only not inconsistent with Reason; but
moreover, that they are very suitable to its dictates.


Theoph. I thank you for helping my Memory in this, as well as in many other
particulars: your information is very true as to many of the weightiest Points;
XLI. An Argument drawn from notions of the Heathens to prove the most weighty
Points of Faith suitable to the dictates of Reason.
and there is no wise man but will assert the same. For it is well known that
the Heathens had a notion of them: Life and immortality are said to be brought
to light by the Gospel, i. e. to give Mankind full satisfaction in that
Article of Faith, is the sole prerogative of the Gospel; our Savior having
given a sensible demonstration of it, by his own Resurrection and Ascension; as
well as in the plainest terms preached it. Now you need not be told that
several of the Learned Heathens have by Arguments drawn from the nature of
humane souls made that Doctrine highly probable; and that even the more Brutish
sort of them had generally, if not universally a sense of a life to come. You
know also that the Doctrine of a day of Judgment they were no strangers to.
Justin Martyr truly tells the Greeks in his Oration to them, That not only the
Prophets, and other Divine persons of the Old Testament; but also those that
were accounted wise among the Heathens, both the Poets and Philosophers, did
acknowledge a judgment to come after death. And their Poets tell us of three
persons whose Office it is to judge men in the other world; viz. Minos,
Rhadamanthus, and Aeacus. And men's being adjudged to rewards and punishments in
the other, suitable to their actions in this world, was a Doctrine that
accompanied that other, and as generally received: Nor are you ignorant what
excellent Discourses diverse of the Philosophers have of the nature of true
happiness. The forementioned Justin says, That it seemed probable to him, that
Plato had entertained the doctrine of the Resurrection of the body: but I must
leave him there, because I find that he gives an insufficient reason for that
Conjecture.

Nay, even the Doctrine of the Trinity was, as to the substance of it, embraced
by the Pythagoraeans and Platonists.

Several other instances of this nature may be produced.

And there are other Particulars I might present you with, of notions the
Heathens had, resembling several other Doctrines reveled in the Gospel, which
are not less generally known than the forementioned. As they held a Doctrine
somewhat like that of the divine Conception of our Savior: for it was their
opinion that diverse of their eminent Benefactors were born of more than Humane
race, and that they were ex stirpe Deorum; and accordingly gave Divine honor
to them. Their sacrificing of men for the attoning of their Gods, showed that
they believed what is somewhat of kin to the Doctrine of Satisfaction; or
Christ's reconciling us to God, by offering himself up as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice. As Grotius, among others, has fully shown in his Book of
Satisfaction.

They had another opinion that bears resemblance to our Saviors
Mediatorship; for they held the intercession of Demons; of which Mr Mede has
discoursed in his Apostacy of the later times; and I find that Celsus calls
our Savior the Christians Demon.


Philal. By these instances it should seem that the Heathens did of their own
accords give credit to as strange Doctrines as any our Savior requires our
belief of; and that several of the strangest of them are so far from sounding
like uncouth and absurd ones, that they are rather gratifications of the
natural propensions of Mankind.


Theoph. That the Learned Dr. More has well observed in his Mystery of
Godliness. Though, no question, the Fathers did upon good grounds conclude that
the Heathens received many Notions from the Jews, and some from a more ancient
Tradition; and therefore we have no cause to judge that all the forementioned
were the products of their own reasoning, yet that makes not at all against the
assertion that occasioned these instances, but on the contrary clearly proves
it. For I did not say that many of the weightiest Points of mere belief may be
certainly concluded from principles of Reason; or that, without the help of
Revelation, men might have been acquainted with them; but that they are
suitable to the Reason of men's Minds, being reveled; and several of them very
taking too; which appears by the Heathens being so tenacious of some, and so
readily catching at others upon the first news of them.


Philal. I give you my heartiest thanks, Theophilus, for the full satisfaction
you have given me concerning those Friends of ours endeavors to persuade men
of the Reasonableness of Christianity. Which does much add to my esteem of
them; (though I know many are offended with them upon this account, and by way
of contempt call them The Rational Preachers) for this Subject is most
necessary to be handled in this our Age especially, wherein Atheism and
Irreligion are, to the grief of all good men, gotten into the Principles, as
well as Practices of very many. And I hope that I shall be better able for the
future to vindicate them, than I have been, when I hear them reproached for
bringing so much Reason into points of Faith. I must desire you now to proceed
to inform me of other things that are, in their Preaching, most worthy of
observation.


Theoph. I think it not amiss, XLII. Of their Style in Preaching.
Philalethes, to let you understand in the next place, that they affect not
B^mbaste words, trifling Strains of Wit, foolish Quibling, and making pretty
sport with Letters and Syllables in their Preaching; but despise those doings
as pedantick and unmanly. But on the contrary, they use a Style that is very
grave, and no less significant.


Philal. This, undoubtedly, must needs be best pleasing to the more
understanding part of our Congregations, and to all incomparably most
profitable: As much as that pretty toying is cried up by many, as a most rare
Accomplishment; and conciliates to the most dextrous in that Knack, the repute
of the Ablest Preachers; and makes them greatly plausible.


Theoph. But, certainly, it can do so among none, but very little-soul'd and
childish people; and such as whose judgment in Sermons, no wise man will make
any account of.

I will add also, XLIII. Of their making Doctrines intelligible.
that it is their endeavor to make the Doctrines of the Gospel as easy and
intelligible as well they may; wherein none have been more successful. They are
far from those men's untoward genius, XLIV. A sort of men that are obscurers of
the Gospel.
that delight to exercise their Wits, in finding out Mystical and Cabalistical
senses in the plainest parts of Scripture, and in turning every thing almost
into Allegories.


Philal. I am greatly apt to fear, that those men are far from being hearty
friends of our Savior, and his Religion; and that some, not daring openly to
decry the Gospel, take this course to undermine it, and to make a mere Trifle
of it.


Theoph. They give us great cause for such a suspicion.

Observe moreover, that those Preachers are no less averse to their temper,
XLV. Another sort of such.
who, most admiring that which they least understand, and thinking there is
very little in that, which is quickly intelligible; please themselves
exceedingly with making Mysteries of the easiest points of Faith; and such
Mysteries too, as they tell us, no man, though he be master of never so clear a
Reason, can have an insight into, without the special illumination of the Holy
Ghost. That, because the Apostle says, Great is the mystery of godliness,
would make every thing so that the Gospel has reveled; and that so high as was
now said: whereas in those words S. Paul means no more, than that diverse
Doctrines of the Gospel, such as he there enumerates, viz. God manifested in
the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. are so high and admirable, that we
cannot dive to the bottom of them, or fully comprehend them, nor could have so
much as once thought of them, had they not been from Heaven made known: but
that being reveled they are still to Reason unintelligible, and cannot be
sufficiently understood thereby; he has asserted no such thing. Now of these,
as well as of the former, those Preachers have, no less than any, discovered
the great weakness and vanity; and when they have occasion, make it plainly
appear, that those whose notions of diverse Articles of Faith are so expressed,
as that no man, that makes good use of his Reason, can tell what to make of
them, deserve nothing less than the Titles of Spiritual Preachers, and profound
Divines, as they are by many accounted; and that they, in stead of being so,
bewray very great ignorance of the Gospel.


Philal. And, without question, they do no small mischief, but render our
Religion, which you have shown is so highly reasonable* greatly suspected by
many of the warier sort of people.


Theoph. I remember that Erasmus complains of the times of the Nicene
Council, that it was then a matter of great Wit and Cunning to be a Christian.
And a matter it was most worthy to be complained of: XLVI. Of the perspicuity
of Scripture.
for evident it is, that our Savior never made it so. He has made
Christianity, so much, at least, as is necessary to carry men to heaven, so
plain, that an honest heart is a sufficient prerequisite to the understanding
of it.


Philal. It Is not to be doubted, but that he has delivered all those points
that are absolutely necessary to be rightly understood, in the plainest and
most intelligible manner: and so condescended to the weakest capacities, that
they cannot but apprehend his meaning in them, if it be not their own fault.


Theoph. I count that only those Doctrines, that contain the terms of Man's
Salvation, are of absolute necessity to be by all rightly understood; and that
all such are delivered with that perspicuity and clearness, that nothing but
men's shutting their eyes against the light can keep them from discerning their
true meaning.


Philal. S. Austin has a good saying to this purpose, in his Book of Christian
Doctrine, viz. That all those things that contain faith and manners of life,
are found among those Doctrines that are plainly laid down in Scripture.


Theoph. This is so true, that Celsus is brought in by Origin, in his Sixth
Book, finding great fault with the Scriptures upon the account of their
plainness, and great simplicity: To whom he returns this answer; That Jesus
and his Apostles made use of such a Style, as was best suited to the vulgar
sort; and that Plato and other of their Philosophers were greatly to blame, for
expressing themselves in so lofty a manner as they did; for that, by this
means, none could make use of them but Learned men. And I remember that, in his
seventh Book, he tells Celsus, that Plato and the other wise Greeks were like
to Physicians that took care of persons of the better rank, but neglected
ordinary Plebeians, and the meaner sort; whereas the Prophets, and Disciples of
Jesus, did no less carefully apply themselves to the good of simple, than of
wise people.


Philal. Surely Christ will never condemn men at the last day, for not
believing those things they could not by any means understand to be reveled:
and it is matter of admiration to me, that any should judge the Gospel to be
obscure in matters necessary; when the Apostle accounted it so sad a Judgment
not to understand it: for, says he, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them
that are lost.


Theoph. And in the words following he says, that those that understand it
not, have their eyes blinded by the God of this world. Isaiah, prophesying of
the Gospel, and expressing it by the Metaphor of a way, says that it is so
plain, that wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein. It Is true
indeed, it is so deep a Sea, as S. Hierome says, that the Elephant may swim
there: there is that, and much of that too, that puts the strongest Brains,
and most searching Wits, hard to it: but (as the same Father adds) it is so
shallow a brook also, that is, as to all things necessary to salvation, that
the Lamb may wade in it. So that all those, Philalethes, that affect to make
such Truths as subtle and mysterious as they can, do what lies in them to
cross and make ineffectual the design that our Savior and his Apostles had in
the delivery of them; and these, and all other Preachers that, like them, do
condemn such doings, do no less advance it. And I will add, that those that
affect to make any points as obscure as they can, whether they are necessary or
not, are too injurious to the Christian Religion.

And, XLVII. Their opinion of powerful Preaching.
by what has been said, I am likewise put in mind to tell you, that these
persons look upon no Preaching as truly powerful, but that which works upon
the affections by first conquering the judgment; and convinces men of their
duty by solid Reasons and Arguments, and excites them thereunto by persuasive
Motives: they esteeming that which affects people so, as they can give no
account why it should, to be so far from powerful, that it does not deserve to
be called Preaching. Now upon these accounts, as well as those forementioned,
do many inconsiderate people despise them, as men of dry Reason, and void of
Gods Spirit: as if to be a spiritual Preacher, were to be an irrational one;
and none were capable of divine illuminations, but such as have bid adieu to
the guidance of their intellectuals. Which is as much as to say, that we must
cease to be Men, and be metamorphos'd into Brutes, before we can hope to become
Christians.


Philal. What confused and gross thoughts have such people in the matters of
Religion! as not to be able to distinguish between that which is truly carnal
(which they talk so much against) and spiritual Reason; XLVIII. Of carnal and
spiritual Reason.
and not to understand that the former is that only which is governed by
fleshly and corrupt affections, and the later that which is submitted to, and
directed by our Saviors Gospel, and designeth nothing so much as promoting the
ends of it.


Theoph. There are a few things more, XLIX. A farther account of their
Preaching.
Philalethes, I would advertise you of, concerning the Preaching of these our
Friends; namely, that they are very careful so to handle the Doctrine of
Justifying Faith, as not only to make obedience to follow it, but likewise to
include a hearty willingness to submit to all Christ's precepts in the nature of
it. And to show the falsity and defectiveness of some descriptions of Faith,
that have had too general an entertainment, and still have. This they look upon
themselves as greatly obliged to do, as being well aware, of what dangerous
consequence some received notions of that grace are; and that not a few that
have imbibed them, have so well understood their true and natural inferences,
as to be thereby encouraged to let the Reins loose to all Ungodliness.

They also so state the Doctrine of imputed, as to show the absolute necessity
of inhaerent Righteousness, and that in a more intelligible way, and less
liable to misconstruction, than has ordinarily been heretofore done. As also
the Doctrine of Gods grace, so as to reconcile it with, and show the
indispensableness of men's endeavors: and (as the Apostle does) they make Gods
readiness to work in us to will, by his preventing grace, and to do, by his
assisting, a motive to work out our own salvation. And I have heard several of
them do this, in a more satisfactory and clear manner, than most, with whose
Preaching I have been acquainted: wherein, as in the foregoing instances, they
have done, in my opinion, very worthy service. But some hotheaded men, from
thence also, take occasion greatly to vilify them, and represent them as men
Popishly affected, and holding Justification by works: as persons utterly
unacquainted with the great Mystery of believing: as those that make void the
righteousness of Faith, by establishing Moral righteousness: and that set
themselves to cry up the power of Nature, and to persuade their Hearers, that
they are able to convert themselves, without being beholden to the divine grace.
In all which, it is easy to show that they have performed the parts of most
notorious Calumniators; and showed themselves, if not too malicious (which I
would not think) yet extremely weak.


Philal. You say that they are accused as men that make void the righteousness
of Faith, by establishing Moral righteousness: I am thereby put in mind, that
they have another Name given them besides the Long one, and that of Rational
Preachers; namely, Moral Preachers.


Theoph. Then have you heard them so called?


Philal. Yes, of late frequently.


Theoph. And do you think that an opprobrious name, Philalethes?


Philal. No, I assure you, not I; but I perceive they do that use it.


Theoph. I ever esteemed Morality as that which no ture Christian can have a
slight opinion of; and therefore thought it could never be judged a Crime to
preach it. L. Of their being accused of preaching up only a Moral
righteousness.



Philal. But by Moral Preachers they mean such as are merely so.


Theoph. If by Moral righteousness they understand a barely external conformity
to, or customary observance of the laws of Righteousness, they most shamefully
belie these Divines, in saying that they preach no other Righteousness: LI. In
what sense they do not so, and in what sense they do.
but if they mean thereby, the whole duty of man, to God, his Neighbor, and
Himself; which these Preachers insist upon, as much as any whatsoever, by the
names of true holiness, the divine life of virtue, the righteousness which is
of God by faith in Christ Jesus; which he taught in his own person, and by his
Apostles, and, upon our using the means, works in us by his Spirit; or inward
rectitude and integrity; and doing all the good we can from the best and most
divine principles; or, (as one of them expresses it) that divine and heavenly
life whose root is faith in God and our Savior Christ; and the branches or
parts of it are humility, purity, and charity: I say, if they upon the account
of their preaching up such a Righteousness alone as this, call them in contempt
Moral Preachers, they expose only themselves to contempt by so doing.


Philal. Those men will tell you, that Evangelical righteousness is as well to
be insisted on as Moral, nay and more than Moral too, by persons that would be
accounted Gospel-Preachers.


Theoph. Truly, LII. No difference betwixt Evangelical righteousness and that
which is in the best sense Moral.
Philalethes, I am so very dull, as not to be able to make any distinction
between these two, as I have now described the later righteousness; but think
Evangelical to be such a Moral righteousness, and such a Moral Evangelical.


Philal. But you know, that they make a difference between them.


Theoph. It is strange they should; understanding Moral righteousness for that
which consists in the Regulation of both the outward and inward man,
according to the unchangeable Laws of righteousness; (which I must confess may
be properly called Moral righteousness, and is so in the most proper sense too)
for I am as certain, as that the Gospel is true, that its only ultimate
design upon us, is to work in us that Righteousness. Let any man but consider
the Precepts of it, LIII. To work in us such a Moral righteousness the design
of the Gospel.
and he shall find, I Will warrant him, that they are all designed (either
mediately or immediately) to make men in that sense morally righteous. And I
fear not to say, that I am verily persuaded, that if this were not the end of
the Christian Religion, it would not be worthy of the Son of God. Let any one
read our Saviors Sermon upon the Mount, and then tell me whether he does not
think, that if he were now upon the earth, these men would not call him a Moral
preacher. He must have a strangely piercing eye of his own, that can therein
discern any other, than such Moral discourses. What does the Apostle S. Paul
tell us, the grace of God that brings salvation teaches us? is it not, that
denying ungodliness, and all worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously
and godlily? And if these Gentlemen suppose, that living godlily implies
something that is not so Moral, (for I know they will not say so concerning
living soberly and righteously) they will find themselves very hard put to it
to make it out. For all Godliness, our Savior (as has been said) refers to
the love of God; and it would be strange if that should not be a Moral virtue.
What did S. Peter mean, when (speaking of our Savior) he says, that his own
self bare our sins in his own body, on the tree; that we, being dead to sin,
might live to righteousness? What righteousness should that be, which he does
there oppose to sin, if not such a one as is in the number of Morals? And yet
the Apostle tells us, that our living to this was the design of the death of
Christ. This also is the end of the promises, as well as precepts of the
Gospel; as the same S. Peter assures us. He has given us, says he, exceeding
great and precious promises; for what end? is it that we should be swollen with
high conceits of Gods special love to us, and of our being the favorites and
darlings of heaven? Nothing less: but it follows, that by these we might be
partakers of the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust. And what do those men think it is to escape the corruption
of the world, if not, to be truly virtuous, and, in the best sense, morally
righteous? Nay, what can they imagine it is to partake of the divine, or a
divine nature, if not this? Can any thing be understood thereby, but
participating of the divine moral perfections, such as Justice, Mercy, Purity?
I hope they will not say that an imitation of God in power, knowledge, and his
other Physical perfections is there intended. This St. Paul also (as much as
those people count him their great friend, and quote him more than any other
Apostle) makes to be the design of the Promises. Having these promises (says
he) dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, (all sensuality, malice and pride) perfecting holiness in the fear of
the Lord. Nay, I may add, that there is not a Doctrine, (as merely Speculative
as diverse may seem to be at first sight) but it has a tendencie to the
promoting of this Moral righteousness: but that will be too long a task to
perform now. And, indeed, I may spare my pains to do this at any other time;
for it will not be long, before the world will see a Discourse upon this
Subject from a very worthy person, if God spare him life and health. But enough
of this: I am ashamed to add more in so plain a case; and think, indeed, that
I have said too much.


Philal. What you have said is as clear as the Sun at noonday: LIVE. A
righteousness in no sense Moral a contradiction.
and for my part I must confess, that I know no Righteousness, that deserves
that name, but what is, in your sense, truly moral. And a righteousness in no
sense so, seems to my understanding a most perfect Contradiction. And therefore
I much wonder what should incline those people to inveigh against preaching up
altogether such a righteousness as this is. They must therefore mean, surely,
something else by it, than such a one as you have described. Do they not (think
you) mean, however they express themselves, a perfect unsinning righteousness;
or the other extreme, a mere partial and external one?


Theoph. I had a thousand times rather charge them with an error of
Understanding only, than of Will; and therefore I should be loath to think
that they mean either of those, because I cannot then excuse them from the
guilt of notorious lying; for they have not the least shadow of pretense for
accusing those Preachers of at all preaching up the former righteousness; which
they as little doubt as any, that no man in this lapsed state can attain to;
and as to the later, none more frequently show the defectiveness and
insufficiency of it. But I perceive that I am acquainted with those men's
Principles better than you are; and therefore can, I presume, tell you, why
they are so angry with those that understand the Gospel better than themselves,
for preaching up only this truly moral or real righteousness: namely, because
they hear no talks from their Pulpits of an Imputative righteousness.


Philal. You startle me now, Theophilus; I pray do those Preachers deny Imputed
righteousness? I thought them as Orthodox in that, LV. Of imputative
righteousness; and in what sense they believe and preach it.
as in any other point.


Theoph. They don't use the phrase, at least not often; and anon I will tell
you why; but they believe the thing, and preach it too, in that sense, that I
dare say you do.


Philal. In what sense?

Theoph. Do you not remember, that I told you a while since, that they so
handle the doctrine of imputed, as to show the necessity of inhaerent
righteousness?


Philal. Yes very well.


Theoph. This, LVI. Their notion of Christ's imputed righteousness.
then, is their notion of Christ's Imputed righteousness: That those which are
sincerely righteous, and from an inward living principle allow themselves in no
known sin, nor in the neglect of any known duty, which is to be truly
Evangelically righteous, shall be dealt with and rewarded, in and through
Christ, as if they were perfectly, and in a strict Legal sense so.


Philal. I my self would have given no other account of Imputed righteousness.


Theoph. You see, I had a good guess of you: for I presumed that such a man, as
I take you to be, could entertain no other notion of it; for I am confident
that this is the only true one.


Philal. But are there any that will not be satisfied with this account? I must
confess, it is so long since that I read any thing of the Quarrelsom men's
Divinity, that I have forgotten both in this, and some other particulars, what
they say.


Theoph. But have you not had occasion of late to discourse with any of them?


Philal. No, not about matters of Religion.


Theoph. If you had, I believe you would not have asked me, whether there are
any, that have any other notion of imputed righteousness, than that which you
now heard.


Philal. Inform me, I pray, what is their opinion of it.


Theoph. That I will do truly; and it is this: LVII. A false notion of it.
That Christ's righteousness or inherent holiness is as completely made theirs,
as if they themselves were completely and perfectly righteous: and that upon no
other condition or qualification wrought in them, but only believing; whereby
too many of them mean strongly fancying this righteousness to be theirs.


Philal. I do now remember that I have read such doctrine as this in my younger
days: but I need no argument to convince me that it is grossly false. For there
are these two palpable mistakes in it.

First, LVIII. The first Mistake in that notion.
That Christ's righteousness is properly made ours. I am confident, that there
is no Scripture that tells us so. All that we find asserted in the Gospel, as
to this matter, is this; That real benefits and advantages, which are likewise
exceedingly great and excellent, do by the righteousness of Christ accrue to
us; and those no less great and excellent, than if that righteousness were in
the most proper sense ours.

Secondly, LIX. The second Mistake.
The other Mistake is, that this righteousness is made ours, upon no other
terms, than that of believing it is so. This is not only a false, but also a
most dangerous opinion.


Theoph. You have not, I suppose, forgotten that I informed you that those they
call the Moral Preachers are careful to show the falsity and defectiveness of
some Definitions of Faith, of dangerous consequence; and this is one of the
false ones; namely, that It is a taking hold of Christ's righteousness; or a
believing that it is made over to us. LX. A false definition of faith they
confute in their Preaching.
Which is the same, as I said, with Strongly fancying it to be ours.


Philal. You said that they are despised, as men unacquainted with the great
Mystery of believing; this is a mysterious Faith indeed.


Theoph. It is so; for I count nothing so mysterious, and hard to be
understood, as the thing called Nonsense; which I am sure this Definition is,
according to their sense of it, that will not admit of any other, but one
worded after that manner: for they understand Christ's righteousness, in the
most proper sense, and not for the advantages redounding to believers by it. I
speak of those that are truly Antinomians.


Phil. But why do not those friends of ours use at all, or but seldom, the
phrase Imputed righteousness?


Theoph. What need they, so long as they preach the Doctrine? I mean, all that
is true of it. But to say the truth, those men's very untoward notion, has so
leavened the heads of the Vulgar, that they can scarcely hear of Christ's
imputed righteousness, but they are ready to make an ill use of it, by taking
from thence an occasion to entertain low and disparaging thoughts of an inward
real righteousness. I have too good reason to suspect this. So that, to deal
freely with you, I think it would be well if it were never used, except when
there is an opportunity of also explaining it.


Philal. What you say is considerable; but is it not a Scripture Phrase? And I
have heard you say, that you could wish that points of Faith were used to be
expressed, as they are in Scripture.


Theoph. It would ordinarily be to very good purpose if they were; and
therefore these Divines preaching the Doctrine of Remission of sins through the
blood of Christ, do preach all that is true of the Doctrine of Christ's imputed
righteousness, in Scripture Language. For, as a Learned Divine says, Preface
to The mystery of Godliness, p. 27.
If you prescind it from remission of sins through the sacrifice of Christ on
the Cross, this phrase of Imputative righteousness has no signification at
all; and that therefore there is no damage done to our Religion, if it be not
accounted a distinct Article from the remission of sins in the blood of Christ.
For it cannot afford any true and useful sense distinct therefrom; nay I may
say, any that is not very mischievous and dangerous, and such as tends to that
loathsome and pestilential error of Antinomianism. Thus far he. But take
notice moreover, that this expression, Christ's imputed righteousness, or the
imputation of Christ's righteousness, is not to be found in all the Bible. Nor
in any of the places where we find the word imputed relating to righteousness,
is the righteousness of Christ at all to be understood; LXI. Christ's imputed
righteousness no Scripturephrase.
but only an effectual Faith which is the very same with inherent
righteousness, which, as I said, is that Moral righteousness only, that those
Preachers may be justly charged with altogether insisting upon.


Phil. I wish we had time, before we go farther, to consider those places.


Theoph. There are but two Chapters in all the New Testament, where we find
the word imputed mentioned as relating to righteousness. One is the Fourth to
the Romans, and the other the Second of S. James. LXII. Some verses in the
fourth to the Romans considered.
In the Fourth to the Romans we have it four or five times; and it is most
evident, that there still it is to be interpreted as I said. For the Apostles
defigne in that Chapter is to prove against the Jews, that the observance of
the Mosaical Rites, whereof Circumcision was the chief, is not necessary to
men's justification or acceptance with God; and this he proves by the instance
of Abraham, who was accepted, and also very high in the divine favor, even
while he was in Uncircumcision. Now in several verses, his Faith (which we know
was not idle, but very operative) is said to be imputed unto him for
righteousness in his uncircumcised estate; i. e. it was of the same account
with God, (...), it was reckoned, (as in two verses it is there translated) or
it was valued by God, at as high a rate, as if it were complete righteousness.
And in like manner the Apostle assures the Romans two or three several times,
that all that believe in Christ, (whereby we are to understand such a Faith as
Abraham's was) their Faith shall also be imputed for righteousness to them,
(without the addition of the works of the Law) as his was to him.

And then we have the phrase again, James 2. 23. LXIII. S. James 2. 23.
considered.
But there is only a repetition of the same that S. Paul had said concerning
Abraham, viz. that he believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness; which is a quotation out of Genesis 15. 6. Now this place of S.
James will farther explicate that of S. Paul. S. James says, verse. 21. that
Abraham was justified by works, that is, (as appears by the next verse) an
obediential Faith, or Faith expressing and exerting it self by good works. And
then it follows, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Nothing can be plainer, than that this is the Apostle's meaning:
This working faith of Abraham, was accounted or accepted by God for
righteousness. For as it was the design of S. Paul, in the forementioned
Chapter, to prove against the Jews, or Judaizing Christians, that Justification
was to be had without the mere external works of the Mosaical dispensation; and
that these could have no influence into it: so is it S. James's, in this
Chapter, to prove, it is like against the Gnostics, who were Ranting
Antinomians, the absolute necessity of new obedience, in order to men's being
received into Gods favor; and that justifying faith must be productive of good
works. Now as S. Paul proved what he designed, by showing that Abraham was
justified by faith without the works of the Law; so S. James proves his
design by showing, that the faith Abraham was justified by was such as
discovered it self by obedience to Gods commands; and instanceth in the highest
act of obedience too, viz. his offering Isaac upon the Altar.


Philal. All this is as clear as can be. But, Theophilus, is that place of S.
Paul, Philippians 3. 9. to be understood of inherent righteousness? where he
says, LXIV. Philippians 3. 9. considered.
that he chiefly desires to be found in Christ, not having his own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith.


Theoph. There can be no other there intended by this later righteousness. For
we learn by the preceding verses, that by his own righteousness which is of the
Law, he meant that which consisted in the observance of the Jewish Law; which
he calls his own, as being that which before his conversion he gloried in, or
rather, as being that which he could obtain by his own natural power, it
consisting of merely external performances. And it is as evident by the verse
following, that by the righteousness which is of God by faith, which he
opposes to his own, and that which is of the Law, he means the righteousness
of the new creature, wrought in him by Gods holy Spirit; and is an effect or
fruit of believing Christ's Gospel: For see how he goes on: That I may know him,
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being
made conformable unto his death. i. e. That I may experimentally know him, and
the power of his resurrection, in raising me up to newness of life; and of his
death, in killing and mortifying all my corrupt affections.

Well, Philalethes, considering what has been said, is it not matter of
wonder, that any but arrant Hypocrites should desire to have more told them,
than that God is so pleased with the Active and Passive obedience of his Son
Jesus, as that for his sake he will reward those, that accept of him for their
Lord and Savior, though they are very weak and imperfect, as if they were
altogether spotless and sinless persons? And is it not every jot as high a
favor, LXV. As high a favor to be dealt with as if we were perfectly
righteous as to be so esteemed.
and as great an expression of the Divine grace, to be dealt with as if we were
perfectly righteous, as to be so judged and esteemed?


Philal. I should think him as blind as a Beetle that does not see it is. But
though I said, the Antinomian notion of imputed righteousness is of dangerous
consequence; yet now I remember me, the defenders thereof have a way to evade
it; for they say, that though a real inward righteousness is no qualification
required to this imputation of Christ's righteousness, and so to our
justification; yet it will follow of it self, by way of gratitude, and
therefore will be found in men, before their Salvation.


Theoph. I will answer you to this, in the words of an excellent Doctor: Dr.
Cudworth in his Sermon* preached at Lincolns Inn.
This is like to prove but a slippery hold, when it is believed that gratitude
it self, as well as all other graces, is in them already by imputation. What
Reply they can make hereunto, I am not able to imagine.


Philal. I am not like to help you. To say the truth, it is a most sottish and
mischievous Doctrine; and must needs do a world of hurt among people that are
glad of any pretense for their carnality and disobedience.


Theoph. I know too many that make use of it to patronize their ungodly
practices; and no question, it is the grand support of most, if not of all
hypocrites. A very worthy person, preaching some time since, upon the words of
Zacheus, the necessity of Restitution, where there is ability, in case of
fraud; one of his Auditors was heard to say, as he was going out of the Church,
If the Doctrine now taught us be true, how are we beholden to Jesus Christ? And
multitudes, I fear, of our merely imputatively-righteous men think what that
Gentleman had the face to speak.


Philal. You may well fear it; LXVI. The dangerous consequence of the
Antinomian doctrine about imputed righteousness.
for there is no consequence more natural from any Doctrine, than is this from
those men's, viz. That real righteousness, or inherent holiness, is a needless
thing in order to eternal happiness.


Theoph. The light at noonday is not clearer, than is that inference: for if a
person may have in his unregenerate or sinful state Christ's righteousness made
his, and so be esteemed by God as perfectly righteous; what should hinder but
that in the same state, he may be admitted to enjoy the reward of a righteous
man? If an ungodly man may be justified, and declared righteous, why may he not
also be saved and made happy?


Philal. But they will tell you, that it is expressly asserted by S. Paul, That
God justifies the ungodly.


Theoph. I cannot conceive why it may not be admitted, Romans 4. 5.
that the word that signifies to justify, is in diverse places to be
understood for making really just, or sanctifying: for because it is sometimes
to be taken in a forensick sense, it does not therefore follow that it must
always be so. But I will willingly grant, that it is to be so understood here,
if that by the ungodly may be meant those that were once so; that is, before,
not at the same time when they were justified. For to say that God can
pronounce a person just and righteous, that is unjust and unrighteous, is the
greatest contradiction imaginable to his own justice, his own righteousness.
This makes him to pronounce a perfectly false sentence, and to do that which
Prove. 17. 5. he himself had declared an abomination. Nor can we entertain a
more unworthy thought of the Holy God, than to conceive, that he has no
greater antipathy against sin, than to make him, that allows and lives in
it, an object of his complacential love.


Philal. But, Theophilus, to say the truth, I have observed that those men make
such a thing of sin, as that it may become God well enough to reconcile himself
thereunto, as well as to him that lives in it. LXVII. The Antinomians opion of
sin.
For they make it a mere indifferent thing in it self, and to depend only upon
arbitrary laws, the evil of which is founded upon the alone will of God; as you
gave me an intimation at our entrance on this Discourse. Which account of sin
does plainly, as you said, undermine all Religion; and therefore the Antinomian
opinion of imputed righteousness, as absurd, and of as wretched consequence as
it is, may, if that be so, very well be true.


Theoph. It may with as great show of reason be questioned whether God be
essentially good, as whether sin be intrinsecally evil: And I admire, what
those men have done to themselves to enable them once to doubt the later, more
than the former.


Philal. I hope they will call it Blasphemy to deny Gods essential goodness;
yet in acknowledging no virtue or vice independent upon all will, they dwindle
it away to a perfect nothing.


Theoph. I have not a more undoubted assurance of mine own being, than of the
truth of what you say. Well, Philalethes, those whose stomachs can digest such
filthy stuff, (and such as I can show you even Heathens did nauseate) need not
stick at swallowing the Phancie of imputed righteousness in that gross sense,
as absurd and dangerous as it is: but we that know how contrary sin is to the
Nature, as well as the Will of God, cannot question, that no man that is in
love with it can, by virtue of another Righteousness, be esteemed or dealt
with by God as righteous.


Philal. When I can once see a diseased or lame man made well and sound, by
another imputed health and soundness, I may imagine a wicked man made
righteous, by the imputation of another righteousness; but before I cannot; as
well knowing that wickedness is as really a moral, as sickness or lameness is a
natural evil.


Theoph. If you don't fancy it till then, to be sure you never will.


Philal. They are both alike contradictions. But, I pray, Theophilus, now I
think on it, how can those that hug, and are so fond of this ill-favored
notion, have any opinion of Christ's Expiatory Sacrifice for the forgiveness of
sins; for how can there be any sin to be pardoned, where a perfect and most
complete righteousness is imputed?


Theoph. That question is put by the last mentioned Doctor; but I believe he
will wait long enough for a satisfactory answer to it.


Philal. Is it possible, think you, that there should be any good men of this
Persuasion?


Theoph. As apt as I am to censure and condemn some doctrines, LXVIII.
Theophilus his charity for some Antinomians.
I would be as backward to pass sentence on the persons of those that hold
them. And I must tell you, I verily hope that there are pious men of that
opinion we are now perstringing; but know too, that those of them that are so,
are so weak as not to understand the true consequences of their Doctrine; and
so honest, as, at first hearing, to abhor them: And were led to like well of
it, not out of a design to gratify any base lust; but because it seemed to
them, to have a show of humility and self-denial, and to advance Gods grace.


Philal. As charitable as you are toward them, I fear that they (if not those
also that are too near of kin to them) had they heard your past discourse,
would pronounce you an Heretic.


Theoph. And what if they should? I should pity them as weak, but not condemn
them as wicked for so doing. The excellent Melancthon was called a worse name
by Luther; and the worst hurt I wish them is, that I could upon as good grounds
return that answer to them, that he did to him: which was to this effect;
Though Luther calls me Devil, yet I will call Luther a most pious servant of
Jesus Christ. Besides, we need not nowadays look upon our selves as having any
great injury done to us by being called Heretics; that name being grown (as
you know who speaks) a mere Theological Scarecrow: and moreover, there is no
man but is so reputed, if not so called, by some or other. But yet, mistake me
not so, as if I thought that to be really a Heretic, and in a Scripture-sence,
were a trivial and light matter: for I am far from so thinking; being well
aware, that the Apostle reckons Heresies with Adulteries, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcrafts, Hatred, Seditions, and other fruits of the flesh, which
will undoubtedly exclude men out of Gods kingdom.


Philal. You intimated that there is more than one definition of Justifying
Faith, LXIX. A defective definition of Faith, that those Divines preach
against, and the ill consequence of it.
which those they call the Moral Preachers concern themselves to bring their
Hearers out of conceit with.


Theoph. There is another, that they judge as defective, as that we have given
our sense of is false; which is this: That it is a recumbence or resting on
Christ for salvation. There are those which I cannot but think are very good
men, that will by no means endure that any more should be admitted into its
definition. Now these men, I acknowledge, make inherent holiness otherwise
necessary, than as that which must needs follow, by way of gratitude, upon a
sense of their being in a justified state: for they make it, a necessary
qualification to Salvation, though not to Justification. But herein they also
fall into the Antinomian Error; that they, or at least their doctrine
supposes a man capable of Gods favor so far as to have his sins pardoned,
before he is purged from them, I mean freed from their reigning power.


Philal. These differ from the other men, as I suppose, in this also, That they
do not make Justification to be from Eternity, as they do.


Theoph. You say well; they do not approve of that mad Phancie, but make
Justification to follow upon Believing: but then, that Believing they judge
necessary to Justification, they make such a scanty thing as I now said; and
will not hear of making receiving Christ as Lord, or being willing to obey his
precepts, a prerequisite to the obtaining of that privilege. And so their
doctrine is too plainly liable to the ill consequences of the other men's.


Philal. Do they not only say, that good works are not necessary to
Justification?


Theoph. No, that I am sure they do not: for, as I told you, they will not
admit so much as a willingness to perform them into the definition of
Justifying faith: And besides, they assert that good works are not always
necessary to Salvation it self neither; as when a person is converted at the
point of death. Wherein they say truly, if any are; which can be known to none
but God only. But then observe moreover, that these persons will not have
their Faith a condition of Justification, but an instrument.


Philal. But why are they so shie of that phrase, and so fond of this?


Theoph. Their pretense is, that to make any condition of Justification, is to
derogate from the freeness of Gods grace therein. But to that we shall have
occasion to speak anon.


Philal. Our Salvation, as well as Justification, is ascribed to Gods grace;
but sure they will grant that that has conditions.


Theoph. Conditions must take from the freeness of the one, as well as of the
other; but therefore, they being aware of it, will not call what is necessary
to Salvation proper conditions, but rather qualifications; men having, they
say, no hand in them, but are the mere effects of the Holy Ghost.


Philal. Will they not grant then, that the Covenant of Grace is conditional?
if it be not, it is, sure enough, no Covenant: for I understand not what a
Covenant means, and how it is distinguishable from a mere or absolute promise,
if it be not conditional.


Theoph. No more can any mortal. Therefore they talk strangely in the clouds as
to this matter; so that I confess, I can by no means understand them; I wish
they understand themselves. For because there are so many promises in the Gospel
that run as conditionally as words can express them they are shie of saying,
with the Antinomians, that the Covenant of Grace is not conditional; but then
they tell us that all the privileges therein contained shall be absolutely
bestowed on those that they are promised to; and so, in my weak judgment, they
plainly deny all conditionality therein notwithstanding. And they think
themselves warranted thus to express themselves, by Jeremiah 31. 33. and the
quotation of that place, Hebrews 8. 10. But to these places we will speak anon.


Philal. Well, I perceive, these also are obscurers of plain, and I had almost
said too, spoilers of good Divinity, as well as the other men: for the
consequences of their Doctrine, will, I fear, be found to have too untoward an
influence upon the practice of too many that understand them; though they do
not show themselves quite so soon, as those that follow from the former Doctrine.


Theoph. I wish they could as easily discern Consequences, as I see you do: for
my charity leads me to believe that very many of them have so much unkindness
for them; as that they would then for their sakes bid adieu to the beloved
premises. But, Philalethes, there are other more moderate and wise persons,
and many of them men of excellent worth, who being sensible how greatly
Protestants have exposed themselves to the Papists lash, LXX. A full definition
of Faith ill applied to the business of justifying.
by that doctrine make receiving of Christ as both Lord and Savior to be
justifying Faith. (Which I acknowledge to be a very true and full definition.)
But yet they say, that though this alone is the Faith that justifies, yet as
it justifies, it receives Christ as Savior only; or consists in relying on
his merits.


Philal. But is not this marveilous subtle?


Theoph. Truly it seems so to me; and I believe, at least, to all vulgar
capacities.


Philal. But why will they not admit, that receiving Christ qua Lord, as well
as qua Savior, justifies?


Theoph. Because they say Justification is often denied to works, and only
ascribed to faith. But they apprehend not a difference between these two,
otherwise than by making faith, relying on Christ's merits; and works, yielding
obedience to his precepts. But, therefore, that they may reconcile
Justification by Faith alone, with taking obedience (or a willingness to obey)
into justifying Faith, (which they are convinced they must do, or they shall
make mad work on it) that is, that they may make S. James not to contradict S.
Paul, they say that justifying Faith must be a working obediential Faith; yet
as it justifies must be considered as distinct from obedience. But because it
is replied, that to rely upon Christ's merits, is an act of obedience, or a
work; they answer, that though it be, yet it does not justify as it is a work;
and therefore with the other men, they will not have it called a condition of
Justification, but the instrument.


Philal. But don't you think that this elaborate acuteness might be well
spared, by understanding works when they are undervalued comparatively to grace
and faith, as quite distinct things from sincere obedience to the Gospel of
Christ?


Theoph. I am verily persuaded it may; and that the way, in which those that
are called the Moral Preachers go, as to this point, will be made as clear as
our hearts can wish, by so understanding them.


Philal. I desire you to give me as full an account, as briefly you can, how
they deliver this doctrine of Faith, in reference to Justification.


Theoph. Justifying Faith (because they would express themselves as plainly as
may be, in a matter of most weighty importance) they describe much after this
manner: That It is so full a persuasion, LXXI. A full and plain definition of
Faith used by those Preachers.
that Christ Jesus is the Savior of Mankind, and that his Gospel is true, as
causes a hearty and sincere willingness to yield obedience to all his
precepts; or to take that course, which he has prescribed in order to
Salvation.


Philal. This is plain enough: And I should think, not capable of being
misunderstood.


Theoph. Though I cannot say that I speak the words of any of them; yet sure I
am, that those I have heard them use, in defining justifying faith, are as
easily intelligible as these are, and have the same sense.


Philal. I have heard you heretofore say, that when you were a youth, you was
taught this definition, viz. Justifying faith is a grace of the holy Spirit,
whereby a man, being convinced of his sin, and miserable estate in regard of
it, and an all-sufficiencie in Christ to save from both, receives him as he is
tendered in the Gospel, or according to his three Offices of Prophet, Priest,
and King. What fault can be found with the wording of this?


Theoph. None at all; not is a better definition of Faith desirable: I was
taught this, when other kind of definitions of that grace were all the Mode,
by a most judicious, as well as pious Divine: (I cannot forbear to call him so,
though he is of all men most nearly related to me) and to him I shall ever
acknowledge my self obliged, for first rightly instructing me in this point,
and antidoting me against the forementioned false notions concerning it, with
diverse others that were highly by very many cried up in those, as well as in
these wild days.


Philal. You are not less beholden to that Reverend and worthy person, upon
those accounts, than you are for your very being. But, I pray, LXXII. Of that
Doctrine of those Preachers, that Faith justifies as it implies obedience.
do the Preachers you have undertaken to represent, not only say that
Justifying faith includes obedience, but also, that it justifies as it does so?


Theoph. Yes, Philalethes, that they do. For they do not think that the
Scriptures make any difference between the two forementioned acts of faith, as
to the influence it has upon Justification; and that not without cause. S.
Paul tells us, Gal. 5. 6. that neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails
any thing; (he means especially as to Justification, as appears by verse. 4) but
faith that works by love; which takes in the whole of obedience; and there he
stops. The Apostle troubles not himself to give any caution to the Galatians,
that they should not understand him as if his meaning was any more than this,
That justifying faith works by love; or as if he had said, That faith
justifies as it works by love.


Philal. There comes into my mind an Argument, that seems to me demonstrative,
LXXIII. An argument to prove that Faith justifies as it receivs Christ qua
Lord, as well as qua Savior.
that there is to be made no distinction between those acts of faith in
justifying: namely, the Scriptures assure us, that our Saviors death was
intended not only to deliver us from wrath, but from sin too; and it is plain
that this later was its immediate end; deliverance from wrath being a
consequent of deliverance from sin: And therefore faith in Christ's blood must
needs justify as it designs obtaining this, as well as that.


Theoph. Your Argument will rather prove more than that for which you bring it,
viz. That if those acts of faith be at all to be distinguished in the business
of Justification, the greater stress is to be laid on that, which complieth
with the principal end of our Saviors death. And so, if we must be making
comparisons, Faith justifies as it receives Christ qua Lord, rather than qua
Priest or Savior. But however, I am not for any comparisons, they being
perfectly needless, and nothing gotten by them.


Philal. That act of receiving Christ as Lord, LXXIV. The act of receiving
Christ qua Lord, to go before that of receiving him qua Priest.
is to go before that of receiving him as Priest: for we may not rely upon him
for salvation, till we are willing to yield obedience to him.


Theoph. It Is most true; we have not any ground at all so to do: we must be
willing to be to our power universally obedient, before we take that confidence.


Philal. Before you go farther, I pray tell me what distinction you would make
betwixt Faith and Repentance, and the other graces also, if its nature be
extended so far as to imply obedience.


Theoph. The Scriptures are seldom so curious, when they speak of Faith, LXXV.
How faith is distinguished from repentance and other virtues, in the business of
Justification.
or Repentance, or the love, or fear, or knowledge of God, etc. as to
understand them in so restrained a sense, as to abstract them from other
virtues: but sometimes they express all by one. We find in multitudes of
places some one of the principal virtues put to express the whole of practical
Religion; as each of those last mentioned; of which I need not give you
instances. And whereas Faith and Repentance are sometimes distinguished, it is
only because believing the Gospel implies more than bare Repentance in its
strict notion. Irenaeus therefore gives this honest description of faith in
Christ: Credere ei est facere ejus voluntatem: To believe in Christ is to do
his will. Moreover, we shall find that Justification, and Remission of sins,
(for the Scripture makes no difference betwixt those two) is sometimes ascribed
to other virtues, as well as to Faith: but then they are understood either in
so general a sense, as to include Faith, or as supposing it. For instance, Acts
3. 19. it is attributed to conversion and repentance: Repent and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out. To forgiveness of trespasses, Matthew. 6. 14.
If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
you. To showing mercy, Mat. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy. To works, or sincere obedience, James 2. 24. A man is justified
by works, and not by faith only. Where Faith is taken in a more strict sense,
and Works suppose Faith. That is, A man is justified by an effectual working
faith, and not by faith without works. And again, verse. 21. says he, Was not
our father Abraham justified by works? who yet, according to S. Paul, was
justified by faith. But whereas Justification is mostly attributed to faith,
LXXVI. Why justification is mostly ascribed to faith.
the reason is, because all other graces are vertually therein contained; and
that is the Principle from whence they are derived.


Philal. I pray inform me next, Theophilus, what influence it is that those
Preachers tell their people Faith has upon Justification; or how it justifies.


Theoph. I should not have forgotten this, though you had not minded me, in the
least, of it: for it is of as great importance to be spoken to, as most of the
heads of our past discourse. LXXVII Two acceptations of the word Faith.
Observe therefore, That Faith sometimes signifies in Scripture the Doctrine
of faith, or the Gospel: so it is to be understood, Gal. 3. 23, 25. LXXviii The
virtue of faith variously expressed in Scripture.
and in several other places. But it ordinarily signifies the virtue or duty
of believing; and so it is variously expressed; as by believing on the Son of
God, and the record that God gave of his Son, 1 John 5. 10. Believing the word
or words of Christ, Joh. 5. 47. Believing Christ to be the Son of God, and the
Savior of the world, Joh. 8. 24. Joh. 11. 26, 27. Receiving of Christ, Joh. 1.
12. All which are to be understood in a practical sense. For as the Scriptures
scarcely ever call any other the knowledge of God, but that which has the end
of knowledge, viz. obedience: so do they make nothing true believing, but that
which has the ends of faith, or causes men to do those things for the sake of
which it is required.

Now as Faith is put for the Doctrine of faith, LXXIX. How faith justifies.
so those Preachers are content it should justify as an instrument, viz. as it
contains the Covenant of grace, and holds forth pardon to sinners; and so
it justifies, as the Law condemns.

As it signifies the virtue or duty of faith, so it justifies as it is the
condition of the new Covenant, wherein forgiveness of sin is offered. God the
Father is the principally. efficient cause of our Justification; and so it is
said, that it is God that justifies: Jesus Christ justifies as the only
meritorious, or procuring cause; the Gospel as the instrumental cause; and
faith therein, as the condition without which we cannot be justified, and to
which that privilege is assured.

The new Covenant offers pardon of sin and eternal life to us, upon the
condition of believing in Christ: So God loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. He that believes shall be saved, etc. If ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall die in your sins.


Philal. This is a very easy account of Faiths justifying.


Theoph. Nothing seems to me to be more plain; as obscure a business as it is
made.


Philal. But what cannot the wit of men make difficult?


Theoph. First, LXXX. The Covenant of grace conditional.
there is nothing more evident (as we said) than that the new Covenant is
conditional; and that God does not therein promise absolutely pardon of sin and
the consequent blessings.


Philal. The great place that is produced against the conditionality of the
Covenant of grace, is that which you said you would speak to, viz. that
quotation out of Jeremiah that we find in Heb. 10. 8. where God seems in his
Covenant to promise to do all, in order to our eternal happiness, and to
require nothing of us.


Theoph. It is in a good hand: I pray do you answer that Objection.


Philal. Were I duller than I am, I think I could easily enough apprehend a
satisfactory answer to it, viz. That a condition is there implied: for the
meaning of those words [ I will put my laws into their hearts, LXXXI. Heb. 8.
10. considered.
and write them in their inward parts] cannot be, I will do all for them, they
need do nothing at all; this would make all the precepts of the Gospel most
wretchedly insignificant, (nor indeed do any assert this, but some very
monstrously wildebrain'd people:) nor yet, as appears from many other
Scriptures, can this be the sense; I will sanctify their natures, and so cause
them to keep my laws, without their concurrence in that act: but, I will afford
them my Grace and Spirit, whereby, they cooperating therewith, and not being
wilfully wanting to themselves, shall be enabled so to do. Or, I will do all
that reasonable creatures can reasonably expect from Me, toward the writing of
my laws in their hearts, and putting them into their inward parts. Whatsoever
God may do for some persons out of his superabundant grace, doubtless this is
all that he either here or elsewhere engages himself to do for any.


Theoph. This exposition of yours is a very good one, most agreeable with the
analogy of Faith, and fully answers the forementioned Objection. But there are
very judicious Expositors that are led by the consideration of the verse
following thus to interpret this place, viz. This is the Covenant that I will
make in the times of the Gospel; I will in stead of those external and carnal
ordinances, which the house of Israel has for a long time been obliged to the
observance of, give them only such precepts as are most agreeable to their
reason and understandings, and such as wherein they may discern essential
goodness: and by this great expression of my grace to them, (as also that which
is expressed in the 12 verse, namely, assurance of pardon to all reforming
sinners, of all past wickednesses whatsoever, and all present frailties and
weaknesses) I shall not only convince them of their duty, but also, strongly
incline them to the cheerful performance of it. And then it follows, very
pertinently to this sense, in verse. 11. And they shall not teach every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know
me, from the least to the greatest. i. e. There shall be no need of such pains,
in teaching men how they must obey the Lord, and what they are to do, as there
was under the Law of Moses, (which consisted in observations that were only
good because commanded, and had no internal goodness in them to commend them to
the reason of men, and which might cause it to prompt them to them;) but the
precepts now given, shall be found written by every man in his own heart, so
that none need be ignorant of what is enjoined for the substance of it, that
will but consult the dictates of their own natures. For a confirmation of this
sense, see Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14 verse. Moses having in the later part of
verse. 10. put the people upon turning to the Lord their God with all their
heart and with all their soul; and before showed that it was their duty to love
the Lord their God with all their heart and soul, which you know contains the
substance of what is enjoined in the new Covenant, and was no part of that
which was required by the Law, that is called in a strict sense the Jewish and
Mosaical, ( which, as the Apostle says, was added because of transgression,
till the seed should come to whom the promises were made; not as any new
condition whereby they were to attain to the promises, but that they should
till they were fulfilled, be restrained and kept under a strict outward
discipline backed on by temporal rewards and punishments) I say, having over and
above his own Law, exhorted them to the observance of those duties, wherein the
substance of those commanded in the Gospel consists, (and which may be found
sprinkled up and down in the other Prophets, as well as his writings, and
doubtless were more completely delivered to them by tradition from their
fathers) he thus says in the 11 verse, and the three following: For this
commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither
is it far off: it is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up
for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? Neither
is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for
us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do it? But the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it. By the
word in their heart at least, we are certainly to understand, the forementioned
spiritual, and essentially good precepts: for so is it interpreted by S. Paul,
Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.


Philal. I am hugely pleased with the Paraphrase you have given, and must needs
say, that of these two (considering the context) it seems the most natural.


Theoph. But however, their interpretation of this place, that endeavor to
prove from it the nonconditionality of the new Covenant, is by no means to be
endured; it being of so very ill consequence, and also so flatly contradicting
the apparent sense of multitudes of Scriptures as it does; whereby we are
assured that God expects that the working of his and our own spirits should go
together, and be conjunct causes cooperating one and the self-same effect.


Philal. If men have no power, LXXXII Men not without all power to cooperate
with Gods grace in their conversion.
as those people say, to cooperate at all with the grace of God, in the
mortification of their lusts, or the renovation of their natures, S. James did
very strangely forget himself, when he said, Cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double minded.


Theoph. The truth is, the Scripture seems one while to give all to God in the
work of Regeneration and Conversion; and another while to make it wholly men's
own act. And as in that place to the Hebrews, it may seem, at first sight, that
all is to be done by God; so does God in other places express himself, as if
man were to do all in this work: as, Cast away from you all your iniquities;
Make you a new heart and a new spirit; turn your selves and live ye. Wash you,
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well. And you know that I could tire you with sayings
to the same purpose.


Philal. Therefore we must interpret such places so, as to reconcile them to
each other.


Theoph. And to this end we must go in a middle way, LXXXiii A middle way to be
taken in giving account of men's conversion.
and avoid the extremes on both hands, or we shall never do so. I mean, that
where God speaks as if he did all in this great work, we are to judge, that he
supposes men's endeavors; and where he speaks as if men were to do all, that
he supposes the concurrence and assistance of his own grace.

But as I said that nothing is more evident than that the new Covenant is
conditional: so, secondly, there is nothing more plainly or frequently
expressed, LXXXiv Faith the condition of the new Covenant.
than that Faith is the condition of it; and therefore I shall not need to
insist upon it.


Philal. You said that those Preachers are accused by many Hot men, for this
doctrine, LXXXV Of their being accused for the foregoing doctrine, as holding
justification by works, and enemies to Gods grace.
as persons Popishly affected, and holding Justification by works; and
therefore enemies to the freeness of Gods grace.


Theoph. I foresaw, that in this part of our discourse, you would put me upon
vindicating them from this high charge; and therefore when I had occasion given
me to do it, I chose (as you may remember) to defer it longer, because this is
the properest place for it.


Philal. But suppose the consequences of this doctrine were so very foul as
those men think they are; would it not be, notwithstanding, very uncharitably
done of them, LXXXvi A digression concerning censuring men upon the account of
their opinions.
to censure the Preachers of it so highly upon that account?


Theoph. Yes verily, Philalethes, this would not excuse them at all from
unchristian uncharitableness: for they ought to hope (seeing they profess to
magnify free grace no less than themselves, and concern themselves to confute
the Papists as much as any, not to say more) that they do not understand the
evil consequences of their Doctrine; and that, if they did, they would most
willingly and freely renounce it.


Philal. If those Preachers should retaliate, (as I hope they are better
Christians than to do so) they might call these their censurers worse than
Papists; I mean, Libertines and Ranters: for they are as strongly persuaded,
that their notions about justifying Faith, and some other, lead to Looseness
and Libertinism, as these are, that theirs lead to Popery.


Theoph. But they dare not, I hope, so much as suspect, that those of them that
seem to make any conscience of their ways, are at all aware of the Poison that
is in some of their Opinions; but judge that their meaning is much better than
their Faith.


Philal. I for my part can truly say, that I think not at all hardly of them
for the sake of their false Tenets, so long as I do not observe that they
practice upon them; but I am sometimes very shrewdly tempted to fear, upon the
account of the Reviling and Censuring not a few of them are guilty of, that
they are no better than mere pretenders to Religion, as great a profession as
they make of it: For S. James has taught me, that, He that seems to be
religious, and bridleth not his tongue that man's Religion is vain.


Theoph. But perhaps they may mean as honestly in the one as in the other; and
it is possible that their angry expressions may not be the effects of malice,
but of a certain kind of zeal.


Philal. Well, Theophilus, I will endeavor after more of your charitable
temper: If you judge too well of those people, it is a safe and good extreme:
Charity, I confess, hops all things, and believes all things, even there,
where are too great temptations to the contrary.


Theoph. When we can put a favorable construction upon our brothers faults,
and not offer overgreat violence to our own Reason, we ought to do it; and to
look upon them as proceeding rather from infirmity, than from a principle of
immorality. But yet, Philalethes, I would not have you take me to be more
charitable than I am: for though I will not conclude those censorious people to
be all hypocrites, yet I dare confidently pronounce them, at best, but of the
lowest fourm in Christ's School; as great seize as they may be thought to
be arrived at, by men of greater honesty than understanding.


Philal. But we have forgotten our business all this while.


Theoph. You do well to mind me of it. You expect, Philalethes, that I should
vindicate those friends of ours, and all that are of their mind in the point
in hand, from opposing free grace, and holding the Popish doctrine of
Justification by works. They are so far from being guilty in these particulars,
that I am amazed at their ignorance, that say they are, upon such slight
grounds, or rather upon none at all. Nor do I think that an easier task can be
imposed on any man, LXXXvii A Vindication of the foregoing account of faiths
justifying from being opposite to free grace.
that has but a competent understanding of our Saviors Gospel, than to clear
the foregoing account of Faiths justifying from those hateful sequels. For,
whereas it is pretended, that that doctrine is an enemy to free grace; I may ask
those that pretend so, how Justification is free, seeing it is necessary to
believe in their sense in order to it: they must at least acknowledge, that if
not so much as that lazy faith of theirs were requisite, it would be so much
the freer.


Philal. But the Antinomians will tell you, that they make no faith at all, nor
any thing else necessary or requisite to their Justification; and that their
faith consists in believing that they are already justified, and that they were
so before they were born too; nay, as was said, that their Justification is as
old as God himself; for he could be but from eternity.


Theoph. I confess these blades are swinging assertors of the freeness of their
Justification; and therefore the Question I now asked is nothing to them: but I
am sure it signifies something to the second sort I told you of, and that are
gotten about one little remove from formal Antinomians. But I say moreover,
that such a Faith as that we have described is absolutely necessary in it self,
to make us capable of that privilege, and meet objects of Gods grace.

Will they say, that the Kings pardoning a notorious Traitor is ever the less
free, because that as far as he could judge of his heart, he looked on him as a
person that was resolved to become for the future a Loyal subject? Methinks
they should not; and that for this reason, because such a purpose is but
necessary to qualify him for a pardon; it being an act of greater fondness and
folly, than of grace and goodness, to forgive an offender that obstinately
persists in his disobedience. Or suppose his Majesty should confer upon one of
them an honorable Office in his Court, would he say he bought it, or that it
was not freely bestowed upon him, because his Majesty required that before his
investiture, and admission into it, he should learn good Breeding, and how to
behave himself in such a Place? Surely he would not; and that for the
already-mentioned reason: this he could not but know was no more than necessary
to be enjoined him; for otherwise he could not be at all fit for the Office;
and the King would greatly disparage his wisdom in making such a choice. And as
little cause have any to imagine, that to assert that God will pardon, and
receive into special favor, none but such, as so believe, as to be heartily
willing to obey his Sons Gospel, is to derogate from the freeness of his grace.
Besides, that glory and blessedness which consists in the enjoyment of God in
the other world, which is the consequent of Justification, cannot be enjoyed by
a wicked man: the joys of heaven are of so spiritual a nature, that carnal
souls are as incapable of them, as are beasts of the intellectual delights of
men. They are only the pure in heart that can, as well as that shall see God.
Heathens will teach us this doctrine, if we are to learn it.

Much less then, in the third place, is this doctrine of a working Faiths being
the condition of our Justification, at all a lessening of the freeness of Gods
grace; when as those that preach it do withal assert, that this faith is Gods
own gift, a grace of his blessed Spirit. They say indeed, and that most truly,
that we are to use the means appointed us by him for the obtaining of it; but
they tell their hearers also, that it must come from God, if they ever have it.
Could we work this faith in our selves, and stood in no need of the divine
assistance; considering what has been said, it would make our Justification to
be never the less free: much less reason then is there, that those should be
charged with making it otherwise, that preach that doctrine of Faiths being the
condition of Justification, when they declare that the power whereby we perform
that condition comes from God.


Philal. I am sure that I have no power to invent any one Reply by way of
objection.


Theoph. Well then, we'll to their next Cavil; namely, that to hold this
doctrine, is to maintain Justification by works: which is indeed the same in
their sense with the former; but it is fit it should be distinctly spoken to,
because S. Paul (in his Epistles especially to the Romans and Galatians) does
so often deny works to have an influence into Justification, and is found
opposing them one while to Grace, and another while to Faith as to this matter.
I cannot stand to cite the particular places; but the consideration of these
following things will enable any man to reconcile them with this Doctrine at
the first sight of them.

1. By the works of the Law, Lxxxviii. A vindication of that Doctrine from
asserting justification by works in S. Paul's sense.
whereby the Apostle says that men cannot be justified, we are frequently to
understand those of the Jewish Law, their External Rites and Observances. And
so they are to be understood in most, if not all the places in the Epistle to
the Galatians. And by the understanding of that one thing, that Epistle may
with ease be defended from patronizing the Antinomian doctrine. The chief
design of which (as is most apparent) being to vindicate the liberty of the
Christian Religion from the Judaical Yoke, which being by the Judaizing
Galatian Converts imposed upon the Christian Gentiles as absolutely and
indispensably necessary, was like to prove a mighty obstacle to the progress of
the Gospel among them.

2. In some other places, by works are meant absolutely perfect, and altogether
faultless ones. And we are told, that, as the Law of Moses cannot, nor ever
could justify, by reason of its own weakness; so, the Law of perfect obedience
now cannot, by reason of ours,

3. We may sometimes understand any works, of what nature soever, considered as
meritorious causes. Could we obey perfectly, we cannot merit thereby the pardon
of past sins: nay, had we never sinned, we could deserve no reward at our
Creators hands, our righteousness being not at all profitable to him; much less
then can the imperfect works of sinners be meritorious.

4. Mere external works performed by our own power in our unsanctified state,
that is, such as proceed not from an inward principle of life, may in other
places be understood.

But we have no ground ever to understand by works when opposed to Grace or
Faith, inherent holiness, or new obedience to the Gospelprecepts. Lxxxix. By
works when opposed to Grace or Faith, new obedience never meant.
I dare promise an unprejudiced person, that, reading the several Scriptures
where works are so opposed, he will be satisfied that they are not any where to
be otherwise understood than of one of these four sorts.

So that as works signify sincere obedience to Christ's Gospel, XC. No crime to
hold justification by works in S. James his sense.
neither I nor those Preachers can account it any scandal to have it said of
us, that we hold Justification by works; nor can we deserve to have it thought
that we have one bit the more of a Pope in our bellies upon that account. And
why any man should be more shie of acknowledging this than S. James was, (who
says in plain terms, A man is justified by works, and not by faith only; and
that Abraham was justified by works) I cannot understand. Nor need we so mince
it, as to say that faith justifies our persons, and works our faith: for
understanding works, I say, for a working faith, our persons (if ever they be)
must be justified by them. I would not that Protestants should give such
advantage to the sottish Papists, as to be shie of using any
Scripture Language; and, by being so, to give them occasion to think that we
are in the other extreme from them, and have a slight opinion of good works.
XCI. S. Paul's language not to be preferred before S. James his.
And I think it desirable that we would cease to prefer S. Paul's language
before S. James his; and not more interpret S. James by S. Paul, than S. Paul
by S. James, they being both alike Apostles, and their Epistles alike
Scripture; but that we would be content to interpret them by each other. And
then, I dare say, this Controversy would quickly be at an end among us; and we
should have no adversary to contend with, about this point, but the Papist
only.


Philal. I am of your mind.

Theoph. But, Philalethes, don't you remember that you set me a method, and
desired me first to discourse of those our Friends Practices, and next of their
Opinions.


Philal. Yes, very well.

Theoph. And you see, how well I have observed it. But the best of it is, I
told you then, that I would not promise you never to confound those two
together; nor, indeed, could I have been as good as my word if I had: for I
could not, as I ought, discourse of their Preaching, and not take in some of
their Doctrine.


Par. II
But I will now, in a more distinct manner, give you an account of their
Opinions. They may be referred to matters of Doctrine and Discipline. As to the
former, I. A more distinct account of their Opinions.
they profess to dissent from none that have been held to be Fundamentals of
the Christian Faith, either by the Primitive, or best Reformed Modern Churches:
And heartily to subscribe to the 39 Articles of our Church, II. Of their
judgment in Doctrinals.
taking that liberty in the interpretation of them, that is allowed by the
Church her self. Though it is most reasonable to presume, III. In what sense
the Church of England imposes subscription to the 39 Articles.
that she requires Subscription to them, as to an Instrument of Peace only.


Philal. So the late most Reverend and Learned Archbishop of Armagh several
times expresses the sense of the Church of England, as to her requiring
Subscription to those Articles. IV. The Lord Primate of Ireland his testimony.
The Church of England, says he in his Schism Guarded, p. 396. does not define
any of these Questions as necessary to be believed either necessitate medii, or
necessitate praecepti, which is much less; but only binds her sons, for
peace sake, not to oppose them. And page 150. he does farther thus express
himself. We do not suffer any man to reject the 39 Articles of the Church of
England at his pleasure; yet neither do we look upon them as essentials of
Saving Faith, or Legacies of Christ and his Apostles; but in a mean, as pious
opinions fitted for the preservation of unity: neither do we oblige any man to
believe them, but only not contradict them.


Theoph. I thank you, Philalethes, for these citations out of so excellent an
Author; which are no small confirmation of the truth of that assertion of mine,
which did occasion them. V. What Doctrines they most endeavor to confute.
But to go on: Those opinions in Doctrinals that those Divines look upon
themselves as most obliged to manifest their disapprobation of, and to confute,
are such as either directly, or in their evident consequences, tend to beget in
men's minds unworthy thoughts of God, and unlovely notions of his nature; or to
encourage profaneness, or discourage from diligence and industry in the ways of
holiness; as, by what has been said, you have in part understood.


Philal. It Is strange to me, Theophilus, that any that understandingly believe
the being of God should entertain an unlovely notion of his nature; for not to
have the most lovely, is to deprive him of his very Godhead. VI. Philalethes
his representation of Gods nature.
He must needs be as good, as good can be, and have all perfections attracting
love concentred in him in the highest degree possible: He must be infinitely
merciful, of perfectly unspotted righteousness, purity, and holiness, (which I
esteem as no less lovely qualifications, than that of mercy) or he cannot be
God. Nay, no man, I should think, (that is not a very Atheist) can doubt but
that all the amiable qualities that we see in good men, are but so many
effluviums, if I may so call them, or emanations from those that are in God;
and therefore must needs be, in an unconceivably greater measure in him, where
they are originally, than in them, where they are but derivatively. We learn
from very Heathens that such qualities are irradiations sliding into men's souls
from God, and that they proceed from a divine afflatus; who also tell us, that
God is not only (...), but likewise (...), the best, as well as chiefest and
most supreme being. And they give a most lovely description of Gods essence;
and make him, you know, to be no less just and gracious, than wise and
powerful; as, I need not tell you, may be shown in a world of instances.

But that any Christian should be able to form to himself an unlovely idaea and
conception of God, is to me matter of the greatest astonishment; he being so
excellently represented in the New, and also in the Old Testament. In the New,
we find his definition to be Love it self; and that the way to be his lively
images, and like to him, is not to affect to be men of great power and
knowledge, but to be most holy and righteous, loving and merciful. In a word,
the new Testament, I am sure, gives the most amiable account imaginable of the
Divine nature: And so does the Old too; even when God appeared in the most
frightful form, did he proclaim himself, The Lord, the Lord God gracious and
merciful, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin: And though it follows,
that he will in no wise clear the guilty, i. e. the impenitent; yet that is so
far from being a contradiction to his goodness, that it is a farther
declaration of it; for otherwise he would not have that part thereof that is
called righteousness. He is there represented, as a God good to all, and whose
mercies are over all his works: As a God, whose ways are all just and right,
and whose soul abominates all evil. It would be a very long work to go over all
the places where we find such accounts of God as these are; and it would find
us employment, I believe, for some days.


Theoph. How dearly do I love you, Philalethes, for the most worthy conception
that I perceive you have lodged in your soul, of the Divine nature! It Is pity,
methinks, that you and I are not Namesakes: I loved you very sincerely since
my first knowledge of you, but now passionately. And I Will no longer account you
my Friend only, but you shall be my dearest Brother, and my Second self too,
for the future.


Philal. How do you transport me, Theophilus, with these almost- rapturous
expressions of Affection! But I cannot understand how I have deserved them, by
any thing I have now said: doubtless there is no Christian, no, nor any Theist
neither, but will say the same. And though I prefer your name before mine own,
yet is mine given me for naught, if I did not thus speak of God; for then, to
be sure, I could make no pretense to be a friend to Truth.


Theoph. But you spoke, what I now heard from you, with such an impetus, as is
a demonstration to me, that you have a most quick and deep sense of what you
said, and that you are infinitely concerned that it should be true.


Philal. But I pray, Sir, answer me; Are there any Christians that dare deny
this, nay, that will not most heartily acknowledge it?


Theoph. Truly, Philalethes, I dare not say there are; but I dare say this,
That there are too too many that will speak such things of God, as most
apparently contradict it.


Philal. Would to God you had no ground for this assertion; but I know, to my
frequent great trouble, that there is too good ground for it; and that some,
whom I cannot but hope are sincerely good men, do with great and mighty zeal
defend such Opinions as are, in my judgment, no less contrary to the goodness
and holiness of Gods nature, than the thickest darkness to the clearest light.


Theoph. We must not by any means, VII. Consequences of Opinions not to be
charged on all those that hold them.
I am more and more convinced, charge the consequences of Opinions upon all
those that hold them: for there is nothing I have a clearer perception of, than
that the Notions of some, whom I verily persuade my self are pious Christians,
and very true lovers of God and goodness, do immediately tend to rob God of his
goodness, (in which word I imply all his Moral perfections) and to lay a
foundation for impiety and irreligion.


Philal. I know the Notions you chiefly mean, are, VIII. That they set
themselves against the Doctrines of Gods absolute decreeing men's sin and misery.
the making of men's sins, and consequent misery, the unavoidable effects of
Gods Decrees.


Theoph. You could not well miss of my meaning, nor I of yours; these Doctrines
must needs be principally in both our thoughts: And I must tell you, that the
Divines we are discoursing of do set themselves against both these in good
earnest: And they profess that they do so for no other reason, than because
they have a most clear sense of the mischievous effects of them.


Philal. But do all those that hold that God does absolutely predetermine men
to eternal misery, make him absolutely to decree men's sins too, in order to it?
I think they do not.


Theoph. No; there are many that assert the one, that no less deny the other:
IX. That those two are not to be separated.
but I confess I do not understand how they can. For if men are by God
unavoidably and absolutely determined to the end, he must do more than decree,
barely to permit the means: for they must necessarily sin, that Gods absolute
decree may infallibly take effect; which it is possible it might not, if they
were only permitted, and not necessitated thereunto; for then mankind might
have never fallen.


Philal. I wonder that all should not see this. But, Theophilus, why should
those that maintain that desperate Doctrine of Gods absolute decreeing men's
sins, be so shie as not to acknowledge him the author also of them?


Theoph. I do not see that they need be so; and therefore there are those of
them that are not; and that tell us, that to boggle at acknowledging God the
author of sin, is to fear where no fear is.


Philal. I would, for my part, be an Atheist, before I would imagine such a
monstrous thing of God.


Theoph. And less you would dishonor him in being so: for as Plutarch says, I
had rather posterity would say, There was never such a one as Plutarch, than
that he was an unjust and vicious person: so it is more dishonorable to the
infinitely just and holy God, to assert that he is the author of sin, than to
say that there is no God at all.


Philal. But that Doctrine, with its appendant, will (in my opinion) not only
make Him the first cause of men's being sinners, but also to set men the worst
example to encourage them still in sinning: which is so horrid, that I even
quake to express it.


Theoph. I guess whereabout you are, Philalethes: Those Doctrines make their
defenders to assert, that there are two Wills in God, whereof of one is
perfectly contrary to the other, X. That those doctrines make their defenders
assert two wills in in God, and the one contrary to the others; by which means
other sad consequences also follow.
viz. his Secret and Reveled will: And though he professes kindness to all
men, and says, nay and swears too, that he wills not the death of sinners
themselves, but had rather they would turn from their wickedness and live; yet,
according to those Doctrines, this is but a declaration of his Voluntas signi;
the plain English of which phrase is this; A mere copy of his Countenance. The
like to which should one assert concerning any one of those that talk after
this rate, I am sure he would take it in greatest disdain, and think himself
not a little reproached.


Philal. From thence it follows too plainly also, that God gives Laws to the
generality, to the very intent that they may break them, and so aggravate their
condemnation; notwithstanding that he professes even a passionate desire, that
men would observe them, and so be made happy. And by this means, most men's
obligations to God for the many temporal mercies they receive from him are
quite struck off, and made to be no expressions of his goodness to them, but
the quite contrary; whereas he tells us, (as was said but now) that he is good
to all, and that his tender mercies are over all his works; and that the whole
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. This is likewise from thence a
sequel too plain and natural, That Jesus Christ is not only eventually, but
also intentionally, the greatest curse that ever befell the world; and a far
greater expression of the Fathers hatred than of his love, notwithstanding that
he himself has said, that he came not to condemn the world, but that the world
through him might be saved: and that, So God loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, etc. For if the forementioned Doctrines be true, our
Saviors coming was to aggravate the condemnation of the generality of men
(which would be far more properly called the world, than a very few) for not
believing in him, who never died for them, so much as to put them into a
possibility of being saved; though he declared that he gave himself a ransom
for the vulgus, or multitude of the people, (for so the word (...), which is
rendered many, does, among the Greeks, most commonly signify; as our Lexicons
tell us, and Vatablus also upon that place) and S. Paul says, He gave himself
a ransom for ALL, and did taste death for EVERY man; and that he is the
Savior of ALL men, though especially of those that believe: and though he
sadly bewailed men's not coming to him, that they might have life; and wept over
Jerusalem for her obstinate persisting in unbelief, and most pathetically with
tears wished, that she had known, in that her day, the things that belonged
unto her peace. I could go on instances of this nature, as --


Theoph. But I pray, Philalethes, do not: for they are grating to my ears, and
most grievous to me. And it troubles me to the very soul, that any (good
people especially) should entertain (and much more, should be zealous for) such
Notions as are attended with so long a train of most dismally-sad Consequences,
and so greatly reflecting dishonor upon our infinitely-holy and good God.


Philal. I fear this kind of discourse has put you into one of your old dumps
of Melancholy; for methinks you all of a sudden look very dejectedly.


Theoph. No, Philalethes, there is no fear of that; but I would willingly be
more concerned at any dishonor that is done to God, and his Son Jesus, than at
any personal evil. Well, what was it that immediately occasioned this last talk?


Philal. The ill use that is made of that distinction of Gods Secret and
Reveled will.


Theoph. You say well, it was so.

Philal. But is that distinction to be found fault with?


Theoph. I see your memory needs rubbing up as well as mine. XI. Of opposing
Gods secret to his reveled will.
I did not at all except against that distinction, but against opposing Gods
secret to his reveled will. And now I add, that whatsoever God says he
intends, he really does so; and that his declarations are to be understood, as
we would any honest man's. But to deal freely with you, I should not be at all
sorry, if the distinction of voluntas signi and beneplaciti were quite thrown
out of doors.


Philal. But what say you to that of Gods commanding Abraham to offer up his
son Isaac? Did he intend he should be offered up? Sure no.


Theoph. Nor did God say he intended it; but only for trial bade Abraham do it.


Philal. So it may be said, that God may not, as well, really intend, that all
should observe his Laws, to whom he gives them.


Theoph. But he plainly and often declares, that he gives them for that end;
and moreover has imprinted them in men's souls, as well as written them in his
Book: and, as I said, expresses a desire that men would observe them, and
yield obedience to them, i. e. do what lies in them so to do. And I hope that
none will say otherwise, than that it is every ones duty to believe that God
would have him obey his Laws: but it was not Abraham's duty to believe that God
would have him to sacrifice his son; but only to do it, except he interposed.


Philal. But it appears from the story, that Abraham did believe this.


Theoph. I grant that; but, I say, he was not bound to believe it, though he
did: for no man can be obliged to believe a falsity: And besides, he could have
no reason to be confident that God did not intend only to try him by that
Command, as the event proved he did. But suppose it had fallen out otherwise,
that would not at all have altered the case; for who dares say but that God
may, if he pleases, give commands to his servants, when he does not intend
they should do as he bids them, but only to make an experiment of their
readiness to obey him? None sure will deny the use of this liberty to any
earthly parents toward their children; or masters toward their servants. And
therefore I say that Abraham had no just cause to conclude that this was not
his Creators design in that command; though he took it for granted, that it
was his purpose that he should do as he bade him.


Philal. What you say is clear enough: But did not God, by the Prophet, tell
Nineveh that in forty days she should be destroyed? did he mean as he spoke
then?


Theoph. Yes doubtless that he did; for there was a condition so plainly
implied in that threatening, ( viz. If she repented not) that the Ninevites
themselves were inclined, of their own accords, so to understand it. And it is
ordinary among men to imply conditions in both threatenings and promises that
sound absolutely, but especially in threatenings; and so such are usually
understood. Nay, some conditions are always understood by us in the most
absolute promises and threatenings that are ever uttered by the tongues of men;
and must be so.


Philal. The truth is, I am but a sorry Objector.


Theoph. Your Objections have as much weight in them, I think, as any that the
Scripture affords: but, I confess, some more baffling ones may be urged from
seeming Reason: but whether we can answer them or no, we ought not, in the
least, to be shaken by them, much less to be overcome. XII. That we must
resolve to believe nothing at all, if we may believe nothing against which we
cannot answer all Objections.
For if I may not believe any thing against which I am not able to answer all
Objections; I must resolve to believe nothing at all, and to set up for a
perfect Sceptick. There are Arguments invented by Wits against the certainty of
evidence from Sense; which he must have a good Metaphysical pate of his own,
that is able to answer; would all men therefore that han't such heads do
foolishly in giving undoubted credit to their own senses? I know no man that
can give a satisfactory answer to an Argument that is brought against the
possibility of so close an union of the particles of matter each with other, as
to make a solid body; but will any man in his wits therefore doubt, whether or
no there be any such thing? The Argument that is brought for the infinite
divisibility of matter, has hitherto puzzled the most acute Philosophers, and
so it is like to do to the worlds end; but yet I cannot imagine that any one
does notwithstanding really believe it. And from thence, all bodies may be
proved to be of a like bigness; and that a Mountain is as small as an Antheap,
and an Ant as big as either: And this with so great a show of reason, as I must
acknowledge I cannot answer; but ought I therefore to suspect whether this be
not true? So there are some Metaphysical Niceties that may seem to make the
Opinion (and those it is founded on) probable, which we last expressed our
selves against: but what of that? All we ought thence to infer is no more than
this, That Man is a weak, shallow creature.


Philal. But our Adversaries will say, Then you may believe their doctrine, for
all the strong Objections you think you can make against it; and answer them
all with an Oh the depth!


Theoph. But what says S. Austin? Because we cannot understand things that are
difficult, shall we therefore deny those that are plain?


Philal. I wish that good Father had always born in his mind that Saying.


Theoph. I wish so too: But to our business: That doctrine does as evidently
contradict the natural notions God has imprinted in the original constitution
of humane souls, as can be; XIII. That the forementioned doctrine evidently
contradicts our natural notions.
at least to me it seems so to do, and so does it to thousands of others that
are neither Fools nor Madmen: and I must add, that I cannot question but it
would to all, that will be but persuaded freely to consult those innate
notions: And besides, it is expressly against the whole strain of Scripture from
Genesis to the Revelation.


Philal. But you know that there are diverse Scriptures that seem to make for
Gods absolute decreeing men's damnation, and their sins too, which are much
urged.


Theoph. Truly, Philalethes, if our Translators had been pleased, they might
with the alteration of but one little particle for another of the same
signification, have prevented the taking almost any arguments out of Scripture
to prove Gods decreeing men's sins, any otherwise than barely to permit them. I
mean, if they had put [ will] in a multitude of places, where men's sins are
foretold, in stead of [ shall]. The [ shalls] make those places look as if they
contained declarations of Decrees, whenas [ wills] would have made it at first
sight to appear that they contain only predictions, and expressions of Gods
foreknowledge that men would commit such and such sins, not of his will and
purpose that they should. I heartily wish that Authority would please to
command the Printers to make that little alteration in their future Impressions
of the Bible. You may smile at this as an odd Fancy; but I assure you, I am
upon good grounds confident, that it would be to very good purpose so to do.


Philal. No Wiseman or Scholar will fetch an argument from such a trifle to
prove that or any other opinion.


Theoph. What of that? the generality of people are neither Scholars nor yet
wise: and I have great cause to suspect, that the vulgar sort have that
wretched doctrine insensibly instilled into them by the frequent reading and
hearing such passages as these, viz. In the later days perilous times [shall]
come; men [shall] be lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, etc. There [shall]
be false teachers, who [shall] privily bring in damnable heresies, etc. And
many [shall] follow their pernicious ways, etc. And there are innumerable
passages of this nature. But then, Philalethes, whatever Scriptures are brought
to prove either the one or the other doctrine by, it must needs be
acknowledged, that they are but very few, in comparison of those that (most
evidently say I, but) all will confess do seemingly contradict them. And which
is the safest course, think you, in reconciling seemingly-contrary places to
each other? To interpret a multitude of plain Scriptures by a few difficult
ones, XIV. Which is the safest course in reconciling seemingly contradictory
scriptures.
or a few difficult ones by a multitude of plain ones?


Philal. The later, without all doubt. But it will be said that the Scriptures
that make for those Doctrines, are as plain as those that make against them,
though, as to their number, there is no comparison betwixt them.


Theoph. But I say they are more difficult, in that, their most obvious sense
does, (as none can deny) at least, seemingly contradict the natural notions of
our souls; which the plainest sense of the other no less gratify. But however,
is it not much the better way, to understand a few Scriptures, in their less
obvious sense, to reconcile them to the most obvious sense of a multitude of
others; than to understand a multitude of Scriptures in their least obvious
sense, to reconcile them to the most obvious of, in comparison with them,
extremely few?


Philal. I have, since I suffered my self to think at all freely, been of your
mind, and concluded that the Scriptures produced on the other side must
necessarily be taken in another sense than that they fix upon; except we will
make them contradict the greatest part of the Bible besides: And those that
endeavor to reconcile all other to those Scriptures, make the Bible an
extremely more difficult Book, than I am verily persuaded God has made it.


Theoph. For my part, I can believe no sense of any Scripture true, XV.
Theophilus can believe no sense of Scripture that does contradict selfevident
notions.
that plainly contradicts the self-evident notions of Good and Evil, that God
has put into my soul, and were born with me: For, (as has been showed) I
could have no reason to believe the Scriptures to be Gods word, no, nor yet any
thing I am sure God himself says, to be infallibly true, were it not for those
notions. And cannot you remember that 'twas proved also, that the goodness of
the Doctrine delivered is necessary to convince us, that it is of God? Mankind
has a natural sense of Moral good and evil.


Philal. But those of the other Persuasion say, That whatsoever God does, is
just and good, because he does it. I am sure many of them, at least, will.


Theoph. There is no other way to defend their doctrine, XVI. Of that opinion,
That whatsoever God does is therefore good and just because he does it.
but to prove that: But do not those, in so saying, plainly make nothing in it
self to be just or unjust, good or evil? And so, in calling God a just God, say
just nothing of him, (pardon the Quibble, I designed it not) that is, no more
than this, that he wills what he wills: and I wonder who does not. Thus you
see, they are forced to make good and evil to depend upon arbitrary will; and
so make the Holy God a mere Wilful Being, and his nature perfectly indifferent
to any thing: And thence it follows, that it is consistent enough with the
Divine nature, to forbid all that which by being commanded is now called
Holiness, and by that means make it wickedness; and to command all that which
by being forbidden is now called wickedness, and by that means make it
Holiness. But if this does not raze and overturn the foundation of all
Religion, no opinion in the world tends so to do.


Philal. If Abraham was of that mind, he strangely forgot himself, when he
said to his Maker, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? And whether
he was of that mind or no, if the Doctrine be true, he was guilty of a
monstrously-absurd impertinence in so saying; and yet (which is more strange)
he had no check for it.


Theoph. Nay, did not God himself appeal to men's innate notions, and so confute
that doctrine, when he said to the Rebellious Jews, Are not my ways equal, and
your ways unequal? Can those men think that he only meant, Are not my ways
such as I please to fancy, and yours such as it is my pleasure to dislike? Who
would dare to fix such an expostulation as that on the infinitely-wise God?


Philal. Well, I am clearly sensible, that nothing reveled by God can possibly
contradict those principles that are impressed in (as I think) indelible
characters upon the souls of men; and therefore whatsoever places may seem to
speak men's being necessitated to be either sinners, or miserable, must be
understood in another sense: especially seeing that God has so often declared
that men's ruin is of themselves, and that their help is to be found in him; and
that he wills not their death, but the contrary; (and therefore much less can
he will their sins; as he has also, as plainly as can be, declared:) And
moreover affords them means whereby they may obtain happiness; (which, who will
not say that all that enjoy them are greatly beholden to God for?) and
expresses his grace and good will to them all without any exception.


Theoph. You have put me in mind of a passage I have met with in a Sermon of a
most pious and learned Divine now in heaven; which, when I read it, did greatly
affect me. It is this: Consider impartially with your selves, what an
unreasonable, horrible thing it is, seeing there are so many several frequent
expressions of Gods general love, and gracious favor to Mankind, enforced and
strengthened with such protestations, and solemn oaths, that the cunningest
Linguist of you all cannot, in your whole lives study, conceive or frame
expressions more full and satisfactory. I say, is it not desperate madness, for
a man to show such hatred and abomination at the comfortable and gracious
promises of God, that he can be content to spend almost his whole age in
contriving and hunting after interpretations utterly contradicting and
destroying the plain apparent sense of those Scriptures: And will be glad, and
heartily comforted, to hear tidings of a new-found-out gloss, to pervert, and
rack, and torment Gods holy Word.


Philal. Methinks this passage should affect any good man. But, Theophilus,
what should induce so many to be led by a few Scriptures against such a torrent
of others, to cry up such strange Doctrine?


Theoph. You love to ask me Questions which you can answer as well your self:
You know they pretend that this is the only way to advance Gods grace in men's
conversion and salvation. XVII. What is the Motive inducing the good men of
that persuasion to go that way.
And this, no doubt, is the only motive that prevails with all the truly
good men among them to go that way. It sounds as harsh in many, at least, of
their ears, as it does in ours; as I have great reason to be assured. And
Calvin himself, in the 608 page of his Institutions, calls Absolute Reprobation
Horribile Decretum: And the President of the Synod at Dort said it was materia
odiosa; and therefore declared to the Remonstrants that that Controversy
should be waved, and said that they would only hear their Arguments against
Absolute Election, for that was materia suavis. As I find in their Letters
called Epistolae Ecclesiasticae, etc. I say, it is very harsh doctrine to many
of them as well as to us; but because they cannot otherwise than by admitting
it, magnify, as they think they ought, the divine grace to Gods elect, they
force themselves to swallow the bitter Pill, as much as their stomachs nauseate
it; and therefore, as those that drink down loathsome Potions stop their noses,
so do these their ears to the clamours of their own Reason against it; and will
not sedately advert to, but violently suppress the natural dictates of their
understandings. Have you not several times observed that the goodnatured people
of that way complain more than others of Blasphemous thoughts? I am sure I
have; and have found when I have discoursed with them, that this doctrine was
the occasion of them. So that whether they will or no, their Reason, or innate
sense of their Souls (call it which you please) suggests to them the dreadful
consequences of it, which they would fain believe to be the devils temptations.


Philal. But don't you believe, that the men of this opinion are also induced
to it, because they are not able to interpret in any other sense those places
of Scripture that seem to make for it?


Theoph. I do not think that the Learned men are: For I cannot imagine that
those should think, that such Scriptures are unintelligible in any other sense
than that they understand them in, that know how few, and therefore how
ambiguous the original words of the Hebrew Tongue are, as also that there are
different senses of the same Verb in several Conjugations; and that there are
strange Idioms and Proprieties of speech in that Language, which are also
imitated in the Greek Testament; and lastly, that the occasions of several
passages do frequently make another sense necessary to be imposed on them, from
that which at first sight, and considering them simply and absolutely, and as
entire propositions, without relation to any other thing, offers it self.


Philal. I have sometimes thought, that those need never despair of
understanding the places they produce to serve their Hypotheses, in a different
sense from that they are so fond of, who can invent a Figure to make All men,
nay and every man too, to signify but some few; and can reconcile I will not
the death of a sinner, with I desire the death of most sinners; and, He will
have all men to be SAVED, with He will have the generality of men to be DAMNED;
and many the like Propositions which sound in my ears as contradictory one to
the other, as any I have ever heard or can invent. So that, Theophilus, it must
needs be, as you said, their desire to magnify Gods grace to the Elect, that
alone prevails with those of them that are good-natured and truly-pious
people to go that way. But yet I wonder that they should no more consider,
that, to magnify Gods grace to some few, so as to deny it to all others; and
so to advance his mercy, as to rob him of his holiness, truth and justice, is
to take ten thousand times more from him, than is given thereby to him.


Theoph. I would advance Gods grace as highly as ever I am able, (and so I
persuade my self would the Divines we have been speaking of) so as not to
destroy his other perfections: nor do I (nor I believe they) desire to
attribute any more to man, in the business of his salvation, than needs must,
and not suppose him a perfect Brute. But to say the truth, I, and those I am
acquainted with of those Divines, do magnify in all respects the grace of God,
as much as any of the other Way; and in one respect incomparably more.


Philal. What is the way you take so to do?


Theoph. A middle one betwixt the Calvinists and Remonstrants; XVIII. Those
Divines middle way between the Calvinists and Remonstrants.
which, in short, is this: That there is such a thing as distinguishing grace,
whereby some persons are absolutely elected, by virtue whereof they shall be
(having potent and infallible means prepared for them) irresistibly saved. But
that others, that are not in the number of those singular and special
favorites, are not at all in a desperate condition, but have sufficient means
appointed for them to qualify them for greater or less degrees of happiness,
and have sufficient grace offered to them some way or other, and some time or
other; and are in a capacity of salvation either greater or less through the
merits of Jesus Christ; and that none of them are damned but those that
wilfully refuse to cooperate with that grace of God, and will not act in some
moral sutableness to that power they have received. And as for those that have
been in an extraordinary manner wrought upon, and find themselves very
powerfully excited and carried to that which is good; such at least have
reason, so long as they are also careful to walk in all ways of holiness, to
believe themselves in the number of the Absolutely elected. Now (as a learned
Divine says) the Arminian need not repine at this way, nor yet the Calvinist:
for whatsoever good Arminianism pretends to concerning all men, is exhibited to
the part not absolutely elected; and to the other part, the goodness of God is
greater than is allotted by Arminius: And whatsoever good is pretended in
Calvinism to that part that is absolutely elected, the same goodness is here
exhibited; and besides, that direful vizard pulled off, that Ignorance and
Melancholy had put upon divine providence, and the lovely face of the Gospel.


Philal. I am glad to understand that you and they have made choice of this
way; which is not new to me, (no more than another Middle way, which I cannot
be satisfied with) but for some time I have been greatly inclined to prefer
this before any other, as having by much the fewest and least difficulties.


Theoph. I did not think you a stranger to it, and believed you could not but
like well of it; nor can I conceive why either any Calvinist or Remonstrant
should mislike it. But that we see in all professions there are those that will
hardly be brought to allow that there may be any farther improvements made,
than those which their great Masters had attained to. Though both Calvin and
Arminius were excellently-learned and pious persons, yet methinks their
respective greatest Admirers should acknowledge each of them short of
infallibility, and therefore not presume them in any thing attained to a Ne
plus ultra. Every Age, sure enough, improveth in knowledge, having the help
still of those foregoing: and as this is seen in other Sciences, so especially
is it discernible in that of Divinity; as all but ignorant, and extremely
prejudiced persons must needs acknowledge.


Philal. But this way is not so new as some have imagined it: XIX. This way
proposed by Catharinus at the Council of Trent.
for I have read it in the History of the Council of Trent, as that which
Catharinus, a Moderate and Learned man, proposed there for the accommodation of
the difference between the Dominicans and Franciscans about this point.


Theoph. The same person (as I am informed by one that has read it) has also
written a very ingenious Piece upon that subject, wherein he lays down, and
defends very handsomely this very way.


Philal. But indeed, if I did not think that this way were as much elder than
that Gentleman, as were our Savior and his Apostles, I should not have, at
all, given credit to it.


Theoph. No, nor I hope any else, if they did not think so: XX. How it came to
pass that this way for some Ages had fewest friends.
Id verum quod antiquissimum, being in Divinity an indisputable Maxim. And I
verily believe that this way is much more befriended by the great Standard of
Truth, the Scriptures, than any other. But how it should, if true, have for
some Ages the fewest, if any Friends, is no wonder: For Truth is too
frequently, if not always lost in a Scuffle, and forced to give place to
extremes by eager contests. And indeed this is too moderate and yielding a way
to have so much as entered into the thoughts of the Hot men of either party;
who like nothing so well as to keep themselves at the greatest distance from
each other. And there is great cause to suspect, that in most other
Controversies that have been managed with that fierceness that this has been,
the several contesting parties have over-done, and outshot the mark: and that
Truth will one day be found to have been on neither side, but to have layn
unobserved between the Combatants, though nearer to some than others.


Philal. It Is not unlikely.

Theoph. This way, XXI. This way a great ease to Theophilus his mind.
I must tell you, Philalethes, has, for diverse years, been a mighty ease to my
mind: And I will communicate to you something concerning my self, that I
never, before now, had occasin to tell you. The Doctrine of Absolute
Reprobation did ever since I was of years of discretion lie very unevenly and
ruggedly in my brains; and seemed extremely harsh to me. And though I for some
time thought that I was bound to believe it; yet could I not endure much to
think, or to hear others talk of it. But after I betook my self to study the
Controversy, I had so quick a sense of the natural consequences of it, as did
greatly distract me: For I was fearful of letting go the Premise, as much as
the Conclusions scared me. But while I thought, or rather feared that the
Doctrine was too too true; I was frequently disquieted with blasphemous
thoughts, and most black apprehensions of the loveliest of Beings; nor could I
think of God many times without consternation. Those thoughts I was ready to
look upon as injections from his and Mankindes enemy: Till at length, after I
had weighed things more impartially, (having read a Book or two that prepared
me with some free Principles) I found that I had wronged the Devil, and that my
affrighting thoughts were the too natural offspring of that Principle: And
came to be convinced that till I let go this, I was not like to be rid of them.
But then I was as much to seek where to fix, and how to steer my self, as to
the doctrine of Election; (for very fearful I was to entertain any opinion that
might at all lessen Gods grace to any) whereupon for a while I was well pleased
with that Middle way you now gave an intimation of; till after better weighing
it, I found but very little, if any thing, gotten by it. Then I fell to
considering that other I have given you an account of, and have ever since been
as well satisfied with this, as I was with that dissatisfied. And so I took my
leave of the forementioned Principle, and was thereupon, I thank God, well rid
of its troublesome attendants. For some time I could not be persuaded that
those sad consequences were so fast tied to that opinion, but that they might
be loosed from each other: whereupon I set my very teeth to the knot, and tried
all my skill to undo it; but when I found that it was labor in vain, I was, as
I said, chiefly encouraged by the acquaintance I took with this way, to send
both Principle and Conclusions packing together; and so bade them all Goodnight.


Philal. I am no less beholden to it than you are; XXII. Philalethes no less
beholden to it; which causes Theophilus to ask him some questions.
nor do I think that any ones mind has been more relieved by it, than mine
has.


Theoph. And have you not found, Philalethes, that since you exchanged the
Calvinistical for this way, you love God better than before, and can think of
him with more delight and pleasure?


Philal. Yes, I thank God; And whereas before I loved him chiefly from some
hopes I had that he loved me; I can now love him for himself, and the
consideration of the amiableness of his nature, and essential perfections: And
therefore my affection to him is more constant, than it was while it chiefly
depended upon the apprehension I had of his affecting me.


Theoph. So it must, I should think, needs be; although you still loved him
only in regard of his love to you: For though you may sometimes, possibly, be
without any great sense of his love of complacence, yet I dare say you now
never want that of his love of benevolence.


Philal. No never.

Theoph. You have also a clearer sense of the goodness of the divine precepts,
and of the hatefulness and vileness of sin, have not you?


Philal. Yes, a much clearer; which I hope has some good influence upon my
life.


Theoph. So your love alone must needs have; but much more that and this
together.


Philal. But, Theophilus, what a Catechist are you grown all of a sudden? I
pray desist from putting any more Questions of this nature. Did I not so well
know you, I should have done but foolishly in thus freely answering those you
have asked me: And had I of mine own accord told you, what you have now heard,
you your self would have accounted me too guilty of boasting and vainglory.
But yet though (thanks be to Gods grace) I am somewhat better than I have been;
yet am I still sensible of so much weakness, of such great discomposure of
thoughts, and disorderliness of affections, as may well keep me exceedingly low
in mine own eyes, and Antidote me from pride and conceitedness in regard of my
seize, (were they greater than they are) even though I should only be
beholden to my own strength for them. But seeing you are so good at
Catechizing, why may not I be so also?


Theoph. So you have been, I think, sufficiently, since the beginning of this
discourse.


Philal. But why may not I repeat to you your own Questions?


Theoph. But you have time little enough, at present, for other matters: don't
you see? the Sun grows low.


Philal. Well then, to pursue more closely the business in hand: Do not our
Adversaries in this point accuse those Friends of ours of Arminianism in
asserting Free Will, XXIII. Of Freewill.
notwithstanding that their Middle way?


Theoph. This way teaches us to assert no Free Will that is opposite to
Free Grace: And only thus much, that men are invested by God with ability to
do much in order to salvation; as, to abstain from the external acts of sin, to
hear his Word, read it and consider it, and to endeavor to subdue all their
lusts, and perform whatsoever duties are required of them, etc. And likewise by
the infinitely-strong motives contained in the Gospel, by the motions of his
holy Spirit, various providence, or in one word, by his preventing grace, may
they will so to do. But that we can, of ourselvs, turn our own wills from the
ways of sin to the ways of God, is peremptorily denied by us; and, for ought
that I can learn, by the Remonstrants themselves also; as much as they are
accused by some for so asserting.


Philal. But don't we see that the generality of men that enjoy the means of
grace are never the better for them, but continue in wilful disobedience?


Theoph. It Is too true, and matter of saddest lamentation: but what of that?
Let us, in Gods name, charge it wholly upon themselves; and not say, they are
not able to do otherwise: if this were so, I should think it the greatest folly
in the world to be angry with a wicked man. Don't we see that the threatening of
an easy punishment, or the promise of a small reward, will make men find a
will to abstain from several sins, which they would not be kept from by all the
threatenings and promises in the Book of God? Therefore, surely, by the help of
these, (and especially if we take the other helps along with them, that were
but now named) they may will not only to keep from some sins, but also to
endeavor to keep from all. Men's Wills being so seldom wrought upon, does not
prove that they have no power to will thus to do: For we see that it is the
very same thing as to all other habits, as well as sinful ones: there is not
one among many, scarcely, that will be broken of such Customs as are in
themselves very innocent, no, though they find them prejudicial to them; as I
need not give you instances. But then for so few men's being thoroughly converted
by the means of grace, let us much less run to Gods absolute decreeing their
non-conversion or damnation to give a Solution of it. Nor let us so wrong God,
as to say that it is any way long of him, or that he has been wanting to them;
and by this means excuse them. What reason have we to imagine that they are not
themselves in all the fault? and that God would not have given them such a
measure of grace, as would have effectually converted them, had they but acted
in some sutableness to the power he has given them? Had they but done what
they could, and might have willed to have done too, but that they freely chose
the contrary; And against the checks of their own Consciences, and all the
methods of Gods grace, with a free, not fatal willingness, preferred the
pleasing of their senses before the salvation of their souls. God has said
enough to persuade us not to imagine this; as may be largely shown.


Philal. I could never hear the most wicked wretch, when he is wisest, and most
himself, (I mean when on his deathbed, or under some smart affliction) either
complain of God, or curse Adam for his neglect of the means of grace, and
unmindfulness of his precious soul: And those of them whose consciences are
awakened do ever lay the blame on themselves principally, of their carelessness
and disobedience: And not at all, I say, either on their Creator or first
parents; as if by the one or the other they were brought into so sad a
condition, as to be under an impossibility of so much as willing to do
otherwise. But then they are heard to befool themselves exceedingly, and to make
God a many fair promises how good they will be, if he will but please to prolong
their lives, or remove their afflictions: which is a plain Argument, that
(whatsoever specious shows of Reason any of them might once have pleased
themselves with, for their being under a necessity of behaving themselves as they
did) their own experience, and inward sense of their souls undoubtedly assures
them, now that they have leisure sedately to consult them, that they are much
freer creatures than they were once willing to fancy themselves to be.


Theoph. That one Argument would satisfy me, more than the most plausible ones
I ever met with of the other side.


Philal. But we see, Theophilus, whither too many of those are carried, that
deny all freedom of will in unregenerate men, as to that which is good: for, I
think I may say, that even all those that best understand themselves in that
way, do also oppose this Liberty as to all the actions of all men: wherein they
are not a little beholden to Mr. Hobbs, as hard an opinion as too deservedly
they have of him.


Theoph. But the Philosophical subtilties whereby that Gentleman and his
Brethren in this point, have defended that opinion, may be abundantly confuted
by the contrary and confessed sense of almost all Mankind, and by the
knowledge we have of our own souls. For we are able at any time to make an
experiment to our selves, that there is an (...) or self-moving principle in our
Wills, and that they are nor blind powers necessarily following the dictates
of our Understandings; (the Will being doubtless no really-distinct faculty
from the Understanding, nor from the Soul neither; but the Soul it self, as it
simply understands or apprehends an object under the notion of true or good, or
as by comparing one with another it judges of them, is called the
Understanding; and as it puts it self forward toward the doing or having
any thing, or refuses so to do, it is called the Will). For we find that we
are able to will to do what we know ought not to be done, and to omit what we
are assured we ought to do: I say, we find this by sad experience; and
therefore when we do thus, our Wills contradict and disobey the dictates of our
Understandings. And if this were not so, (let those men say what they can)
there could be no such thing as a sin against Conscience.


Philal. Our own Feeling and Sensation is a thousand times more convincing than
any Argument can possibly be that is only founded in Speculation.


Theoph. Yes verily. But whereas I said, that this strange opinion is against
the sense of almost all Mankind; I think I spoke too modestly, and might have
spared that [ almost]. For I cannot imagine that those men themselves, that are
the greatest Zealots for the Doctrine of men's Wills being under a fatal
necessity, either by the means of Gods Decrees, or upon any other account; (I
say, I cannot imagine that) they really believe it themselves, except in some
certain Fits; as confidently as they may talk or write (I will not say to show
their parts, but) to manage a disputation. For they will as much befool and vex
at themselves when they are sensible they have done amiss, as other folk. But
how a man's Conscience, or the reflecting of his practical Understanding upon
his actions should trouble him, so as to make him condemn himself; I cannot by
any means understand, if he be not at the same time conscious to himself, that
he might have done otherwise.


Philal. None are more angry with others neither, than they use to be, and that
not only upon the account of actions, but also of opinions: there are none in
the world more impatient toward those that are not of their mind than I
perceive the violent men of that way are: Nay, they will be ready to call you
Heretic if you don't think as they do in Philosophy, as well as in Divinity.


Theoph. But there is nothing in the world more certain, than that if all men's
actions and opinions be the necessary result of an irresistible Fate, they may
only pity Naughty men, and poor Heretics; it would be the most unaccountable
folly to be angry with them. And though they are never so willingly so, this
can make them the objects of only so much the greater pity; seeing, according
to their doctrine, they cannot but will so to be. And he therefore that shall
storm against you and me, for talking against this Doctrine, XXIV. Of the state
of the Heathens.
will in so doing take our parts, and declare himself to be of our mind.


Philal. But we have all this while, Theophilus, been discoursing only of such
as enjoy the means of grace; but what say you to the Heathens, that never heard
of Christ, or saw one letter of the Bible? Are not they under a fatal necessity
of being damned? And is not God wanting to them, think you?


Theoph. To say the truth, many of them, for all their not having heard of
Christ, and their being strangers to the Bible, have outdone most Christians,
to our great shame be it spoken. But, I say, that God is not nor has not been
wanting to them neither, as to the enabling them to do so much, as he expects
from them; and so making them capable of some lower degrees of happiness. Has
not our Savior told us, that where little is given, but little shall be
required? And I have heard of a mere Natural Fool, that on his deathbed said,
Lord, where thou give but little, thou do not expect much. God has given
the meanest of them a sense of good and evil in diverse instances, and that he
is willing to assist them with his grace to live accordingly; as also that he
sometimes excites their Wills, who dares deny? Has not S. Paul told us, that
they are without excuse, or rendered inexcusable? but how can they be so, if
they are denied what is, at least, so far necessary as was now said? But,
Philalethes, we need not trouble our selves about them; we shall, no question,
at the great day (if we can but have patience to wait till then) clearly
understand the infinite justice of God Almighty's proceedings with them; and
that those of them, that shall then have the sentence of condemnation past upon
them, will accuse themselves mostly, and not at all their Maker for it. For my
part, I will not say that they are any of them saved; but I would not for a
world, neither, pronounce them all damned. I know that there is no name under
heaven whereby men can be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ; but I am
nowhere told, that those which never heard of him cannot be saved by him,
without faith in him. If this be so, what becomes of poor Infants? nay, of all
those, except a Prophet or two, that lived before the coming of our Savior? He
shall be my great Apollo, that can give me sufficient reason to believe that
any under the Law, except some few extraordinary persons, had faith in Christ's
death for the remission of their sins; whenas his own Disciples had not, till
after his Resurrection: but yet eleven of them will be acknowledged to have
been good men before his death. Nay, it is evident, that till after his
Resurrection, they retained too gross a notion of the Messiah. So that, I say,
if any of the Heathens be saved (which if they are not, it will be their own
faults) it may be time enough to understand their obligation to Christ for it,
when they are come into the other world. But why should we Christians be less
charitable toward them, than were the very Jews? who admitted those that
observed the seven Precepts of Noab, and worshipped the true God, (who were
called Proselytes of the gate) to the hope of eternal life. And the saying of
Trypho the Jew to Justin Martyr is very observable. If thou had continued a
Heathen Philosopher, said he, and lived unblamably, there would have been hope
of thee: but seeing thou leavest God, to believe in a Man, what hope can there
be of thy salvation?

So that if I were bound to give my sense of the honestest of the Heathens, I
would choose to judge on the right hand: but we have nothing to do with them;
nor can any Argument drawn from the consideration of their circumstances,
establish the doctrine against which we have so freely expressed our selves.


Philal. From that little you have said of them, it plainly enough appears.
But besides, there are some, you know, that are of opinion that those who have
been in the worst circumstances in this state, and enjoyed the least means, may
continue in a state of probation for some time betwixt their departure hence
and the day of Judgment, and have better means then afforded them.


Theoph. Whether that will be so or no, XXV. That God has ways, though they
may be perfectly unknown to us, to clear the justice and goodness of his
dealings with all mankind.
God only knows: But this, methinks, should be by all granted, that the
infinitely-wise God has ways enough, though never so much unknown to us, to
clear his Justice and Goodness, in his dealing with the whole world; though the
Doctrine some are so fond of, and we no less dislike, should have no truth in
it: And that he may have most wise holy and good ends in those dispensations
that seem most harsh to us; which we cannot so much as dream of. Nor is it fit
for us to desire that unsearchable wisdom it self should make us acquainted
with the reasons of all his actings; or level his Providence with our most
shallow capacities, and gratify our licourish curiosity in all our enquiries.
We may well be abundantly satisfied with this, That God is perfectly holy,
wise, and good; and that he cannot do any thing disbecoming or unworthy of
those attributes. And therefore as desirous as I am to defend, according to my
weak ability, what the Almighty has declared concerning himself in the
plainest manner that words can express, from the attempts of those, that I
think in my conscience do take a course (as well as they may mean) to render it
insignificant, and to vindicate him from those notions that most evidently tend
to eclipse those perfections which he most desires to be known by: yet I
altogether dislike prying into those matters that he has kept secret, and
affecting to be wise above what is written.


Philal. If all men were of that mind, the Controversy in hand would be soon
ended. But, Theophilus, there are those that say, that what we are forced to
acknowledge to defend our Middle way, XXVI. Whether what must be acknowledged,
to defend that middle way, tends to encourage security, etc.
tends to encourage men in Security, and to defer the great work of
Repentance to the very last: For that it from thence follows, that it is in
men's power, when they please to have a mind to it, to put themselves into the
number of Gods faithful and elect people.


Theoph. We most heartily abominate that consequence; nor can any doctrine of
ours be at all charged with it. For we say that men may sin away their day of
grace, even before that of their lives be expired. And by their often grieving
Gods holy Spirit, and quenching his blessed motions, they may cause him quite
to leave them, and give them over to the hardness of their own hearts. And let
me speak to the man, that is hereby inclined to be more secure, in the words of
the excellent person, a passage in whose Sermon I before quoted, and which
presently follow it. Thou wretched Fool! dare thou make an advantage of Gods
goodness to assist and patronize thy security? Has he promised to give thee
Repentance, whenever thou please to allow thy self leisure to seek it? No,
know, there is a time, (and presuming security does hasten and add wings to
that time) when there shall be found no place for Repentance, etc.


Philal. I wish you could as easily vindicate the contrary doctrine from
tending to make men secure and careless.


Theoph. I wish I could, XXVII. That the Doctrine discoursed against does a
world of mischief.
but for my life I cannot: And I am sure it does a world of mischief. Many whom
I hope are good people would be better, I verily think, were it not for that
doctrine: But I am certain that multitudes of wicked wretches are greatly
hardened in their sins by it; and will not endure to be told that it is not
true, that they may not be deprived of the main prop of their security. They
will fleer in the faces of their pious Ministers, when they pathetically excite
them to work out their own salvation; and flatter themselves with this, that
whatere the Preacher is pleased to say, there is no necessity of any such
strictness and diligence, or of any at all: for their fate is determined; and
that though holiness be necessary to happiness, yet if they are absolutely
designed for happiness, God will sure enough, at one time or other make them
holy; but if not, let them do what they can, he will not. And who can answer
this? Were there no other mischief attending the doctrine than this, it would
make one conclude it false. And would it not vex one to the very soul, to be
liable to be baffled by every sorry Rascal; and that too in a business of
infinitely the most weighty importance?


Philal. I see you have some hot blood in you, and can for a need be very
heartily angry. One would think all the veins in your body to have emptied
themselves into your face.


Theoph. Say you so? I must confess I can never think of this Mischief, but I
am apt to be much moved: and to say the truth, I give my self leave to be angry
upon such accounts; I wish that no much slighter occasions could ever make me
so, and then of all my sins, I should least bewail that of Passion. Well,
Philalethes, I am sure that our doctrine is a mighty incentive to holiness, and
the other a no less obstacle; as many as there are whose true goodness does
antidote them against the poison of it. And this is the great Test and
Standard, whereby I examine points of Controversy; I consider which of the
opposites tends most to the advancement of real holiness, (which I have more
than once had occasion to tell you, XXVIII. The Test by which Theophilus
examines controverted points.
is the great design of the Christian Religion) and that I think my self bound
to prefer, which I find does this: but that which apparently tends to make men
careless in their prosecutions of it, I account my self obliged to reject as
false, as great shows as it may have of probability. Nor is it any thing in the
world, but the clear sense I have that this doctrine does so, as also that it,
with its unavoidable consequents, shamefully misrepresents our blessed Creator
and Redeemer, that makes me oppose it, as I sometimes do, and conclude it to be
erroneous.


Philal. But you likewise reject it because it contradicts (as was said) such
an innumerable company of Scriptures?


Theoph. The forementioned considerations make me interpret those few
Scriptures that seem to make for it, by these many; and not these many, by
those few.


Philal. I believe this doctrine would quickly be exploded by all good men, if
they could once be persuaded to think that the Ninth to the Romans is capable
of another Exposition than that which is commonly given to it: For I know no
other Scriptures urged for it, but may be answered with ease enough.


Theoph. Though I will not say, XXIX. Of the great obscurity of S. Paul's style
in many places; and the causes of it.
that it is easy to give the true sense of every verse in that Chapter, any
more than it is in many others of S. Paul's Epistles, (whose style is often the
most obscure I ever read, the connexions in many places being not to be found
without extreme difficulty; which is occasioned, I think, chiefly by his many
tacit Answers to Objections, and Questions made to him by those to whom he
wrote, which we are unacquainted with; as also having a very curt and short way
of expressing himself, (observing very much in the Greek Tongue the Hebrew way
of speaking) and besides, making so many excursions as he does, and very long
Parentheses; upon which accounts, if not more, no Apostle has been so
misunderstood as he; and, if you observe it, you shall find that they are S.
Paul's Epistles out of which almost all our wild opinions have principally had
their original, through the ignorance of men, or what is worse. The Apostle S.
Peter observes, that even in his days, (when they were much more easily
intelligible than now they are) there were some things in them hard to be
understood, which those that were unlearned and unstable wrested (as they did
the other Scriptures also) to their own destruction). I say therefore, though
it may not be easy to give the true sense of every verse in that Ninth to the
Romans; yet I count it far less difficult to vindicate it from patronizing
Absolute Reprobation, than to prove it does so.


Philal. If it be not too great a trouble, I could wish that you would run it
over with a brief Paraphrase.


Theoph. That I need not do, nor above half that Chapter; there being but about
so much of it that signifies any thing toward the countenancing of that
opinion: And so far I will comply with your desire. The Apostle having in the
five first verses expressed his great sorrow for his Countrymen the Jews, XXX.
A Paraphrase upon several verses in the Ninth to the Romans.
in that by their killing the Messiah, and most obstinate persisting in
unbelief, they had provoked God to resolve upon the casting off and rejecting
their Nation in general, that is, to put them into the same circumstances with
the rest of the world, and in some respects into worse, viz to deprive them of
their good land, and even to cause them to cease to be a Nation or Body
Politic, but to be dispersed here and there up and down the world; and
therefore necessarily deprived of the extraordinary advantages for their souls
they had an enjoyment of, which are there summed up, together with not a few
temporal ones; they having been a people owned by God above all other, and his
most special Favorites: I say, having done this in the five first verses, it
follows

In the 6. Not as though the Word of God had taken none effect; for they are
not all Israel that are of Israel.

In which words he answers an Objection they might make against the possibility
of Gods rejecting them, viz. If this be so, how can the promise of God to
Abraham concerning his seed be performed? And he replieth, They are not all
Israel that are of Israel; i. e. God has reserved to himself a liberty of
determining at several times, according to his pleasure, who shall be esteemed
that seed of Abraham to whom the promise belongs, and therefore he may
restrain it to those that were never the seed of his loins, but of his faith
only. And he shows next that this liberty God did use immediately after the
promise: for, says he in

V. 7. Neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all children, but
in Isaac shall thy seed be called: i. e. Those which came from Abraham's loins
were not all accounted those sons of Abraham that should have a share in the
promise, but those only which he should have by Isaac. And he says in

V. 8. That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God, but the children of the promise are accounted for the seed. i.
e. They that descended from Abraham by carnal generation were not all heirs of
the promised Blessing; but only those children he had by virtue of the promise
were accounted for the seed that should so be. Then it follows,

V. 9. For this is the word of promise, At this time will I come, and Sarah
shall have a son. i. e. The birth of Isaac was a special effect of Gods
promise; he being miraculously born of a naturally-barren woman, and according
to the ordinary course of nature past childbearing, had she been never so
fruitful; and his father being a very old man. Then says he,

V. 10, 11, 12. And not only this, but when Rebecca also had conceived by one,
even by our father Isaac (for the children being yet unborn, nor having done
good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand not of
works, but of him that calls) it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the
younger. i. e. Neither did God at one time only declare, that he reserved to
himself liberty to distinguish between the sons of Abraham, as to their
enjoyment of the promised inheritance, and other extraordinary privileges; but
he declared it again concerning the sons of Isaac: For before the birth of the
Twins which he had by Rebecca, and therefore when neither had done good or
evil, whereby there should be any difference made between them, it was reveled
by God to her, that her elder son, that is, the people that should be born of
him, should serve the younger, or the Nations that should descend from him.
This I say, because Esau in his own person did never serve Jacob. And this
appears farther, in that God told Rebecca at the same time, that two NATIONS
were in her womb. So that God declared to Rebecca, that he intended to restrain
the promise made to Abraham to the seed of Jacob only; and that they alone
were chosen by him to inherit the good land, together with its appendages. And
this privilege, he tells them here, they had not upon the account of any
foreseen desert of theirs, but only of his free goodness that called or
designed them thereunto. Then he thus proceeds,

V. 13. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. This is a
quotation out of Malachi 1, 2, 3. where Esau's person was not spoken of; but by
Esau, his posterity the Edomites are understood; as you will see, if you
consult the place. Some conceive, that whereas God says by the Prophet that he
hated Esau or the Edomites, he meant no more than that he less loved them than
the Israelites, or was not so kind to them, as he was to these; in that
whereas he gave Jacob or the Israelites a land flowing with milk and honey, the
portion of Esau or the Edomites was the stony and barren mountains of Seir. And
it is certain that so the word that signifies to hate is in many places to be
understood. As Genesis 29. 31. Jacob is said to hate Leah; i. e. he loved Rachel
better, as appears by the foregoing verse. In Luke 14. 26. we are required to
hate our father and mother, etc. and John 12. 25. to hate our lives. But nobody
understands by hating these, any more than not loving them so well as Christ.
But however, I conceive that by hating in this chapter of Malachi, is to be
understood very severely punishing: and indeed, the words following make this
evident. And observe that the Apostle does here only allude to these words of
the Prophet: nor does he say, that before the children had done either good or
evil, God said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated; but only, The elder
shall serve the younger. But as for that saying, Esau have I hated, it was
after their wicked and most unnatural behavior toward their brethren the
Israelites, and also upon the account; as you will see, if you compare this
place with the Prophecy of Obadiah; where, in verse. 10. it is said, For thy
violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be
cut off for ever: And in the next verses, we see what the violence they are
charged with was. I confess I do not know but that I am singular in this
Exposition; but it is so very evident, that I should wonder if several
Expositors should not have hit upon it. Now then the Apostle says,

V. 14. Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. i. e. Will God be unjust
in casting off the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, which strictly observe the
Law given them by Moses, and making those of the Gentiles his special
favorites in their stead, that believe his Revelation made by Christ and his
Apostles? No surely, we cannot accuse him of injustice if he does so; for it is
but agreeable to his own words to Moses.

V. 15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and
I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion. i. e. I will bestow my
kindness where I please, without giving account thereof to any one. And
therefore God may justly accept Gentiles to his special favor, as idolatrous
and wicked as generally they are, (for he is not obliged to damn all that
deserve it) and cast off his ancient people the Jews at his pleasure, as strict
observers as they are of one Law, they being disobedient to another. Then he
thus proceeds:

V. 16. So then it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy. i. e. From thence it is evident, that this mercy and
favor of God is not the desert or prerogative of those that with great zeal
aspire to it, but in a wrong way, viz. by the Mosaical performances; as the
Jews do, (this you will see is very clear by v. 31, 32.) but to be had from the
free grace and mercy of God by faith in Jesus Christ. Then in the verse
following the Apostle proceeds to show that God had reserved liberty to
himself, not only in bestowing benefits on whom, and on what conditions he
pleases; but also in inflicting punishments, and so casting off the Jews,
notwithstanding their zeal for the Law of Moses: for this he tells them God had
given them a plain testimony, concerning his dealing in the like case, viz.
showing his severity against obstinate sinners, as the Jews were in rejecting
Christ and his blessed Gospel. And instanceth in that of Pharaoh;

V. 17. For the Scripture says unto Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my Name might be
declared throughout all the earth. i. e. Pharaoh having long hardened his own
heart, notwithstanding the several warnings he had by Moses, and no fewer than
six Judgments inflicted upon him; God at length says concerning him, that he
would harden his heart in his just judgment, i. e. do that which he would be
farther hardened by: and adds, that he would presently cut him off, but that
he preserved him, and raised him out of great dangers, for no other end, but to
make him an example of his just indignation against obdurate and stubborn
Rebels, in the more signal and illustrious manner. That the word (...), which
is translated [ I have raised thee up] is to be understood as was now said, is
apparent, in that it signifies to raise out of some low condition, and often
from some disease or danger, as a very learned Critic has observed.
Particularly, James 5. 15. it is used to signify raising out of a disease. And
farther, this appears from the Hebrew word that is used Exodus 9. 16. which is
the very place that is here cited by the Apostle: the word there is (...), and
it signifies Stare feci, I have made thee stand. The Vulgar Latin renders it,
Sustentavite, I have sustained thee. The Septuagint, (...), Thou were kept, or
kept alive. It follows,

V. 18. Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will be
hardens. i. e. From hence I conclude, that God may without the least
injustice, have mercy at his pleasure, on some wicked persons that have
deserved the contrary; and harden others.

By Gods hardening in Scripture, XXXI. How God is said to harden sinners.
we are not to understand any positive action of his, whereby he puts
wickedness into men, or intends and increases that which is already in them;
for then would he be the author of sin; which to assert is the highest
blasphemy. Neither have we any cause to believe that it is to be understood of
Gods withdrawing all manner of necessary helps whereby sinners may be
mollified. For the Signs that were wrought upon Pharaoh, were in themselves
very proper to soften him; and most of them, while they continued, had that
effect: but Gods still removing of them, seems to be the great cause of his
induration; as among others is observed by Origin. And I remember he says,
that it is usual for fafathers to speak after this manner to their disobedient
children: It Is I have hardened you, it is I that have made a Rogue of you: for
had not I been so indulgent toward you, you would not behave your self as you
do toward me. So that by Gods hardening, we are to understand no more than his
doing such things to wicked men, which are not in their own nature, but
accidentally, through their wickedness, the occasion of their farther
hardening. And so, and no otherwise, did he harden the Jews; nay, chiefly were
they hardened by the divine forbearance to punish them for their rebellion and
unbelief; by which means most of them came to be, through their own
naughtiness, more and more obstinate; and so rendered themselves the more fit
objects of that vengeance that forty years after our Saviors death, according
to his prediction, brake forth upon them. That notwithstanding this induration,
each particular person of them was not in an absolutely hopeless condition as
to their eternal state, appears in that many of them were converted to the
faith by the Apostles preaching; though it is certain, that the rejection of
them, considered as a Nation, was inevitable; and the decree concerning their
being deprived of those privileges, whereby they were for a long time
distinguished from other people, irreversible. In the next words a reply of the
perverse Jews is brought in, to what the Apostle had said to them in those
foregoing; which, it is like, they had sometime made upon the like occasion.

V. 19. Thou will say then unto me, Why does he yet find fault? for who has
resisted his will? i. e. Why does he still accuse us for, and upbraid us with
not believing in your Jesus; when he has (as it seems from what thou have
said) hardened us, and is resolved to reject us? for his counsel shall stand;
who has ever resisted his decree? though we should now believe the Gospel, it
will be to no purpose. Nay, now he would not have us believe it, that his
decree concerning us may take effect. To this he answers,

V. 20. Nay but, O man, who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing
formed say unto him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? i. e. Nay but,
O man, who art thou, that thou dare tax the wisdom of God, upon the account
of his so doing, as if he could do foolishly? (And as for his dealing in such a
manner with you, as that you become by that means more hardened, and averse to
obey his Gospel; you may thank your selves for it, and therefore have no cause
to object against Gods justice neither: and besides, it is only long of your
own wickedness that you become more hardened by any of his providence). For you
therefore to talk after this rate, is as arrogant, as if the thing formed
should say to him that formed it, why have thou made me after this fashion?

V. 21. Has not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? i. e. If you think that God has
dealt unjustly with you, I pray answer me this Question: Has not the Potter
power over his clay, to make of it what vessel he thinks good? And when a piece
thereof is marred upon the wheel, to make a meaner vessel of it than otherwise
it might have been? and shall not your Creator have as much power to deal with
you as he pleases, and (if he thinks good) to harden some of you, when he
converts others; seeing you have rendered your selves as liable to his wrath, as
is the clay to the Potters pleasure? By Jeremiah 18. 4, 5, 6, and the following
verses, will this Exposition be made very plain and clear: to which place the
Apostle, in these words, does very probably allude; and you will by those
verses understand, that the only use God himself makes of this similitude, is
the very same with that which you now heard. Then he goes on thus:

V. 22* 23 What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known,
endured (or will endure; here being, it is like, an Analage of the Tense) with
much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction; and that he
might (or that it may please him to) make known the riches of his glory, on the
vessels of mercy which he has before prepared unto glory? i. e. What if God
does not presently punish you according to your desert, but goes on for some
time to bear with you, and, while he does so, finds fault with you for your
unbelief? What if he does not immediately destroy those that have long provoked
him to it, and by their continued Rebellions made themselves most worthy and
fit objects of his wrath; but is pleased still, with great gentleness and
patience, to bear with them (as he did with Pharaoh) to chide and threaten them
(as he also did him) that so he may the more severely proceed against those,
that shall be more hardened by his forbearance, and continue refractory
notwithstanding his threats, and punish them in the more exemplary manner, (as
he did that wicked King) I pray what show of injustice is in this? But much
less can God be taxed with unrighteousness in having mercy on some as
ill-deserving Jews, and even wicked Gentiles (see the next verse) by preparing
them by a true and effectual faith in Christ for eternal blessedness, to
demonstrate, in the most signal manner, the riches of his grace and goodness.

Observe, that the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, are such as the
Apostle says God endured with much long-suffering; and therefore they were not
made so by any absolute Decree of his, but made themselves so by their wilful
and free sinning: For what long-suffering can it be, to bear with the sins of
those that could never have possibly been avoided?


Philal. That verse alone is enough to warrant the truth of the Paraphrase you
have given of those foregoing, at least as to the substance of it.


Theoph. But, Philalethes, those that would have the Apostle to design in
those verses the proving of the doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, and the
justice of it; how besides the purpose do they make him in this verse to
conclude that discourse?


Philal. It would have been a thousand times more pertinent to such a design,
for him thus to say: What if God willing to declare his Sovereignty, was
pleased from Eternity to determine concerning you, that you should be
unavoidably damned, and to make you for that very end, notwithstanding all the
means of grace he has afforded to you; which of you dares therefore to say or
think that he is too hardly dealt with, or can complain upon that account?


Theoph. Ay well said, this would be to the purpose with a witness: but thanks
be to God, there is no such talk as this in all the Bible.


Philal. But give me leave to offer to you another interpretation of the 19 and
20 verses: XXXII. Philalethes offers another interpretation of the 19 and 20
verses.
Why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will? i. e. Why does he
now find fault, ((...) may be so rendered, for it signifies jam as well as
adhuc) for who has disobeyed his Law? Why is he so angry with us, and resolved
so severely to punish us? for we are so far from refusing obedience to his Law,
that it is only our zeal for that, which makes us reject your Christian
Religion.

Then says the Apostle, Nay but, O man, who art thou that replyest against
God? Shall the thing formed? etc. i. e. You may be ashamed of that saucy and
profane answer: for may not God your Creator impose what Laws he pleases on
you? is he bound never to abrogate the Law given by Moses to you, and to
require your obedience to no other? And then it follows, Has not the potter
power over the clay? etc. And therefore why may not God, for your obstinate
disobedience to his Son Jesus, as zealous as you are for the Law of Moses, of a
glorious Nation dignified with extraordinary privileges, make a base and
contemptible people of you; and continuing in unbelief, make your condition far
worse too in the other world; as well as the Potter, when he finds a piece of
clay untractable, so that it will not be made a fine vessel, does make a
courser, and one for a mean use, of it?


Theoph. This Exposition of yours is ingenious, and for ought I know the
truest; if either there can be found a good connection between the 22 verse, and
those so interpreted; or the 22 verse be related not so much to these, as to
the 18 verse.


Philal. But whatsoever meaning the Apostle had in some verses of this Chapter,
the oftener I read it, the more am I convinced, that there is not a syllable of
any such Doctrine as that you have been disproving to be found there: and that
he says nothing to prove either Esau or his posterity to be put into a
desperate condition, by Gods decrees, concerning their eternal state; but only
that the seed of Jacob were distinguished from that of Esau by the enjoyment of
far greater privileges in this world. Nor that he asserts any other
Reprobation of the Jews, than that which their wilful rejection of the Messiah,
and his Gospel, was the cause of.


Theoph. No, nor yet, as I said, does the Apostle say, that they were in a
hopeless condition as to their eternal salvation, notwithstanding their
unbelief; but only that upon this account God had passed an irreversible
Decree for the rejection of them considered as a Nation. For the conversion of
any particular persons among them, is not asserted to be absolutely impossible;
but all that may be proved from any of his words is, that Gods purpose to cast
them off so far as that they should be no more a distinct Nation or Body
Politic, was unchangeable.


Philal. I have been often told that the most ancient Fathers were not so
Eagle-eyed as to epsy that doctrine either in this Chapter, nor yet elsewhere.


Theoph. Several, nay most of them, most plainly, I assure you, contradict it
in their Writings in the plainest expressions; as I am prepared to show you at
large, whenever you shall please to desire me. XXXIII. That the most ancient
Fathers were enemies to absolute Reprobation, with its concomitants.
And this is so true, that you know they are suspected by many of that Doctrine
which was since their days called Pelagianism, though without sufficient
ground; if at least the Pelagian Doctrine were what it is now commonly
represented to be; but it is not certainly known what it was.


Philal. This alone is almost a demonstration to me, that the Apostles never
preached this Doctrine: For those Fathers living so near their days, it is not
easily conceivable how they should so unanimously concur in mistaking their
sense, they being in far better circumstances to understand it, than we that
are at such a distance from them.


Theoph. But how is it imaginable then, that they should run so soon from one
Extreme to another, as they must have done, if the forementioned suspicion of
some be true. But however, I can by no means understand how it should come to
pass, that those Fathers of the Church that almost immediately succeeded the
Apostles, should in such a point as this, (which is pretended to be so clearly
revealed) depart from them. Justin Martyr wrote his Apology for the Christians
but fifty years after St John's death, as appears by the Apology it self; I
mean that written to the Emperor, Senate, and People of Rome; for therein he
tells them, that it is now one hundred and fifty years since Christ's Nativity;
and St John died according to both Eusebius and St Hierom sixty eight years
after his Passion; and therefore a 1000 or 101 after his Birth. Now Justin in
several of his undoubted Books expressly contradicts that Doctrine; and so he
does particularly in his First Apology, viz. that to Antoninus Pius; which the
forementioned Eusebius and St Hierom say was the first, though it be set in the
second place. The like also does Athenag^ras who was Iustin's Equal; and
Irenaeus frequently, who was Scholar to Polycarpus, who was Scholar to St John
the Evangelist. And I can give you many more instances, as Tatianus,
Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, etc. but that this is a most plain
and confessed case.


Philal. This Doctrine, as it has of late years been stated, (as I have been
informed) was never known till fourteen hundred years after our Saviors Birth*
in the Christian world.


Theoph. But I assure you, Philalethes, whosoever told you so, misinformed you:
For that which is as like to it as an Egg is to an Egg, or Milk to Milk, was
held and taught in the first Ages of the Church.


Philal. You seem now to contradict what you last said.


Theoph. No, but I do not.


Philal. By whom was it taught then?


Theoph. By the Old Gnostics; XXXIV. That the Old Gnostics were great Friends
to it.
as you will see if you consult Irenaeus, and Origens Philocalia: where you
have them urging the very same Scriptures for it, that are now urged; and by
those Fathers, but especially by Origin, you shall find them answered. And by
this means it was that the first Fathers were so express in declaring
themselves in this matter.


Philal. Those Gnostics (as ancient as they were) are but a slender Credit to
that Cause they are found Friends to.


Theoph. They were (as I can largely show you) the most monstrous Heretics
that ever the Christian Church was infested with, from its first Plantation to
this very day; as many other vile ones as there have been: And they were as
horribly profane Devils also, as ever the Earth bore: And the Doctrine of
Men's being under an irresistible Fate of being wicked and miserable, or good
and happy, was their great Encouragement so to be, as appears by their being
so concerned for the propagation of it. Nor were they so meal-mouthed as to
stick at declaring the too natural sequel from it that all good men abominate,
viz. That God is the Author of sin: As also that other which all such must
abominate also, that understand it, viz. That all Virtue and Vice are made so
by arbitrary Laws; and founded in the Divine Will; that is, that they are mere
(...), only imaginary things, and nothing in themselves. Well, Philalethes, it
is high time to have done with this, we are gotten into a large field, and
scarcely know how to get out of it. The truth is, I did not think, when we
entered on this Discourse, to be held in it one quarter of this time; but one
word has insensibly drawn on another; and indeed we may as easily persist in
it twice thus long. Let us therefore bethink our selves, and proceed to what
remains.


Philal. I shall only desire first to mind you of a passage I have read in the
Life of the most Judicious and Pious Mr Joseph Mede, written by the Learned Dr
Worthington, and affixed to his Elaborate Works; which is this: XXXV. Mr Joseph
Mede his Judgment concerning this Point.
If at at any time (as it was said of St Paul at Athens) his Spirit was stirred
in him, it was when he observed some to contend with an unmeasurable
confidence, and bitter zeal, for the Black Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation,
upon which occasion he could not forbear to tell some of his Friends, that it
was an Opinion he could never digest; being herein much of Dr Jacksons mind,
that generally the Propugners of such Tenets were men resolved in their
Affections of Love and Hatred, both of which they exercised constantly, and
violently, and according to their own tempers, made a judgment of God and his
Decrees. Several more passages relating to the same matter, you may (if you
have not already) there also read; which show his judgment in this particular;
as much a Calvinist as he was accounted.


Theoph. He therein showed himself to be of his Mother the Church of England's
temper; XXXVI. The Church of England no favourer of it.
who injoyns us, in Her 17 Article, To receive Gods Promises in such wise, as
they are generally set forth to us in Holy Scriptures. And now let us return to
those Sons of Hers, that were the occasion of all this Talk. And take notice,
that as in this last, so in diverse other of those Points, about which there
has been so great a Contest, and which have raised such Feuds and Animosities
betwixt Protestants, their moderation is very remarkable. XXXVII. The
Moderation of those Divines in other matters of Controversy which Theophilus
has not time to insist upon, very remarkable.
For they have not (as has been too general a practice) Endeavored to run as
far from their Adversaries as possibly they could; but carefully observing what
truth may be found in their Opinions, and heedfully separating it from what
they conceive Erroneous in them, they have, I say in some more, which with too
great heat have been Controverted among us, steered a middle Course; which time
will not admit me now to enlarge upon, and therefore I will not so much as
instance in them.


Philal. Therefore it is no great wonder, that it fares with them, as usually
it does with those that endeavor to part a fray, that they are beaten on both
sides, and exclaimed against by the hot men of the several extremes.


Theoph. But whomsoever they dissent from, XXXVIII. None more disliked by them
than the Monopolizers of Truth to a Party.
there are none they can worse brook, than the Monopolizers of Truth to a
Party, or those that make the judgments of such, as they most admire, the
Standards of it. Nor will an ipse dixit be admitted by them as a sufficient
Argument to prove any Doctrine by, if it be understood of any but God himself:
They not thinking the wisest and best of men, or Churches either, as
privileged from a possibility of being deceived. They therefore look upon it
as very unreasonable, for any to go about to knock down their Adversaries with
humane Authorities, and to deprive each other of their liberty to judge for
themselves.


Philal. This is so great a fault, that it is not possible any Protestant
should be guilty of it, XXXIX. Infallibility in the best of Men, or Churches,
denied by them.
and not contradict his own professed Principles. For do we not all most highly
condemn the Practice of the Roman Church, in erecting an infallible Chair for
the Judicial deciding of Controversies in Religion, and to give men the true
sense of Scripture?


Theoph. And upon the same grounds, that all Protestants complain of that
Corrupted Church; these Persons greatly blame those, whose practice is in this
particular, like to theirs: and that while they inveigh against the Pope, make
Popes of themselves; or of the Masters of their several Sects; and so entrench,
as he does, upon God's Authority.


Philal. But I perceive, there are those among our selves that seem, by their
talk, to lay no less weight upon the Judgment of the Church, than the Papists
themselves do.


Theoph. But I would gladly hear them speak out, XL. Of the infallibility of
the Church, and those Protestants that seem to be Sticklers for it.
and tell us what Church they mean. Surely they cannot mean the Church of
England; for if she be infallible, it is more than she knows or believes her
self; for whoever reads her Articles, may swear she renounceth all claim to
Infallibility. But if she did not, how miserably would she be baffled out of
her Pretense thereto by her Sons Arguments against the infallibility of the
Church of Rome?


Philal. I suppose they mean the Truly Ancient, Catholic and Apostolic Church.


Theoph. Very good; But where shall we look for her Decrees? If it be said in
the Writings of the Apostles; we will cry up the Churches infallibility, and
believing as she believes as much as any. But then, who shall judge of the
true sense of those Writings, in matters disputable?


Philal. Surely they say more than so.


Theoph. Will they say, That the Churches Judgment is to be found in the
Ancient Fathers? But we are like to be but sorrily helped by that means too,
they differing so much among themselves, as it is well known they do; and there
being but few things, if any, besides such as are most plainly revealed,
wherein they are all unanimous. And in such points, why may not We also be
unanimous, and that as well without their help as with it?


Philal. But there are some that cry up the Four first Ecumenical Councils,
XLI. Of acquiescing in the Four first Ecumenical Councils.
as our great Standard; and assert that their Determinations ought to be by all
acquiesced in.


Theoph. But there are few Controverted Points determined by them; what then
shall we do as to all other? But besides, what assurance have we that those
Councils ascribed Infallibility to themselves? But suppose they did, must we
believe them infallible upon their own bare word? If any will assert so, they
must prove it, except we are bound to believe them as infallible as those
Councils; and if they undertake to prove this, who shall judge whether they do
it well or no? They must say every man's own reason, or hold their peace; and
if so, then all is at last to be thereinto resolved. Nor is it any men's saying
that General Councils are infallible, that will cause considerative men one jot
the sooner to embrace their Decrees, unless their understandings be first
convinced by a proof of it. If any will say, that those Councils proved
themselves, or shall for them go about to prove that they were infallible; the
same Question recurrs, who shall judge whether this be done convincingly? And
so the matter comes again to the same Issue.


Philal. But you do not contemn the Authority of those Councils?


Theoph. I am so far from it, that I have a great Veneration both for the
Ancient Fathers, and all General Councils that have been impartially Called;
and whose members have been under no restraint, but were freely permitted to
speak their minds, and give their Suffrages; but I must tell you, that such
have been at most very rarely known. Yet I will not ascribe more to such
neither, than I have good reason for; much less will I believe them infallible
against plain reasons, too many to be now given. If I could think any so, I
should be most inclined to believe it, of the Great Jewish Sanhedrin, because
the Jews were expressly Commanded to stand to their Determinations; but he that
will say that Council could not err, must renounce his Christianity, and
believe that it justly Condemned our Savior.


Philal. What is the Veneration then that you say you have for those Councils?


Theoph. I say, XLII. What respect is due to Councils.
that we ought rather to suspect our own private Judgments, than without very
apparent reason to conclude their Determinations false. And moreover, that it
is our duty in order to the preserving of the Churches peace, not publicly to
oppose them, whatsoever opinion we have of them. For supposing them obnoxious
to error, yet I will grant them to have the Authority of Courts of Appeal, and
that their Power is so great as to bind men to outward submission, when their
errors are not so weighty as to preponderate the Churches peace. But though we
ought for peace-sake to submit to them, in all things that are not contrary to
the great Essentials of our Faith; yet (as I said) there is no warrant for our
being obliged to assent to their Decrees ( quatenus so) as infallibly true. But
for all this saying, neither I, nor those friends of ours (who are all, I
believe, of the same Judgment in this point) do no less value all General
Councils then does our Mother the Church of England, as appears by what she
says of them in her 21 Article, whose words are these; XLIII. The Church of
England's sense of General Councils.
General Councils may not be gathered together without the Commandment and Will
of Princes. And when they be gathered together, forasmuch as they be an
Assembly of men, whereof all be not governed with the Spirit and Word of God,
they may err, and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God.
Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to Salvation, have neither
Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared that they are taken out of
Holy Scripture. And it will not be amiss to mind you also; that in her 19
Article she declares not only that the Church of Rome, but also that those of
Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have actually erred. By these Citations you
will easily guess, who are most of the Church of England's Judgment in this
Point; whether we or those Persons, whose talk we but now took notice of, and
which occasioned this Discourse. And the like to what was said of General
Councils, we also most heartily acknowledge concerning our own particular
Church, XLIV. The Determinations of our own Church not to be opposed in Matters
disputable.
viz. That we are bound by no means to oppose the Determinations of her
Governors and Representatives in disputable Matters; nor do they (as has been
shown) require our internal Assent to their Articles, but enjoin our submission
to them, as to an Instrument of Peace only. And what wise and good man can
think, though he should suppose them (not only subject to error, but likewise)
to have actually erred in some of them, that Contention about them can by any
means make amends for the loss of the Churches Peace?


Philal. It is too apparent that those which contend for an Infallible Judge of
Controversies in Religion, are like to do no service toward the ending of
them, but indeed so much disservice as to increase them. Seeing there is
nothing more hard to prove, than that there is any such Judge; and, if there
be, where he is to be found: And in the determining of this Controversy, the
Reason of every man's own mind must be appealed to, except there be another
Judge to resolve us concerning that Judge; and again, another to satisfy us
concerning him, XLV. An Argument that Christ intended us no infallible Judge of
Controversies.
and so we shall never have done. And I look upon this as a most certain
Argument, that our Savior never intended us any other, besides our own Reason,
assisted with his Blessing; for if he had, he would, no doubt, have been so
plainly deciphered, as that there should be no dispute about him; much less
would that which was ordained for the Churches Peace, be an unavoidable
occasion of Contention.


Theoph. For my part, I see no need of any other Judge, for the Rule of our
Faith, the Scripture, is in all Essential Points so plain, that we can not
reasonably desire to have it plainer: And moreover, in such Points, XLVI.
Private Christians promised Infallibility in the same sense that the Church
Representative has the promise of it.
every private honest Christian has a promise of Infallibility in the same
sense, that the Church Representative has. If any man will do his Will, (says
our Savior) he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, John 7. 17. If
ye continue in my Words, then are ye my Disciples indeed; and ye shall know the
Truth, Joh. 8. 31, 32. and several other promises there are to the same
purpose. I grant, the Church cannot err in Fundamentals, while she continues
so, for should she, she would, ipso facto, cease so to be; and therefore the
same is to be asserted also concerning every particular Member of it. And as
for Circumstantials, why may not men dispute about them, and maintain peace and
love notwithstanding? What is there in not thinking just alike in doubtful
Matters, that should make people so much as angry with each other? XLVII. Of
Disputacity.
I like not, I confess, a Disputatious wrangling and contradicting Humor; I
despise nothing more; it argues those, in whom it is observable, to have
attained to no solid judgment or sense of things; and besides, there is a deal
of conceitedness and pride in it, and too much, ordinarily, of a cross-graind
and ill nature. XLVIII. Of Friendly Disputes.
But amicable Disputes sometimes, merely in order to the finding out of Truth,
can have no other than a good effect: and moreover, they add much to the
pleasure of Conversation. XLIX. The way to peace.
And therefore let the Professors of Christianity labor for the true spirit
and temper of Christians; and it will be as well with the Christian World, as
if we were all of the same mind. I mean, let us not magisterially impose upon
one another, and be so charitable as to believe well of Dissenters from us that
live good lives, are of a modest and peaceable deportment, and hold no
Opinions, that directly oppose the design of the Christian Religion, and of
making men like to God; and then we shall see, that there will be little reason
to desire an Infallible Judge of Controversies, to make us all of one Opinion.
So that by this pleading for one, L. The mischief of contending for an
Infallible Judge.
(the Case standing as it does) there is no hope of having an end put to them,
but by this means (as you said well) is there another Controversy added to the
rest; and this alone, except it were more plainly decidable than it is, may
cause as much wrangling, as the Church is now disturbed with. So that, LI.
Forcing others to be of ^^r mind tyrannical.
Philalathes, those Friends of ours cannot but judge it a piece of Tyranny, too
near of kin to that of the Cruel Procrustes, for any to endeavor to force
others to be just of their pitch and size in Opinions, and to approve of their
Sentiments.


Philal. And well they may: For by this means, though men may make Hypocrites,
and cause some to profess what they do not believe, yet they can never make any
sincere Converts; but rather so much the more alienate Dissenters, both in
their Judgments and Affections, from their Religion.


Theoph. There cannot be a more effectual Course taken so to do, than this is.
And though men of some Tempers may not be able to contain themselves from
overmuch warmth in managing a Dispute; yet it is no less unreasonable to
malign our Brethren, because they are not in every thing, or in several things
of our Judgment, than to quarrel with each other, upon the account of the
unlikeness we observe, in our Faces and Constitutions.


Philal. It Is, LII. To condemn men for dissenting from us unwarrantable.
surely, utterly unwarrantable, and most unaccountable to Censure and Condemn
those Persons as Heretics, that dissent from us in any matters, not very
clearly revealed in Scripture, for no other reason, but because they do so. It
being very evident, that where its sense is doubtful, we have a liberty of
thinking one way or other: and that we are not so much as Culpable in
misunderstanding such places as are capable of various Interpretations, if we
are not wanting to our selves in our endeavors to understand them; If we
suffer not our selves to be lead by Parties, Prejudices, and the like, in our
Enquiries after Truth.


Theoph. Our understandings are not free, as are our wills; but the Acts of
them are natural and necessary: Nor can they judge but according to the
Evidence that is presented. The Understanding is like the the Eye, which cannot
apprehend the Object, but as it offers it self; nor can it otherwise judge of
Objects, than the nature of the Reasons that are offered will endure.


Philal. But Theophilus, though that faculty can never properly deserve blame,
when it is deceived; yet men's Wills may, and I fear often do; and that many
suffering them to lie under the power of prejudice, and to be governed by some
inordinate affection, are by that means careless of providing their
understandings with due helps for making a true judgment.


Theoph. You say well; but this no man can be a competent Judge of in any one
that does not declare it by unwarrantable practicing upon his Opinions; and
therefore to be incensed against men merely for not being of our mind, and not
having the same thoughts that we have in uncertain points, may be to find fault
with the make of their Intellectuals, and to condemn them for that which they
cannot help.


Philal. If our Savior had laid such great weight, as too many nowadayes do,
on such things; if he had made a right understanding and belief of them a
necessary condition of Salvation, we may be assured that the love he bears to
mankind, would have caused him to speak most plainly, and to have taken a
course that his Apostles should do so likewise, where it is of such infinite
importance not to mistake his meaning.


Theoph. There is no doubt to be made of it. LIII. Of those Divines candor
toward dissenters from them.
Now then I say, Philalethes, that those Divines, from these Considerations,
and such like, are not at all forward to conclude any man an Heretic, or
erring damnably, that is of a Persuasion contrary to theirs; supposing his
Opinions do not so evidently contradict the Scriptures, as that it is
unimaginable how any should not see it, that do not purposely shut their eyes.
And can hope well of any one, notwithstanding his mistakes, if they be not
inconsistent with true Goodness, and have no bad influence upon his Practice.
They are so persuaded of the graciousness of the Divine Nature, that they
verily believe that simple Errors shall be destructive to none, I mean, those
which men have not contracted by their own default; and that where mistakes
proceed not from evil affections, and an erring judgment from a corrupt heart,
through the goodness of God, they shall not prove damnable. But that he will
allow, and make abatements for the weakness of Men's Parts, their Complections,
Educations, and other ill Circumstances, whereby they may be even fatally
inclined to certain false Persuasions.


Philal. I remember, to this purpose, a good saying of the Learned and Pious
Chillingworth, in his excellent Book against the Papists. I am (says he)
verily persuaded, that Errors shall not be imputed to them as sins, who use
such a measure of industry in finding Truth, as humane Prudence, and ordinary
Discretion (their Abilities and Opportunities, their Distractions and
Hindrances, and all other things considered) shall advise them to.


Theoph. It Is a saying, like one of that brave Persons, who had he lived till
these days, would most assuredly have been branded with the hateful long Name,
as he was before his death; with those of Papist and Socinian (and which adds
to the wonder) for the sake of that his Book.


Philal. I scarcely ever more admired at any thing, LIVE. Of Mr. Chilingworth's
Book.
then at the Character I have read of that Piece.


Theoph. As vile a Book as not only all Papists, but some also that would be
thought no Friends to them think it; I am sure he would do a very excellent
piece of Service, (which all good Protestants would have cause to thank him
for) that would take the pains to translate it into the Latin Tongue. I think
it great pity that it should be kept locked up in our own Language. But to
proceed, LV. Of their Opinion concerning Fundamentals, and that they are not
forward to give a catalogue of them.
as that Gentleman was not, so these also we are speaking of, are not at all
forward to give a Catalogue of Fundamentals; but instead thereof, content
themselves to tell their Hearers, that it is sufficient for any man's Salvation,
that he assent to the truth of the Holy Scriptures, that he carefully endeavor
to understand their true meaning, so far as concerns his own duty, and to order
his life accordingly. And that he whose Conscience tells him, upon an impartial
inquiry into himself, that he does thus, need not fear that he erreth damnably.
But into the number of the Doctrines, they account Fundamentals, they will by
no means admit any, that are not plainly revealed, as has been already
intimated, with the reason why. And for the same reason they doubt not, but
that according to men's various Capacities, means of knowledge, and such like;
the same points of Faith may be to some fundamental, and to others not: I mean,
may be necessary to be known, and explicitly believed by some, but not so by
others; which was likewise before in effect said.


Philal. Well, LVI. The use of the foregoing Principles.
Theophilus, you have imparted to me, I thank you, very excellent Principles.
Without doubt they would be greatly effectual to the cementing of our present
differences, and healing our lamentable wide Breaches, if they were generally
entertained by Christians, and improved. What a brave World should we have,
would we but all practice upon such Principles? This would be the way to unite
those in Affection, that differ in Opinion.


Theoph. And this would be the way too, to make far fewer differences in
Opinion: For then would not men be superstitiously fearful of impartially
examining those Doctrines, the truth of which, they now think it a sin so much
as to call in question. And by this means, taking all those they have been
instructed in for granted, there is little hope of ever undeceiving them. These
Principles, being well digested, will likewise mightily quiet men's minds, and
cure them of all tormenting fears, of their being out of the true way to
Blessedness, while they are not conscious to themselves of living in the
allowance of any known sin, or neglect of any such duty, that they seek Truth
impartially, and adopt not any Opinion, in order to the gratifying of any
corrupt affection.


Philal. They will certainly unshakle, and disintangle men's minds and give them
their due liberty; they will enlarge and widen their Souls, and make them in an
excellent and most commendable sense, men of Latitude.


Theoph. You make me smile at that conceit. LVII. That those Divines procure to
themselves Enemies of diverse sorts, by their endeavors to propagate those
Principles.
But yet, Philalethes, as excellent and very useful as they are, and must needs
appear to be, to any one that will give himself leave to consider them, those
Friends of ours, by their endeavors to propagate them, have procured to
themselves enemies of diverse sorts. Their thus doing, vexes to the heart all
peremptory and magisterial Dictators of whatsoever Party they be: This whets
the Tongues of those against them, whose great ambition it is to lead, and of
those no less, that take as great pleasure in being led, and in following
blindfold either some particular men, or certain Church.


Philal. Concerning these latter, it may be said, (as Tacitus does of some)
that they are, Natiad Servitutem, Born to be Slaves; and think bondage a great
blessing: For otherwise how could they be so highly displeased with the charity
of those that would set them free? I presume, Theophilus, that it might be upon
this account that so much Choler discovered it self in a Reverend Doctor,
(whose years alone, it might be thought, should have taught him much more
discretion) and provoked the angry man, not very long since, to shoot from the
Pulpit most dreadful Thunderbolts against these Divines, in a Learned Auditory.


Theoph. There are those that suspect, that 'twas envy chiefly that put him
upon taking so much vain pains to render them odious to Gentlemen too wise, to
do other than pity him for his labor; he finding himself (as great as he
thinks his own deserts) less regarded, than some of those vile persons.
Moreover, Philalethes, thence it is that some who have more Zeal than
Discretion, (and I wish I had not cause to say more Passion and Pride than
either) do inveigh against them as those, that are so far from true Sons of the
Church, that they are her Enemies, and undermine her; and more dangerous people
than the worst of Sects. And thence it is that others too, who are of the same
temper, though of a contrary Faction, join with these in accusing them as men
lukewarm in the Cause of God, and unconcerned for the Orthodox Religion; nay
such as are so far from contending earnestly for the Faith once given to the
Saints, that they expose it, and endanger the loss of it.


Philal. I think in my Conscience, they take the only course to preserve it.
But it seems those men take it for granted, in the mean time, that those
Opinions they are pleased to call theirs, must needs be of no less account with
God, than with themselves; and that those they think good to brand with the
black mark of Fundamental Heresies, cannot be otherwise; and that there can be
no effectual confuting of them, but when the Persons that hold them are cursed
with Bell, Book, and Candle, and have the severest and most dismal of Sentences
past upon them.


Part III
Theoph. You may be sure of it. But is it not time, think you, Philalethes, to
acquaint you with those Divines Judgment in Matters of Discipline?


Philal. Yes, I. Their judgment in matters of Discipline.
if you think so.


Theoph. Come on then. This following, be you assured, is a true account
thereof. Namely, That to all Forms of Ecclesiastical Government, they greatly
prefer that of Episcopacy; because it is apparent that so much as is essential
to that Government, did universally take place in the Church presently after
the Apostles times, and therefore it is very probable that it was also in their
days: II. That they prefer Episcopacy to all other Forms of Church Government.
It being hardly conceivable, that so great an alteration as that of
Presbyterian, or Congregational to Episcopal Government, could in a little time
have prevailed over all the World, and have continued for so many Ages
together, if it had been otherwise.


Philal. How much do they or you conceive to be Essential to Episcopacy, and
therefore agreeable to the Primitive Pattern?


Theoph. Mr. Chillingworth shall answer you that Question. III. How much
essential to Episcopacy.
If we abstract (says he) from Episcopal Government all Accidentals, and
consider only what is essential and necessary to it; We shall find in it no
more than this: An appointment of one man of eminent Sanctity, and Sufficiency
to have the care of all the Churches, within a certain Precinct or Diocese; and
furnishing him with Authority (not Absolute or Arbitrary, but regulated and
bounded by Laws, and moderated, by joining to him a convenient number of
Assistants) to the intent that all the Churches under him may be provided of
good and able Pastors: and that both of Pastors and People conformity to Laws,
and performance of their duties may be required, under Penalties, not left to
discretion, but by Law appointed.


Philal. By the account you have given me of those Divines, IV. That they
unchurch not those Churches that will not admit it, though they think it
desirable that all would.
I am confident they do not unchurch those Churches that will not admit of this
Government, as highly as they themselves approve of it.


Theoph. If they should, they would be very inconsistent with their own
Principles. But let me tell you, they cannot but look upon it as very
desirable, that those few Churches that refuse it, would receive it, upon more
accounts than that of its great Antiquity. V. Their Opinion of the power of the
civil Magistrate in Sacred Affairs.
I need not tell you, that they moreover believe the Civil Magistrate to have a
Power, both Legislative and Judiciary, as well in Sacred, as in Civil Affairs.


Philal. But this will not be admitted by many Protestants, any more than by
the Papists themselves.


Theoph. I know it will not; and that some very fiercely talk against it, where
they think they may do it safely, but they bewray too much ignorance in so
doing. VI. That the Civil Magistrate has a power both Legislative and
Judiciary in Ecclesiastical Affairs.
For (as the Learned Author of the Ancient Liberty of the Britannick Church
has shown) as Fathers of Families were at first both Princes and Priests, and
as by the increase of Families, and their enlargement into Cities and
Communities, the Oeconomick Authority at length became Politic: So it is
apparent, that in the first Institution of Priesthood, Moses took away no part
of the Supreme Jurisdiction from the Politic Authority; for he, as King of
Iesurun, was constituted by God himself the Keeper, as well of both Trumpets,
as Tables. And as Moses, not Aaron, delivered the Ceremonial Law; so long after
Moses, King David, instituted the Courses of Priests, and Solomon thrust out
Abiathar the High Priest. And when Christ inaugurated his Apostles, he furnished
them with great powers of his own, such as the Administration of Sacraments,
and the power of the Keys; but all that he bestowed on them, he did it
Cumulatively, and naught at all Privitively; for he detracted nothing from the
Authority of the Civil Power; nor gave any Commandment that Kings, because
Christians, should have their Jurisdiction abated. But you may find this
Subject excellently, and more fully handled, in the former part of the
Discourse of Ecclesiastical Polity, lately published.


Philal. Seeing, Theophilus, those Divines are of those good Subjects, that
heartily acknowledge the Kings Majesty to be Supreme Governor, in these his
Dominions, in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; they must needs
likewise believe, that the Church Government He has Constituted, may not
without the guilt of Rebellion be violently opposed, or of Sedition, be in any
kind affronted by any of his Subjects.


Theoph. You may be assured of it, VII. Their Opinion of the Authority of the
Church.
Philalethes, of any (as well as them) that are not next door to Madmen. And
these our Friends acknowledge also, that it is in the power of the Governors
of the Church to Compose Forms of Prayer to be used in Public; and such Rites
as they in their Wisdom shall conceive most proper for the decent, orderly and
Reverend Solemnizing of Divine Worship: And that it is the duty of all under
their Authority to Submit to the use of such Forms; supposing the matter of
them be agreeable to the Holy Scriptures, and that they are directed only and
immediately to God in the Name of Christ; and that they ought to conform to
those Rites, so long as they are of an indifferent nature, and not imposed as
necessary in themselves, or essential parts of Worship, or to recommend the
Worshippers to God, and make their Service accepted, or to convey Grace, or as
laying an Antecedent Bond upon the Judgment, as well as on the Practice; but
only as things alterable, and in their own nature indifferent: And such they
conceive the Forms of Prayer, now enjoined, to be; and the other Rites of our
Church; and to be no otherwise than as such imposed.


Philal. But do they not likewise hold that Governors are obliged not only to
make choice of such Rites as are in their own nature indifferent; and to impose
them as such, but also to beware how they enjoin any, that they are not on good
grounds assured are for Edification?


Theoph. This is out of doubt: And I presume they also believe; that no Rites
may be enjoined, that are known to be but by accident, and the infirmity of the
people generally inconvenient. VIII. That they believe Magistrates are to be
obeyed when they command things inconvenient, if lawful.
But yet though Governors should miscarry in the discharge of their duty, they
question not but that the people are bound to obey them, while they command
nothing but what is lawful, though it should be inconvenient.


Philal. That Command of the Apostle; Obey them that have the Rule over you in
the Lord, has no such limitation as this annexed, [ When they command things
convenient.] We are also required to submit to every Ordinance of Man, for the
Lords sake: Whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as those
that are sent by him.


Theoph. Nor ought that limitation to be employed in these or the like Precepts:
For that, though those that are under Authority ought to judge for themselves
what is lawful; yet it is most unreasonable, that the judgment of what is
convenient, should not be left to their Governors.


Philal. Nothing is more apparent, than that if the people should have this
liberty, it would tend to the invalidating of all Laws, and utter subversion of
Government.


Theoph. That Is certain: Therefore these Divines, though they could heartily
wish that nothing may be enjoined in the Worship of God among us, but what
(considering the very outward Circumstances we are in) may be as expedient as
lawful; yet they esteem it as unquestionably true, that the people ought to
obey, even in those things that the Magistrate should not command: And that a
certain duty (and such is Obedience to Authority) may not be forborne upon
uncertain Conjectures, or any miscarriage in those to whom they owe it. The
mischiefs of contending with Governors about supposed inconvenient things,
being incomparably greater, than any that can follow upon obedience in such
things.


Philal. By what you have said, I easily guess what Opinion they have of that
conceit, that has of late years been broached and practiced upon, viz. That
when the Supreme Magistrate refuses to reform what is amiss in Church or
State; the Subjects ought to take that work into their own hands.


IX. That they judge it unlawful for the people to take Arms against their
Prince on any pretense.
Theoph. Do you only guess at it? You may be most certain, that they judge no
Fancy more wild and mad, nor of more pernicious Consequence. And know also that
they profess unfeignedly to believe (as well as subscribe to it) that it is
unlawful for the people to take up Arms against their Prince, or those
commissionated by Him, upon any pretense whatsoever. I need not now inform you,
Philalethes, whom by their forementioned Moderation, they greatly offend: You
know that also upon that account they are condemned by some; who without any
reason take themselves to be the only Sons of the Church, as false Friends to
her: And that as by acknowledging no more, they anger that extreme; so, by
granting so much, X. That they are for showing favor to Dissenters out of
Conscience.
they no less displease the other. But to proceed: These persons are not more
for obedience to all lawful Commands of Authority, than desirous that Mercy and
Indulgence should be shown toward those whose Consciences will not permit them
to comply with the Will of their Governors in some things disputable.


Philal. But do they not conceive it to be most unfit, that Seditious Practices
should pass unpunisht?


Theoph. Yes that they do: XI. Whom they conceive are not to be dealt with as
men of tender Consciences.
And do believe that those Dissenters from the established way of Religion,
ought not to be esteemed or dealt with as men of tender Consciences, who are
not quiet and peaceable, modest and charitable in their behavior toward
those, that are not of their Way and Mind: And that think it not enough, not to
obey; but they must needs be likewise confronting Authority; and refuse to
yield Obedience in those things against the lawfulness of which there can be no
pretense, that carries any show of Reason.


Philal. I suppose they cannot but look upon it as extremely desirable, that
(if our Governors shall see it good) the terms of Communion with the Church
of England, and likewise of exercising the Ministerial Function therein, may be
so enlarged, as to take in all that are of any Reason, Sobriety and Moderation.


Theoph. I wonder that all wise men should not; it being so very plain a case,
that this would tend exceedingly to the Churches security, and the
strengthening of her hands against unreasonable, illminded, and wild-headed men
of diverse sorts, who would rejoice in nothing more, than in her utter Ruin,
XII. Theophilus presumes that they would be glad, if some things that most
offend were removed.
and are ready to catch at all advantages to effect it. And for that end, I
presume they would be very glad, if our Church Doors were set wider open, I
mean, if some things that most offend were taken out of the way; and that no
such weight may be laid on any little things, as that they should be insisted
on, to the endangering those of an higher nature, and hazarding the Churches
prosperity and peace. And particularly, that there might be no Expressions in
our Forms of Prayer, that contain disputable and uncertain Doctrines; and so
give occasion to those that are dissatisfied concerning the truth of them, to
refuse to join with us in those Forms: And in a word, that there might be
nothing in our Ecclesiastical Constitution, that may give any plausible
pretense for Separation or Nonconformity. This, I say, they cannot, I am
persuaded, but heartily desire, but with submission to the wisdom of their
Governors.

And now, Philalethes, I have performed my promise of giving you an impartial
Representation of those our Friends; and I pray tell me your thoughts, in a few
words, upon the whole matter.


Philal. From the account you have, XIII. Philalethes his Opinion upon the
whole account.
I thank you, given me, I cannot but confidently conclude, that were many more
tongues let loose against them than there are; there would need no other
Solution of the Phoenomenon, than that of the Philosopher, A wise man is the
greatest Prodigy. And I believe them the only sort of men, that are in any
likelihood of, or qualified for the repairing of our present dangerous
Breaches, and curing our very ill presaging Animosities.


Theoph. For my part, I must profess to you, that I could scarcely persuade my
self once to hope, that there may be any prevention of our utter Confusion, but
that it has pleased the Divine Providence to raise up among us so considerable
a number of such good spirited and generously minded Persons, the thoughts
whereof are my best Antidote against Despondence.


Philal. That they chiefly design the propagation of Truth, and true Goodness,
and not any private selfish interest, from what has been said I have cause to
conclude: For the Practices and Principles that distinguish them from other
men, have never yet, in any times, been the way to raise any; but the contrary.


Theoph. It Is certain they have not. XIV. Why the Bigots of the several Parties
are mostly their Enemies.
And the great reason why the Bigots of our several Parties, do chiefly set
themselves against them, must needs be because they are aware, that of all
their other Adversaries, there are none that do them so much disservice as do
these, by showing, that those things they raise such a dust about, and make
such a hideous stir and noise, signify nothing (what ere they pretend) to the
promoting of true Religion, the advancement of Christ's Kingdom, and the real
and true welfare of his Church, but are available only to the carrying on of
such little, narrow, and low designs as the making and strengthening of Sects
and Parties, and gaining to themselves Greatness and Popularity. Those high and
hot Gentlemen know very well, that if these persons Principles should once get
good footing among the People, they must either grow more cool in those matters
that do most exercise their Zeal, or there will be little for them to do.


Philal. The truth is, those men trouble themselves most about matters which
(as an excellent Person says) are neither Religion, nor the Body of Religion,
nor scarcely the Garment of the Body of Religion; but are rather the Fringes of
the Garment of the Body of Religion. They are Things, or rather Circumstances
and manners of things, wherein the Soul and Spirit are not at all concerned.


Theoph. But yet as great an Antipathy as those kind of men profess against
these Persons; XV. That it is pity there should be any distinction of name
between them and the moderate men of some parties.
I observe there are Prudent and Moderate Men in some of the Parties, that have
a reverend esteem of them, and look upon them as men very valuable. Which Sober
Persons are no less honored and loved by them also; between whom the
difference in Opinion is so inconsiderable, that it is pity there should be any
distinction of Names between them.


Philal. And if the generality of each of our Parties were as true to the Cause
of Christ Jesus, and so self-denying, as to prefer his Interest before their
own; I question not but that they and their Principles, would find incomparably
more Friends among them, than they do now Enemies.


Theoph. But whereas I now spoke of the distinction of Names, XVI. What Name
they only desire to be known by.
I must desire you to take notice, that if others were not better at Coining
them, than these our Friends are, they would be known by no other than the good
old Antiochian one, viz. Christians, or (if they must have one that is more
discriminating) Obedient Sons of the Church of England.


Philal. To which Church I cannot better express the sincerity of my affection,
than by wishing that all those who are ambitious of being accounted her most
genuine Offspring, were of the Temper and Principles of these here Children,
if they were, I doubt not but that her Circumstances would be far less sad than
now they are.


Theoph. Nay it is not at all then improbable, but that in due time, her
condition (as seemingly desperate as at present it is) may be very good. I need
not tell you, Philalethes, that these men's temper and free Principles are of no
late standing; XVII. That their temper and free Principles are of no late
standing, etc.
for they are no whit younger than Christianity it self, nor yet than the
Blessed Founder of it: Who, were he now upon the Earth, and conversant here
among us, would, I doubt, narrowly escape the reproach of the Long Name, as
much as those that in spite and contempt use it, pretend to be his only Friends
and Followers. For I might show in several Instances, that it was upon the
account of his being such a one, as they are accused for being, that the
Zealous Pharisees could by no means endure him. As particularly his Free
Conversation, void of all Sourness, XVIII. Why the Pharisees could not endure
our Savior.
Starchtness, and Affectation; his condemning their Ostentatious shows of
Sanctimony, their base Censuring and Judging, their Scrupulous straining at
Gnats, when in the mean time they swallowed Camels: Their teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men, and making more species or kinds of duties
and sins than God has made; Their Zeal for Men's Traditions, more than for Gods
Commandments: Their great exactness in little things; such as Tything Mint,
Anice, and Cummin; and preferring them before the weightier matters of the Law,
Judgment, Mercy and Faith; Their placing Religion mostly in Externals; Their
cloaking their Naughtiness with Long Prayers; Their accounting themselves
defiled by any thing without them, etc. And moreover his forbidding to call
none Master upon Earth, or to pin their Faith on any men's sleeves: His freely
and ingenuously showing them wherein the power of godliness consists, viz. in
inward Purity and Holiness: And preaching up only an inward, real and truly
Moral Righteousness.


Philal. And to be sure the Apostles did in all things follow the Example of
their Great Master.


Theoph. Yes, no question, as far as they were able: And among other, it may be
shown they did so in such instances as the forementioned. And, I fear, were
they alive now, that there are many pretended Christians that would quickly
change their Opinion of them, and upon such accounts carry themselves toward
them (as much as now they profess to admire them) as our Savior intimated to
the Jews, they would toward the Prophets, were they then living, as great
honor, as in garnishing their Sepulchers, XIX. When the temper and spirit that
have been described, began to decay in the Christian World.
and otherwise they professed to have for them. And for many years after our
Savior and his Apostles, did the temper and spirit we have been describing,
mightily prevail: but as the Christian World grew worse and worse, which was
especially after it came to be freed from Persecution, and to enjoy rest and
prosperity, it more and more decayed: And the generality of Christians grew
miserably narrow Soul'd, and contentious with each other about little matters,
and rigorously to impose their own private Conceits upon their Brethren, and
pronounce those Heretics that would not receive and admit of them: To lay a
greater stress upon that which they pleased to call Orthodoxy, than upon an
innocent and holy Life: To evaporate Religion into mere Air and Speculations:
To burden the Worship of God with unprofitable and needless Ceremonies; and by
overmuch pomp and gaudery, to rob it of its Primitive Simplicity and
Spirituality: And in a word, quite to forget the great end and design of
Christ's Gospel. XX. The Pope beholden to the decay thereof for his Power.
So that the excellent Spirit we awhile since commended, seems to be utterly
lost in those Places where the Bishop of Rome bears the sway; the very great
decay of it being that to which he was first beholden for his Power. But,
blessed be God, it has been much revived in the Churches, XXI. That it is much
revived in the Protestant Churches though the generality are still greatly
defective in it.
which have thrown off his Yoke; though there are yet but few in these neither,
in whom it is in that measure and degree discernable, that it was in the most
Ancient Christians. And the generality of our greatest Professors are still
very defective in it: And even most good men in too many Instances yet to seek
for it.


Philal. If it were once, in some good measure, prevalent in the Protestant
World; I am persuaded we should soon see those very Blessed Days, that have
been so much talked of, and that all pious Souls, and good Christians long for.


XXII. If the invisible Antichrist were once fallen, the visible one would
quickly follow it.
Theoph. I verily believe we should: And that we shall not much longer wait for
the downfall of the Visible Antichrist, if the Spiritual and Invisible One,
whose Seat is erected in our own Breasts, were once fallen. This being that
which is like, as long as it continues, to keep the other in his Chair, in
spite of all our Prayers, and other endeavors to pluck him thence.

But my dear Philalethes, it is high time now to conclude this Discourse, and
refresh our selves with a short Supper: for we cannot but be both of us
sufficiently tired, and hungry too.


Philal. If I am tired, then well may you.


Theoph. Yes truly am I, XXIII. The Conclusion.
and as sharp set, as one that has lost his Dinner. We Will therefore no longer
exercise each others patience, than while we put up our most earnest Prayer,
that at length it may please the God of Peace to guide all our Feet into the
way of Peace: That he would give us teachable Tempers, modest and meek Spirits:
and that the differences in our Sentiments may cease to have so ill an
influence upon our minds; as to create such uncharitable heats among us, and
unchristian Animosities; to the great dishonor of God; the no less Scandal and
Reproach of our most Excellent Religion, the raising of Jealousies in our
Governors, the Exposing our Church and State to the Common Enemies, and the
greatly endangering our Immortal Souls. That the Profession and Practice of
Christianity may not so rarely go hand in hand: And that we may place our
Religion in doing, rather than in talking and disputing: And may behave our
selves as those that understand wherein the Life and Power of Godliness does
indeed consist. That [ Non magna loquimur sed vivimus] may be ours, as it was
the Ancient Christians Motto, and that the old Primitive Spirit may now at last
prevail among us. That we may not peremptorily pursue our own private Humors,
and the Concerns of Parties, and prefer them before indifferent and impartial
Enquiries after Truth; or oppose them to the public Peace, Reason and
Interest. That we may hate a selfish, private Spirit, as unworthy of the
benignity, and generosity of the Christian Religion. And lastly, that we may
contend with each other about nothing more, than who shall express, in the
midst of our different Persuasions, most Charity and most Candor. God grant
that our Jerusalem may at length be made a praise in the Earth, by a confluence
of these, infinitely above all other, desirable Blessings.


Philal. Amen.


FINIS.

