A BRIEF DISCOURSE Concerning the NOTES OF THE CHURCH.

With some REFLECTIONS on Cardinal BELLARMIN's Notes.

LICENSED, April 6. 1687. IO. BATTELY.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

The Fourth Note of the CHURCH EXAMINED, VIZ. AMPLITUDE, or Multitude and
Variety of Believers.
Quarta Nota est Amplitudo, sive Multitudo and Varietas Credentium. Bellarm. L.
iv. c. vii. de Notis Ecclesiae.
IMPRIMATUR.

Apr. 27. 1687. GVIL. NEEDHAM.

WE could very willingly appeal to our Adversaries themselves, were they
unconcerned, whether a plainer Proof can be given of a Baffled Cause in a
Controversy relating to any Point of revealed Religion, than for the Assertors
of it to decline maintaining it by those Books, which alone can acquaint us
with Divine Revelations. But it is Notorious that the Romanists are highly
chargeable upon this Account, in their Endeavors to persuade the World, that
theirs is the only true Church. They need not be told, that we are beholden to
the Holy Scriptures for our having any Notion of such a thing as a Church, and
they and we are agreed that that only is the true Christian Church, which
professes the true Christian Faith: and therefore how is it possible they
should not be aware, that the best way to be satisfied whether those, who
challenge to themselves the Title of the True and Catholic Church, have it
really belonging to them, is, to examine their Faith by the Holy Scriptures?
Which it is hard to imagine they can think to be so imperfect a Rule of Faith,
as to believe it a justifiable thing to be so averse to this Method, as we have
ever found they are. This we of the Reformation have always stuck to, and we
are desirous of nothing more, than that it may be tried by the Faith we
profess, whether we are sound Members of the Catholic Church, and the
soundness of our Faith may be tried by the Scriptures.

But instead of taking this Course, those of the Roman Communion have invented
and do insist on a Company of Notes and Characters of the Church, which are
either not to be met with, or are far from being plainly delivered, in
Scripture. Had this been our practice, I appeal to their own Consciences,
whether they could have imputed it to a better Cause, than our being conscious
to our selves of the disagreeableness of our Faith with the Doctrine of
Scripture, and our not daring to have it brought to this Touchstone.

Of this sort of Notes Cardinal Bellarmine has given us no fewer than Fifteen,
among which he could afford no Place to this Note of ours; though it is as
evident as the Light, that this one alone would have signified much more to his
Purpose, than all that long Bead-roul put together.

The Design of this Discourse is to examine his Fourth Note, viz. Amplitudo,
sive Multitudo and Varietas Credentium. Amplitude, or Multitude and Variety of
Believers. And how far he makes it to extend, his next Words inform us, viz.
Ecclesia enim vere Catholica, non solum debet amplecti omnia Tempora, sed etiam
omnia Loca, omnes Nationes, omnia Hominum Genera. The truly Catholic Church
ought not only to comprehend all Ages, but also all Places, all Nations, and
all Sorts of Men. And,

First, He endeavors to prove this to be a true Note.

Secondly, To make it to belong to the Church of Rome, and to her alone.

Thirdly, To persuade us that those particularly who call themselves the
Reformed Churches, can lay no claim to it.

And it shall be my Business,

First, To show that this cannot be a Note of the true Church. And,

Secondly, Supposing it to be so, that the Church of Rome will however gain
nothing by it, as to her Pretension; nor the Reformed Churches lose any thing:
Nay on the contrary, that it will quite overthrow her Pretension of being the
whole Catholic Church, and do the Reformed Churches as great Service, as Her
Prejudice.

First, I will briefly show, that this cannot be a Note of the true Church. By
a Note is understood a distinguishing Character; but this is such a Character
of the true Church as no one could less distinguish it: And that, whether we
consider the Members thereof under, either the notion of a great Multitude, or
a great Multitude of Believers.

Considering them under the Notion of a great Multitude, the Church which is
Christ's Kingdom, is far from being distinguishable as such from the Kingdom of
Satan, which was always incomparably more numerous: Or from that part of it
which consists of Idolatrous Pagans. What Romanist can boast of his Church,
in reference to this Note, as Demetrius the Silver-Smith did of his Diana, when
he said, That all Asia and the World worshipped her? Nor can the Church of
Christ by the Number of its Members be distinguished from the Worshippers of
that great Impostor Mahomet; which the Sons of the Roman Church must especially
grant to be far exceeding the Members of Christ's true Church in Number, since
they make themselves the only Catholics.

Again, considering them under the Notion of a great Multitude of Believers,
there was an Age in which the Orthodox Christians could not be distinguished
from Heretics, by the greatness of their Number (whom the Romanists will not
admit to be Members of the Church in any sense) for in the Reign of Arrianism,
ingenuit Orbis and mirabatur etc. The World lamented and wondered to find it
self turned Arrian; says St. Hierom. And it became a Proverb, Athanasius
against the whole World, and the whole World against Athanasius. And lastly,
the Church of Christ is not to be thus distinguished from the Kingdom of
Antichrist. I wish our Adversaries could impartially consider, whose Note that
of having Power given him over all Kindreds and Tongues and Nations is most
likely to be: Apoc. 13. 7.
And who it is that is described by sitting, as upon seven Hills, Chap. 17. 1.
so upon many Waters: Verse. 15.
Which Waters are Peoples, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues.

These things considered, nothing is more apparent, than that the true Church
is neither to be distinguished from other Bodies of Men, or of Professors of
Christianity, by the largeness of its Extent, or the Numerousness of its
Members; and therefore that a true Note thereof cannot result from these. And
besides, a true Note of the Church must be Essential to it, must belong thereto
as the true Church, and therefore is inseparable from it. But how could
Amplitude or Multitude, be ascribed to the true Church in the Time of our
Savior, when he called it a little Flock, and said, Strait is the Gate and
narrow is the Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it, etc.

But Bellarmin pretends to fetch this Note of his out of the Bible, and not
only to be beholden to Vincensius Lyrinensis for it, whom he first cites in
favor of it; tho little to his Purpose, as will be seen anon. The Texts he
produces are four; two in the Old Testament and two in the New. Those in the
Old Testament are, Psalm. 2. 8. Where God the Father promises his Son, That He
will give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
Earth for his Possession. And Psalm. 72. 8. Where it is prophesied, That Christ
shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the Ends of the
Earth. Those in the New Testament are, Luke 24. 47. Where our Lord declares,
That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And Acts 1. 8. Where he tells his Apostles,
That they shall receive Power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon them, and
they shall be Witnesses unto him, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the Earth. And it cannot be doubted
but that these Texts do prove, that the Members of Christ's Church shall be a
very vast Multitude, and that its Amplitude should even extend over all the
World. But nevertheless,

1. It does not from hence follow, that the Conjunction of Amplitude and
Multitude does make a Note, or distinguishing Character, of Christ's true
Church. It is one thing to say, it belongs thereto as an Attribute; and
another, that it is appropriated to it as a Note. That may be even Essential to
a Thing, which yet is not a Note of Distinction, or peculiar Property, whereby
it may be known from all other Things. The power of Sensation is essential to a
Man, yet for all that, he is not distinguishable thereby from a Beast. But it
is evident from what has been discoursed, that the true Church is not to be
distinguished from the Kingdom of Satan, nor of Antichrist, nor from Erroneous
Sects, by Amplitude and Multitude: And that these together, or apart, are not
so much as Essential to the Church of Christ; since there was a time when, as
has been said, it was without them both.

2. This is so far from being a Note of the Church, that it is no more than a
variable State and Condition thereof; since it has had, from time to time, its
Ebbs and Flows, and has had sometimes larger, and other times straiter and
narrower Bounds. This the Cardinal was aware of, and therefore, among other
things he would have to be observed for the right understanding of this his
Note, he says, That Although the Church ought not necessarily to be in all
places at the same time, yet now it ought necessarily to be, or to have been,
in the greater part of the World: For it is acknowledged by all, even the
Heretics themselves (meaning the Protestants) that the Church is now in her
old Age, and therefore must be past growing. By the way; though all his
Heretics, no doubt, do believe that the Church has daily grown elder and
elder, yet I know not how many he has found asserting, that she is now arrived
at old Age. But it will by no means be granted him, that the Church is yet
grown so old as to be past growing, or to have a period put to its time of
Increasing. And therefore I add,

3. That we have great Assurance that the Church hitherto has not deserved to
be compared with what it shall be before the end of the World, both in respect
of its Amplitude, and the number of Believers. For there are very many plain
Prophecies from whence this may certainly be concluded; which all, that without
prejudice consider them, must needs be satisfied, have not hitherto been
accomplished. Namely, those which have reference to the Calling of the Jews,
and the bringing in of the fullness of the Gentiles, and the most plentiful
Effusion of the Spirit, and perfect rest from Persecution, and universal Peace,
with the most wonderful outward Prosperity of the Church. There are, I say,
abundance of the plainest Predictions and Promises of this Nature, which the
Church has not as yet experimented the performance of; and they are expressed
in such Words as that it may reasonably be believed, that those great things
which God has heretofore done for his Church, either Jewish or Christian, are
no better than Types and Emblems of what he intends to do, in His appointed
time. Among those Predictions and Promises, the Reader may consult these
following, which are but a few in comparison of the whole Number, viz. in the
Old Testament, Psalm. 22. 27 to 31. Isa. 2. 1 to 6. Chap. 11. throughout. Ier.
32. 37 to 43. Chap. 33. 7 to the end. Dan. 7. 13, 14. And in the New Testament,
Mat. 24. 14. Romans 11. 12. and ver. 25 to 33. 2 Cor. 3. 15, 16. Apoc. 20. 1 to
7. Though the fulfilling of these Scriptures has been deferred for so many
Ages, yet He is Faithful that has promised so glorious an increase of His
Church, with the other unspeakable Blessings now mentioned, and will fulfill
them when the Time is come which His infinite Wisdom knows to be the fittest
for that Purpose.

And thus much may suffice to be said in reference to the Cardinal's proving
this Note by Scripture.

As to those Words, in the next place, of Vincensius Lyrinensis, in his
Commonitorium, which he produces for the confirming thereof, viz. Eos proprie
esse Catholicos, qui tenent id quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus
creditum est. Those are properly Catholics, who hold that which has been
always, every where, and by all believed. I answer,

1. That Vincensius does not pretend to give us, in these Words, a Note of the
Catholic Church, but of such a Christian. This is evident at first sight: And
so is this,

2. Whereas he makes it the Character of a true Catholic, to hold what has
been believed semper, ubique and omnibus, it cannot be hence inferred, that he
believed Amplitude, or a Multitude of Believers to be so much as an Attribute
of the Catholic Church; and therefore much less a Note.

3. If these Words lay down a true Note of a Catholic Christian, then no Body
of Christians can be more evidently proved to be no true Catholics, than those
of the Roman Communion may, in all those Articles of Faith which are peculiar
to themselves. For, as to Points of mere Belief, how much more than the
Apostles Creed can they show us to have been received, always, every where, and
by all Christians? But as for that large Addition of Tridentine Articles,
annexed to that Creed by P. Pius the 4 th, no unbiassed Person can believe,
they have ever done any thing like proving, that any of them have been received
always, and much less every where, and by all those whom themselves own for
Catholic Christians.

4. By this Note of a Catholic, no Society of Christians can bid so fair for
Catholicism, as the Reformed Churches, but especially the Church of England;
whose avowed Principle it is, to receive nothing as an Article of Faith, Artic.
6.
but what is contained in the holy Scriptures, or may be proved thereby. Nor
does she embrace any one Doctrine as an Article of Faith, but what is clearly
expressed in those Books, of whose Canonicalness there never was the least
Dispute in the Primitive Church.

Secondly. I proceed to show that if we should acknowledge this to be a true
Note of the Catholic Church; instead of enabling the Church of Rome, to make
good her Pretension of so being, it will destroy it: And instead of doing
Disservice to the Reformed Churches, it will do them excellent Service, and be
a certain Argument of their being true Parts of the Catholic Church. And,

1. I will show that it will not at all Advantage the Church of Rome as to that
her Pretension, and therefore can do us no Prejudice. The Cardinal proves,

(1.) That his Church began to fructify throughout the World in the Days of the
Apostles, from these Words of St. Paul, Col. 1. 6. The Truth of the Gospel is
come unto you, as it is in all the World, and brings forth Fruit, as it does
also in you, etc. But what is this to his Church? Is the Gospel's bringing
forth Fruit in all the World, the same thing with the Church of Rome 's so
doing?

(2.) He adds the Authority of several Fathers, for this Church's being spread
in their Time, all over the then known World, but gives us none of their
Sayings except St. Prosper's. The first Father he cites is St. Irenaeus, in the
3 d Chapter of his Book. Edit. Paris. P. 53.
But the Father here only says, That this Faith (which he sums up immediately
before, and is but the chief part of the Apostle's Creed) the Church
disseminated throughout the World diligently preserves, as if it were confined
but to one House. But how does this concern the Church of Rome? Which is not
once mentioned with others here particularly named; except we could be made to
believe that wheresoever the Word Church is found, that Church is still to be
understood. Next he cites Tertullian adversus Iudaeos, Edit. Rig. p. 189.
and having searched that Book, these, or none, are the Words he means, viz.
Those Words of David are to be understood of the Apostle's, their Sound is gone
forth in all the Earth, and their Words unto the End of the World: For in whom
have all Nations believed, but in Christ, who is now come? The Parthians,
Medes, Elamites, and those that inhabit Mesopotamia, Armenia, Phrygia,
Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia and Pamphilia, Egypt, Africa, and beyond Cyrene, the
Romans and Jews now in Jerusalem, and other Nations; as now of the Getuli and
Moors, all Spain, diverse Countries of the Gauls, and those of the Britains,
which the Romans could never conquer, are subject to Christ, etc. But I again
ask, What is all this to the Church of Rome, more than to any other particular
Church belonging to any one of the many Nations, of which that of the Romans is
one, and two whole Quarters of the World, here mentioned? His third Father is
St. Cyprian, Edit. Oxon. p. 108.
in his Book de Vnitate Ecclesiae. But here is nothing he could fancy to be for
his purpose, except these Words: The Church is one, which by its Fruitfulness
is extended into a Multitude; As there are many Rays of the Sun, and but one
Light, etc. So the Church of our Lord, which being filled with Light, sends
forth her Beams through the whole World, is but one Light, which is diffused
everywhere. But though this be said of the Catholic Church; is here the least
Intimation that the Church of Rome is this Catholic Church? After St. Cyprian
follow several of the later Fathers, their Books being only directed to. But
the narrow room I am confined to, will not permit me to examine them; nor need
we look any farther to be satisfied, how this greatest Man of the Roman Church
condescended to the most shameful impertinence, in citing Scripture and Fathers
for the doing her Service. But we must not overlook St. Prosper's Verses, in
his Book de Ingratis, viz.

Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis Honoris
Facta Caput Mundo, quicquid non possidet Armis,
Relligione tenet -- i. e.
Rome the Seat of Peter, being made the Head of Pastoral Honor in the World;
whatsoever Country she possesses not by her Arms, she holds by her Religion.

But, considering how early this Father lived, viz. about the beginning of the
Fifth Century, he could mean no more than this, That the Church of Rome, the
most Honorable of all other (by means of that Cities being the ancient Seat of
the Emperors) keeps still possession of those places by the Religion they
received from Her, over which she has lost Her Old Dominion. And what is this,
but another plain Instance, of most idle quoting of Ancient Authors? Not to
reflect upon Fetching Arguments from Poetical Flourishes.

But, not to stand to consider how Ample the Roman Church was in the times of
those Fathers, nothing is more evident, than that that part of Christendom she
took up, was but a small Spot of Ground compared with the Space those Churches
filled; which, tho they held Communion with Her, were distinct Churches from
Her, and owned no Subjection to Her. And it was about or above, an Hundred
Years after the youngest of those Fathers, that the Pope was invested by that
Execrable Wretch Phocas (a Blessed Title in the mean time) with the Primacy
over all Churches. And Gregory the Great, who died in the Beginning of the
Sixth Century, not only sharply inveighed against John Patriarch of
Constantinople, and his Successor Cyriacus, for assuming to themselves the
Title of Universal Bishops (though there was no appearance of their designing
any thing more thereby, than an Addition of Honor (not of Power) to that
Patriarchate) but also called those who should affect such a Haughty Title,
Greg. Epist. 37. and 70. lib. 11. and Ep. 30. l. 4.
the Forerunners of Antichrist. And, as these Bishops taking this Title, was a
Demonstration, that they acknowledged not the least Subjection to the Bishops
of Rome; so Pope Gregory's calling those Bishops who should so do, without
Exception, Forerunners of Antichrist, is as plain a Proof, that the Bishops of
Rome to his time, did not look on themselves as having a Primacy over all
Churches. And it is manifest that in the time of the Council of Nice, the Church
of Rome was not thought to include the Catholic Church, or to be any more than
one part thereof: This, I say, is manifest from the Sixth Canon of that
Council, viz. Let the ancient Customs be preserved, for the Bishop of
Alexandria to have Jurisdiction over Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis; because the
Bishop of Rome has a like Custom, etc. Which is as much as to say, that the
Bishop of Alexandria had then the same uncontrollable Power in his large
Jurisdiction, that the Bishop of Rome had in his. And therefore that Council
knew nothing of this Bishop's having any Power over the Alexandrian, and much
less over the whole Catholic Church. Nor is any thing more certain, than that
the mere Superiority of Honor, which the Roman Church had, was founded on no
Divine Right, but only on that Cities being the Seat of the Empire. For, as the
Second General Council, viz. that of Constantinople, decreed in its Third
Canon, That the Bishop of Constantinople should have the privilege of Honor
next to the Bishop of Rome; upon the account of its being the Imperial City,
and therefore called New Rome: So in the Twenty eighth Canon of the Fourth
General Council, viz. that of Chalcedon, it was ordained, that for the same
Reason, the Bishop of Constantinople should have equal privileges with the
Bishop of Rome. So that it is a plain Case, that whosoever shall undertake to
prove from any Sayings of the Ancients, for the first 500 Years at least, that
the Church of Rome and the Catholic Church were reputed to be the same, and
consequently that whatsoever they said of the Amplitude of this is to be
understood of that Church, must necessarily make as sad work of it, as
Bellarmin has here done. And therefore it is apparent too, that no Service can
be done to the Church of Rome by this Note, as to her pretension of being the
true, Catholic Church: From whence it will likewise follow, that no prejudice
can from thence accrue to the Reformed Churches. But this is not all; For,

2. This Note, were it a true one, would be Destructive to that her Pretense,
and do the Reformed Churches great Service, viz. in demonstrating them to be
true parts of the Catholic Church. This also may be concluded from what has
been said, but it will be made more evident by these following Considerations.

1. If the Church of Rome had as Ample a Spread over the World, for some of the
first Ages, as Bellarmin contends for, this would far more redound to the
Advantage of our Churches of the Reformation (were Amplitude a distinguishing
Property of the Church) than to the Advantage of the present Church of Rome,
because that Church then was more ours, than now it is the Romanists. For there
can scarcely be a greater Disagreement in Doctrine and Worship between any two
Christian Churches, than there has for a long time been between the same
Church as she was then, and is now. But the Agreement is as great between the
Ancient Church of Rome, and our Churches; and especially between Her and the
Church of England. This our Adversaries could not but see, would they
impartially compare the Doctrine and Worship of each together. And the only
Quarrel they have with us, is, that we will not admit more into our Creed, than
the Christians of the First Ages did into theirs: And that we worship God only
by the alone Mediation of Jesus Christ, as they did: That our Laity partake of
the Communion in both kinds, as theirs did. And, in short, that we believe the
Holy Scriptures to be a complete Rule of Faith, as it was every where believed
to be by the Primitive Catholics; and that we will not receive into our
Worship the Roman Novelties; those things which were utterly unknown to both
the Roman and all other Churches in those Ages.

Now, whereas the Cardinal would have it observed, for the better explaining
the meaning of this Note, That if one Province alone should retain the true
Faith, it might properly be called the Catholic Church, so long as its Faith
is one and the same, with that which at one time or other had prevailed in the
whole World: We desire no greater Advantage to our Church, and all other in
Communion with Her; since these and those Churches which in the Primitive Times
were extended all over the then known parts of the World, are agreed in much
more than all the Fundamental Points of Faith.

2. It has been estimated upon Computation, that the Churches subject to the
Roman See exceed not much the Reformed Churches in Amplitude, or Multitude of
Members: See the Preface to Brerewood's Enquiries.
Especially since Italy, Spain, and Portugal are detained in the Romish
Religion, not by Choice or Judgment, but by Ignorance and the Tyranny of the
Inquisition. But who can be ignorant that the Church of Rome bears not the
least proportion upon those Accounts, with these Churches considered in
Conjunction with that part of Christendom which agrees with them, as in all
the main Points of Christianity, so in refusing Subjection to that Church; and
in most of those Doctrines and Practices, which we condemn in Her as contrary
to Holy Scripture, or as not founded thereon (and yet made necessary to
Salvation by Her) and not taught by the Primitive Church? So that should all
the Churches which deny that of Rome to have any Authority over them, deal with
Her as she has dealt with them, and pronounce Her to have nothing more left
Her than the mere Name of a Church; this Her Note would be an unanswerable
Objection against Her being A true Church, as well as The true Church; on
supposition that (as she holds) of two Parties of Christians rejecting
Communion with, and unchurching each other, but one of them can be a true
Church. That so large a part of Christendom, I say, agrees with the Reformed
Churches in all the Grand Articles of Faith, and in the Chief of those wherein
they are at Varience with the Church of Rome, as makes the whole an
incomparably greater Body of Believers than all those together who own that
Church for their Mother, is so notorious, that it is impossible our Adversaries
should dispute it.

The Cardinal indeed tells us, on this Note, That Besides all Italy and Spain
and almost all France, which the Church of Rome possesses: And besides
Germany, England, Poland, Bohemia, Hungary, Greece, Syria, Aethiopia, Egypt, in
which many Catholics are found; even in the New World (viz. America) She has
Churches without the mixture of Heretics. And we can Reply, That Besides,
England, Scotland and Ireland, in which Protestancy is the National Religion;
and in the two former of which, the Number of Papists is very inconsiderable:
And besides Denmark, Norway, Sweden and the United Provinces, in all which it is
also the National Religion: And besides Germany, Switzerland, Hungary,
Transylvania, in which are abundance of Protestant Churches (as there were
lately in the Kingdom of France too, and 'twill never be forgot by what Methods
they have been extirpated); Besides all those Countries, I say, the Protestants
have also their Churches in the New World, no less without the mixture of
Heretics: And these consist of other kind of Believers than those the
Romanists boast of in that Quarter. For, whereas Surius and others have told
prodigious Stories of incredible Numbers of them, that have been baptized by
particular Priests; Acosta, tho a Jesuit, acknowledges that De Procur. Ind.
Sal. l. 6. c. 3. Ovied. Hist. Ind. Occid. l. 17. c. 4. Benzo Hist. Nov. Orb. l.
2. ^6. 19.
Many of them were driven to Baptism as Beasts to the Water. And Oviedo says
of Cuba, That there was scarcely any one, or but extremely few, that willingly
became Christians. And both he and Benzo, who were long conversant in those
parts, say of Cuba and New Spain, That they had scarcely any thing belonging to
Christianity, besides the bare Name of Christians. That they only minded the
Name they received in Baptism, and not long after forgot that too. And the
former of these makes this no matter of Wonder, since he declares their
Converters to be no better Christians than these Converrts: And excellently
expostulates with them about the horrible Wickedness of their Lives; telling
them that would they give the poor Indians good Examples, this Method would
signify much more toward the making of them good Christians, than that Course
they took with them. And the old Monsieur Arnaud, in an Assembly at Paris,
scoffed at the Jesuits for the Conversion of the Indians; calling it a brave
warlike Conversion, Conversionem bellam and bellicosam; and telling them that
they had converted Gladium oris in os Gladii.

And whereas the Cardinal, in the Words following those last cited, makes this
flourish, that Rome has Churches in all the four Parts of the World; to the
East in the Indies, to the West in America, to the North in Japan, to the South
in Brasil, and the uttermost Part of Africa: If his meaning was more than this,
That there is no Country in all those Parts, but what has Romanists in it, it
was (to say no worse) a mere Flourish: If he meant no more than so, we may dare
to affirm as much concerning Protestants. But it matters not much whether we
can or no, since there are infinite Numbers of Christians, who, though they
bear not the Name of Protestants, yet agree with them in not being Papists, and
(as was said) in all the great Points of the Christian Religion; whether of
Faith or Practice.

To pass by the Christians under the Patriarch of Mozall, of whom Postellus
says, Cosmog. p. 69.
Though they are but few in comparison of what they have been, yet they are
many more than us Latins. To say nothing neither of the Armenian Christians,
falsely called Nestorians (whose Catholic, as they call their Patriarch, Otho
Frisingensis reports to have under his Obedience above a thousand Bishops, See
Brerewood 's Enquiries, p. 211. last Edit.
from the Report of his Legates sent to Rome) both which vast Bodies of
Christians acknowledge no Subjection to the Sea of Rome* I say, to pass by
these, we need not instance in any besides the Greek Church, for the foresaid
Purpose: Which has had an uninterrupted Succession of Bishops from the
Apostles, and is of greater Antiquity than the Church of Rome, and which has
produced more Fathers than that Church. This Church is divided into many
Nations, as the Hyberians, the People of Colchis (now Mengrelia) the Arabians,
Chaldaeans, Aethiopians, Egyptians, Moscovites, Bulgarians, Sclavonians,
Albanians, Caramanians, Walachians, Moldavians, Graecians, etc. And we may
guess what a huge Disproportion there is in Largeness, between all the Greek
Churches, and those Subject to the Church of Rome, by this, That the Countries
in Europe and Asia, which the Moscovites alone inhabit, are computed to be near
of as great an extent as all Europe besides.

The Greek Church has Four Ancient Patriarchs, the Constantinopolitan, the
Alexandrian, the Antiochian, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem. And since the
Patriarchate of Constantinople has been under the Turkish Tyranny, there has
been a Fifth Patriarch, viz. of Mosco. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, and since
of Constantinople, Bellarmin 's Contemporary, says of the Greek Church
dispersed through the foresaid Nations, that They are steadfast in the Faith of
Christ: That no Innovation in Matters of Faith is found among them; and but
only some difference in Ceremonies. Ep. 2. ad. Vytenbogard. inter Ep. praest.
Vir. p. 399. in Octavo.
He acknowledges that some of those Nations are not free from Superstition;
but adds, that without detriment of the Faith it is connived at, because it
cannot be remedied, in regard of many Difficulties: But in those things which
belong to the Essence of Faith, Perseverantes sunt and permanentes, they are
fixed and unalterable. He also writes, that Whereas the Oriental Churches seem
to be Reproached for their Ignorance; Ep. 1. ad eundem. ibid. p. 369.
Philosophy and other sorts of Learning being gone from thence into other
parts, since they have been oppressed with many Miseries by reason of the Tyranny
of the Turk, yet they reap no small Advantage hereby; because by this Means
they are unacquainted with those Pestiferous Questions, which at this time
infect Men's Ears; and with the new Monstrous Portentous Doctrines: And it is
plain what Doctrines he chiefly meant. He adds, that They are content with
incompta Fides, See the Rvd. Dean Stilling-fleet's Defense of the Greek Church
from the Romanists charge of Heresy. In his Learned Vindication of ArchBishop
Laud.
a plain undrest Faith, taught them by the Apostles and their Ancestors, and
herein they persevere even unto Blood: That They keep (...) integram, the Faith
entirely: That They see themselves bereft of all their Substance, their
Children snatched from their Embraces; and are continually brought into the
greatest Tribulations, yet it is not grievous to them to suffer these things
for the Faith of Christ, etc.

So that the Motto which Minutius Felix made for the Primitive Christians, Non
magna Loquimur sed Vivimus; Great things are not so much Talked as Lived by us:
This Great Prelate (whose Fidelity in this Account is unquestionable, he being
a Person of as famed Piety as Learning) does assure us is deserved by these
Greek Christians. But for all this, They must all be doomed to Hell Torments,
as effectually as the Church of Rome's Sentence can do it, because they will
not* Truckle under Her, and so be made subject to a double Bondage.

And thus have I sufficiently showed, That it would be for the Interest of the
Reformed Churches, that Cardinal Bellarmin's Fourth Note of the Church were as
true as we have proved it false: And that it would then overthrow instead of
establishing the Church of Rome's mavelous Pretense of being The True or
Catholic Church.

THE END.
Page 80. lin. 18. read, ab omnibus.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1687.


