Four Questions DEBATED.

Q. 1. Whether the Exercise of the Government of England be totally Subverted?
Affirm. Q. 2. Admitting the Exercise of Government dissolved, whether the power
of Selling is in the People? Affirm. Q. 3. Whether as the Case stands it is
best to settle the Exercise of the Government in the Person, who would be next
by Lineal Descent, if King James the Second was actually dead? Neg. Q. 4.
Whether it is consistent with the Prince's Honor to accept of the Government,
especially considering his Declaration was to Redress Matters by a Free
Parliament. Affirm.
WITH An Answer to the Objection that the Convention will not have the Power of
a Parliament.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1689.

Q. 1. Whether the Exercise of the Government of England be totally Subverted.
Affirm.
IT is necessary first to consider what Government is, then what the Ancient
Constitution of the Government of England was.

I shall take Sir Robert Filmer's definition of Government, because he was a
man, who endeavored to maintain the utmost height of Kingly Power in England,
and his definition is this, Government is the Exercise of a Moral Power.

The Ancient Constitution of the Government of England, I take to be that which
was agreed on by the King and all the People after the Heptarchy, when the
Saxons molded the Government, and chose Alfred to be King, amongst other
things these were part of his Oath; viz. That he should be obedient to suffer
right (abbeissant a suffer droit) as well as others of his people. And it was
agreed that a Parliament should be held twice every year at London, and this
continued from that time to the time of King Edward the Second, as appears by
Horns Mirror of Justice, Cap. 1. Sect. 2. And in the same Section are these
words, viz. Et tout soit que le Roy ne devoit aver null peer en la terre, pur
ceo nequidant que le Roy d'soit tort, si il pecha-vers ascun d'son people, ne
null deses comissairs ne poit estre Judge and partee, convient per droit que le
Roy ust Compaignions pur oyer and terminer aux Parliaments trestouts les breves
and plaints de torts de la Roy de la Roign, and de leur Infants and de eux
especialment de que torts l'en ne poit aver autrement common droit.

And although the King ought not to have any Peer in the Realm, because the
King, if he offend against any of his People, none of his Commissaries may be
Judge and Party; it behooves by right, that the King have Companions to hear,
and determine at Parliaments, all the Writs, and Plaints of the wrongs of the
King, of the Queen, and their Infants, especially of those wrongs of which any
cannot otherwise have common right.

And that Parliaments were held accordingly is manifest, not only by the
Authority of the Mirror, but by the Writs of Summons to Parliament in Edward
the First, Second and Third; and though there are affirmative Laws to hold
Parliaments once every year, and once in three years, I know not of any
Negative Law that there shall not be Parliaments as by the Constitution.

That King James the Second has totally Subverted the Exercise of Government,
by Exercising an Arbitrary Power contrary to all Moral Power, and so the
Exercise of Government is Subverted, I shall plainly demonstrate both in Church
and State.

First in Church, By setting up the Ecclesiastical Commission, and thereby
illegally prostituting all the Clergy to an Arbitrary Power, with a Non
obstante to all Laws; this is directly against the Exercise of a Moral Power.
Secondly, By the Commission to the Bishop of Chester, Chief Justice Wright, and
Justice Jenner, by which they turned out the President, and many of the Fellows
of Magdalen College in Oxford, (the same College where Queen Mary began to
Tyrannize) to which may be added, the placing Papists in their Room, and
putting Massey into the Deanery of Christ-Church, the greatest College in the
University, and Dr. Walker in the Headship of University-Colledge. By this
means Traitors were made Tutors to young Scholars, (for so are all Englishmen
reconciled to the Sea of Rome) a ready means totally to Subvert the Reformed
Religion and Government; for from Universities generally come great Officers in
Church and State.
The dispensing power contrary to an act of Parliament made on purpose to
prevent Popery, and arbitrary power by preferring persons in Ecclesiastical,
Civil and Military affairs without taking the Test, by means whereof Papists
sat in Council with the King, Judges who have the executive power of the Law,
and many made for particular illegal purposes were placed in Westminster Hall,
Sheriffs who had the power of Counties (seven of eight in one Circuit) being
professed Papists, and a great number of the Justices of the Peace of the same
Religion, many Officers in the Army, and Soldiers were displaced, and Roman
Catholics placed in their stead, and in Ireland by degrees, Protestants were
put out, and Papists put in, and that Kingdom was totally in the power of Roman
Catholics.

Besides, the King owns the Supremacy of the Pope, in all Ecclesiastical
Affairs, whereas the Laws of England declare the King Supreme in Matters
Ecclesiastical and Civil, and the King owning the Supremacy of the Pope, is a
setting up an arbitrary power in all matters of Religion, for if he is Subject
to the Pope, and all the Clergy swear Supremacy to the King, this is
contradictory, to have two Supreams, one by the Law of the Land Legally
established, and another raised by Arbitrary Power of the King destructive to
the Constitution of the Church of England; these things manifestly tend to the
putting all Power Ecclesiastical, Military and Civil into the hands of Papists,
and the dispensing power at once sets up Arbitary Power to destroy all the
Laws, and makes the exercise of Moral power to cease.

If it is objected, That all these things, though they are great misdemeanors,
yet they are but misdeameanors which a Parliament may correct, but cannot
amount to a subversion of the exercise of Government.

I answer that although in fact the whole Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military
power, was not yet actually vested in Papists (for then all must grant it
subverted) yet the acts before mentioned totally subvert the exercise of
Government and annihilate the Kingly Office to which there is not requisite the
actual destruction of all, but it sets up an Arbitrary Tyrannical Power which
may destroy all; and many an instance may be given, when without any actual
wrong done upon the Bishops and Clergy or the Nobles and Commons of the Land
the exercise of Government may be subverted, as if the King should send to the
King of France, etc. to Invade England, and destroy the Subjects of England,
though no English man is hurt thereby, nor any Frenchman comes into England,
vet the Government is totally subverted; for as King he is bound to protect his
people, and when instead thereof, he invites others to destroy 'em, the
exercise of Government is subverted, and the Trust reposed in the King
forfeited, as if a Keeper of a Park Pulls down the Pales which should keep in
the Deer, he forfeits his Office.

If it is said, He Is King, and accountable to none but God, and Subjects must
not rebel, nor resist, but suffer and pray.

I Answer, his being King makes the Crime the greater, for it is not so great a
wickedness for a foreign King to destroy us, as for our own; for it is no
breach of Trust in the one, as it is plainly in the other; and what Junius
Brutus says in his vindiciae contra Tyrannos, when he compares a Tyrant King
to a Shepherd, destroying the Sheep, does he say, I am Shepherd, therefore I
may destroy them? Junius says, Major lupus, quia pastor, and major tyrannusquia
Rex, the greater Wolf because a Shepherd, and the greater Tyrant because a King.

Q. 2. Admitting the Exercise of Government dissolved, whether the Power of
Settling the Exercise of Government is in the People? Affirm.
THo some have said the present case to be the Demise of the King, that I deny,
the Demise of the King being but a soft expression of his death, and is only
properly so when the King dies; and King James the Second being alive, to call
it a Demise of the King is a contradiction.

Then I argue thus, either the exercise of the Government is in King James the
Second, or in some other person, or the power of settling it in the People; but
it is not in Kings James the Second, for the reasons before given and some
other which follow; nor is it in any other person: Therefore it is in the power
of the People to settle it. If any can say it is in any other person let, him
assign that person, which he cannot, because there can he no claim by descent
during his life, for Non est haeres viventis, there must be the death of the
Ancestor before the Heir can claim any right.

Then if there is none to claim any right; there must be a sort of reverter to
the people, who first chose the King (as is plainly proved) or a greater
absurdity must follow, which is, that a People must remain without Government
which I think no man will say, especially in England where many hold Monarchy
Jure divino, tho I understand not that, or any specifical Government to be so,
for then the Israelites Government would not as to the species of it have been
so often changed; but Government in general may be said of divine right, as of
necessity; then if no person living can claim a legal right, they must consent
to the People to choose Representatives to settle the exercise of the Government.

Q. 3. Whether as the Case stands it is best to Settle the Exercise of the
Government in the Person, who would be next by Lineal Descent, if King James
the Second was Actually dead? I Answer Negatively.
BEfore I speak to this Question, I must say, Her Royal Highness the Princess
of Orange, by what I have heard concerning her eminent zeal for God, and being
an extraordinary, exemplary Pattern of Morality; true is the proverb of
Solomon, Many daughters have done virtuously, but she excels them all; this
looks like flattery, but if Universal report is true, her great humility and
wisdom leave no room for such a vanity; I shall therefore plainly give my
reasons for my opinion.

1. The first is ab inconvenienti, the inconveniences which may follow at this
time, (1.) the dispute of the pretended Prince of Wales. 2. If the two
Princesses dye without issue, the Government will go to Papists, viz. to Spain,
etc. 3. Desert is the best cause of reward, and who has deserved most, ought to
have most given; it is plain who has recovered England, and the consequence is
as plain. 4. The Princess has more advantage, than she or her Sister could
expect; for the life of the King, and the claim of a Prince and Children, that
may be of the King, make them at a more remote distance, than if he who
recovered them, and the people be let in for his life, which is no more than
the Law gives to a Husband by the Courtesy of England. 5. He is next Heir
Male, though not by Males. 6. A Princess, not so able to make War, the great end
of Isreal's choosing a King was to fight their Battles, which a Woman cannot do.
7. The Allies engaged with the Prince to defend the Protestant Religion is very
considerable, and if his Power should cease by the death of another, it would
be dangerous. 8. Great ingratitude to put him in possibility of being worse,
than if he had never come, for if the Princess dies, he has no longer power to
proceed. 9. It Is ungrateful to make him a subject in that Kingdom for which he
has done more, than all the Kings of England ever did. 10. As his Power dies,
so his person may not be safe, if a subject; for he maybe indicted by any man.
11. May be in more hazard of Assassination. 12. The Lords and a great number of
the Commons who were legally chosen in former Parliaments, thought fit the
public administration should be in the Prince.
I know some are of opinion to have the Prince and Princess, King and Queen, to
which I only say, that such joint-power in governing never was in England, and
the consequences are difficult (if possible) to judge, and tho some say the
administration may be in the Prince only during the joint lives of the Prince
and Princess. I answer, if the Princess is Queen, Regal Power is inseparable
from her person, as was said by some, and not denied by any of the Judges in
the case of Ship-mony, and it was said to be a proprium quarto modo, which a
King or Queen as such must have, and then to have joint-power, will make both
equal, and if they should differ, what should be done?

Q. 4. Whether it is consistent with the Prince's Honor to accept of the
Government, especially considering his Declaration was to Redress Matters by a
Free Parliament?
I Answer, taking it for granted (which I need not) that at the Princes coming
he could not, yet what the King did since his coming readers it clear and
plain, viz.

1. The Kings own Judgment against himself for issuing Writs to Elect, proves
he thought a Parliament of necessity, and then destroying most of them, takes
away the only remedy, and he which does so to a desperately sick man, murders
him as sure, as he who stabbs him to the heart. 2. Then the taking the great
Seal and carrying it no man knows whither, stays the Spring of Justice, so
that no Originals out of the Chancery can be filed for the Subject to have
relief in any real Action; nor in many personal Actions where Original Writs
are requisite. 3. His going with Sir Edward Hales a person notorious being set
up to maintain the Arbitrary Dispensing Power, justifies his Dispensing Power
still, by these he has brought the power into the people whose Representatives
have the right of settling the Government as in wisdom shall be thought fit; for
though some object it cannot be, for want of a Writ to call them, yet upon long
Debate in the House of Commons, when this Objection was started, the Lord Chief
Justice Hales said, That though he would not maintain the Commons called
according to Form by Writ, yet they being met were a good House of Commons, for
the Parliament is not the Kings, etc. -- but the Parliament of England, and
they being duly chosen by the People, were the Legal Representatives of the
People to Act as a Parliament, and to say the Convention has Power to settle
the Government if self, as to the Exercise, and not to have the force of a
Parliament, seems strange; besides, no man can say but this Convention will be
a Supreme Power, and for the Supreme Power to have any thing Legal to be above
their reach, is to say they are Supreme, yet there is something above their
Power, and cujus est dare ejus est disponere, if they have Power to give the
Exercise of the Government it self, which is the highest Act, and not to be
able to make Laws for the Establishing, and the manner of Exercise, opposes
that plain Maxim.
To conclude, The extraordinary Providence of God, whose Wonders His Highness
has seen in preserving Him and the Fleet in the Deeps, and what we have heard
and seen since he came on Shore, makes it apparent that the Lord has sent him,
and it would make a Heathen (like Nebuchadnezzar) confess it, because no other
God can deliver after this sort, and the works of God being all perfect, it is
to be hoped, that there are yet greater things to be done by him, for the
refining and reforming Matters in Church and State. England had Lucius the
first Christian King, as most say. Constantine the first Christian Emperor was
Born here; the first Reformation began here, and who knows, but what is
remaining, viz. the refining of all things (which the best want) may be
accomplished here to the Glory of God, and the honor of him who he has sent. I
wish he may put him upon whose Shoulders the Government of all things in Heaven
and Earth is laid, into the possession of his inheritance to the uttermost ends
of the Earth.

FINIS.

