An humble REMONSTRANCE FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the ARMY
under his Command.

Concerning the present state of Affairs, in relation to themselves and the
Kingdom; with their Desires and present Resolutions thereupon.

Presented to the Commissioners at S. Albans, to be by them humbly represented
to the Parliament.

ALSO The Names of the Officers that were present at the Council of War at the
making of the said REMONSTRANCE.

Together with A PROCLAMATION OF The strict Discipline of the Army.

PRinted and published by the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax,
and the Council of War.

S. Albans, June 23. 1647. Signed by me JOHN RUSHWORTH.

London, Printed for Francis Coals, JUNE 25. 1647.

AN HUMBLE REMONSTRANCE From His EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army
under his Command: Concerning the present state of affairs, in relation to
themselves and the kingdom; with their Desires and present Resolutions
thereupon.
Presented to the Commissioners at St. Albans, to be by them humbly represented
to the Parliament.
OUr Desires as Soldiers, in behalf of our selves and other Soldiers that have
faithfully served the Parliament in this Kingdom; as also our remaining
Dis-satisfactions, in relation thereunto, may be clearly collected out of our
several Papers that have been formerly presented to the Parliament concerning
the same; to which particulars we have not yet received any farther
satisfaction.

In our last Representation it may appear what our Desires are, as members of
the Commonwealth, in behalf of our selves and all others, for the clearing,
settling and securing of the Rights, Liberties and Peace of the Kingdom, for the
justness, reasonableness, necessity and common concernment whereof unto all, we
dare appeal to the whole Kingdom and the world; yet we have hitherto received
no answer thereunto, nor can hear of no consideration taken thereupon, to put
the things contained therein, into any way of resolution or dispatch.

We have since that, in pursuance of the first and second heads of our desires
in the said representation, delivered in a Charge against diverse persons,
Members of the House of Commons, for diverse Designs and Practices, to the abuse
and dishonor of the Parliament, the insufferable injury of the Army, the
infringement of the Rights and Liberties, both of Soldiers and Subjects, the
breach or hazard of the Peace of this Kingdom, and the hindering of the relief
of Ireland, etc. Upon which, though the main things charged with the
mischievous Designs, and further dangerous consequences of them; as also the
constant and continued activity of all or most of the persons charged in
relation to those things, be for the most part sufficiently and notoriously
known, especially to the Parliament it self; yet we find neither any thing
done, upon what is so known, nor any way resolved on, or admitted by the
Parliament, for the examination of discovery of what is less evident unto them:
But rather (as if neither the things charged, nor the present sad effects, nor
future ill consequences thereof, were at all considerable) the whole business
seems to be slighted, past over, or set aside.

Lastly, We did with these, deliver in another Paper (whereof here is a Copy
annexed) containing diverse just and necessary things, which we did desire might
be provided for, and done for the better proceeding in the Premises, with more
safety to our selves and the Kingdom, and with more assurance or hopes of a
timely and happy issue.

To which things desired (which we think all men will judge reasonable, just
and necessary) we have yet received no answer or resolution, nor can find any
consideration at all had of them, save that a months pay is sent down for the
Army (whilst those that have deserted the Army receive at London much more)
and that some Votes have been passed for annulling the Orders of the Committee
(pretended) for Safety, about listing of men and drawing forces together; which
Votes we find rendered but vain and illusive, by the continued underhand
practices of those whom we have charged and their accomplices, in Listing and
engaging men for a new War, and by a later days Votes not admitting that the
Forces so Listed or engaged should by public Order be dismissed or
discharged, which with other things we cannot but attribute chiefly to the
prevalent influence of the same persons.

Now whereas we find that our first Desire in the Paper last montioned (for
present suspending the persons impeached from sitting in the House) is judged
by some to be against the course and Privilege of Parliament, or of ill
consequence in the president of it, The Charge being but general, and no
partitular proof as yet produced to render the proceeding Legal, we cannot but
reminde the Parliament,

1. That as the most and many things charged (with the sad effects and
consequences of them) so the constant and continued activity of all or most of
the persons charged in relation thereunto, in mis-informing, delading, abusing
or surprising the House, and otherwise are sufficiently known to the Parliament
it self; so as the House might, upon their past and present Cognizance of the
same, most justly proceed to suspend them (as in many other cases upon far less
occasions, which never could have produced such sad effects to the Kingdom)
they have done many other of their Members merely for words spoken, or things
moved in the House (alleged to be but against Order or Custom of the House)
and this without any Trial, Proof or Charge, but merely upon the Houses own
Cogninance of the things, as we could instance in many cases since the
Parliament began.

2. Whereas many of the things to which the Charge relates, are things spoke,
moved or done in the House, so as we have yet no clear way opened, particularly
to charge or mention them, or to produce Proofs to them, without some pretense
against us of breach of Privilege; and therefore (though we think no
Privilege ought to protect evil men in doing wrong to particulars, or mischie^
(...) Public, yet) we have been hitherto so tender of Parliament Privileges,
as that we have only Remonstrated the evil of such things done; and supposing
the House to have been (as we did and do believe, and if way were open, without
breach of Privilege, should not doubt to prove it was) some ways misinformed,
deluded, surprised, or otherwise abused, in those things by evil Members, we
have frequently in former Papers (before the Charge) put the Parliament upon it
(who without color of breach of Privilege might do it) to find out and
discover who they were that had so abused them, and to dis-ingage the honor of
Parliament from the evil practices and Designs of such Incendiaries.

Now since the same difficulties or prejudices lie yet in our way (as to the
particular charging or proof of those things against the Members and the
Parliament) though so often put upon it in our former Papers, yet through the
powerful interest of the persons guilty, has not taken any cognizance, what
Members or others have so abused them, to draw the Parliament to such dishonor
and inconvenicnces, We cannot but again more fully and clearly assert (as we
have in former Papers, and shall yet more particularly, if need be,
remonstrate) That diverse things lately done and passed from the Parliament
against this Army (as particularly the Order for suppressing the Petition) that
high Declaration against it, and against all that should proceed in it, putting
the faithful Servants of the Parliament and the Kingdom out of the Protection
of Law, and exposing them as Enemies to the State, etc. to the forfeitures of
the Estates, Liberties, Life and all, but for going about in an humble,
peaceable and inoffensive way, to desire what was undeniable their due, and
dearly earned, and many other such like proceedings, both against the Army and
others, do carry with them such a face of Injustice, Oppression, Arbitraryness
and Tyranny, as (we think) is not to be paralleld in any former proceedings of
the most Arbitrary Courts against any private men, but has brought in
insufferable dishonor upon the Parliamentary Authority and Proceedings (which
we are, and others ought to be deeply sensible of) has tended to disoblige all
men, especially Soldiers from the same, to destroy all just Freedom, either of
Soldiers or Subjects, and has conduced to all other the sad effects and worse
consequences expressed in the Charge, and gives us and others cause to
conclude, That those Worthies who have formerly acted and carried on things in
Parliament for public good, Right and Freedom, are now awed or overborn by a
prevailing party of men of other private Interests crept in, and that neither
we, nor any other can reasonably expect Right, Freedom or Safety (as private
men) or to have things acted in Parliament for public good, while the same
parties continue there in the same Power, to abase the Name and Authority of
Parliament, to serve and prosecute their private Interests and passions, and
(under the Privileges of Parliament) to shelter themselves under the worst of
evils or mischiefs they can do, though to the Ruin of the Kingdom.

We are in this case forced (to our great grief of heart) thus plainly to
assert, The present evil and mischief, together with the future worse
consequences of the things lately done even in the Parliament it self (which
are too evident and visible to all) and so in their proper colors, to lay the
same at the Parliaments doors, until the Parliament shall be pleased, either of
themselves to take notice, and rid the Houses of those that have any way
misinformed, deluded, surprised, or otherwise abused the Parliament, to the
vehement pressing and passing of such foul things there; or shall open to us
and others some way how we may (regularly, and without the scandal of breaking
Privileges, come to Charge and Peosecute those particular persons, that in
truth have so abused the Parliament (as well as our selves) even for those
misinformations, and other evil and indirect Practices or Proceedings in
Parliament, whereby they have abused the same, as in our said Charge and former
Papers is set forth. And here, if we may, we should humbly offer it to
consideration, Whether it were not a necessary expedient for prevention or
remedy of such evils in future, That in things so clearly destructive to the
common Right and Liberties of the People, and the Safety of the Kingdom, there
should be a liberty for dissenting Members in the House of Commons (as it is
allowed in the House of Peers) to enter their dissent, and thereby acquit
themselves from the guilt or blame of what evils may ensue; that so the Kingdom
may regularly come to know who they are that perform their Trust faithfully,
and who not. And this provision for future, as also our Desires for Remedy in
the present cases, as it were clearly good and necessary, in the respects
premised, so (we think) the same may well be without farther prejudice or
discouragement in any other respects to succeding Members of Parliament:
Provided always, That no man shall be questioned or censured for any thing said
or done in Parliament, any farther then to exclusion from that Trust, which is
all that in the present case we should desire upon any such grounds.

And that future liberty of entering the sense, we do not here propose as a
thing we any way insist on to the prejudice of Parliament-Priviledges, We only
ofter that to consideration (and that) from good wishes to the Privileges of
Parliament, to render them more lasting, by being less nocent; and indeed,
whoever most adores or tenders those Privileges, will best express his zeal
toward them, in taking care they be not abused or extended to private wrongs
or public mischief; for we clearly find, and always men may see it, That
Parliament-Priviledges, as well as Royal-Prerogatives, may be perverted and
abused, or extended to the destruction of those greater ends for whose
protection and preservation they were admitted or intended ( viz. The Rights
and Privileges of the People, and Safety of the whole) and in case it be so,
the abuse, evil or danger of them is no les^ to be contended against; and a
remedy the^^of no less to be endeavored then of the other.

And whereas the Injustice in that particular of the Declaration against the
Army for their just and innocent Petition, may seem to have been recompensed in
the late expunging thereof out of the Journal books, We confess that has been
so in great measure, as to the present or particular injury unto the Army
therein; And we cannot but acknowledge so far, That the Justice that lies in
those Votes for expunging thereof, and for their own and the Armies particular
reparation, we should never wish more, nor scarce have insisted on so much to
any dishonor of Parliament in future; we should rather have been satisfied with
the Parliaments Declaring, how, and by whom they had been misinformed,
surprised and otherwise abused, in the framing, proposal or passing thereof as
it was, but as to that particular, or any other of that nature, we say as
follows:

1. We never did, nor do value or regard our own injury, or reparation, in any
comparison to the consequence of the one, to the prejudice of the other, or to
the future security of the common right and freedom of this Nation; and
accordingly we do not account any reparation considerable that extends but to
our selves in the present case, and does not in some sort secure our selves,
and all others from danger of the same or worse injuries or oppressions (as
private men) from the wil^s or passions of the same persons that have offered
and acted such things against us while an Army.

2. We cannot but imagine and consider (according to general report) how the
expunging of that Declaration was carried and obtained; and upon what grounds
or intentions it was given way to; but had those that procured it been all for
expunging it (and that freely) yet how can we expect better, but that the same
men who at one time carried such a Declaration, and another time expunged it,
may the next day obtain the like or worse (upon any occasions wherein it may
serve their private ends or interests) if they continue in the same power and
sway, and be let pass in deluding and surprising the Parliament, as they have
done in the past particulars.

3. The apparent dishonor and prejudice brought upon the Parliament, in having
such a Declaration so passed, as they should soon after (without any alteration
in the pretended ground of it) find cause (for shame of the world) to expunge
(we think) should engage those Members, in point of honor, to find out and
discover how and by whom the Parliament had been abused, or otherwise brought
into such an inconveniency, and the Parliament may in this see the temper (as
bystanders do the prevolence) of those members that abused the Parliament in
that Declaration, who will and can make the authority of Parliament to lie
under the dishonor of it in a bare expunging or retracting, rather then admit
any consideration, to acquit the Authority of Parliamant, that will tend to fix
the blame on those particular Members that had deserved it: and this certainly
would be admitted and done, rather then to slight it over with a bare
expunging, were not some men more tender of and more swayed with such
considerations and consequences as may tend to the prejudice of Persons, then
such as tend to the general prejudice and dishonor of Parliaments.

4. As to those particulars included in our Charge which depend on things done
without the Parliament, we are ready and should most willingly proceed to the
particular charging and proving thereof, if first (from the Justice of the
House in a present proceeding against the persons charged for those things that
are already known to the House, being done in it) we could find encouragement
to expect any good issue upon those other things; and did we not (on the
contrary) find, that (notwithstanding what is so known to the House as before
expressed) the same persons continue in such power and prevalency, both in the
House and in all the Comittees of the highest trust, as leaves little hopes of
Right or Satisfaction to the Army or Kingdom in other things, and much less in
any just proceedings against themselves, while they continue Judg^s of their
own and our Concernments: So as we cannot (while they remain in the same power)
expect any thing but a continued perverting and making advantage of all things
(and especially of those delays which a regular proceeding against them would
necessarily endure) altogether to our own and the Kingdoms prejudice and
danger, to disable or weaken us for those things which the safety and se^ling
the Rights, Liberties and Peace of the Kingdom requires, and to strengthen
themselves by under-hand-practices and preparations at home and abroad, the
better to oppose us, and to engage the Kingdom in a new War, thereby to
accomplish their desires, or at least to save themselves from Justice in a
common Confusion: We say, Were it not for these and such other considerations
that leave little hopes of Justice to our selves or the Kingdom (while they
continue in the same power) and render all delays dangerous, and destructive to
our selves and the Peace of the Kingdom, we should be contented that the
business concerning the Members we have charged should be said aside till
those other things were first settled which our Declaration does propound for
the common Rights and Liberties of the Kingdom.

But finding things still so carried, and that while they are Judges in their
own causes, they (with that party which they make) will do what they please,
and yet render it a breach of Privilege to be amused for it as they are, and
we have before expressed; we cannot, upon all these Consderations, and for all
the Reasons before expressed, insist upon it, that the Members charged may first
be forthwith suspended from si^ting in the House, otherwise we cannot expect
any fair proceeding against them upon a more particular Charge, nor think there
is any good intended to our selves or the Kingdom.

As to our desires of having the Army presently paid up equally with those that
have deserted it, we appeal to all men for the justice, reasonableness and
necessity thereof. The Justice, in that the former service (for which those
Arrears are due) has been (at least) as faithfully and diligently performed by
the Army, as by those late deserters of it and in our present posture (though
they have appeared indeed more officious or serviceable to the persons or wills
of particular men then we, yet) we are sure the Army is, and (we hope) will at
last appear to be more faithful to the true interest of Parliaments and the
Kingdom, (which we were at first called out and engaged for) then they in
diserting the Army have hitherto appeared: For the reasonableness of our
desires, though we have grounds to claim more then they, or rather that they or
some of them should forfeit their arrears; yet we ask for present but equal,
nor should we at present insist on that so much (as to Officers) if our
soldiers were but first paid up) our necessity to insist on that, is obvious
to every man, and therefore (unless we should betray our own and the Kingdoms
cause, we cannot but positively insist upon it, that the army should forthwith
be paid up (at least) equally to those deserters of it, which if denied or
delayed, we shall be thereby enforced upon present ways of remedy, and right to
the Army therein.

And whereas the Parliament has lately ordered and publicly declared, that
all that shall desert the Army, shall have present satisfaction in their
arrears (the Officers three months pay, the soldiers all their arrears,
deducting for free quarter) which still continues unrecalled; we cannot but
look upon it as a most clear evidence of the continuing mal^ce and prevalence
of ours and the Kingdoms enemies; and we must and do insist upon it, that that
Order or Declaration may forthwith be publicly recalled; otherwise we cannot
believe that any thing but ruin and destruction is designed to our selves and
all other in the Kingdom, who every where call upon us not to disband, till we
see the Rights, Liberties, and Peace of the Kingdom settled, according to the
many Declarations by which we were first called forth, and invited to engage in
the late war.

Next, we cannot but take notice, that instead of granting or answering our
desires in the last paper, in order to the better and more safe proceeding to a
composure and settlement of all things, for the good and peace of the Kingdom,
and for prevention of any new war, the Army being first commanded to forty
miles distance from London; his Majesty's person is demanded immediately to
Richmond House, within eight miles of London, which as we cannot but impute it
to the prevailing interest of the same enemies to our and the Kingdoms peace,
so all men may easily discern (with us) how directly it tends (in pursuance of
their former private designs upon the King ere he came from Holdenby, to put
his Majesty within reach of those men's power, who have underhand listed about
London already, a very considerable number both of Horse and Foot, and are
daily listing and engaging more, both there, and in many parts of the Kingdom,
to serve their designs; and therefore we appeal to all unengaged men, whether
we can in this give way to have the King put so far within those men's power,
without giving them the long sought for advantage of his Majesty's Person;
whereby to embroil this Kingdom in a new and bloody war, and to strengthen
themselves in their mischievous designs, the better to uphold and establish
their facton and intended domination; so that in this case we cannot but
importune the Parliament (as they tender the peace and safety of the Kingdom,
and the avoiding of jealousies or worse inconveniences in the Army) that they
would resume the consideration of that business concerning the Person of the
King, and not propose any place for Him nearer to London, then they would have
the quarters of the Army to be.

And whereas (by the procurement of the same persons, or others of their party)
there have been scandalous informations presented to the Houses, and
industriously published in print, importing as if his Majesty were kept as a
Prisoner amongst us, and barbarously or uncivilly used; we cannot but declare,
that the same and all other suggestions of that sort are most false and
dangerous, and absolutely contrary, not only to our declared desires, but also
to our principles, which are most clearly for a general right and just freedom
to all men; and therefore upon this occasion we cannot but declare
particularly, that we desire the same for the King and others of his party (so
far as can consist with common right or freedom, and with the security of the
same for future) and we do clearly profess, we do not see how there can be any
peace to to this Kingdom firm or lasting, without a due consideration of
provision for the rights, quiet, and immunity of His Majesty, His Royal Family,
and His late partakers; and herein we think that tender and equitable dealing
(as supposing their cases had been ours) and a spirit of common love, and
justice diffusing it self to the good and preservation of all, will make up the
most glorious conquest over their hearts (if God in mercy see it good) to make
them and the whole people of the land lasting friends.

To draw to a Conclusion; since we can yet obtain no satisfaction or answer to
the things desired, as before, but contrariwise find all things carried on by
the prevailing interest of those our enemies, to the prejudice and danger of
our selves and the Kingdom, since (notwithstanding some Votes of Parliament
against the late Orders of the Committee of Safety for listing of Forces, and
notwithstanding the earnest desires and endeavors of the City, concurrent with
our own, to have the same prevented or remedied, yet) the said Committee of
Safety being continued still in the same power, we find that by the
appointment or contrivance, and under the protection or countenance of the same
persons whom we have charged, and their accomplices, there are still manifold
practices underhand to list and raise new Forces, and (notwithstanding the
discovery thereof to the Parliament from the City, yet) the same persons have
prevailed so far in the House, as not to admit the question for discharging of
them, but the same practices still continue, and with double diligence are
enforced; since also diverse Forces (pretended to have been engaged for Ireland)
are by the same persons ordered to Rend^zvouze about Worcester, there to lay
the foundation of a new Army; and to that purpose their Emissaries and
Correspondents in all Counties are busy and active to raise Forces for then:
And though for these things the Actors of them have no present Public
Authority, yet they have some way such countenance and assurance to be
justified in Parliament (if questioned for it) as that they have the confidence
to act openly: Since they have likewise their Emissaries or Agents in Scotland,
France and other Countries, very active to draw in Foreign Forces for their
assistance: Since in the mean time they are endeavoring by Spies and secret
Agents in all our Quarters, to inveigle and invite the Soldiers of this Army
to desert their Officers and come to London, and for that purpose do improve
the advantage of that Order or Declaration of Parliament aforementioned, for
satisfaction of Arrears to such as shall desert the Army; and we find they
have the public Purse so much at their disposal, as to make good that and
other their undertakings of that naturel, and yet such as have so deserted the
Army, and received their Arrears, are not discharged or dispersed, but continued
together in Bodies, and under Command, in or near the City (as in particular,
some of Sit Robert Pye's men, Col. Grevis, Capt. Farmers, and others still
quirtered upon Kent: Since like wise they have their Agents and Correspondents
laboring with the King, to make Contracts with Him, to draw His Majesty to
engage and declare for them, or at least to declare himself a prisoner amongst
us, whereby to stir up and engage his party against us: Since in all these
respects, we find all dilatory ways (which they industrionsly devise) to be
designed and made use of only to our disadvantage, weakening and ruin, to the
Kingdoms prejudice, and to their own advantage and strengthening in their
designs, the better to prepare for a new War.

And lastly, considering the multitudes of Reformadoes and other Soldiers
swarming about the City (whom the persons we have charged and their accomplices
have at their beck to bring up to Westminster when they please) and that by
their frequent tumultuous confluences thither (besetting and sometimes blocking
up the Parliament doors, threatening and offering violence to the persons of the
most faithful Parliament Men) the just freedom of Parliament seems to be taken
away, or at least for the present abridged, insomuch as those Members who have
served the Kingdom hitherto with most faithfulness, diligence and integrity
for the Public good, many of them dare scarce come to the House, or (if they
do) they come in fear and peril of their lives; and when they are there, are
awed, discouraged, or disabled from discharging their Consciences, or doing
their duties to the Kingdom.

Upon all these Considerations, we are clearly convinced and satisfied, That
both our Duty and Trust for the Parliament and Kingdom, calls upon us and
warrants us, and an imminent necessity (for our own and the Kingdoms safety,
and preservation of a new War) enforces us to make or admit no longer delays,
but, upon those foundations God has given us, with vigor and speed to
endeavor in some extraordinary way, the vindicating of Parliament-freedom from
tumultuous violence, the breaking of those designs and preparations that
otherwise threaten a present imbroilment of the Kingdom in more blood and War,
and a future perpetual enslaving of it under Faction and Tyranny; and so (if
God see it good) to put the Parliament into a freedom and capacity (with His
Majesty's wished and hoped concurrence) to settle the Rights, Liberties and
Peace of the Kingdom.

Upon all these grounds, and for all these ends premised, we shall be enforced
to take such courses extraordinary as God shall enable and direct us unto, to
put things to a speedy issue, unless by Thursday night next we receive
assurance and security to our selves and the Kingdom, for a more safe and
hopeful proceeding in an ordinary way, by having those things granted which in
order thereunto we have before insisted upon, and shall here for more brevity
and clearenesse, as follows:

1. That the Declaration inviting men to desert the Army, and promising their
Arrears in case they do so, be recalled and annulled.

2. That the Army may be presently paid up equally to those that have deserted
it.

3. That his Majesty's coming to Richmond may be suspended until things be
better settled and composed; and in the mean time no place may be appointed for
his Majesty's Residence, that may be any nearer to London, then the Parliament
will allow the Quarters of the Army to be.

4. That the Members charged may be forthwith suspended or sequestered from the
House.

5. That those that have deserted the Army may be instantly discharged and
dispersed, and receive no more of their Arrears, till the Army be first
satisfied.

6. That both Parliament and City may be speedily and effectually freed from
those multitudes of Reformadoes and other soldiers before mentioned, that
flock together about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from
the City.

7. That all such Listings, or raisings of new Forces, or drawing together of
any (as is before mentioned) and all preparations toward a new War, may be
effectually declared against and suppressed: as also all invitations or
endeavors to draw in foreign Forces.

8. That the present perplexed affairs of the Kingdom, and these concerning
the Army, as also all the things desired in our late Representation in behalf
of the Kingdom, may be put into some speedy way, of settlement and composure.

S. Albans, June 23. 1647, By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho.
Fairfax, and the Council of War. John Rushworth, Secretary.

At a Council of War at S. Albans, June 23, 1647.
Present, His Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax. Lieutenant General Cromwell.
Lieutenant General Hamond. Commissary General Ireton. Colonel Sir Hardresse
Waller. Col. Fleetwood. Col. Lambert, Col. Rich, Col. Lilborn. Col. Okey. Col.
Hewson. Col. Scroop. Col. Harrison. Col. Barkestead. Col. Tomlinson. Col.
Horton. Col. Pride. Quartermaster General Grosvenor, Scoutmaster General
Watson. Adjutant General Deane, Lieutenant Col. Jubbs. Lieut. Col. Cobbet.
Lieut. Col. Ewers. Lieut. Col. Salmon. Lieut. Col. Goffe. Major Barton. Major
Rogers. Major Sanders. Captain Cunn. Captain Husbands,
(...)

The Remonstrance was agreed on by the Officers aforesaid, and afterward by
direction from the General and Council of War, delivered to the Parliament by
Colonel Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel Rich, and Major Tomlinson.

A PROCLAMATION published to the Army at the General Rendezvous.
Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX Knight, Commander in Chief of the Forces raised by the
Parliament.
WHereas diverse complaints have been made of several abuses, disorders, and
misdemeanors lately committed by some soldiers of this Army, both in their
Quarters, and in their Marches through the Countries respectively, contrary to
the laws of War, and tending much to the dishonor and prejudice of the Army,
they taking liberty thereunto under pretense of want of pay; For prevention of
the like, and all other disorders and abuses that may hereafter happen, or be
committed under the same or any other pretense, I do hereby strictly charge
and command all soldiers of the Army, Horse and Foot, and all others whom it
may concern, not to offer any violence, or do any prejudice at all to any
country man or other whomsoever (in their persons o^ goods) either in their
Quarters, or upon their March through the Countries respectively, as they tender
the honor of the Army, and (...) they tender the avoiding of the severest
punishment that may be inflicted upon such offenders by a Counsel of War. And
I do hereby further charge and require all Officers of the Army, both Horse
and Foot, to use their utmost endeavors to prevent the respective soldiers
under their Commands from committing any disorders upon the said, or any other
pretense, and to question such soldiers as shall speak any thing in derogation
to the authority of the Parliament, and to bring all such as are offenders to
condign punishment for the same.

Thomas Fairfax.
To the Marshal General. To be published at the head of every Regiment, both
of Horse, Foot, and Drogoons, by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet.



FINIS.

