Books Printed by FINCHAM GARDENER.
A Continuation and Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleets
Unreasonableness of Separation, in Answer to Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Lob, etc.
Considerations of present use, considering the Danger Resulting from the Change
of our Church Government. 1. A Persuasion to Communion with the Church of
England. 2. A Resolution of some Cases of Conscience, which Respect
Church Communion. 3. The Case of indifferent things, used in the Worship of
God, Proposed and Stated by considering these Questions, etc. 4. A Discourse
about Edification. 5. The Resolution of this Case of Conscience, Whether the
Church of England' s Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome,
makes it Unlawful to hold Communion with the Church of England? 6. A Letter to
Anonymus, in Answer to his Three Letters to Dr. Sherlock about
Church Communion. 7. Certain Cases of Conscience resolved, concerning the
Lawfulness of Joining with Forms of Prayer in Public Worship* The first Part.

THE RESOLUTION OF THIS CASE OF CONSCIENCE, Whether the Church of England's
Symbolizing so far as it does with the Church of Rome, makes it Unlawful to
hold Communion with the Church of England?

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Jun. for Fincham Gardener at the White Horse
in Ludgate Street, 1683.

The Case. Whether the Church of Englands Symbolizing so far as it does with
the Church of Rome, makes Communion therewith Unlawful?
IN speaking to this Case, we will,

First, Premise, that there is a wide and vast distance betwixt the Church of
England and that of Rome.

Secondly, Show, that a Churches Symbolizing or agreeing in some things with
the Church of Rome, is no Warrant for Separation from the Church so agreeing.

Thirdly, Show, that the Agreement that is between the Church of England and
the Church of Rome, is in no wise such, as will make Communion with the Church
of England Unlawful.

First. We think it necessary to Premise, that there is a wide and vast
distance betwixt the Church of England and that of Rome. Our Church having
renounced all Communion with the Church of Rome, this speaks the greatest
distance in the general betwixt the two Churches. And as their distance
particularly in Government is manifest to all, from our Churches having utterly
cast off the Jurisdiction of the Papacy, so it is easy to show, that there is
likewise a mighty distance betwixt them, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline.
But we shall not stand to show this in each of these distinctly, but rather
make choice of this Method, viz. to show that our Church is most distant from,
and opposite to the Church of Rome.

1. In all those Doctrines and Practices, whereby this Church deprives her
Members of their due Liberty, and miserably inslaves them. 2. In all those
Doctrines and Practices, in which she is justly Charged with plainly
Contradicting the Holy Scriptures. 3. In each of their public Prayers and
Offices. 4. In the Books they each receive for Canonical. 5. In the Authority
on which they each of them found their whole Religion.
First, Our Church is at the greatest distance from that of Rome, in all those
Doctrines and Practices, by which she deprives her Members of their due
Liberty, and miserably inslaves them. For Instance,

1. This Church denies her Members all Judgment of Discretion in matters of
Religion: She obliges them to follow her blindfold, and to resolve both their
faith and judgment into hers; as assuming infallibility to her self, and
binding all under pain of Damnation to believe her infallible.

But our Church permits us the full enjoyment of our due Liberty in believing
and judging; and we Act not like Members of the Church of England, if
(according to St. Paul's injunction) we prove not all things, that we may hold
fast that which is good, if we believe every Spirit, which St. John cautions us
against) and do not try the Spirits, whether they be of God; which he requires
us to do. It Is impossible that our Church should oblige us to an implicit
faith in herself, because she disclaimeth all pretense to infallibility: Our
Church tells us, in her 19 th. Article, that, As the Churches of Jerusalem, and
Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred, so also the Church of Rome has erred, not
only in their Living and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith.
And our Churches acknowledgment is plainly employed, in asserting the most
famous Churches in the World, to have erred from the Faith, that she her self
must needs be Obnoxious to Error in matters of Faith; and that she would be
guilty of the highest impudence in denying it.

2. The Church of Rome imposes a deal of most slavish Drudgery in the vast
multitude of her Rites and Ceremonies, and unreasonably severe Tasks, and cruel
Penances. As to her Ceremonies, they are so vast a number, as are enough to
take up (as Sir Edwyn Sandys has observed a great part of a man's life merely
to gaze on: And abundance of them are so vain and Childish, so marvellously odd
and uncouth, as that they can Naturally bring (to use that Gentleman's words,
who was a curious observer of them in the Popish Countries) no other than
disgrace and contempt, to those exercises of Religion wherein they are
stirring. In viewing only those that are enjoined in the Common Ritual, one
would bless ones self to think how it should enter into the minds of Men, and
much more of Christians, to invent such things. And the like may be said of the
Popish Tasks and Penances, in imposing of which the Priests are Arbitrary, and
ordinarily lay the most Severe and Cruel ones on the lightest offenders, when
the most Loud and Scandalous come off with a bare saying of their Beads thrice
over, or some such insignificant and idle business.

But the Church of England imposes nothing of that Drudgery, which makes such
Vassals of the poor Papists. Her Rites are exceeding few, and those plain and
easy, grave and manly, founded on the Practice of the Church, long before
Popery appeared upon the Stage of the World. Our Church has abandoned the five
Popish Sacraments, and contents her self with those two which Christ has
ordained: As is to be seen in her 25 th. Article, where she declares that,
There are two Sacraments ordained of Christ our Lord in the Gospel, that is to
say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord. Those five commonly called Sacraments,
that is to say, Confirmation, Penance, Orders, Matrimony and Extreme Unction,
are not to be counted for Sacraments of the Gospel; being such as have grown,
partly of the Corrupt following of the Apostles, partly are states of life
allowed in the Scriptures: But yet have not like Nature of Sacraments with
Baptism and the Lords Supper: For that they have not any visible Sign or
Ceremony ordained of God. The Sacraments were not ordained of Christ, to be
gazed upon, or to be carried about, etc. And in saying that our Church owns not
the forementioned Popish Sacraments, is employed that she has nothing to do
with any of those very many Superstitious Fopperies which are enjoined in the
offices appointed for the Administration of those Sacraments.

Again our Church no whit more imitates that of Rome in her Cruel Tasks and
Penances, than in her Ceremonies; as is needless to be showed.

In short, in our Churches few Rites, she has used no other Liberty, but what
she judges agreeable to those Apostolical Rules of Doing all things decently
and in order; and Doing all things to Edification. And she imposes her Rites
(not as the Church of Rome does hers) as necessary, and as parts of Religion,
but as merely indifferent and changeable things; as we find in her 34 th.
Article, where she declares that, Every Particular or National Church, has
Authority to Ordain, Change and Abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church,
Ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all things be done to Edifying. And
this Article begins thus, It is not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be
in all places one or utterly like; for at all times they have been diverse, and
may be changed according to the diversities of Countries, Times and Manners; so
that nothing be Ordained against Gods Word.

2. The Church of Rome Subjects her Members by several of her Doctrines to
inslaving Passions. For instance, that of Purgatory makes them all their life
time subject to the bondages of Fear; at least those of them who are so
solicitous about the life to come, as to entertain any mistrust or doubting (as
it is strange if the most Credulous of them do not) concerning the Efficacy of
Penances and Indulgences.

Her Doctrine of Auricular Confession subjects all that are not forsaken of all
Modesty to the passion of Shame.

Her Doctrine of the Dependence of the Efficacy of the Sacraments upon the
Priests intention, must needs expose all considerative people, and those who
have any serious concern about their state hereafter, to great Anxiety and
Solicitude.

But these Doctrines are all rejected by the Church of England. That of
Purgatory she declares against in these Words: Article 22 d. The Romish
Doctrine of Purgatory, is a vain thing fondly invented and grounded on no
Warranty of Scripture, but rather Repugnant to the word of God. As to that of
Auricular Confession, nothing like it is taught or Practiced in our Church. Her
Members are obliged only to Confess their Sins to God, except when it is
necessary to Confess them to Men, for the relieving of their Consciences, and
their obtaining the Prayers of others; or in order to the righting of those
they have wronged, when due satisfaction cannot otherwise be made; or in order
to their giving Glory to God, when they are justly accused and their guilt
proved: in which cases and such like, it is without dispute our duty to confess
to Men.

Nor have we any such Doctrine in our Church, as that of the Dependence of the
Efficacy of the Sacraments on the Priests intention; but the Contrary is
sufficiently declared, Article 26 th, viz. that The Efficacy of Christ's
Ordinance is not taken away by the Wickedness of those that Minister.

3. The Church of Rome subjects her Members by not a few of her Doctrines and
Practices to Vile Affections and Vices of all sorts: See Libertas Evangelica.
Chap. 17.
As might be largely showed, and will be in part under the next head of
discourse.

But our Church neither maintains any Licentious Principle, nor gives
Countenance to any such Practice; our Adversaries themselves being Judges.

Secondly. The Church of England is at the greatest distance from that of Rome,
in all those Doctrines and Practices in which she is justly charged with
plainly contradicting the Holy Scripture. For instance, (not to repeat any of
those ranked under the foregoing head, several of which may also fall under
this,) Her Doctrines of Image Worship, of Invocation of Saints (with her gross
practicing upon them) of Transubstantiation, of Pardons and Indulgencies, of
the Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein Christ is pretended to be still offered up
afresh for the quick and dead. Her keeping the Holy Scriptures from the Vulgar,
and making it so heinous a crime to read the Bible, because by this means her
foul Errors will be in such danger of being discovered, and the People, of not
continuing implicit believers. Her injoyning the saying of Prayers, and the
Administration of the Sacraments in an unknown Tongue. Her Robbing the Laity of
the Cup in the Lords Supper. Her prohibiting Marriage to Priests. Her Doctrines
of Merit, and works of Supererogation. Her making simple Fornication a mere
Venial sin. Her damning all that are not of her Communion. Her most devilish
cruelties toward those whom she is pleased to pronounce Heretics. Her darling
Sons Doctrines of Equivocation and Mental Reservations; of the Popes power of
dispensing with the most Solemn Oaths, and of absolving Subjects from their
Allegiance to their Lawful Princes: with many others not now to be reckoned up.

But the Church of England Abominates these and the like Principles and
Practices. As to the instances of Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, and
Pardons and Indulgences, what our Church declares concerning Purgatory, she
adds concerning these things too, Article 22 d. viz. That the Romish Doctrine
concerning Pardons, Worship and Adoration, as well of Images as of Relics, as
also Invocation of Saints, is a fond thing vainly invented and grounded on no
Warranty of Scripture; but rather Repugnant to the Word of God. And as there is
no such Practice as Worshipping of Images in our Church, so all are destroyed
which Popery had Erected among us. Nor have we in our Church any Co-Mediators
with Jesus Christ; we Worship only one God, by one only Mediator, the Man
Christ Jesus. And the now mentioned Practices, our Church does not only declare
to be Repugnant to the Holy Scriptures, but to be likewise most grossly
Idolatrous, viz. in the Homilies.

As to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, our Church declares her sense
thereof Article 28 th. in these Words: Transubstantiation (or the change of the
substance of Bread and Wine) in the Supper of the Lord, cannot be proved by
Holy Writ, but it is Repugnant to the plain terms of Scripture; overthrows
the Nature of a Sacrament; and has given occasion to many Superstitions. The
Body of Christ is given, taken and eaten in the Lords Supper, only after an
Heavenly and Spiritual manner; and the mean whereby the Body of Christ is
received and Eaten in the Supper is Faith. The Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
was not by Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or Worshipped.
As to the Sacrifices of the Mass, see what our Church says of it, Article 31
st. viz. That the offering of Christ once made, is that perfect Redemption,
Propitiation and Satisfaction for all the Sins of the whole World, both
Original and Actual; and there is none other Satisfaction for sins but that
alone. Wherefore the Sacrifices of the Mass, in the which it was commonly said,
that the Priest did offer Christ for the quick and the dead, to have Remission
of pain or guilt, were Blasphemous Fables, and dangerous deceits.

As to the Church of Romes locking up the Scriptures, and prohibiting the
reading of them, Our Church has not only more than once caused them to be
Translated into our Mother Tongue, but also* as I need not show, gives as free
Liberty to the reading of the Bible, as of any other Book; nor is any duty in
our Church esteemed more necessary, than that of Reading the Scriptures, and
Hearing them read.

As to Praying and Administering the Sacraments in an unknown Tongue, as this is
contrary to the Practice of the Church of England, so is it to her Declaration
also, Article 24 th. viz. That it is a thing plainly Repugnant to the Word of
God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church, to have public Prayers in the
Church, or to Administer Sacraments in a Tongue not understanded of the People.

As to Robbing the Laity of the Cup in the Lords Supper; in Our Church they may
not receive the Bread, if they refuse the Cup. And Article 30. tells us, That
the Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Laity, for both the parts of the
Lords Sacrament, by Christ's Ordinance and Commandment, ought to be Administered
to all Christians alike. As to prohibiting Marriage to Priests, this is
declared against, Article 32. Bishops, Priests and Deacons are not Commanded by
Gods Law, either to vow the Estate of single Life, or to abstain from Marriage;
therefore it is Lawful for them as for all other Christian Men, to Marry at
their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve better to godliness.

As to the Popish Doctrine of Merit, Our Church declares against this, Article
11. We are accounted righteous before God, only for the Merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by Faith, and not for our own Works, or Deservings.
Wherefore, that we are justified by Faith only, (viz. such a Faith as purifies
the Heart, and works by Love) is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
Comfort; as more largely is expressed in the Homily of Justification.

As to the Doctrine of Supererogation, this is confuted, Article 14. Voluntary
Works, besides, over and above Gods Commandments, which they call Works of
Supererogation, cannot be taught without Arrogance and Impiety: For by them Men
do declare, that they do not only render unto God as much as they are bound to
do, but that they do more for his sake than of bounden duty is required:
whereas Christ says plainly, when ye have done all that are Commanded to you,
say, we are unprofitable Servants.

As to making simple Fornication a mere Venial sin; Our Church will endure no
such Doctrine. For as in the Litany she calls Fornication expressly a deadly
sin, so has it ever been accounted in Our Church, one of the most deadly, even
considered as distinct from Adultery.

As to the Church of Romes Damning all that are not of her Communion, the
Church of England is guilty of no uncharitableness like it; and never
pronounced so sad a sentence against those in Communion with the Church of
Rome, as great a detestation as she expresses, in the Homilies, especially of
her Idolatrous and Wicked Principles and Practices. She is satisfied to Condemn
the gross Corruptions of that Apostate Church, and leaves her Members to stand
or fall to their own Master, nor takes upon her to Unchurch her.

And as to the remaining most Immoral Principles and Practices of the Romish
Church, which are all as contrary to Natural as to revealed Religion, the
greatest Enemies Our Church has, cannot surely have the forehead to charge her
with giving the least countenance to any such. There being no Church in
Christendom that more severely Condemns all instances of Unrighteousness and
Immorality.

Thirdly, The Church of England is at a mighty distance from the Church of
Rome, in reference to their Public Prayers and Offices. Whereas our Liturgy
has been by many Condemned as greatly resembling the Mass Book, all that have
compared them do know the contrary, and that there is a vast difference between
them, both as to matter and form: Although some few of the same Prayers are
found in both, and three or four of the same Rites; of which more hereafter. To
show this throughout in the particulars, would be a very long and tedious task:
I will therefore single out the Order of Administration of Infant Baptism, as
we have it in the Roman Ritual, and desire the Reader to compare it with that
in our Liturgy; and by this take a measure of the likeness between our Liturgy,
and the Mass Book, etc. there being no greater agreement between the Morning
and Evening Services, and the other Offices of each, than is between these two;
excepting that, besides the Lords Prayer, there is no Prayer belonging to the
Popish Office of Baptism to be met with in ours.

For the sake of the Readers who understand no more of the Language, that the
Popish Prayers and Offices are expressed in, than the generality of those that
make use of them, take the following account of the Popish Administration of
Infant Baptism in our own Tongue.

To pass by the long Bedroul of Preparatory Prescriptions, the Priest, being
dressed in a Surplice and Purple Robe, calls the infant to be Baptized by his
Name, and says, what ask thou of the Church of God? The Godfather answers,
Faith. The Priest says again, What shall thou get by Faith? The Godfather
replies, Eternal life. Then adds the Priest, If therefore thou will Enter into
life, keep the Commandments; thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, etc. and thy Neighbor as thy self.

Next the Priest blows three gentle puffs upon the Infants face, and says (as
if we come all into the World possessed by the Devil,) Go out of him O unclean
Spirit, and give place to the Holy Ghost the Comforter. Then with his Thumb he
makes the Sign of the Cross, on the Infants Forehead and Breast, saying;
Receive the Sign of the Cross both in thy Forehead, and in thy heart: Take the
faith of the Heavenly Praecepts, and be thy manners such, as that thou may
now become the Temple of God.

After this follows a Prayer that God would always protect this his Elect one
(calling him by his Name) that is Signed with the Sign of the Cross, etc. And
after a longer Prayer (the Priest laying his hand on the Infants head) comes
the Benediction of Salt: of which this is the Form.

I exorcize (or conjure) thee O Creature of Salt, in the Name of God the Father
Almighty, and in the Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Power of the
Holy Ghost. I conjure thee by the Living God, by the True God, by the Holy God;
by the God which Created thee for the safeguard of Mankind, and has ordained
that thou should be consecrated by his Servants, to the People entering into
the Faith, that, in the Name of the Holy Trinity, thou should be made a
wholesome Sacrament, for the driving away of the Enemy. Moreover we Pray thee O
Lord our God, that in Sanctifying thou would Sanctify this Creature of
Salt, and in Blessing thou would Bless it, that it may be to all that
receive it a perfect Medicine remaining in their Bowels, in the Name of the
same Jesus Christ our Lord; who is about to come to judge the quick and dead,
and the World by fire, Amen. This Idle and profane Form being recited, the
Priest proceeds in his Work with the poor Infant; and next, putting a little of
this Holy Salt into his mouth, he calls him by his Name, and says, Take thou
the Salt of Wisdom: (and adds-most impiously) be it thy propitiation unto
Eternal Life, Amen. This ended with the Pax tecum, God Almighty is next mocked
with a Prayer, That this Infant, who has tasted this first food of Salt may
not be suffered any more to hunger, but may be filled with Celestial Food, etc.

Now follows another Exorcising of the Devil, wherein he is conjured as before,
and most woefully becalled. And next the Priest Signs the Infant again with his
Thumb on the Forehead, saying, And this Sign of the Holy Cross which we give to
his Forehead, thou Cursed Devil never dare thou to Violate. By the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen. And now after all this tedious expectation, we see some
Sign of Baptism approaching, for the Priest puts his hand again on the Infants
head, and puts up a very good Prayer for him, in order to his Baptism.

The Prayer being ended, he puts part of his Robe upon the Infant, and brings
him within the Church, (for he has been without all this while) saying,
(calling him by his Name) Enter thou into the Temple of God, that thou may
partake with Christ in Eternal Life, Amen. Then follow the Apostles Creed, and
the Pater Noster. But after all this here is more exercise for our Patience, for
the Priest falls to his fooling again: For now comes another Exorcising or
Conjuring of the Devil. And this being also concluded, the Priest takes Spittle
out of his Mouth, and touches therewith the Ears and Nostrils of the Infant.
And in touching his right and left Ear, he says, Ephphatha (i. e.) Be opened.
Then, touching his Nostrils, he says, for a savor of Sweetness: no doubt
mighty sweet.) Another Conjuration of the Devil follows, in these Words, Be
packing, O Devil, for the judgment of God is at hand.

And now the Priest will make you hope again that he has not forgotten his
main business: For he asks the Infant, whether he renounces the Devil, and all
his Works, and all his Pomps; of which he makes three Questions; and the
Godfather distinctly answers to them. But alas he is thus soon gone off from
his proper Work again, for now you have him dipping his Thumb in Holy Oil, and
anointing the Infant with it in his breast, and betwixt his Shoulders, in the
figure of a Cross, saying, I anoint thee with the Oil of Salvation, in Christ
Jesus our Lord, that thou may obtain Eternal Life, Amen.

Then next he puts off his Purple Robe, and puts on another of a White Color,
and falls in good earnest to the great business: for having asked three more
Questions out of the Creed, and received the Godfathers Answers, and this
other Question, Whether the Infant will be Baptized? and received the
Godfathers answer to that, he pours Water thrice upon the Child's head, as he
recites over it our Saviors Form of Baptism, doing it each time, at the
naming of each of the three Persons.

And now (that the Priest may not conclude less wisely than he began) comes the
Chrism or Holy Ointment, in which dipping his Thumb, and Anointing the Infant
upon the Crown of his head in the figure of a Cross, he thus Prays, O God
omnipotent, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has regenerated thee of
Water and the Holy Ghost, and who has given thee Pardon of all thy Sins,
Anoint thee with the Chrism of Salvation, in the same Christ Jesus our Lord, to
Eternal Life, Amen. And next, after the Pax tibi, and the wiping of his Thumb,
and the Anointed head, he takes a White Linen Cloth and putting it on the
Child's head, uses this Form, Take the white Garment which thou may carry
unspotted before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may have
Eternal Life, Amen.

And Lastly, He puts into the Child's, or his Godfathers hand a lighted Candle,
and says, Receive the burning Lamp, and keep thy Baptism blameless, keep Gods
Commandments, that when the Lord shall come to the Wedding, thou may meet
him, together with all his Saints, in the Celestial Court, and may have
Eternal Life, and live for ever, Amen. Concluding all with this Form, Go in
Peace and the Lord be with thee, Amen.

And as if there were not fooling and ridiculous doings enough in this Office
of the Common Ritual, there are diverse others added to them, in the Pastorale:
For instance, the Ceremony of blowing thrice in the Child's Face is here to be
done Crossways. And after the Conjuration following, to which two more are here
added, the Priest Crossing his Forehead, says, I Sign thee in the Forehead in
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may trust in him. Then he
Crosses his Eyes, saying, I bless thy Eyes, that thou may see his
Brightness. Then his Ears, Which Crossings are also prescribed by the Ritual in
the Office of Adult Baptism, but with a variation of the Forms.
saying, I bless thine Ears that thou may hear the Word of his truth. Then
his Nostrils, saying, I bless thy Nostrils, that thou may smell his
sweetness. Then his Breast, saying, I bless thy Breast, that thou may believe
in him. Then his Shoulders, saying, I bless thy Shoulders, that thou may bear
the Yoke of his Service. Then his Mouth, saying, I bless thy Mouth, that thou
may Confess him, who Lives and Reigns God with the Father, etc. Again, The
Child here receives the Sign of the Cross in his Right Hand, the Priest saying,
(calling him by his Name) I deliver thee the Sign of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
thy Right Hand, that thou may Sign thy self, and drive away the Enemy on all
sides from thee, and may have Eternal Life, etc.

Here also the Priest is to lay his Robe on the Child in the Figure of a Cross,
with a many dire menaces tormenting the Devil before his time. Here also the
Ave Maria is added to the Pater Noster. The Infant likewise has this
Benediction pronounced over him before his going to the Font; The Benediction
of God the Father Almighty, and of his Son and Holy Ghost descend and abide
upon thee, and the Angel of the Lord keep thee, until thou come to Holy
Baptism. As if the poor Creature were in mighty danger of being carried away by
the Devil, before he could be Baptized, notwithstanding all the past
Conjurations, and dreadful doings that had been made with him, and all the
Crosses, together with the holy Oil, and holy Spittle bestowed on the Infant.
And lastly (to name no more additions, tho there are diverse others) the Flax
wherewith the anointed places are wiped is ordered to be burnt over a Pond of
Water.

If those who are unacquainted with our Churches office of Baptism would, after
the Reading of this of the Romish Church, consult ours, they will immediately
acknowledge that no two things can well be more unlike than are these two
Offices. And the like, as was said, may be seen in the rest, as those may
perceive who, if they understand sorry Latin, will take the pains to compare
theirs with ours. And whereas we asserted the same thing of their and our Forms
of Morning and Evening Prayers, we might particularly instance in the Litanies.
Our Litany (which I think, if comparisons may be allowed, is the choicest part
of our Service), is more than any other part of the Liturgy condemned by
Dissenters, as Savouring of Popish Superstition; But, as nothing but great
Ignorance can make any man think it really does so, so I am persuaded that the
mere comparing it with that of the Romanists might incline the most prejudiced
to call it a most Protestant piece of Devotion: For they shall find invocations
of Saints and Angels to pray for them, the greater part of the Popish Litany.
Next after the Holy Trinity St. Mary is there invoked first by name, then as
the Mother of God, then as the Virgin of Virgins. Next to her, three Angels are
invoked by name. Then all the Angels and Archangels together. Then all the
holy Orders of Blessed Spirits. Next John the Baptist. Next all the Patriarchs
and Prophets. Next St. Peter and all the other Apostles and Evangelists by
name. Then Altogether. Then all the holy Disciples of our Lord, then all the
Holy Innocents. Then the Protomartyr St. Stephen, and Ten other by Name. Then
all the Holy Martyrs together. Then Seven more Saints. Then all the Bishops and
Confessors together. Then all the Holy Doctors. Then Five more of their own
great Saints by Name. Then all the Holy Priests and Levites. Then all the Holy
Monks and Hermites. Then Seven She-Saints by Name. Then all the Holy Virgins
and Widows. And Lastly, All the He and She Saints together.

But the brevity I am confined to in this Discourse will not permit me to abide
any longer upon this Argument, of the vast distance between these two Churches
in reference to their Public Prayers and Offices.

Fourthly, We proceed to show, that there is also no small distance between the
Church of England, and that of Rome, in reference to the Books they receive for
Canonical. This will be Immediately dispatched: For no more is to be said upon
this subject, but that, whereas the Church of Rome takes all the Apocryphal
Books into her Canon, the Church of England, like all other Protestant
Churches, receives only those Books of the Old and New Testament for Canonical
Scripture, as she declares in her Sixth Article, of whose Authority there was
never any doubt in the Church. And she declares concerning the Apocryphal
Books in the same Article, citing St. Hierom for her Authority, That the Church
does read them for Example of life, and Instruction of manners, but yet it does
not apply them to Establish any Doctrine. And after the example of the
Primitive Church, no more does ours; and appoints the reading some of them on
Holy Days, only upon the foresaid Account.

In the Fifth and Last place, The Church of England is at the greatest distance
possible from the Church of Rome, in reference to the Authority on which they
each found their whole Religion. As to the Church of Rome, she makes her own
Infallibility the Foundation of Faith* For,

1. Our belief of the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures themselves must,
according to her Doctrine, be founded upon her infallible Testimony.

2. As to that Prodigious deal which she has added of her own to the Doctrines
and Precepts of the Holy Scriptures, and which she makes as necessary to be
believed and practiced, as any matters of Faith and Practice contained in the
Scriptures (and more necessary too, than many of them) the Authority of those
things is founded upon her unwritten Traditions, and the Decrees of her
Councils; which she will have to be no less inspired by the Holy Ghost, than
were the Prophets and Apostles themselves.

But Contrariwise the Church of England does,

1. Build the whole of her Religion upon the Sole Authority of Divine
Revelation in the Holy Scriptures: And therefore she takes every jot thereof
out of the Bible. She makes the Scriptures the Complete Rule of her Faith, and
of her Practice too, in all matters necessary to Salvation, that is, in all the
parts of Religion; nor is there any Genuine Son of this Church, that makes any
thing a part of his Religion that is not plainly contained in the Bible. Let us
see what our Church declares to this purpose, in her 16. Article, viz. That
Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation; so that whatsoever
is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be required of any
Man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith; or be thought requisite
or necessary to Salvation. So that, as Mr. Chillingworth, says, THE BIBLE, THE
BIBLE IS THE RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS: So you see the Bible is the Religion of
the Protestant Church of England: Nor does she fetch one Title of her Religion
either out of unwritten Traditions, or Decrees of Councils. Notwithstanding she
has a great Reverence for those Councils which were not a Company of Bishops
and Priests of the Popes packing, to serve his purposes, and which have best
deserved the Name of General Councils, especially the Four first, yet her
Reverence of them consists not in any opinion of their Infallibility: As
appears by Article 14. General Councils may not be gathered together without
the Commandment and Will of Princes; and when they be gathered together (for as
much as they be an Assembly of Men, whereof all be not Governed with the Spirit
and Word of God) they may Err, and sometimes have Erred, even in things
pertaining unto God. Wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to
Salvation, have neither Strength nor Authority, unless it may be declared (that
is, manifestly proved) that they be taken out of Holy Scripture.

Let us see again how our Church speaks of the matter in hand, Article 20. The
Church has Power to decree Rites or Ceremonies, and Authority in Controversies
of Faith: And yet it is not Lawful for the Church to Ordain any thing that is
contrary to Gods Word Written; neither may it so Expound one place of
Scripture, that it be Repugnant to another. Wherefore although the Church be a
Witness and Keeper of Holy Writ (that is, as the Jewish Church was so of the
Canon of the Old Testament, by whose Tradition alone it could be known, what
Books were Canonical, and what not, so the Catholic Christian Church, from
Christ and his Apostles downwards is so, of the Canon of the New;) Yet as it
ought not to Decree any thing against the same, so besides the same ought it
not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity of Salvation. If it be
asked who is to Judge, what is agreeable or contrary to Holy Writ? it is manifest
that Our Church leaves it to every Man to Judge for himself. But it is Objected,
that it is to be acknowledged, that if the Church only claimed a Power to Decree
Rites and Ceremonies; (that is, according to the general Rules of doing all
things Decently and Orderly, and to Edification, which Power all Churches have
ever Exercised) this may well enough consist with private Persons Liberty to
Judge for themselves, but it is also said in the now Cited Article, that the
Church has Authority in Controversies of Faith; and accordingly Our Church
has Published 39 Articles, and requires of the Clergy, etc. Subscription to
them. To this we Answer, that we shall make one Article Egregiously to
Contradict another, and one and the same to Contradict it self, if we
understand by the Authority in Controversies of Faith, which Our Church
acknowledges all Churches to have, nay more than Authority to Oblige their
Members to outward Submission, when their Decisions are such as Contradict not
any of the Essentials of our Religion, whether they be Articles of Faith, or
Rules of Life; not an Authority to Oblige them to assent to their Decrees, as
infallibly true. But it is necessary to the maintaining of Peace, that all
Churches should be invested with a Power to bind their Members to outward
submission in the Case aforesaid; that is, when their supposed Errors are not
of that Moment, as that it is of more pernicious Consequence to bear with them,
than to break the Peace of the Church by opposing them. And as to the
forementioned Subscription that is required to the 39 Articles, it is very
Consistent with Our Churches giving all Men Liberty to Judge for themselves,
and not Exercising Authority (as the Romish Church does) over our Faith; for
she requires no Man to believe those Articles, but at worst only thinks it
Convenient that none should receive Orders, or be admitted to Benefices, etc.
but such as do believe them (not all as Articles of our Faith, but many as
inferior truths,) and requires Subscription to them as a Test, whereby to
Judge who does so believe them. But the Church of Rome requires all under Pain
of Damnation, to believe all her long Bed-roul of Doctrines, which have only
the Stamp of her Authority, and to believe them too as Articles of Faith; or to
believe them with the same Divine Faith that we do the indisputable Doctrines
of our Savior and his Apostles.

For a proof hereof, the Reader may consult the Bull of Pope Pius the Fourth,
which is to be found at the End of the Council of Trent. Herein it is Ordained
that Profession of Faith shall be made and sworn, by all Dignitaries,
Prebendaries, and such as have Benefices with Cure, Military Officers, etc. In
the Form following:

I. N. Do believe with a firm Faith, and do profess all and every thing
contained in the Confession of Faith, which is used by the Holy Roman Church,
viz. I believe in one God the Father Almighty, and so to the end of the Nicene
Creed. I most firmly admit and Embrace the Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
Traditions, and the other Observances and constitutions of the said Church.
Also the Holy Scriptures according to the Sense which our Holy Mother the
Church has held, and does hold, etc. I profess also that there are truly and
properly Seven Sacraments of the New Law, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord,
and necessary to the Salvation of Mankind; although all are not necessary to
every individual Person, etc. I also admit and receive the Received and
approved Rites of the Catholic Church, in the Solemn Administration of all the
foresaid Sacraments (of which I have given the Reader a taste) I Embrace and
Receive all and every thing which has been declared and defined concerning
Original Sin, and Justification in the Holy Synod of Trent. I likewise profess
that in the Mass a True, Proper and Propitiatory Sacrifice is Offered to God,
for the quick and dead: And that the Body and Blood of Christ, is truly, really
and substantially in the most Holy Eucharist, etc. I also Confess that whole
and entire Christ, and the true Sacrament is received under one of the kinds
only. I Constantly hold that there is a Purgatory, and that the Souls there
detained are relieved by the Prayers of the Faithful. And in like manner that
the Saints Reigning with Christ, are to be Worshipped and Invoked, etc. And
that their Relics are to be Worshipped. I most firmly assert, that the Images
of Christ, and of the Mother of God, always a Virgin, and of the other Saints,
are to be had and kept, and that due Honor and Worship is to be given to them.
I Affirm also, that the Power of Indulgences is left by Christ in his Church,
and that the use of them is very Salutiferous to Christian People. I
acknowledge the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Roman Church, the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches; and I Profess and Swear Obedience to the Bishop of
Rome, the Successor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, and the Vicar of
Jesus Christ. Also all the other things delivered, decreed and declared by the
Holy Canons, and Ecumenical Councils, and especially by the Holy Synod of
Trent, I undoubtedly receive and profess: As also all things contrary to these,
and all Heresies Condemned, Rejected and Anathematized by the Church, I, in
like manner, Condemn, Reject and Anathematize. This true Catholic Faith, (
viz. all this Stuff of their own, together with the Articles of the Creed)
without which no Man can be Saved, which at this present I truly profess and
sincerely hold, I will, God Assisting me, most constantly Retain and Confess
entire and inviolate; and, as much as in me lies, will take Care, that it be
held, taught and declared, by those that are under me, or the Care of whom
shall be committed to me; I the same, N. do Profess Vow and Swear: So help me
God, and the Holy Gospels of God. Who, when he Reads this, can forbear
pronouncing the Reformation of the Church of England, a most Glorious
Reformation?

2. As to the Motives our Church proposes for our belief of the Doctrine of
the Holy Scriptures, viz. that that Doctrine is of Divine Revelation, they are
no other than such as are found in the Scriptures themselves, viz. the
Excellency thereof, which consists in its being wholly adapted to the reforming
of men's lives, and renewing their natures after the Image of God; and the
Miracles by which it is confirmed. And as to the Evidence of the truth of the
matters of Fact, viz. that there were such Persons as the Scriptures declare to
have revealed Gods will to the World (such as Moses, our Savior Christ, and
his Apostles;) and that these Persons delivered such Doctrine, and Confirmed it
by such Miracles, and that the Books of Scripture were written by those whose
names they bear; I say as to the Evidence of the truth of these matters of
Fact, our Church places it not in her own Testimony, or in the Testimony of
any Particular Church, and much less that of Rome, but in the Testimony of the
whole Catholic Church down to us from the time of the Apostles, and of
Universal Tradition, taking in that of Strangers and Enemies as well as
Friends, of Jews and Pagans* as well as Christians.

Secondly, We proceed to show, that a Churches Symbolizing, or agreeing in some
things with the Church of Rome, is no Warrant for Separation from the Church so
agreeing. Agreement with the Church of Rome in things either in their own
nature good, or made so by a Divine Precept, none of our Dissenting Brethren
could ever imagine not to be an indispensable duty: Agreement with her in what
is in its own nature Evil, or made so by a Divine Prohibition, none of us are
so forsaken of all Modesty as to deny it to be an inexcusable sin. The Question
therefore is, whether to agree with this Apostate Church, in some things of an
indifferent nature, be a Sin, and therefore a just ground for Separation from
the Church so agreeing. But, by the way, if we should suppose that a Churches
agreeing with the Church of Rome in some indifferent things is sinful, I cannot
think that any of the more Sober Sort of Dissenters (and I despair of success
in arguing with any but such) will thence infer, that Separation from the
Church so agreeing is otherwise warrantable, than upon the account of those
things being imposed as necessary terms of Communion. But I am so far from
taking it for granted, that a Church is guilty of Sin in agreeing in some
indifferent things with the Church of Rome, that I must needs profess, I have
often wondered how this should become a Question: Seeing whatsoever is of an
indifferent nature, as it is not Commanded, so neither is it Forbidden by any
Moral or Positive Law; and where there is no Law, the Apostle says, there is
no transgression; Sin being, according to his definition, the transgression of
the Law. And whereas certain Circumstances will make things that in themselves
are neither duties nor sins, to be either duties or sins, and to fall by
Consequence under some Divine Command or Prohibition, I have admired how this
Circumstance of an indifferent thing's being used by the Church of Rome can be
thought to alter the Nature of that thing, and make it cease to be indifferent
and become sinful. But that it does so, is endeavored to be proved by that
general Prohibition to the Israelites, of imitating the doings of the
Egyptians and Canaanites, in those Words, Lev. 18.2. After the doings of the
Land of Egypt wherein ye dwell, shall ye not do, and after the doings of the
Land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall ye not do, neither shall ye walk in
their Ordinances. This place diverse of the Defenders of Nonconformity have laid
great weight upon, as a proof of the Sinfulness of Symbolizing with the Church
of Rome, Even in indifferent things. But I choose to forbear the Naming of any
whose Arguings I purpose to enquire into, because I would prevent (if it be
possible) the least suspicion in the Readers, that I design in this Performance
to expose any Man's weakness in particular, or that I am therein Acted by any
Personal Piques.

Now then, as to the Text now Cited; Not to insist upon the Fallaciousness of
Arguing, without mighty caution, from Laws given by Moses to the Israelites, so
as to infer the Obligation of Christians, who are under a dispensation so
different from theirs, and in Circumstances so vastly differing from those they
were in; I say, not to insist upon the Fallaciousness of this way of Arguing,
(which all considering Persons must needs be aware of) if this general
Prohibition be not at all to be limited, then it will follow from thence, that
the Israelites might have no usages whatsoever in common with the Egyptians or
Canaanites; and therefore, in as general terms as the Prohibition runs, our
Brethren must needs acknowledge that there is a restriction therein intended:
it being the most absurd thing to Imagine, that the Israelites were so bound up
by God, as to be Obliged to an unlikeness to those People in all their Actions:
For, as the Apostles said of the Christians, if they were never to Company with
Wicked Men, they must needs go out of the World, we may say of the Israelites
in reference to this Case of theirs, they then must needs have gone out of the
World. Now if this general Prohibition, after their doings ye shall not do, be
to be limited and restrained, what way have we to do it, but by considering the
Context, and confining the restriction to those particulars Prohibited in the
following verses. But I need not show that the particulars forbidden in all
these, viz. from v. 5 th. to the 24 th. were not things of an indifferent
Nature, but Incestuous Copulations, and other abominable Acts of Uncleanness.
And God does Expressly enough thus restrain that general Prohibition, in the 24
th. v. in these Words: Defile not your selves in any of these things, for in
all these the Nations are Defiled, which I cast out before you.

But those that allege this Text to the foresaid purpose, will not hear of the
general Proposition's being thus limited by the Context (as apparent as it is,
that it necessarily must) because, say they, we find that God forbids the
Israelites in other places, to imitate Heathens, in things of an Indifferent
and Innocent Nature.

To this I Answer, First, That supposing this were so, it does not from thence
follow, that God intended to forbid such imitations in this place, the contrary
being so manifest as we have seen. But,

Secondly, That God has any where prohibited the Israelites to Symbolize with
Heathens, in things of a mere Indifferent and Innocent Nature; I mean that he
has made it Unlawful to them, to observe any such Customs of the Heathens,
merely upon the account of their being like them, is a very great mistake:
Which will appear by considering those places which are produced for it. One
is, Deuteronomy. 14.1. You shall not Cut your selves, nor make any baldness between
your Eyes for the dead. Now, as to the former of these prohibited things, who
sees not that it is Unnatural, and therefore not indifferent? And as to the
latter, viz. the disfiguring of themselves by Cutting off their Eyebrows, this
was not merely an indifferent thing neither: It being a Custom at Funerals much
disbecoming the People of God, which would make them look, as if they sorrowed
for the dead as Men without hope.

Another place insisted upon for the same purpose is Lev. 19.19. Thou shall not
let thy Cattle Gender with a diverse kind, thou shall not sow thy Ground with
mingled seed, nor shall a Garment of Linen and Woollen come upon thee. Now
these three, it is said, are things of so indifferent a Nature, that none can be
more indifferent. I answer, It Is readily granted. But where is it said, that
these things were forbidden because the Heathens used them? Maimonides indeed
(as I learn from Grotius) says, that the Egyptians used these mixtures of
Seeds, and of Linen and Woollen in many of their Magical Exploits; but it is
universally acknowledged that these things, among many other, were forbidden to
the Jews, as Mystical instructions in Moral Duties.

I have found no other Text made use of to prove mere indifferent things to
have been forbidden the Israelites, only in regard of Heathens using them,
which make more for this purpose than these two do, nor hardly another that
makes so much. But if there were never so many, it is not worth our while to
concern our selves now with them, because, though we should suppose a great
number of instances of such things as were forbidden those People, for no other
reason, but because the Egyptians or Canaanites used them, yet this would
signify nothing to the proving Our Churches Symbolizing with that of Rome in
indifferent things to be Unlawful, because there is not the like reason, why in
such things we may not Symbolize with Papists, that there was why the Jews
should be forbidden to Symbolize in such with those Heathens. For there could
not be too great a distance and unlikeness between those People and these in
their usages, in regard of their strangely Vehement inclination to their
Superstitious and Idolatrous Practices. And upon this account, the distance was
made wider (as our Brethren themselves will acknowledge) between the Jews and
the Pagans, than it ought to be between Christians and them, or between
Protestants and Papists. And we find that the distance that God made between
the Jews and Heathens, as very wide as it was, was not wide enough to preserve
the Jews from being very often (and that generally too) infected with their
Superstitions, and various kinds of Idolatry: No, though they frequently paid
most dear for these their Wicked Imitations of them. But, thanks be to God,
there is no such inclination in the Members of Our Church to go over to that of
Rome, nor has any such inclination been observed ever since the Reformation.
And where one of our Communion has Revolted out of Love to Popery, (of those
few Comparatively who have played the Apostates) we have cause to believe that
many have so done merely upon the score of interest. And I need not say, that
such Persons would not have been preserved from Apostasy, by our Churches being
set at the widest distance possible from the Church of Rome, in indifferent
things. Nay it is so far from being true, that there is a general inclination in
our Protestants to Popery, that nothing is better known, or has of late been
more observed, than the greatest Antipathy and Aversation thereto imaginable in
the generality. Upon which account, I say, the foresaid and the like
Prohibitions to the Jewish Nation (although they should be understood in the
sense of our Dissenting Brethren) can by no parity of reason be obliging to us
Protestant Christians.

And indeed most of them have seemed of late years to be pretty well aware of
this, and therefore diverse of their Writers have limited the unlawfulness of
Symbolizing with the Romish Church, to things that have been abused
notoriously, in Idolatrous and grossly Superstitious Services. And that our
Symbolizing with that Church in any such things is Unlawful, they endeavor to
demonstrate both by Scripture Precepts and Examples.

First, They endeavor to demonstrate this by Scripture Precepts. And if any
such Precept as this could be produced, That all such things as have been
notoriously abused and Polluted in Idolatrous or grossly Superstitious services,
should by all be abolished and laid aside, there could be no place left for
dispute about this matter; and I doubt not but we should all of us express as
great Zeal, as our Brethren do, for the abolishing of all such things. But no
such express and unlimited Precept is pretended, but the chief of those Texts
from whence our Brethren endeavor to Infer this Proposition, That it is the
will of God, that all things so polluted should be utterly destroyed and laid
aside, are these following, Isaiah 30.22. Ye shall Defile also the covering of
thy Graven Images of Silver, and the Ornament of thy Molten Images of Gold:
Thou shall Cast them away as a Menstruous Cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get
thee hence.

Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. The Graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn with Fire, thou
shall not desire the Silver or Gold that is on them, nor take it unto thee,
lest thou be snared therein: for it is an Abomination to the Lord thy God.
Neither shall thou bring an Abomination into thy House, lest thou be a cursed
thing like it, but thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall utterly abhor
it, for it is a Cursed thing.

Jude. 23. -- hating even the Garment spotted with the Flesh.

Revel. 2.14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them
that hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a Stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, to Eat things Sacrificed unto Idols, etc. v. 20.
Notwithstanding I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that
Woman Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
Servants to commit Fornication, and to Eat things Sacrificed to Idols.

Now to their alleging of these Texts to prove the foresaid Proposition, I
reply:

First, That the last of them is altogether impertinent. For the eating of
things offered to Idols condemned in those two verses, is nothing better than
joining and complying with Idolaters, and Communicating in Idol-worships. Which
the vile Gnostiques held they might do (and accordingly practiced this
doctrine) to avoid persecution: Which abominable Sect arose in the Church (as
we learn from Irenoeus, Epiphanius, Eusebius etc.) even in the Apostles times,
of which Simon Magus was the first Founder. But St. Paul has given us his
judgment concerning Eating of things offered to Idols, without any respect to
Idols in Eating, in 1 Cor. 8 chap. viz. That upon no other account but that of
Scandal it is unlawful.

And the like he has done, 1 Cor. 10.27, 28, 29. If any of them that believe
not bid you to a Feast, and you be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before
you, Eat, making no question for Conscience sake. But if any man say unto you,
this is offered in Sacrifice unto Idols, Eat not, for his sake who showed it,
and for Conscience sake, etc. Conscience I say not thine own, but of the
others: For why is my liberty judged of another man's Conscience? That is, so as
to make a thing indifferent in it self, simply unlawful to me. But the Stating
of this case of Scandal is the business of another Pen, to which I refer those
who need satisfaction in this matter.

Secondly, As to those words of St. Jude -- hating even the Garment spotted by
the Flesh: Nothing more can possibly be gathered from them, than what we and
all Christians must acknowledge, as well as our Brethren viz. that we ought to
be as Cautious of exposing our selves unnecessarily to temptations to sin, as
we naturally are of touching the Garments of infected Persons. But if the Text
had run thus -- hating even the Garment that was once spotted with the Flesh,
or once fouled with a plague Sore, though it be never so well cleansed from
infection, then I must confess it would be an argument for our Brethrens
purpose, we could make no reply to.

Thirdly, As to the two places cited out of the Old Testament, they indeed not
only serve to prove, that it was God's will that the Jews should destroy Idols,
but also the Appurtenances of them. And the reason of these Precepts being
given to those People has already been showed, viz. because they were so
strangely, so prodigiously addicted to the Superstitions and Idolatry of their
Heathen-Neighbours. But if these and the like places should really make for our
Brethrens design in Citing them, and do prove that Christians are obliged to
destroy, or cast away, all things notoriously defiled in grossly Superstitious
and Idolatrous services, they would certainly prove more, than the more sober
sort of Dissenters do desire they should. For they do not object against the
lawfulness of our using the Churches, or Fonts or Bells, which heretofore were
most notoriously so defiled by the Papists. But if these texts speak it to be
the duty of Christians as well as Jews to destroy all such things, then it is
manifest that down we must with all our Old Churches etc. or we are guilty of
an inexcusable violation of the Divine Law. And to except such things as these,
after they have Evinced from such Scriptures our obligation to destroy all
things notoriously polluted in grossly Superstitious and Idolatrous services,
seems to be making too too bold with the express Laws of God, which make no
such exceptions, nor does the forementioned reason of them imply any such. And
therefore they have been highly condemned for making such like exceptions by
others of their Brethren who have Attained to a higher dispensation; And
considering this Concession that such things as the fore named may still be
lawfully used, as also the Concessions of a nameless Author in his famous Book
called Nehushtan, that no Creature of God is to be refused, nor any necessary
or profitable devices of men need be sent packing upon the account of their
having been much abused to the foresaid ends, I appeal to their own more sedate
thoughts, whether all that can be concluded from such Scriptures is any more
than this, that things so abused ought to be destroyed or abolished, by all who
have power to do it, in some certain case or cases, and not merely for this
reason, because they have been so abused. This, I presume, none of us will
deny, and if they will acknowledge it, as they must do if they will stand to
those their Concessions, they will be Constrained to give up this cause.

I will conclude the Argument in hand with the judgment of that Eminent
reformer Mr. Calvin whose Authority goes farther with the generality of our
Brethren, than, I think, any Man's next to the Apostles. Says he upon the
Second Commandment, I know that the Jews, throughout the time of their
Paedagogy, were Commanded to destroy the Groves and Altars of Idolaters, not by
virtue of the Moral Law, but by an Appendix in the Judicial or Politic Law,
which did oblige that People for a time only, but it binds not Christians: And
therefore we do not in the least scruple whether we may Lawfully use those
Temples, Fonts and other Materials, which have been heretofore abused to
Idolatrous and Superstitious uses. I acknowledge indeed, that we ought to
remove such things, as seem to nourish Idolatry, upon supposition that we our
selves in opposing too violently things in their own Nature indifferent, be not
too Superstitious. It is equally Superstitious to Condemn things indifferent as
Unholy, and to Command them as if they were Holy. Thus you see Mr. Calvin's
sense agrees exactly with Ours, touching this Point of Controversy between us
and many of our Dissenting Brethren.

Secondly, They endeavor also to make out this Doctrine of theirs by
Scripture- Examples. There are four or five of these Examples insisted upon,
but I will trouble the Reader with considering only one of them; both because
it is the Principal Example, and that which they lay most stress on, and
because the reply I shall make to this, will be as satisfactory in reference to
the rest. It is that of Hezekiah his breaking in Pieces the Brazen Serpent that
Moses had made, because the Children of Israel burnt Incense to it, 2 Kings
18.4. Now, sai^^ a certain Noted Author, what Example is more considerable than
that of Hezekiah, who not only abolished such Monuments of Idolatry, as at
their first Institution were but Men's inventions, but brake down also the
Brazen Serpent (though Originally set up at Gods Command) when once he saw it
abused to Idolatry. And he adds, that this deed of Hezekiah Pope Stephen does
greatly Praise (citing Wolphius for it) and professes that it is set before us
for our imitation; that when our Predecessors have wrought some things, which
might have been without fault in their time, and afterward they are converted
into Error and Superstition, they may be quickly destroyed by us who come after
them.

Which soever of the Stephens this was, he was a strangely Honest Pope;
especially had he Practiced according to this his Profession, and his
Infallibilityship had judged Impartially of Errors and Superstitions. And he
cites Farellus (out of an Epistle of Calvin's) for this saying, That Princes and
Magistrates should learn by this Example of Hezekiah, what they should do with
those Significant Rites of Men's devising which have turned to Superstition. And
he farther adds, that the Bishop of Winchester ( in his Sermon on Phil. 2.10.)
acknowledges, that whatsoever is taken up at the injunction of Men, when it is
drawn to Superstition, comes under the Compass of the Brazen Serpent, and is
to be abolished. And he says he Excepteth nothing from this Example, but only
things of Gods own Prescribing. But it is strange if a Bishop should not except
Churches, and some other things besides which are of an humane make; and as
strange if there be nothing going before or coming after this acknowledgment,
to lead us to a better understanding of it. We will not question our Authors
faithfulness in Transcribing it, but wish he had told us which Bishop of
Winchester this is, and in what page of his Sermon we might find this
Acknowledgment.

But that this Fact of King Hezekiah will not prove, that whatsoever has been
notoriously defiled in Idolatrous or grossly Superstitious services ought to be
abolished, and much less, that the not abolishing some such things is a good
ground for Separation from the Church that neglects so to do, will, I presume,
sufficiently appear by these following considerations.

First, The Brazen Serpent was not only a thing defiled in Idolatrous services,
but it was made an Idol it self.

Secondly, It was not only a thing that had once been made an Idol, or Object
of Religious Worship, but it was Actually so at that time when it was
destroyed. Nay it was at that instant an Object of the most gross kind of
Idolatry: It being not only bowed down to, but had likewise Incense burnt to
it; this being a Rite which is never used in mere Civil Worship, like bowing
the Knee, etc. but so proper and peculiar to Divine Worship, that no Rite is
more so. Nay farther:

Thirdly, It was not thus notoriously Idolized by some few of the People, but
the People were Generally lapsed into this Idolatry: As the Text plainly
shows. Nay:

Fourthly, There was as little hope as could be of the Peoples being reclaimed
from this Idolatry, while the Idol was in being: Seeing that of a long time
they had been accustomed thereunto. For it is said, that unto those days the
Children of Israel burnt Incense to it; which speaks it to have been not only a
Custom, but a Custom also of a long standing.

Fifthly, Although it had been only a thing defiled in Idolatrous services, yet
we freely grant that it ought to have been destroyed, or removed from the
Peoples sight, if the continuance of it in their View were like to be a Snare
to them, and a Temptation to Idolatry: Since now the use of it was ceased, for
which, by Divine appointment, it was first Erected. But there was no necessity
for this, upon supposition, that it had ceased to be abused for any
considerable time, and there were no appearance of an inclination in the People
to abuse it again. And no doubt, all things of an indifferent Nature, that have
formerly been abused to Idolatry or Superstition, ought to be taken away by the
Governors, whenever they find their People again inclined so to abuse them;
at least, if such abuse cannot Probably be prevented by other means.

Sixthly, But had Hezekiah suffered the Brazen Serpent still to stand, no doubt
private Persons (who have no authority to make public Reformations) might
Lawfully have made use of it, to put them in mind of, and affect them with the
wonderful mercy of God expressed by it to their Forefathers; notwithstanding
that many, had not only formerly, but did at that very nick of time, make an
Idol of it. And much more might they have Lawfully continued in the Communion
of the Church, so long as there was no constraint laid upon them to join with
them in their Idolatry: As we do not read of any that separated from the Church
while the Brazen Serpent was permitted to stand, as woefully abused as it was by
the generality.

I will also conclude this head with the sense of Mr. Calvin concerning Rites
used (and consequently superstitiously abused) by the Papists, expressed in
these Words; Let not any think me so austere, or bound up, as to forbid a
Christian without any exception, Calv. devitana Superstitione, etc.
to accommodate himself to the Papists in any Ceremony or Observance: for it is
not my purpose to Condemn any thing, but what is clearly Evil and openly
Vicious. To which may be added many other such like sayings of this Learned
Person.

And thus much shall suffice to be discoursed upon our second general head,
viz. That a Church's Symbolizing in some things with the Church of Rome is no
Warrant for Separation from the Church so Symbolizing.

We now proceed, in the Third and last place, to show, That the Agreement which
is between the Church of England and the Church of Rome is in no wise such as
will make Communion with the Church of England unlawful.

We have showed, what a vastly wide Distance and Disagreement there is between
the Church of England and that of Rome: And we have sufficiently (though with
the greatest brevity) made it apparent, that a Church's symbolizing or agreeing
in some things with the Church of Rome, and those such too as she has abused
in idolatrous and grossly superstitious Services, is no just ground for
Separation from the Church so agreeing; And we have answered the Chief of those
Arguments which have been brought for the Confirmation of the contrary
Doctrine. And now, from what has been discoursed, it may with the greatest
ease be proved, that those things wherein our own Church particularly, agrees
with the Romish Church, do none of them speak such an Agreement therewith, as
will justify Separation from our Church's Communion.

Now the particulars wherein our Church symbolizeth with that of Rome, which
our Dissenters take offense at, and make a pretense for Separation (though all
Dissenters are not offended at all of them, and much less so offended as to
make them all a pretense for Separation) are principally these following.

First, The Government of our Church by Bishops.

Secondly, Our Churches prescribing a Liturgy, or Set-Forms of Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Public Offices.

Thirdly, A Liturgy so contrived as that of our Church is.

Fourthly, Certain Rites of our Church. Particularly, The Surplice, the Cross
in Baptism, the Gesture of Kneeling at the Communion, the Ring in Marriage, and
the Observation of certain Holy Days. And to all these I shall speak very
succinctly, the limits I am confined to not permitting me to enlarge much upon
any of them.

But I must first premise concerning them all in the general these following
things.

First, That I take it for granted, that they are all indifferent in their own
nature: That there is nothing of Viciousness or Immorality in any of them to
make them unlawful. I know no body so unreasonable as not to grant this.

Secondly, That there is no Express positive Law of God against any of these
things. I do not know of any such Law objected against any one of them. And
therefore if all, or any of them are unlawful, they must be made so either by
Consequences drawn from Divine Laws, or certain Circumstances attending them.

Thirdly, That I am concerned in this Discourse to vindicate them from being
unlawful, upon the account only of this one Circumstance, viz. Our symbolizing
with the Church of Rome in them. Now then,

First, As to the Government of our Church by Bishops: This is so far from
being an Unlawful symbolizing with the Church of Rome, that we have most clear
Evidence of its being a symbolizing with her in an Apostolical Institution. And
what eminent Divines of the Presbyterial Party have acknowledged (and is too
evident to be denied or doubted by any, who are not wholly ignorant of Church
History) is sufficient (I should think) to satisfy unprejudiced persons
concerning the truth of this: And that is, that this was the Government of all
Churches in the World from the Apostles times, for about 1500 years together.
Beza, in his Treatise of a Threefold kind of Episcopacy, Divine, Humane, and
Satanical, asserts concerning the second (which is that which we call
Apostolical) that of this kind is to be understood whatsoever we read
concerning the Authority of Bishops, in Ignatius, and other more Ancient
Writers. And the Famous Peter Du Moulin in his Book of the Pastoral Office,
written in defense of the Presbyterial Government acknowledges that presently
after the Apostles times, or even in their time (as Ecclesiastical story
witnesses) it was ordained, that in every City one of the Presbytery should be
called a Bishop, who should have pre-eminence over his Colleagues; to avoid
Confusion, which often times arises out of Equality. And truly, says he, this
Form of Government all Churches every where received. Mr. Calvin says in his
Institution of Christian Religion, Quibus docendi munus injunctum erat, etc.
Those to whom was committed the Office of Teaching, they called them all
Presbyters. L. 4. cap. 4,. 2,
These Elected out of their number in each City one, to whom in a special
manner they ga^^ the Title of Bishop; lest Strife and Contention (as it
commonly happens) should arise out of Equality. And in his Epistle to
Archbishop Cranmer, he thus accosts him, Illustrissime Domine, and Ornatissime
Pr^sul, etc. Most Illustrious Sir, and most Honorable Prelate, and by me
heartily Reve^enced: And tells him, that if he might be serviceable to the
Church of England, he would not think much of passing over ten Seas, for that
purpose. Again in his Epistle to the King of Poland, he thus speaks of
Patriarchs and Archbishops; The Ancient Church did appoint Patriarchs and
Primates in every Province, that by this bond of Concord the Bishops might the
better be knit together.

In short, (for I must not proceed farther upon this vastly large head of
discourse I know not how our Brethren will defend the Apostolical Institution
of the Observation of the Lords Day, while they contend that this of
Episcopacy, cannot be concluded from the uninterrupted Tradition of the
Catholic Church, for so many Centuries from the time of the Apostles. Nor how
those that Separate from our Church upon the account of its Government by
Bishops, and call it Antichristian, can defend the Lawfulness of Communicating
with any Church in Christendom for about 1500 years together.

Secondly, As to Our Churches prescribing a Liturgy or set Forms of Prayer and
Administration of Sacraments, and other public Offices; It is easy to show
that Symbolizing with the Church of Rome herein is so far from being culpable,
and much more from being a just ground of Separation from our Church, that it is
highly Commendable: For as herein Our Church no less Symbolizeth with the
Primitive Church, than with that of Rome, as she is now Constituted (nothing
being more certainly known than that Liturgies are of most Ancient standing) so
nothing is more highly expedient, for the due management of the public Worship
of God, than the use of a Liturgy. And, indeed, instead of Expedient I might
say Necessary; it being impossible to secure the performance of public Worship
with that solemnity and gravity that becomes it, in a Church where its
Ministers are wholly left free to the Exercise of Extemporary invention. But
the handling of this Argument is the business of another new Discourse, to
which I refer the Reader. I shall therefore conclude it with a citation out of
Calvin's Epistle Ad Protectorem Anglioe; says he, As to a Form of Prayers and
Ecclesiastical Rites, I do very much approve of the publishing of a fixed one,
from which it may not be Lawful for the Pastors to depart in the exercise of
their Function: Thereby to provide against the simplicity and unskilfulness of
some, and that the consent of all the Churches with each other may more
certainly appear: And lastly to put a bar to the skipping Levity of others,
who Affect certain innovations. And therefore (as he proceeds) Statum esse
Catechismum oportet, Statam Sacramentorum Administrationem, publicam item
precum Formulam, there ought to be an Established Catechism, an Office for the
Administration of the Sacraments Established, and also a Public Form of
Prayers. And he accordingly composed a Liturgy, to be used by the Ministers in
Geneva, on Sundays and Holydays. And the Exiles that resided at Geneva, in the
days of Queen Mary, did by his advice draw up a Liturgy, which was Printed in
the English Tongue, in the year 1556.

Thirdly, As to a Liturgy so contrived as that of our Church is, what has been
said of the vast distance between our Church and that of Rome herein, is
sufficient to show that there can be no warrantable pretense for Separation
from our Church, upon the account of the Symbolizing that is between these two
Churches in this particular. But we will particularly consider those instances
of agreement between ours and the Roman Service which are most offensive to
our ^rethren; they are especially these four.

1. Our many short Prayers, which some have too lightly called short Cuts, and
Shreddings, and rather Wishes than Prayers. But there needs no other reply
hereunto, than that our Learned Hooker gives, viz. That St. Augustine says,
Epist. 121. That the Brethren in Egypt are reported to have many Prayers, but
every of them very short, as if they were Darts thrown out with a kind of
sudden quickness, lest that Vigilant and erect attention of mind, which in
Prayer is very necessary, should be Wasted and dulled through Continuance, if
their Prayers were few and long. But that which St. Austin allows they
Condemn, etc. He might as well have said, what that good Father Commends, nay
his words imply no small commendation. And I fear not to appeal to all Pious
Souls, who without prejudice join with us in our Public Prayers, whether they
find the shortness of many of them an hindrance or help to their devotion. I
don't question but that such will readily acknowledge that they find it an help.
And therefore, in my weak judgment, our Symbolizing with the Church of Rome in
this particular, is Symbolizing with her in that which is highly commendable,
as it is so also in that wherein she Symbolizeth with very Ancient Churches.

2. Another instance is, The Peoples bearing a part with the Minister in divine
Service. But Mr. Baxter has said enough in his Christian Directory on Q. 83.
not only to vindicate the Lawfulness, but the Fitness and Expediency also, of
Symbolizing herein with the Church of Rome. Says he, 1. The Scripture no where
forbids it. 2. If the People may do this in the Psalms in Meter, there can be
no reason given, but they may Lawfully do it in Prose. 3. The Primitive
Christians were so full of Zeal and Love of Christ, that they would have taken
it for an injury, or quenching of the Spirit, to have been wholly restrained
from bearing a part in the Praises of the Church. 4. The use of the Tongue
keeps awake the mind, and stirs up Gods graces in his Servants. 5. It was the
decay of Zeal in the People that first shut out the Responses: while they kept
up the Ancient Zeal, they were inclined to take their part vocally in the
Worship. Though I were under no obligation of brevity, I should add nothing
more of mine own about this matter.


3. Another instance of this Nature is, the taking of some of the Collects out
of the Mass Book. But to this I give this, I hope as satisfactory as short
Answer, viz. That these Prayers are either good or bad; if they are bad ones,
they may not be used, though they were not in the Mass Book, and upon that
account the use of them would be Unlawful, not upon the account of our
Symbolizing in them with the Roman Church. But if they are all good ones, as
they are very good, then from what has been said it is Evident that this
Symbolizing cannot make them bad; and it is a hard case that we should not be
allowed the use of whatsoever is good in their Service. Our Brethren will allow
of reading the same Scriptures that they do, and why then should they disallow
of using what perfectly agrees with Scripture, because they use it? Our
departure from them was designed to be a Reformation, not a total Destruction
and Extirpation.

4. The last instance is, The appointing of Lessons out of the Apocryphal
Books. But herein we Symbolize with the Primitive Church, rather than with this
of Rome: For (as has been showed out of the 6. Article of our Church) they are
not appointed to be read as Canonical Scripture, and we perfectly agree with
the Primitive Church, in reading them for Example of life, and Instruction of
manners, but not for the Establishing of any Doctrine: Which, in that Article,
is showed from St. Hierom, to have been the Practice of that Church. And
besides they are not now appointed to be ordinarily on Sundays read in Our
Churches, but only on Holydays.

These I take to be the chief of those instances of our Churches Symbolizing
with that of Rome, in the Composure of the Liturgy, that Our Dissenters are
offended at: And as for their other Objections of this kind they are as easily
answered. And I most sincerely profess, that it is not to me imaginable that any
thing better than Extreme prejudice can make any Man a Separatist from Our
Communion upon such accounts as these: As also, that I cannot understand how
any devout and pious Souls that come to our Public Prayers without prejudice,
can find themselves in the least tempted not to join in them heartily with the
Congregation. Absolute perfection is not to be expected in any thing of a human
make, but if all would read Our Liturgy with that Candor they use in reading
the Books of those they have a good opinion of, as I am sure they could think
nothing intolerable therein, so am I as sure, they would freely acknowledge it
to be exceedingly well adapted to the design of it, viz. the exciting of
Devotion, and that good temper of mind, that is necessary to Our Worshipping of
God in Spirit and in Truth. I am certain, the experience of very many as
excellent Christians as this Age can boast of, do bear me witness, that this is
no lavish commendation of Our Prayers. Dr. Tailor that Blessed Martyr gave this
Testimony to Our Liturgy, Acts and Monuments. p. 1696.
There was set forth by the most Innocent King Edward (for whom God be Praised
everlastingly) the whole Church Service with great deliberation and advice of
the best Learned Men in the Realm; and Authorized by the whole Parliament, and
received and Published gladly by the whole Realm; which Book was never reformed
but once, and yet by that one Reformation it was as fully perfected, according
to the Rules of Our Christian Religion in every behalf, that no Christian
Conscience could be Offended, with any thing therein contained. I mean of that
Book Reformed. What then would he have thought of it, had he lived to see it
twice more Reformed, as it has been since.

Lastly, I proceed to the forenamed Rites and Ceremonies of Our Church, in
which our Symbolizing with Popery is so much Condemned, and made a pretense for
Separation. But before I come to particulars, I will observe in the general,
that the distance Our Church keeps from that of Rome in the imposition of
Ceremonies is infinitely greater than her Agreement therein with her. For, as
those imposed by our Church (as has been already said) are exceeding few, not
the hundredth part scarcely of those imposed by the Roman Church, so does not
our Church impose them (as the other does) on the Consciences of her Members as
things of necessity, as parts of Religion or meritorious Services, as has been
proved out of the Articles. Now then,

1. As to the Surplice, our Church requires not the wearing of this Garment, as
an Holy Vestment, like the Priestly Garments under the Old Law, but merely for
the sake of Order and Uniformity: whereas in the Church of Rome a Surplice may
not be worn till it is hallowed in a solemn manner by the Bishop, or some one by
his Allowance (as may be seen in the Missal) with diverse prayers, that it may
defend him who wears it from the Assaults of the Devil; the prayers being
accompanied with a number of Crossings, and, in fine, the Surplice besprinkled
with Holy Water, in the name of the Blessed Trinity. But, I say, in our Church
it is used only as a Garment of distinction, no more holiness is placed in it,
than in the Hoods worn over it merely for distinction of degrees: And the White
is preferred before any other Color, because it was a very ancient Custom in
the Primitive Church for the Ministers to Officiate in White Garments. Beza
says of the Surplice, These linen Garments we do not so stick at, Contra
Westphalum. vol. 1. p. 255.
that we would have the progress of the Word of God hindered in the least for
them. And we might show that Mr. Calvin much blamed contending with Authority
about the wearing this Garment: Particularly in his Epistle to Bullinger. And
since all the Popish abuse of this Garment is perfectly removed, I know not why
all Ministers should not be of their mind; and much less can I imagine, why
those who are not obliged to wear it, should be affrighted from our Churches by
the mere sight of so Innocent a thing.

2. As to the Cross in Baptism; Our Church holds so little Conformity with the
Papists herein, that in no one thing of an Indifferent nature can our
Symbolizing with them be less scandalous. Dr. Burges in his defense of Dr.
Morton, P. 416, etc.
Shows, that we hold no Conformity with the Papists in the use thereof,
either in the time when, or place where, or manner how, or end whereto. The
Minister with us as he there shows) may not Cross Himself, or the People, or
Font, Water, Communion Table, or Cups, or the Bread and Wine, or any other of
Gods Ordinances: All which in Popery the Priest is bound to do, for their
Consecration, or blessing of himself, or them, as without which nothing is
Consecrated. The Child to be Baptized with us, may not be Crossed before
Baptism on the Forehead, Breast, or any part, which in Popery, the Priest must
do, to drive away the Devil, and make the Efficacy of that Sacrament more easy
and strong, as they teach. After Baptism, the Minister may not with us Cross
the Children with Oil or Chrism, or without, on the Crown of the Head, as in
Popery is required, to give them their full Christendom, lest they should die
before Confirmation. Yea at Confirmation, the Minister is not to make the sign
of the Cross on the Forehead with Chrism or without, which is enjoined in
Popery as an Essential part of the Sacrament (as they call it) of Confirmation.
Nay (as he proceeds) if the Child be in danger of present death, and not like
to live to make profession of Christ Crucified, the Minister is directed not to
use the sign of the Cross; that all may know, that we hold it not to be either
Operative upon the Child, or at all necessary to the Efficacy of the Lord's
Sacrament, but do only retain it, according to the first and best intention, as
an outward badg of the Constant profession of Christ Crucified. And where as
it is said in the 30 Canon, that by this lawful Ceremony and honorable badg,
this Child is dedicated to the service of Christ, the Doctor declares that he
has good warrant to assure those who are offended at that Explication, that
the word dedicated does there import no more, than declared by that Ceremony to
be dedicated, viz. by the foregoing Baptism: like as the Priest is said to have
cleansed the Leper, whom he only declares to be clean. Lev. 14.11. And it is
manifest from the account given of the imposing of this Ceremony in that Canon,
that this Phrase cannot otherwise be understood. I shall not need to add any
thing more about this Ceremony, after I have said, that our Church retains it
not in imitation of the Church of Rome, but of the Primitive Christians, they
thereby (to use the Words of the foresaid Canon) making an outward profession
even to the astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to acknowledge
him for their Lord and Savior, who died for them upon the Cross, etc. And (as
it follows) this use of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, was held in the
Primitive Church, as well by the Greeks, as the Latins, with one consent and
great applause, etc. I conclude with Bezas judgment of the Lawfulness of this
Ceremony. Resp. ad Baldw. p. 324.
Says he, I know many to have retained the use of the sign of the Cross, the
Adoration of the Cross being taken away: Let them, as is meet, use their own
Liberty. But in our Church, not only the Adoration of the Cross but likewise
all Superstition in the use of it is perfectly abolished. How then can it be
thought such a Symbolizing with the Church of Rome as may warrant Separation
from our Communion?

3. As to the Ceremony of Kneeling at the Communion: If our Churches
Declaration at the end of the Communion Service, will not vindicate her from an
Unlawful Symbolizing with Rome herein, I have nothing to say in her defense.
The declaration is this, Whereas it is ordained in this Office for the
Administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicants should receive the
same Kneeling (which order is well meant, for a signification of our humble and
grateful acknowledgment of the benefits of Christ, therein given to all worthy
Receivers, and for the avoiding of such Profanation and disorder in the Holy
Communion, as might otherwise ensue) yet lest the same Kneeling should by any
Persons, either out of Ignorance and Infirmity, or out of Malice and Obstinacy,
be misconstrued and depraved; It is here declared, that thereby no Adoration is
intended, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine,
there bodily received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ's Natural Flesh
and Blood. For the Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very
Natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry to
be abhorred of all faithful Christians.) And the Natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not here; it being against the truth of
Christ's Natural Body, to be at one time in more places than one. We see that
our Church does here, not only declare that no Adoration is in this Gesture
intended, either to the Elements or to Christ's Corporal Presence under the
Species of Bread and Wine, but also that, as such a Pretense is absurd and
contradictions, so the adoring of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, would be
Idolatry to be abhorred by all faithful Christians. So that, as nothing is in
it self more indifferent than this Gesture in receiving the Holy Communion,
there being not one Word said of the Gesture in our Saviors Institution of
this Sacrament either before his Death to his Disciples, or after his Ascension
to St. Paul, (who has delivered to us what he received of the Lord about this
matter, as he said, that is, all that he had received) and as Christ has
Consequently left the particular Gesture to the determination of the Church, a
Gesture being in the general necessary, so this Circumstance of Symbolizing
with the Church of Rome herein, cannot make Our Churches requiring Kneeling to
be Unlawful (and much less our Obedience to the Church in using this Gesture)
seeing all the Idolatry and Superstition too, wherewith the Church of Rome has
abused it, is perfectly removed, and it is required by our Church merely as a
decent Reverend Gesture.

4. As to the Ring in Marriage: The Church of Rome (as is to be seen in the
Office of Matrimony, juxta usum Ecclesiae Sarisburiensis, abuses it most
notoriously. There you have it, first blessed with two Prayers; in the former
of which, God is beseeched to send his blessing on this Ring, that she who
shall wear it may be Armed with the Power of Heavenly defense, and it may be
beneficial to her, to Eternal life, through Christ our Lord. And in the latter,
the Priest, Crossing, himself, Prays, that God would bless this Ring, which
we in thy Holy Name bless, that whosoever shall wear it, may abide in his
Peace, etc. Next Holy Water is sprinkled upon the Ring: And lastly, the Priest
puts it upon the Brides Thumb, the Bridegroom saying, in the Name of the
Father: Then upon her second Finger, saying, and of the Son: Then on the third,
saying, and of the Holy Ghost: Then on the fourth, saying, Amen. And there he
leaves it. And there is expressed a special Mystery in leaving it upon that
Finger. But there is used nothing of this impious or Superstitious fooling
about the Ring in our office of Marriage. All the doings about it are, the
Ministers putting it on the fourth Finger, the Bridegroom saying after him with
this Ring I thee Wed, and the mentioning of it in the Prayer following, as a
Token and Pledge of the Vow and Covenant made between the Married Persons. So
that it is so far from being used as a Sacramental sign among us, that it no
otherwise differs from a mere civil Ceremony, than as it is a Token and Pledge of
a Covenant made between the Parties in the most Solemn manner, viz. as in the
presence of God. And in truth, this is such a Symbolizing with the Church of
Rome, as I should be ashamed to bestow two Words about, but that so many of our
Brethren have been pleased to take offense at it.

Lastly, As to our Observation of certain Holy days: All I shall say about it
is,

1. That there is no Comparison between the number of our Holydays and the
Popish ones.

2. Our few are purged from all the Superstitious and wicked Solemnizations of
the Popish ones.

3. We observe scarcely any besides such as wherein we have the Primitive
Church for our Example: Excepting those which are enjoined upon the account of
Deliverances and Calamities, in which our own Nation is peculiarly concerned.

4. An observation of them void of Superstitious conceits about them, and only
as our Church directs, can have no other than a very good Effect upon our
hearts and lives. If we could say as St Austin did of the Christians in his
time, viz. By Festival Solemnities and set days, we dedicate and sanctify to
God, the memory of his Benefits, lest unthankful forgetfulness of them, should
in tract of time creep upon us we should certainly be much the better
Christians for the observation of our Holydays. Mr. Calvin says, in Festis non
recipiendis cuperem vos esse Constantiores etc. In Epist. ad Monsbelgardenses,
p. 81, 82.
I could wish that you would be more constant in your not receiving Festivals,
but so, as not to contend and make a stir about all, but about those only which
nothing at all tend to Edification, and which have a manifest appearance of
Superstition, etc. And he instanceth in those Days which Popery dedicates to
the Celebrating of the immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, and of her
Assumption, on which Holydays nothing, he says, can be said in the Pulpit, by
a servant of God, besides exposing the folly of those who have invented them.

And in another Epistle, In Epist. ad Hallerum.
Caeterum cum Festi dies hic abrogati, etc. Moreover, whereas some of your
Country are much offended at the Abrogation of Holy days among us, and it is
likely that much odious talk is spread about it: And I make account that I am
made the Author of this whole matter, and that by the Ignorant as well as
Malicious; I can solemnly testify of my self, that this was done without my
knowledge or desire, etc. Before I ever came into the City, there was no Holy
day at all observed besides the Lords day; those which are Celebrated by you
were taken away by that same Law of the People, which banished me and Farel: And
'twas rather Tumultuously extorted by the violence of Wicked Men, than decreed
legally. Upon my return I obtained this temper (or mean) that Christmas day
should be observed after your manner, but upon the other days extraordinary
supplications should be made, the Shops being kept shut in the Morning, but
after Dinner, every one should go about his own Business.

And, no doubt, the Governors of our Church would be abundantly satisfied with
such an observation of most of our Holy Days, as Mr. Calvin ordered at Geneva,
would the People be generally so far conformable.

And thus I have, I hope, sufficiently showed, that our Church's Symbolizing in
this Rite too with the Church of Rome no otherwise than she does, can be no
color for Separation.

It may be objected, that notwithstanding our having several times cited Mr.
Calvin, for the unlawfulness of Separation from the Church of England, on the
account of her Symbolizing as she does with the Church of Rome, yet he calls
her Ceremonies tolerabiles ineptiae, tolerable fooleries, which would make one
think that he was not in earnest in calling them tolerable; fooling in the
Worship of God being no doubt intolerable.

In Answer hereto, let Mr. Calvin account for his joining ineptiae and
tolerabiles together, but the instances he gives of things he so censured, were
such as the Liturgy was cleared of, in the amendment of it under Queen
Elizabeth, viz. Prayers for the dead, (that is, that they might have a happy
Resurrection, not such Prayers as supposed Purgatory) Chrism at Baptism, and
Extreme Unction. And besides, he says, he was informed by Mr. Knox, of several
other Popish Ceremonies that were retained, viz. the Use of Wax Candles, diverse
Crossings at the Communion, etc. which Information was not true.

And now, how happy should we think our selves, would our Brethren at length be
persuaded to cease fearing where no fear is; as also to fear what is really
very frightful; namely, the guilt of so great a sin as that of Schism, or
making and continuing a breach in the Church by Separation without just cause:
The greatness of which sin none have more aggravated than Mr. Calvin, and
several of our old Non-Conformists; who have also zealously born their
Testimony against Separation from the Church of England, and accordingly did
themselves hold Communion therewith generally ( viz. all the Presbyterian
Party) to their dying day, though they could not Conform as Ministers. And
there is another very formidable Evil too, which I wish more of our Brethren
had a greater sense of, viz. the advantage that our Common Enemy is too like to
make of our Sad Divisions, and being crumbled into so many Sects and Parties,
and has already made, in order to their final accomplishing their designs upon
us. The truth on it is, they themselves have had the main hand in those
Divisions, they so upbraid us with, of which we have abundant Evidence) having
most industriously followed that advice of the famous Jesuit Campanella, Jam
veroadenervandos Anglos, nihil tam conducit, quam dissensio and discordia inter
illos excitata, perpetuoque nutrita: Quod cito occasiones meliores
suppeditavit, Camp. de Mont. Hisp. p. 204. Amstel.
viz. There is no such effectual way to weaken the English, as to stir up
strife and discord among them, and still to feed it: This will quickly put into
our hands very fair advantages and opportunities. Their main spite is at the
Church of England, as being well aware, that it has ever since the Reformation
been their most formidable Enemy, and the most impregnable Bulwark in all
Christendom against the mighty Power and Policy of their Church of Rome. What a
madness therefore is it in hearty Protestants, to join with those People in
layi^g this Church as low as ever they are able! And by contending with our
Church about innocent, if not commendable things, upon the account of her
symbolizing in them with the Church of Rome, eminently to endanger the opening
such a breach as shall let in all her Heresies, Superstitions, and Idolatries
among us. Which God in his infinite Mercy prevent, by causing us to live more
answerably to the happy Means and Opportunities we now enjoy, by quenching our
as unreasonable as unchristian fierce Feuds and Animosities, and by making our
Church like Jerusalem of old, a City compact together, and at Unity within it
self. Amen.

FINIS.

