THE BISHOP of GLOUCESTER's Thanksgiving Sermon BEFORE THE house of Lords, At
Westminster-Abby, April 16th. 1696.

Die Veneris 17o Aprilis, 1696.
IT is Ordered, by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Thanks of this House shall be, and are hereby given to the Lord Bishop
of Gloucester, for his Sermon Preached Yesterday before this House, in the
Abby-Church at Westminster; And he is hereby Desired to Print and Publish the
same.

Matt. Johnson, Cler' Parliament'

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE The house of Lords In the Abby-Church at Westminster,
Upon Thursday the Sixteenth of April, 1696.

Being a Day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD, FOR The most Happy
Discovery and Disappointment of a Horrid Design to Assassinate His Sacred
MAJESTY, AND For Our Deliverance from a French Invasion.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

LONDON Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1696.

PSALM. lxxxvi. 12, 13. I will praise Thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart;
and I will glorify Thy Name for evermore: For Great is Thy Mercy toward me;
and Thou have delivered my Soul from the Lowest Hell. Or (as it is in the
Margin) from the Grave.
IT is not worth our while to enquire, what particular Deliverance from an
Extraordinary Danger that was, which King David here expresses, in very
Vigorous and Emphatical Words, his thankful Sense of. It Is enough to observe to
you, that it was from a Design of Uillains upon his Life. This the next Verse
shows: O God, the Proud are risen up against me, and the Assemblies of
Violent men have sought after my Soul, and have not set Thee before them. And,
the Deliverance we are now met to Commemorate, being of the same nature; it
being from an Horrible Conspiracy of Bloodthirsty People, both Foreigners and
our own Countrymen, against our King and his Kingdoms; His Majesty from a
Barbarous Assassmation, and all his good Subjects not only from the Loss of
him, who is the very Breath of our Nostrils, but also from a most Formidable
Invasion ready to follow it: I say, this being the Deliverance which God
Almighty, in His undeserved and infinite Goodness, has now sent us, I take the
Words I have read to you, to be a Subject very proper to Employ our Thoughts
on, upon this joyful Occasion. I will Praise Thee, O Lord my God, with all my
heart, and I will Glorify Thy Name for evermore: For Great is thy Mercy
toward me; and Thou have delivered my Soul (or Life) from the Grave. Or, Great
is Thy Mercy toward me, in delivering my Life from the Grave.

The Return which this Pious King here makes to his Great Deliverer, was the
Engaging himself to Praise Him for his Deliverance with all his heart, and to
Glorify His Name for evermore. And the Example of this as Good as Great Man,
are We bound to follow; though we need no Example to excite us to make the same
Return for Our Deliverance, which is as great a one as his could be; it being a
most necessary and indispensable Duty, thus to Express our Gratitude, for far
less Expressions of the Divine Grace and Favor.

In the handling of these words, I will endeavor to show,

I. What is implied in Praising God with all our hearts, and Glorifying His
Name.

II. That we are under the most necessary Obligation thus to do, for our
Deliverances, and, consequently, for our other Blessings.

1. What is implied in Praising God (the Lord our God) with all our hearts, and
Glorifying His Name. I join these two together, because they are one and the
same thing; as God Himself says, Psalm. 50. 23. Whosoever offers Praise,
Glorifieth me. And Glorifying God's Name is expressed by Singing forth the
honor of his Name, and making His Praise glorious, Psalm. 66. 2.

I need not inform those, who are not grossly ignorant of the Divine Nature,
that it is impossible to make any Addition to the Divine Glory and Praise. There
is no greater Contradiction, than that the Glory of an infinitely-Glorious
Being is capable of the least augmentation or diminution. But if a greater
could be, it would be this, that it lies in the power of any Creature to add
thereto or lessen it. To Glorify God, therefore, is to make His Glory (His
Essential Glory) to be more known. observed, and acknowledged. And by His
Essential Glory, His Glorious Perfections are to be understood; such as His
Power, Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and Goodness. Thus does God Almighty
Glorify Himself, namely, by displaying His Perfections, and making Men and
Angels behold them, in their Admirable Effects. And Rational Beings do Glorify
Him, by declaring such Effects, and their affecting Sense of them.

When it is said, That God in all His Actings designeth His own Glory, we are
to take notice, that the Glory He designeth to Himself is not a Consequent of,
but the self-same thing with, the Illustration of His 'foresaid Perfections,
and making them known and manifest in various Exertions and Exercises of them.
The Glory He aims at, is, the making His Intelligent Creatures to feel in
themselves, and to observe in other Beings, His Perfections in their
Productions. And it is absolutely impossible for any Creature, to give Glory to
God otherwise, than by rendering His Glorious Perfections more conspicuous,
which are much Eclipsed and Obscured by the Sins of Men. In which sense Sinners
are said to dishonor God, and to rob Him of His Glory, and to turn His Glory
into Shame.

Having thus explained the Notion of giving Glory and Praise to God, I proceed
to show what is implied therein. And,

First, It implies a strong Belief of our being Principally obliged to God
Almighty, for our Deliverances, with all other Blessings; and obliged to none
but Him otherwise than as His Instruments.

Secondly, A grateful Sense of our Unspeakable Obligations to Him.

1st, It implies a strong Belief of our being principally Obliged to God for
our Deliverances, etc. and to none but Him otherwise than as His Instruments.
As those who are acquainted with, and do believe the H. Scriptures, cannot
doubt but that God is All in All to the whole Universe; that the most excellent
Creatures are perfectly dependent things, things immediately dependent on their
Creator, both for their Well-being and their Continuance in being; that all
their Powers and Abilities are from Him, and preserved by Him, so all hearry
Theists must acknowledge this, nothing being more knowable by Natural Light. And
therefore Tully stuck not to pronounce Epicurus an arrant Atheist, because though
he professed to believe the Existence of a God, he denied the Divine
Providence, and that the Affairs of Men are under His Care and Government.

And as to Deliverances from Open Violence and Secret Conspiracies, and
Successes of War, nothing is better known, than that the Pagans who retained
any Sense of Religion, have always ascribed them to the Protection and
Assistance of their Gods. Even those brutish Idolaters the Philistines, upon the
slaying of their great Enemy King Saul, and vanquishing his Forces, did show to
whom they acknowledged themselves Obliged for this great Victory, by putting
his Armor in the House of their Gods, and fastening his Head in the Temple of
Dagon, 1 Chronicles. X. 10.

2. Giving Glory and Praise to God for Deliverances and other Blessings,
implies a grateful Sense too of our being Obliged to Him for them. The mere
Belief hereof, I need not say, is a most insignificant thing without this. And
it is equally necessary to express this Sense, by Praising Him with joyful Lips,
and by Living to His Praise and Glory. Nor can we glorify and praise Him with
all our hearts, but by joining these two together. And therefore Offering
Praise, and Ordering the Conversation aright, are conjoined by the Psalmist in
the words following those forecited ones, He that offers Praise, Glorifieth
Me.

As to the former of these Expressions of Gratitude, what Noble Strains do we
find of Praise and Thanksgiving, in the H. Scriptures, and especially in the
Psalms! As, Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me Bless His Holy
Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all His Benefits. Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities, and heals all thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy Life from
destruction, and Crowns thee with loving kndness and tender mercies, Psalm.
103. beg. I will extol Thee my God, O King, and I will-Bless Thy Name for ever
and ever. Every day will I Bless Thee, and I will Praise thy Name for ever and
ever. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and His Greatness is
unsearchable. One Generation shall declare Thy Works to another, and shall
Praise Thy mighty Acts. I will speak of the glorious Honor of Thy Majesty, and
of Thy wondrous Works. And men shall speak of the might of thy Terrible Acts,
and I will declare Thy Greatness. They shall abundantly utter the memory of Thy
great Goodness, and shall Sing of Thy Righteousness; Psalm. 145. 1st to 7th V.
And so he goes on admirably to the end of the Psalm.

But could we sing God's Praises with the Tongues of Angels, we shall be far
from Glorifying Him, from giving Him the Glory due unto His Name, (as we are
called upon to do) except we live them too; except we are led by the Great
things God does for us, to a more careful Observance of His Righteous Laws. The
Praises of the Disobedient do Him no Honor, since the Lives of such do give
the Lie to their Tongues. Such will never be believed to Praise God in Earnest,
for it may well be concluded, that the Principle which will make a man Sincere
in his Praises, must needs excite him to real Expressions of Thankfulness, no
less than Verbal ones. It is not to be imagined, that those who take but little
Care, to do what is acceptable in the Sight of God, and stick not at wilfully
and deliberately Offending Him, can have any great Sense of their being much
Obliged to Him.

And God does lay so great weight, upon being glorified by our Lives, that this
is His great design in obliging us as He does. And we read particularly of
Deliverances from our Enemies, that they are sent us for this end, Luke 1. 74.
That we being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, may serve Him without
fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before Him, all the days of our Life.

King David, upon his Deliverance (as it is very probable) from the imminent
danger he was in from his Son Absalon, brake forth into such Expressions as
these; I love the Lord, because He has heard my Voice and my Supplication:
Because He has inclined His Ear unto me, therefore will I call upon Him as
long as I live. I will lead a more devout and religious life. Thou have
delivered my Soul from death, mine Eyes from tears, and my Feet from falling. I
will walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Or, therefore I will do
so; I will be more caresul than ever, to walk uprightly before Him. What shall
I render unto the Lord for all His Benefits toward me? I will take the Cup of
Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my Vows unto the
Lord, now in the presence of all his People. O Lord, truly I am Thy Servant, I
am Thy Servant, Thou have loosed my Bonds. Or, by thy having set me free from
the fear of mine Enemies, Thou have laid a new Obligation upon me, to be Thy
Servant, Thy faithful Servant. The Israelites (as the Psalmist observes)
remembered that God was their Rock, and the High God their Redeemer; and they
remembered this in Songs of Praise to their Rock and Redeemer; He had enough of
these from them; but their Hearts not being upright with him, as it follows,
and they not being steadfast in His Covenant, it is said, they flattered Him with
their mouth, and lied unto Him with their Lips. All their Thanksgiving Songs
(and Sacrifices too) were of no better account with God than mere Mockeries,
and were in themselves no better. We our selves can have no better Opinion of
the Thanks we receive from those we have Obliged, though they are never so solemn
and seemingly hearty, when at the same time we observe an Aversion in them, to
answer our reasonable Expectations from them.

Though we read of but one Fault charged upon that Excellent Prince Hezekiab,
namely, that his Heart was lifted up; that he had a too high Opinion of
himself, by means of his being magnified in the sight of all Nations, upon the
most Miraculous Deliverance which God had sent him, from an irresistible
Invasion; yet, upon this single Account, he is said not to have rendered
according to the Benefits done unto him; and it follows, that therefore there
was Wrath upon him, and upon his People, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. Therefore God
punished him, and took this occasion to be very severe upon his People, for
former Provocations. And this leads me to show,

2dly, That we are under a necessary (the most absolutely necessary)
Obligation, to Praise the Lord our God with all our hearts, and to Glorify His
Name for evermore (as these Phrases have been expounded) for all God's
Blessings in general, and for our Deliverances from our Enemies in particular.

I will not here insist upon God's Command, whose Will and Pleasure must as
such be obeyed, but upon those Reasons on which this Command is founded. And
those Reasons do speak this Duty, not only a Branch of Natural Religion, but as
clearly discernable to be a Duty of the most indispensable necessity, at first
sight, as is any corporeal Object apparent to our outward Senses: So that no
man in his Wits can doubt, whether he be bound to glorify God both with his
Lips, and by his Life, for the great Expressions of His Goodness to him.

Now the Reasons on which our Obligation hereto is grounded, over and above the
Command of God, and which are the Foundation of God's willing to be glorified
by us, are these two.

1. Thus to do is the most comely, the most fit, just, and good thing in it
self.

2. It is the most beneficial and good thing for us.

1. It Is the most comely, the most fit, just, and good thing in it self. Praise
is comely, says the Psalmist, Psa. 147. 1. And Praise is comely for the
Upright, Ps. 33. 1. Gratitude is highly becoming, meet, fit, and good in its
own nature, without considering it as an Instance of Obedience. And we have
every whit as lovely an Idea of Gratitude, as we have of Obedience, not to say
a more lovely, Gratitude being the Principle of the most lovely Obedience. It Is
as disbecoming and unjust, on the other hand, to be ungrateful, as to be
disobedient. I mean, the Notion of Ingratitude speaks it to be as unjust and
vile a thing, abstractively considered, as the Notion of Disobedience, so
considered, speaks it so to be. It is indeed commonly said, Such a one is not
bound in Justice to do this or that, but he is in Gratitude. I cannot say this
is dishonest dealing, but it is disingenuous. But we do ill to distinguish
between Justice and Gratitude, and between Disingenuity and downright
Dishonesty, otherwise than by making Gratitude a distinct Species of Justice,
and Disingenuity of Dishonesty and Injustice. These differ only as one is more
Comprehensive than the other. Whatsoever is an Instance of Ingratitude, is so
likewise of Injustice; though every Instance of Injustice is not so of
Ingratitude: And no man can doubt, that it is Unjust to be Ungrateful, since it
cannot be questioned whether it be Injustice to deny a Due; but Gratitude is
due (naturally due) to every Benefactor: for which reason Kindnesses are called
Obligations. He who is Bountiful or Merciful to us, has by so being a Right to
our Thankfulness and hearty Endeavors to serve and please him. There is no
Notion that more seems to be born with us than this, though we nevertheless need
to be minded of it, or to have it impressed upon us; so Corrupt is Human Nature.
And, next to a Sense of Pleasure and Pain, we discover none more early than a
Sense of Gratitude: Nay, we discern in some Brutes that which is as like it, as
an Egg to an Egg. And as Solomon sent the Sluggard to School to the poor
Pismire, to learn Industry; so may the Dog of the Ungrateful man, teach him
Gratitude.

Now, if Love, Thankfulness, and Obedience are Duties necessarily resulting
from the Relations of Fathers, Benefactors, and Deliverers, how much of those
must needs be due to the infinitely best of such! His Right to them in the
highest degree is so necessary, that He can no more quit or surrender it, than
it can be taken from Him. He cannot Will to forgo this Right, any more than He
can cease to be what He is, both in Himself, and in reference to His Creation.
Contradictions are not Objects of Power, and therefore not of the Divine Power.
And farther, setting aside the Divine Will in this Case, God cannot give us
liberty not to Glorify Him, because this would be to separate between things
Essentially inseparable; which to suppose possible, is a monstrous
Contradiction.

2. The other Reason on which this Duty is founded; this, of Praising God with
all our hearts, and Glorifying His Name for evermore, for our Deliverances,
etc. is, that thus to do is as good for us, and that necessarily, as it is
just, fit, and good in itself. So that God must leave off to be concerned for
the Happiness of his Creatures, according to their Natural Capacities of
Happiness, (which so infinitely Good a Being cannot do) should He cease to
Oblige us hereunto.

Now the Sun at Noon is not more clearly visible than it is evident to all,
whose Understandings are not blinded with vile Affections, that there is the
most necessary Connection between our Interest, and the Conscientious discharge
of ^his Duty; even our Interest relating to both Worlds. And that we must be
utterly unqualified for the Heavenly Happiness, and as incapable of all true
Self-enjoyment on this side Heaven, and shall have much more of the Brutish
(nay, the worse than Brutish) than of the Human Nature, while the Blessings
which are so heaped upon us, do not so affect us, as to engage us to live to
the Praise of that Good-God, who has so highly Merited at our Hands.

Nothing is more plainly or easily demonstrable than this, as nothing has been
oftener, or more Abundantly demonstrated. But good Men need not demonstrations
of it; this is Self-evident to all such: Which may well excuse me from entering
now upon so copious an Argument, though my time would permit me, as it will not.

Now, to make Application of what has been discoursed to the present Occasion,
Is it possible we should any of us be difficultly persuaded, upon such a
Deliverance as God has now again given us, to make these words of the Devout
King our own, or to repeat them with that sense of the Divine Goodness, which
he expressed in them? I will praise Thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and
I will glorify Thy Name for evermore; for great is Thy Mercy toward me, and
toward my King and Country, in that Thou have delivered our Souls from going
down into the Pit. Is it possible, I say, we should not readily and cheerfully
thus do for such a Deliverance as this?

1. And, in the first place, since so doing supposes an hearty Acknowledgment
of God's being the Author of it, can we think much of doing Him this Honor,
which is the very least we can do Him for it?

It may be censured as no good Manners to ask any of those this Question, who
have now been joining in the Praises of God for this Deliverance; and I doubt
it may be deservedly so censured, did we not too well know, that nothing is
more common than mere formal Addresses to Almighty God, and drawing near to Him
with our Lips, when our Hearts are far from Him. With which great Hypocrisy,
the Prophet, in His Name, charged even the generality of his Country men, as
devout Worshipers, as they would have been thought to be, of the God of Israel.

And, I would to God that the incomparably greater number of our Country men,
be not as chargeable herewith as the Israelites then were, although the Religion
we profess so much excels theirs!

And as to the great Sin of Infidelity, I wish it could be said, that it does
much less prevail among us, (though we all call our selves Christians) than it
did among the Jews, even in the Sadducean Age. But however, we must give a
better demonstration of our sincerely professing our Obligation to God for this
Great Deliverance, than our compliance with Authority in the observance of this
day.

In some Occurrences the Hand of God appears much more plainly than in
others. We ought to believe it to be in all, but it is to be seen in some; so
that those who discern it not, must shut their Eyes on purpose that they may
not. And among these may this Deliverance be well reckoned; as, I hope, 'twill
appear anon.

But there have been in the World, such wilfully Blind and Perverse People, as
would not acknowledge God's Hand, no, not in the most incontestable Miracles.
Such were those of whom the Prophet complained, That they regarded not the Work
of the Lord, neither considered the Operation of His Hand. And those of whom
the Psalmist says, That they understood not God's Wonders in Egypt. And, what
strange Examples were those of this Perverseness, who had so many of the most
Wonderful Miracles, wrought by our Savior and His Apostles, before their Eyes,
and yet believed not!

Ordinarily the Divine Concurrence with the free Actings of Men, and with
natural Agents, is not so discernible as that we are able to say, this is the
Divine Part of the Event, and that the Humane, or merely Natural; though right
Reason, as well as the Divine Oracles, will not so exclude God out of any
Event, as to make Him a mere Spectator thereof, or a bare Permitter of any more
in it, than what is morally Evil. For the Notion of God's being the Wise
Governor, as well as Maker of the World, (which is evident from the
Improvement of Natural Reason, as well as from Revelation; and therefore taught
by the Pagan Philosophers, as well as by the Jewish and Christian Divines) will
not admit of His being wholly Unconcerned inany Occurrence whatsoever; since
very great things may be occasioned, and very frequently have been, by as small
and inconsiderable ones.

I say, there are Occurrences, and such as (strictly speaking) may not be
called Miracles, which have such Circumstances belonging to them, that an
Impartial Considerer of them, must necessarily see a Special Providence, and
God's more immediate Hand in them. And these are so far from being Rarities,
that all Ages and Countries have abounded with them. Nay, I question, whether
there be any one single Person, who has not experimented several such relating
to himself. But as to Public and National Instances of this kind, how full are
the Best Historians of them!

To confine our selves to Deliverances of Kings and their People, out of great
Calamities, or from imminent Dangers of falling into such: Who, for Example,
can question whether there was an Extraordinary Divine Hand, in the Raising of
Cyrus for the Deliverance of the Jews from their Seventy. Years Captivity,
tho'he were an utter Stranger to Isaiah's Prophecy (in which he is foretold by
Name as their Deliverer, above Two hundred years before he was in being) if he
has read Tully's Prince of Historians Herodotus, Or Xenophon, Or Justin? In
whose Accounts of Cyrus's Birth, and Preservation from being Butchered as soon
as Born, by the Commandment of his Grandfather Astyages, and of the most
wonderful Fortune that all-along attended him, from a poor Shepherd's Boy, to
his Advancement to a Mighty Empire, though I remember not one Miracle recorded in
his Story, yet so long a Series of Marvelous Events as we find therein, must
needs have made the observers of them conclude him to be the immediate Care of
Heaven, in order to the Accomplishment of some Glorious Design.

There was no Miracle neither, in the Jews Deliverance from the Cursed Design
of proud Haman, but there was a concurrence of such Happy Events for the
bringing it about, as spoke it to be the Peculiar Work of God, as evidently
every whit, as if it had been the Achievement of many Miracles.

But because I want time to enlarge upon Examples of this nature, I Will content
my self to mention but two or three more, which shall be Deliverances of our
own Kings, Church and People.

There was nothing properly Miraculous in the Discovery of the Hellish Powder
Plot, but it being brought to light by such very Strange Means, (which I hope
few of us are Ignorant of) and so very late, that had it been delayed but some
Hours longer, the Astonishing Blow would have given the first News of it, even
Cardinal Bellarmin was so affected with the Consideration of these things, as
to acknowledge to the World that he looked on this Deliverance, as no less than
Miraculous.

The Deliverance of King Charles IId from his Twelve years Banishment, and of
his Kingdoms from Arbitrary Government, Oppression, and Confusion, had no
Miracle neither accompanying it, but so great a number of the most Surprising
things, all of a sudden followed upon the neck of each other, till they had
made way for the King's Easy Return, even without the Effusion of a drop of
Blood, through the most inconquerable difficulties, that the Divine Power,
Wisdom and Goodness were scarcely less eminently visible therein, than if no
Human Means had contributed toward it.

And what are we to think less of our Late Deliverance from Popery and Slavery,
and as scaring a Prospect as ever People had? Surely the most Egregious Folly
of the Jesuits Counsels, as cunning shrewd Fellows as the World, to that time,
had long accounted them: The strong Impressions which were upon the Minds of
Great Men Abroad, even of both Religions, to Assist in Promoting this
Deliverance: The Unanimous Agreement of so many of different Sentiments at
Home, to the utmost to put to their helping Hand: The so close Concealment of
so Hazardous a Design, which so many were Privy to: The Ordering of the Wind:
The strange dispiriting of those who (humanely speaking) had Power, as well as
Will, abundantly enough to defeat this Design: These, with many things more,
are demonstrations that this Mighty Deliverance was no less the Work of the
Almighty God, than that of the Israelites at the Red Sea though it was not
properly and strictly Miraculous, as that was.

I may well add to this, the Deliverance of poor Ireland afterward, out of the
most deplorable Circumstances, it having been brought about by so many most
Signal Events, as are enough to make a good Volume.

After the self-same manner, that Tully ridiculed the mad Epicuraean Hypothesis
of the World's being formed by a lucky jumblement of Atoms, may our Infidels
imputing such Deliverances to mere fortunate Chances, be exposed to the
Laughter of all, who are but a remove or two from Idiots.

And we have great reason, to reckon the Deliverance we are now Commemorating,
among the 'foremention'd. The Hand of God so appears in this, that no Thanks
are due for it, to either any Humane Power or Policy. The happy Discovery of
the horrible Design to Assassinate our Gracious Sovereign, and to back his
Murder with a powerful Invasion, together with a mighty Assistance from the
Combined Forces of Papists, and a strange sort of Protestants among ourselves;
I say, the mere Discovery hereof was our Deliverance, like that of the
Gunpowder Treason: Which (by the way) was in some respects the less dangerous
of the two, viz. as none but Papists were engaged in this, and there was no
Division among Protestants at that time; and we had then nothing so formidable
an Enemy to our Neighbor, as we have now.

As to the Tragedy now to be Acted, there was late notice from Abroad of great
French Preparations, but no great Apprehension from them of a Design to invade
us, till the Assassinating Part was brought to light. And the Circumstances of
the discovery hereof are such, as speak it the Lord's doing. And indeed without
the knowledge of those Circumstances (which may hereafter be more fully
published) whosoever believes a Providence superintending the Affairs of the
World, will think it highly reasonable to impute this Discovery to a Secret
Impulse from Him, who has the hearts of all Men in His Hand, (as the Wise Man
says of the hearts of Kings) and turns them as the Rivers of Water. And to
what can we ascribe so certainly the bringing to light such a hidden Work of
darkness as this was, and which was so very shrewdly laid, as to His Special
Providence, from whom there is no darkness, nor shadow of death, (to use
Elibu's words) where the Workers of Iniquity may hide themselves? Since nothing
is more worthy of Infinite Goodness, than to take the most special Care of
those, to whom is committed the Care of Whole Nations; and who are the Greatest
Instruments of Good to Manking; as all good Kings are. And never did the
Welfare of any People in the World more necessarily (under God) depend upon the
Life of their King, than does Ours at this time (as our Enemies well know) upon
the Preservation of his Life, who (not as our Conqueror, but for having been
the Glorious Instrument of our Deliverance) now Reigns over us. And who that is
a hearty Assertor of the Divine Providence, can find in his heart to impute an
Event of so Mighty a consequence as this is, to God's bare Permission, since he
knows that the most insignificant and trivial matters cannot come to pass
without it?

And as to the Invasion, what a PROVIDENCE was it that the Wind should so
constantly blow, for, I think, near a Quarter of a Year together, and in the
Winter too, from such Points of the Compass, as that the Squadron designed for
the Mediterranean, could not stir! Which if it had gone within that time, our
Island had been left naked of all Defense. I am sure we concluded this stay of
those Ships, a very Unhappy Providence, and that it boded extremely ill to us,
whereas it proved to be the Happiest we could have wished for. Little did we
imagine that now God had sent us another Protestant Wind. To nothing better
than most Stupid Infidelity can the not seeing God's immediate Hand in this, be
attributed by us.

But, God be thanked, no Body, would he never so fain, can now be so stupid or
perverse, as to have the least doubt' of even the basest and most barbarous
part of this Conspiracy; as many as at first would have had it a Sham; it being
confessed, under their hands, by two of those three Papists who have Suffered
for it, and not denied by the third; though they could not have Wanted
Absolution, had they Protested most solemnly in their Old Form, That they knew
no more of it than the Child unborn. But all they Attempted was, the Clearing
their King from having any hand in it. And how did they this? They only
affirmed, that they saw not, nor knew of any Commission from him for it. And
this they might truly affirm in the strict sense of the word [Know] if they had
never seen it, though it had been never so well Attested to them. But those
little understand what a Papist is, who can think the Conscience of any of them
so strait laced, as to scruple so small an Equivocation as this, to serve so
highly meritorious a purpose, as the wiping off such a horrible Scandal from a
King so Bigoted to the Church of Rome, as to part with three Kingdoms for her
sake. But it is a Jest which no Sensible Man can forbear smiling at, that there
should be a Commission for an Invasion, but none for that on which their Hopes
of Success did so much depend.

2. In the second place, since the Hand of God is so Apparent in this
Deliverance, let us not only Acknowledge it, which (as has been said) is the
least Honor we can do Him for it, but let us most Gratefully Acknowledge it.
And let us express our Gratitude, by Praising our Great and most Merciful
Deliverer with all our hearts, and Glorisying His Name for evermore, in the
full sense which has been given of these Phrases. Let us express it by crying
out, with the same holy Man, O Magnify the Lord with me, and let us Exalt His
Name together: By adapting the Doxology of the Mother of our Lord hereto, My
Soul does Magnify the Lord, and my Spirit does Rejoice in God my Savior: And,
above all, by more fearing to offend Him, and more delighting to please Him,
for the time to come; this being the great End and Design of Deliverances
particularly, as has been showed: And God Almighty having told us the same
thing, Psalm. 50. 15. I will deliver thee, and thou shall Glorify Me. And I
need not repeat it, that the Reforming of our Lives is absolutely necessary to
our Glorifying of God. Certainly, a very little Ingenuity will constrein us to
these Expressions of Thankfulness, if we well consider,

First, What our Deliverance is.

Secondly, What little Reason, we had now, of any time, to expect such a
Deliverance.

1. If we well consider, what our Deliverance is, and therefore seriously
Reflect upon what we are delivered from, we shall be presently satisfied, that
no People under Heaven ever had a Greater. Had our Enemies Accomplished their
Horrid Design, upon the Royal Person of our Sovereign, How would our Faces have
gathered Blackness! With what Fearfulness and Trembling should we have been
seized, upon the dreadful Outcry, The King is Murdered! The King is
Murdered! And how would our Hearts have failed us for fear, and for looking
after the things that were coming upon us! And what Horror and Astonishment
would have filled all Places, upon the Rushing in of so many Thousands of
Bloody French, joined with an Army of Unnatural English!

Then would our Streets have Rung with as doleful Moan, as that of the Prophet
Jeremy, upon the Babylonians invading his Country: My Bowels! My Bowels! I am
pained at the very heart; my heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my
peace; because thou have heard, O my Soul, the Sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm
of War; Destruction upon Destruction is Cried. And like that of Isaiah, in the
name of Jerusalem, upon the Assyrian Invasion; Look away from me, I will weep
bitterly, because of the Spoiling of the Daughter of my People: For it is a day
of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity by the Lord of Hosts. And
what frightful Spectacles should we have been forced to behold, while our
selves were not among those Spectacles! Such as dead Bodies covering our
Streets, and Blood running down the Kennels: Our Houses all on a Flame: The
Ravishing of Wives and Daughters; and All manner of Salvage Outrages.

And should an entire Conquest at last have been made of us; which, considering
all our Circumstances (not now to be mentioned) would, in the Eye of Reason,
have been inevitable, without God Almighty's Wonderful Interposing, and been
but a short Work too, our Religion, Liberty, Property, every thing valuable and
worth the keeping, would for ever have taken leave of the Survivers of those
Calamities; and of how many succeeding Generations also, God only knows. For
who needs be told, that Tyranny and Cruelty are inseparable from Popery,
wheresoever it has its full Swing, and is under no Restreint; and nothing in
Nature is more Evident, than that now it would be so. For, at least, our
Protestant Allys must undoubtedly in a little time, have drank as deep as our
selves, of the same Bitter Cup.

And now, to digress a while, could our Restless Protestant Countrymen, who
have longed for nothing more than the Downfall of this Government (as Easy as
they might, if they would, live under it) could they have hoped that this
Bitterest of Cups should have past from them? We know they more than hoped it,
they presumed it would, or they could never have adventured to Engage with
Popish Foreigners, and the most deadly Enemies in the World to England, in such
a Conspiracy. But never was Faith built upon such foolish Evidence. For, if we
can be certain of any Futurity, we may be of this, that, had their Design
prosper'd, they would have been so far from not being involved in the sad
Circumstances of the Friends of this Government, that they must have been the
most Wretched People among us. And therefore, if any have more cause than
others, to Praise God for this Deliverance, these have most of any; All of them
that shall be so Fortunate, as to Escape the Hand of Justice.

For, how Miserable must those be, who have not Abandoned all Concern for their
Native Country (which, I should think, none of them can, should they never so
much endeavor it) when, upon observing the Miseries they have brought upon it,
they would be forced to take up that Cry of Fools, Non Putaram, I could never
have thought it; and when they should have no better Cordial for the allaying
of their Grief, than themselves and their Families faring no better than their
Neighbors.

And that they could not, is every whit as certain, as that Protestants Merits
can have no other Influence upon Papists, than to raise Laughter, whenever
they are wholly at the mercy of their Ingenuity: And as certain too, as that
nothing but Interest can oblige Papists, to keep faith with Heretics. And
these men's Greatest Master may satisfy them, that against what he shall please
to call his Interest, he cannot be obliged (no, not by the most Solemn Oaths at
the Holy Altar) not to break faith with his Brother Catholics. The Most
Catholic King well knows to his Cost, what hold such Cords as those can have,
of his Most Christian Majesty.

But as to these Gentlemen's Great Merits, on which they have built such mighty
Confidence, how sanguine are they in taking it for granted, that their
After-game would be better Remembered than their having had no Concern for their
King, when they might, possibly, have kept him upon his Throne! Nay, that it
would be better Remembered than their having been so very Angry with him, for
his Arbitrary Proceedings; or rather (to speak plain truth) for his not
employing themselves in advancing Prerogative above Law; and for his having so
forgot their former Merits, as to kick them off, to receive the Fanatics in
their room. And, once more, how came they by their Confidence, that this their
After-game must needs be better Remembered, than their Rejoicing as much as
others at the Prince's Landing; and than their being so willing to have K.
James shackled, and made a kind of Doge of Venice? Not to go farther in the
Demerits of some of the Chiefest of them, as they know I might.

I wish these People could have looked on their Dark, as well as on their
Bright side, and then have thought with themselves what Darlings they are like
to be, when a View shall be taken of both together, or rather of their Dark
side only. And all but themselves must needs call to mind enough to conclude,
that their Ill deservings will be best Remembered, when there is no farther
occasion for their Service; as there would have been none in a little time.

What I have said, is upon a charitable Supposition, that, for the completing
of their Merits, they would not (at least Generally) be prevailed with to
Renounce their Religion; but it is easy to think that whosoever should thus
late be persuaded to it, his Motives thereto would be so well understood, as
that 'twould stand him in but little stead. Not to mention how dear he must
expect to pay for his Apostasy in the Other World.

But indeed, half an Eye may see, that under a French Conquest, 'twill be Crime
enough to be an English Man; and that should K. James be never so willing to
show favor to his Subjects, he would have none to show favor to. That, at
best, the Power of a Viceroy must then Content him. Who can question this,
that has not forgot, how very short his Power was of a Viceroys in Ireland,
and that Lauzune made all the Figure there? (...)


And now let these Gentlemen take it for a great Civility, to be addressed to
in no harder words than those of K. Solomon, How long, ye Simple ones, will you
love Simplicity? Or of his Royal Father's, Ye Fools, when will ye be Wise? When
will you be made sensible, how destructive to all Humane Society, the
Principles are, on which you have founded your Flaming Loyalty? When will you
be Convinced of the Pernicious Folly of such an Extravagant Notion of Passive
Obedience, as levels a Legal with the most Arbitrary Constitution; as makes
Laws not worth a Straw, one jot longer than the Prince pleases; as has not the
least shadow of Truth, except instead of Kings being made for People, People
are made to be wholly subjected to the Lusts of Kings; to Abuse them, Harass
and Plague them, and do what they list with them? Which to suppose, would speak
God Almighty such a Being, as that 'twould be even a less horrid Blasphemy,
boldly to affirm He has no Being.

I am sure, much more than enough has been written since this Happy
Revolution, to make these Friends of ours sensible, not only how False their
Principles of Government are, but also how fatally Mischievous and Destructive.
I pray God their Eyes may at length be opened; and I should think that now is
the time for it, if ever they be.

The less Innocent of them do well deserve to have those words of the Prophet
applied to them, Let favor be showed to the Wicked, yet will be not learn
Righteousness; and will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. Lord, when Thine
Hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be Ashamed, etc.
Or they shall see when it is too late for seeing to do them Service. But I choose
rather to give them the necessary Advice of Our Blessed Savior, Sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto you. And let them thank God with all their Hearts,
that he has done infinitely better now for them, than what they had done for
themselves, if He had not defeated their most Desperate Design.

2. In order to our being the more Affected with the Greatness of our
Deliverance, let us not only reflect upon what Miseries we are delivered from,
but likewise consider what little Reason we had now (we had now of any time) to
expect from Him such a Deliverance. Had we, I beseech you, made such Returns
for our late so wonderful a one, as reasonably to hope for such another, should
we again need it? Alas, alas! never was our Good God worse Requited for any
Delivearance, than He has been for that. So that we had all the reason in the
World to fear, that (as He threatened the Israelites, Judge. x. 13.) He would
deliver us no more; and yet we are not only again rescued from a worse than
Egyptian Bondage, but also delivered from being so much as Scared with the
Imminent Danger we were in again of falling under it. What shall we say to
this? What other Account can be given of it, but that of the Son of Sirach, As
is God's Majesty, so is His Mercy.

I say, our former Deliverance, as Amazing as it was, was (to our Infinite
Shame) very soon forgotten; and that notwithstanding many very strange and most
surprising Providence, in order to the more completing thereof. And
notwithstanding the severe Scourges we have since met with, for our horrible
Ingratitude, we have still persisted therein, as if we had a mind to provoke
God Almighty, to become no less our Enemy, than He had been our Friend. But if
an Affecting Sense of the Dreadful things we have been delivered from, be not
now revived; and (whereas we apparently grew a Worse People, after that
Deliverance, having begun to be a Better, while the Rod was upon some of us,
and hung over us all) if there be now no Visible Reformation; if Debauchery and
Prosaneness shall abound among the Friends of this Government as much as ever;
if those who have been Infidels in their Principles, or such in Practice
(living without God in the World, and disacknowledging Him in their Ways) shall
be generally so still; if Pride and Vanity, a dear Love of the World,
Factiousness, and base Selfishness, or the preference of our Personal or
Private Interests, before the Interest of the Public (of the Church and State)
shall reign as much as ever; if Religion shall hold on at so very low an ebb,
as it is now at (ay, and the Old English Honesty too, God knows); if Divisions
and Animosities, Emulation and Strife do not now abate; if we continue so
Unconcerned for each others Welfare, while our God so concerns Himself for all
our Welfares; if neither the Wrath of our Enemies, nor our repeated
Deliverances from their Wrath, can Reconcile us to God, nor to one-another:
And, lastly, whereas we have at length obtained an Excellent Law, against
profane Swearing and Cursing, (which, I fear, begins already to signify much
less than it did at first) if there be not henceforth an Hearty Zeal for a more
through Reformation; I say, if this Great Deliverance shall do no more than past
Deliverances, toward the making us a more Honest, a more Sober, a better
Natured, and a more Religious People; and I think fit to add too, if a Sober
and Discreet Use be not made of it; as much as good Men Rejoice in it, they
will rejoice with trembling to think, what things may yet be reserved for our
Church and Nation, after all the Extraordinary and next to Miraculous
Appearances of God for both.

'T will not then be our Associating in Defense of the King and of each other,
from which we may reasonably promise much to our selves; but if we shall still
hate to be Reformed, the Prophet's Ironical Apostrophe to the Assyrians, will
as well fit us; Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, Isa. 8. 9. And besides, there is no Relying upon the best Security
wicked men can give us.

I will leave with you, part of the 13th and 14th Verses of the 9th of Ezra,
and so conclude: Seeing Thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities
deserve, and have given us such a Deliverance as this, should we again break
Thy Commandments, would not Thou be Angry with us, till Thou have consumed
us; so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping?

And God Almighty give us all His Grace, to know (now at last) in this our day,
the things which belong to our Peace, before they be hidden from our Eyes.

THE END.

