An Alarm FOR SINNERS: Containing The Confession, Prayers, Letters, and last
Words of Robert Foulkes, Late Minister of Stanton-Lacy in the County of Salop;
who was Tried, Convicted, and Sentenced, at the Sessions in the Old Bailey,
London, January 16th 1678/9 and Executed the 31st following.

With an Account of his LIFE.

Published from the Original, Written with his own hand, during his Reprieve,
and sent by him at his Death to Doctor Lloyd, Dean of Bangor.

Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Licensed,

Jan. 29. 1678.


LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, on Ludgate Hill, 1679.

TO THE Right Reverend and Honorable MY LORD BISHOP of LONDON.
May it please your Lordship,
AS it was an Act of the Highest Charity and Condescension in your Lordship,
(upon Dr. Lloyd's Motion) so speedily and effectually to Address your self to
his Majesty for a Reprieve of my Body from Death, for some small time, in order
to the Preparation of my Soul for that Eternity I am ready to enter on; so that
I think my self in Duty and Gratitude obliged, not only to give some Account to
the World how that time is Employed, but also to submit this Account to be
Ordered and Disposed of as shall seem best to your Lordships great Wisdom. If
it be thought useful, (as I hope it may be a loud Caveat against bold and
daring Impiety) I humbly desire it may not steal abroad, but take along with it
the Honor as well as authority of your Lordship's Imprimatur. That Learned and
Charitable Person which Presents it to your Lordship, has promised to Order and
Dispose of the confusion of these loose Papers, so as shall be least
troublesome to your Lordship in the Perusal; and to make my Apology for
Presenting them to such an Honorable Hand, in such a Rude and Disorderly Form.
The Circumstances of my present Condition will not suffer me to put them in any
better: But what I have now Presented to your Honor is sincerely the Truth,
and there is not a Tittle here but what is the Exact Transcript of those
Impressions I find upon my Conscience. I hope they may in some measure
contribute to the Advancement of His Glory, whom I have so beyond all Example
dishonored; and convince all that are not willing to catch at irrational
Inferences to support themselves in their Atheism and Debauchery, That our
Excellent Religion, and this Sacred and Honorable Profession, are not to be
Judged and disparaged for the Miscarriages of such unsound Members as I have
been. This gives me also some Ground to hope, that I shall obtain* your
Lordships Pardon and Prayers, together with that of the numerous Clergy under
your Lordship's Government, in this great and populous City; which I most
humbly and heartily beg. God continue your Honor to be what you are, as great
an Ornament to the Protestant Profession, as I have been a Scandal to it. In a
deep Sense of your abundant Charity, I shall not cease to improve that Breath
you have borrowed for me, as for my Own, so for

Your Lordship's Eternal Happiness. Robert Foulkes.

An Alarm FOR SINNERS.
THAT they who have seen the former ill Example of my Life and do now look on
this dismal Conclusion of it, might not be Spectators disappointed; as I had
great Reason so I had a good Occasion to encourage me in this following Account.

That Great God that brings Good out of Evil, so ordered it, that that very
Evening after my Condemnation, I received a very seasonable Visit from a Dr.
Lloyd.
Reverend Person, Indeed the Visit was but short, and our Discourse also
interrupted with Matter not so pertinent to that Lamentable Occasion, so that
(being under great Disturbance) I could make little or nothing of it; but as I
lay on my Bed that Night, about one or two of the clock, it came into my
thoughts again; and upon the search of my Memory, I recollected two things,
which, in Answer to my earnest Request for his Assistance, that Worthy Person
had directed me to. The first was, to Glorify God: The other, as a means to
promote that Chief End, to wipe off all I could of the Scandal and Reproach
which my Vicious Life and Ignominious Death reflected upon my Function; and
both these, He told me, could not be more Effectually performed, than by a full
Confession of my manifold Enormities. I then resolved upon it, and as soon as I
could procure Pen and Paper, set about it; being willing with all my Heart to
Justify the Holy and Righteous God, and all I can to Vindicate that Reverend
Employment from unjust Aspersions, though it redounds never so much to my own
Shame and Reproach: and cannot otherwise be imputed to my Profession, but as
the Effect of great Ignorance of, or great Malignity against Canons and
Constitutions so Regular and Orderly in every Circumstance, such as strictly
oblige to great Circumspection and Exact Walking; from which Excellent Rules I
wretchedly departed, as appears by the following Audit of my Life and Actions.
I had made no considerable Progress in that Work, but I found my self
interrupted by that Consideration, That God would not Approve or License
David's Intention of Building him a Temple to Glorify his Name in, because his
hands had been too deeply concerned in Blood. 'Twas of no Difficult, but of
very discouraging Application; but whether this were a Design of Satan, or a
plot of my own Corruption, or a Concurrence of both, I will not stand to
Examine. The Advice of another Able Person so Encouraged me, and baffled the
Objection, that it vanished of it self. That removed, I considered, that being
now summoned to a speedy Appearance before the Impartial and most Dreadful
Tribunal of the Just and Righteous Judge of all the Earth, there to Answer for
those many and heinous Sins, visible in my Vicious and Ill-led Life; I hold my
self obliged to enter into a narrow Search, and a very close Inspection of my
Heart and all my Ways. And though my Crimes be so Crying and Public, the
Aggravations of them such as make them s exceeding sinful, that the shame of
them does cover me, my Horror for them, and the just Reward due to them here
on my Body, hereafter on my Soul, in the more dreadful and terrible Miseries of
Eternal and unquenchable Burnings, that these Sins must needs draw upon me, if
the hand of Infinite Mercy does not snatch me as a brand out of the Flame;
though, I say, these General Considerations have almost distracted my Thoughts,
yet I cannot find any rest till I have made a more diligent Scrutiny, a more
distinct and particular discovery of all that Wickedness that was damm'd up in
my Heart, as the Spring and Fountain; and burst out thence into such Rapid and
impetuous Streams of Profaneness in my Life.

Such were my Irregularities, that I have just Cause, and had long ago reason
to smart under the severity of David's Reproofor rather of David's God: So the
words run, Psalm. 50. 16. But unto the wicked, says God, What have thou to do
to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth,
seeing thou hate Instruction, and castest my words behind thee, and have been
partaker with Adulterers: but then, Consuetudo peccandi tollebat sensum
peccati. I was of proof against the strokes of Divine Comminations.

But now that my Sins have found me out, and Gods Justice has overtaken and
arrested me, so that I am to be a Spectacle to the World, I may be heard to
publish my Sin, and leave this Warning behind me; that all that shall hear or
see it, may fear, and do no more so Wickedly: And in particular, that they who
by my ill Life have been led to ill thoughts of that Holy Profession and
Calling so dishonored, or of that pure Church of which I was an unworthy
Member, and a more unworthy Teacher; may no more blaspheme the Function of the
Ministry, the Christian Faith, or the Church of England; but be rather struck
with Horror at my base Apostasy and Impiety, and that by my Example He that
stands may take heed lest he fall, and such as are fallen may be moved to
Remember their first Love and do their first Works; lest the like Horrible
Judgments pursue and overtake them.

Let the Circumstances of my Condition add weight to my Words; Dying men have
no Temptation to warp them from Sincerity, they cannot then be suspected either
to Lie or Deceive: And though my former preaching was blasted by my Scandalous
Living, and could not be of any Worth or Consideration; yet these my last
Words, together with my sad Condition, will (I hope,) so Affect all Persons, as
to engage their Consideration of what I say.

I confess then, to Gods Glory and my own Shame, that the Hand of Heaven had
been exceeding bountiful to me; that great God that fills with his Blessing
every living thing, had loaded me with Benefits; of his Fullness I received
Grace for Grace, John 1. 16. that is Copia and Abundantia Gratiae, he had given
me all things richly to enjoy; I had no Reason to Murmur, as if my Portion had
been sparing and penurious, either in Temporals or Spirituals.

1. I had my Birth and Education not amongst them that are Aliens from the
Common wealth of Israel and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, etc. But in
the Pale of the Church, and not in a Church stuffed with Error and
Superstition, but in a Church so refined and reformed, that it is become the
purest upon Earth. A Church that teaches no other Doctrine but what Christ and
his Apostles delivered, derives none of its Principles from the puddled
Fountain of vain and uncertain Tradition, but a sure Word of Prophecy is that
Spring that sends forth all her Doctrines; a Church that gives no Encouragement
to Sin, nor Countenance to such vicious Persons as (Alas!) I have been; all her
Articles, all the Parts of her Worship, all her Cannons and Constitutions are
Pure and Holy; and such, as all they that sincerely observe them shall
certainly be saved. In this Church I lived, though not according to its Rules;
and in this by Gods Assistance I shall dye.

2. But this was not all, God by the outward Ministration of his Word and the
inward Operation of his Spirit wrought so on my Heart, that for some time his
Fear was before my Eyes, so that I walked tenderly, and endeavored to keep my
Conscience void of Offense, toward God and toward Man; I served him in
Secret, and Studied to glorify him in my whole Conversation. In this Path I
walked when I was dedicated more immediately to his Service, and by Imposition
of Episcopal hands was in Anti-Episcopal times, ordained a Minister of his Holy
Gospel. This should have been my Crown, and my Joy, but is now my Shame and
Reproach, that I knew God, and was an Instructor of the Foolish, and a Teacher
of the Simple, to me therefore it may be said, Thou who teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou that say a man should not commit Adultery,
do thou commit Adultery?

3. God also blessed me with competent abilities for the discharge of that
Function, so that had I prosecuted my studies with that industry and diligence
as I did other vanities, I might have attained to greater improvements of my
own and others understandings.

4. God provided plentifully for me; by the favor of a noble and an honorable
Patron I was settled very comfortably as to all the concerns of humane life, My
lot was fallen in a very fair ground, yea I had a goodly heritage; my portion
was so far from being scanty, that I had enough and to spare, and (till of
late) I was beloved of my Parishioners, and respected in my Neighborhood.

5. The same bountiful Providence blessed me with as worthy Relations, a very
faithful affectionate Wife, tender of my person, careful and industrious about
my affairs, one that had a very good right to Solomon's Character, Prove. ult.
One that blessed me with four sweet Children, and brought me within the reach
of that promise, Like a fruitful vine.

Thus in all respects God dealt graciously with me, so that I was happy as any
of my Neighbors; and now how much have I to answer for, who had received so
many Talents, but instead of employing them in my Masters service, did not so
much as lay them up in a napkin, but like a prodigal child wasted all this in
riotous living!

And now I come to the last and worst of my condition; wherein without any
favor or partiality to my self, I shall make a discovery of my shame, and
expose my vicious practices to the eye of the Sun.

That tenderness that was on my Conscience was not long-lived; my own
corruptions, with the Devils temptations, soon overcame it: then returned the
Devil attended with seven more worse than himself into my swept and garnished
soul. An unclean, a filthy Devil he was. Then I violated my Baptismal Vows, and
my Ordination Engagements, and the Faith of Wedlock, and delivered my self to
work all uncleanness with greediness; I had eyes full of adultery, that could
not cease from sin. The Devil had prepared for me a sad companion and partner
in my debaucheries; she was easily tempted by me, and proved afterward a
constant temptation to me, and has been the great occasion of this dismal
conclusion of our wretched course of life. This being so remarkably the sin of
this present Age, I will enlarge a little, to conjure all Married persons to
keep that Bed undefiled. When that Faith is once broken, the comforts of the
married life quickly expire and come to an end: nor is there any stop; but such
persons soon pass over all the stages of sin; they run from one wickedness to
another, till at last they ruin both soul and body. Open your eyes therefore,
and not only look, but contemplate upon these dreadful and tragic instances,
oh Adulterers and Adulteresses, and be not ensnared with a Whores charms; trust
not to her kindnesses, though confirmed with her Oaths, and Execrations, and
Tears; they lead on to all manner of sin; they will waste your Estate, divide
your Family, ruin your Health, destroy your Soul; and if ever you need her
friendship, she will most perfidiously betray you.

But on no sort of men shall the judgments of God more certainly fall, than on
the Hypocrites, who think either to hide, or perhaps to gild over their
abominations, so as to make the most monstrous and deformed of their lusts and
vices, peeping under the vizor and mask of Religion, look to deluded eyes with
the beauty and comeliness of real virtues.

I thought my sin well secured under the protection of one of these; I vainly
fancied it was done in secret, and that it should never be brought to light;
but I was deceived: the scandal of it became so public, that my Right Reverend
Diocesan the present Lord Bishop of Hereford, came to the knowledge of it,
reproved and admonished me for it, and ordered his Court to take cognizance of
it. It burst out with that violence, like water long dammed up, that all took
notice of it; the love of my friends, the malice of my enemies alarmed me with
it; and what I thought to be an Arcanum between my partner and my self, is now
become Vox populi; the Neighborhood rings and echoes again with it. To this I
opposed my confident denials, and those confirmed with Oaths and Execrations,
which I too frequently used for my own purgation. I stood also upon points and
forms of Law, which I thought would have born me out.

But all this while, though a very slave to my lust, and in absolute vassalage
to my flesh, yet I briskly received the assaults of all that opposed my impious
practices, and with that success, that I promised my self as complete a
conquest over them, as I had obtained over my own Conscience, whose accusations
I had almost perfectly stifled, so that it made but few and very feeble
Attempts upon me.

Once indeed it charged me very furiously; and having the advantage of a great
fit of sickness, it made such assaults upon me, that sin had like to have lost
its hold, for I was driven into great fears, and deep apprehensions, (Oh that I
had still continued such a Convert!) those fears extorted confessions, the
confessions begat vows and promises; but woe is me, they all proved abortive,
for I soon returned to my vomit, and the health of my body renewed the disease
of my soul; the tyrant Sin soon recovers its dominion, and ever since
Conscience has been kept under hatches. And to palliate and hide my sin the
more, I studied to be more elaborate and zealous in my Preaching, to the great
satisfaction of my Hearers; only I seldom meddled with, or but very tenderly
touched my own beloved sin; I went about all the parts of my Ministerial duty
so carefully, and discharged them with such approbation, that the judgments of
many charitable and well-meaning persons not only acquitted me of the vices I
stood charged with, but I deluded their good opinion into some thoughts of my
innocence and virtue.

As in the case of Abraham, the fowls of the air fell on the carkases of the
beasts that were offered in sacrifice; so unclean and vicious thoughts haunted
all my duties and performances; only with this difference, Abraham drove away
those, but these I fed and entertained generally without the least disturbance
to my Conscience. Indeed at the Sacrament some fears would arise, and the
consideration of the Exemplary execution of Nadab and Abihu, whereby they
became monuments of Divine vengeance in the very place where they committed
their sin, would sometimes arrest my confidence, and fill me with apprehensions
lest some like judicial proceeding should be served upon me also, for daring to
present my false fires upon Gods Altar, which engaged me in some short lived
restraints, that seldom exceeded two or three days; by these arts I built me a
house without a foundation, I procured to my self some false quiet, and so
deceived my self as well as others; for now that the storms and tempests, the
winds and floods of affliction beat against it, I am very sensible how it
shakes and is ready to fall on my head, now I have most need of shelter and
protection. Not that I despair, that I shall yet through the Grace and mercy of
God, and those excellent assistances he has sent me, stick to the Rock of my
Salvation. It Is of dreadful consideration (I know) what the Scripture says of
the Hypocrites portion. But now God has taken off the mask, I cannot be
considered under that notion, an open sinner, a very great and heinous one is
my Character; and I am sure Christ came to call such to repentance.

Although I never grew to that proficiency in sinning, as to be of the
Head-form, and to herd my self amongst them that say, There is no God, no
Judgment to come; yet I must confess I had suppressed, if not utterly laid
aside the thoughts of those things; and all my care and contrivance was how to
hide my sin from the eyes of man. It Is my wonder now, though then I thought not
of it, how I should so baffle and besot my Reason and Understanding, as well as
Conscience, and run so counter to what I demonstrated to, and inculcated on my
Neighbors in a Discourse on Eccles. 11. 9. where I considered and argued, and
at last concluded in reason the necessity of Judgment; and in the close showing
the Qualifications of the Judge, I insisted sufficiently for that occasion upon
his Omnipresence and Omniscience; and that he does commonly make signal
discoveries, even in this life bring to light our closest contrivances; and yet
the impressions of that quickly wore out of my own memory. But I find, and (in
my instance) you may read, That nothing is so secret but shall be revealed: and
what is done in closets, shall be published upon the housetop. Be not deceived
therefore, God is not mocked. He will not suffer sin to lie always concealed,
but will bring to light the hidden things of dishonesty; and when once sin is
detected, he will much less indemnifie it, and suffer it to go unpunished; what
though the world commend you, if your own Conscience condemn you; and God who
is greater than your Conscience knows all things. Whither shall I fly from
his presence? Who when I said the darkness shall cover me, made the darkness to
be light about me, for the darkness and the light are both alike to him.

I am now arrived at the height, and by many lower steps mounted even to the
top of impiety, to which by a long course of many Adulteries I have been
fitting my self: so successfully have I fought the battles of this hellish
Commander, that now he thinks me courageous enough to be led into a more bloody
field. Having by many former repeated acts, arrived at last to a habit in
sinning, my Conscience became so seared and past feeling, that I was not afraid
to commit this horrid Murder, for which the Law has so justly judged me; a
crime of a crimson complexion, of a scarlet tincture; a crime that not only
bids defyance to God and Religion, but the very Dictates and Principles of
Nature and Humanity, would abhor and even startle at the suggestion to it; a
crime indeed not to be thought on without horror; so formidable and
affrighting, that abstracted from its aggravating-circumstances, it required a
conscience of full proof in Satan's service to attempt it. To destroy an
innocent Babe, had cruelty enough in it; but to offer violence to the fruit of
ones own body, was such a monstrous piece of barbarity, as admits not of a
parallel. I cannot remember another instance. God grant the Repentance may bear
some proportion to the vast dimensions of the sin.

When I first entered on this dissolute course of life, if any body could have
suggested to me where it would have ended, I should certainly have answered
with the Syrian, Am I a dog that I should do this! yet I am the Dog that did
it. Sin in its minority is easily opposed; at first to resist it, requires not
so much labor; but there is no withstanding when it has attained to maturity:
the heights of wickedness appear so monstrous at a distance to one that is but
newly entering upon it, that he flatters himself he shall never come thither;
but after long continuance in it, and suppressing many Convictions, violating
our Vows and Resolutions, after many Evasions to shift off the imputation,
apologies to excuse or lessen it, Oaths and Execrations to deny it, a man
becomes strangely altered; he is not what he was, but is insensibly brought
more and more into the snare of the Devil, who leads him captive at his
pleasure; and one sin draws on another, and each of a more deformed production
than another. Like the Serpents of Africa, who by their promiscuous Copulations
have engendered such strange and ugly Monsters as Nature never intended: Whosoever
allows and licenses himself in the practice of any one sin, though he think it
never so small, that man involves himself in a fatal kind of necessity to admit
of a train to attend and support it. Try not thy self, but trust my words, who
(with sorrow confess) I find the Experiment to be true. And if thou art under
any temptation to drive a trade in sin, though never so small, and have made
some ventures already, and perhaps have received some returns of profit or
pleasure, Oh! consider and learn from me to conclude what a horrible wrack and
devastation it will bring upon thee at the last; Oh remember the precious Soul
is aboard the Vessel; and if the tempestuous wrath of God, and the Hurricanes
of his severe but righteous Judgments should overtake and sink thee, then would
it appear to thee how great thy folly was, and how irreparable thy loss;
consider the pleasures of sin are but for a season, and those in low degrees;
hazard not therefore for them a fullness of joy, and those pleasures that are
for evermore; resist the first beginnings, crush the Cockatrice. -- Every step
thou make in sin, brings thee in greater danger; repentance may be denied, or
come too late. Nor ought any man to expect that when he has yielded himself up
to the power of his lusts, it may not end as infamously and miserably as mine
has now done.

Thus far I have gone; and truly here I thought to have stopped; but my
Prison-walls, how close soever, cannot keep out the Report, That I am
represented in this City, where for many years I have been a stranger, under no
better notion than that of a common Drunkard; a soul and scandalous charge,
which (as all other imputations) admits of a deep dye from my person and
profession; and as it makes way for all other sins to which the Devils
temptations shall prompt our forward natures, is a vice of pernicious
consequence. But how far I am concerned, is not time now to conceal.

I remember the time, and I believe it is not forgot in my late Neighborhood,
when I had a very competent share of temperance and sobriety; I can truly
attest, that an Alehouse or a Tavern had none, or but a very little of my
custom: If at any time my occasions invited me to them, or their necessity
urged me, I went not in without reluctance, I thought not them places for me;
therefore while I stayed, I was uneasy, and I hastened my departure: and this
was my practice for several years. He that considers my circumstances, cannot in
charity suspect I need Witnesses.

But alas! I too well remember the time, and I can give but too good an account
of the occasion of my fall (in any degree) into a sin so contrary to my nature;
I the rather reflect on it, and I wish I may do it with a proportionable
sorrow, because it was the Child of what was too much the sin of my nature,
Lust and Uncleanness; these involved me in quarrels and contentions; I had
suits depending both in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts; and to support the
credit and interest of the Causes, I spent I confess, too much of my time, too
much of my Money in public Houses, to treat the friends and favorers of the
Suits, especially those whose interest it was to promote and continue them;
there I staid long, and drank to intemperance; and this I came to do about two
or three years since; but I have examined and humbled my self, and I thank God,
do not find my self burdened with any extraordinary guilt upon that account.

Let not therefore the people by their unjust detentions of dues, force their
Ministers to legal severities upon any account; what is due, part with
willingly, and let it not be wrung out by Suits and Law-contentions; I cannot
certainly (in these circumstances) be suspected of any selfish design to
promote my own interest in any pleadings of this nature; I have received my
last, I expect no more; 'Twill be their advantage therefore, not mine, to admit
of these persuasions; you cannot tell what influences you lose, what
inconveniences you incur by any such injustice, I will leave it to your own
collection, Mal. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Besides a blast upon the Estate, it leaves a
blot upon the Name; such people as strive with the Priest, being by the Prophet
styled the worst of men, Hos. 4. 4. But as to the people, whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear, I have done my duty in leaving this Writing
behind me.

Let it not be thought presumption by the Clergy, in one who in his lifetime
had too many experiences of the ill effects and inauspicious consequences of
such differences, now at his death to leave his advice against them; you know
where they begin, but you cannot tell either where or when they will end. They
are fires which a small matter kindles, but commonly improve themselves into
such a flame, as a whole Neighborhood affords not water enough to extinguish,
and sometimes are not quenched till they consume to ashes the subjects that
feed them: Not to reckon up all the mischiefs it does, there is too much in
this one, the hindrance of the success of your Ministry. As you will be tempted
to Preach to the advantage of your Cause, so the people will receive all your
duties with prejudice; and while you quarrel about the Tithe, the Devil takes
the advantage to ruin those souls of which you must give a severe account. The
securing or regaining of the Churches Rights, was the answer wherewith I
stopped the mouths of all objections: But now I find to my sorrow, that the
gaining of souls, the rights of Christ, which he purchased with his own blood,
is upon no account to be neglected or prejudiced.

Thus far have I gone, and in all probability much farther had I proceeded, if
my merciful God, by a strong and irresistible providence, had not stood in the
way and resisted me; for nothing less would conquer my stubborn and masterless
Nature. As I desire to submit to it with silence and contentedness, so through
the aid of his grace, I hope to improve it to his Glory, and to such spiritual
advantages for my self, as will administer great cause of eternal gratitude and
thankfulness.

Now what more can I say? I am become the reproach of men; all that see or hear
of me, either shoot out the lip, or shake the head at me: they either insult
upon my fall, or are much troubled at it; for no body can be indifferent upon
this occasion.

You workers of iniquity, be afraid of the judgments of God, and take no
advantages or encouragements from my fearful backsliding, but rather tremble at
it. Let this my Confession reach your Consciences; believe it, Religion is
true, the terrors of sin are the most insupportable things even in this world;
but how much more shall they be so in that blackness of darkness for evermore.
If you felt those agonies I have been under, that Raok I have been on, you
would certainly loath the pleasures of sin, and abhor the thoughts of it. Pray
credit my experience. To be brought to the Bar of an Earthly Tribunal, there to
be Arraigned for the precious life, before a Judge that will not spare thee; to
hear thy Jury find thee Guilty, and thereupon the Judge proceed to Sentence
against thee: These are affrighting and amazing Considerations. But I am able
to give you assurance, that these are (by vast degrees) inferior to that
consternation that seizes the guilty Soul, in consideration of its sudden
summons to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.

Think not the worse of Religion, or of this Church, or of the Ministry, for
what I have done. Christ close twelve, and one of them was a Devil. Be not
hardened in sin by what you have heard of me, but be terrified rather by what is
now befallen me.

And for such as have not known these depths of Satan, yet are under
temptations, and make light of some sins, especially the too too fashionable
sin of Uncleanness, stay in time, as you love your Souls; delude not your
selves with these vain thoughts and argumentations, I will only go so far in
sin, to such a stage in wickedness, and no farther; by these stairs am I come
up to this dreadful height, that it amazes my thoughts to look down the fearful
precipice I stood upon. When once men have forsaken God, and cast his fear
behind their backs, there is no force can keep such from running into excesses
of riot. Trust not therefore to your selves, but by me learn, that you who do
forsake God, may be forsaken of him, and delivered up to the snares of a
whorish woman, out of which, all your strength shall not disintangle you; and
there is no wickedness of so black and swarthy a complexion, but such a man is
capable of committing it. Had you but a prospect of the slavery, or would be
but persuaded of the thraldom of that condition, and convinced, with what
labor, and care, and diligence they run on the Devils errand, and do his
drudgery, filling every corner of their life with trouble and anxieties, and
that attended on with extreme hazard and danger, which (as in my case) most
commonly ends too in utter and irreparable ruin; and then bursts out the filth
and shame that was hitherto concealed, with that strength, as is noisome and
offensive to all men. Certainly these Considerations but seriously adverted to,
especially when proved by such dreadful and lamentable instances, would leave
some impressions, and contribute toward a reformation.

And as for you that tremble at the judgments of God, while you stand, take
heed lest you fall. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling; take heed and beware of falling
from God, and of slacking in, much more of an utter slighting and rejection of
Religious duties; for such an Apostasy is often attended with some strange
desertion. God had done so well for me, that it might have been justly said,
What more could have been done for him? and you have heard how in all
circumstances. I lay in the Sunshine of his favor, being replenished with
Divine blessings. I could have said with the Prophet, Psalm. 23. 2.
He makes me to lie down in green pastures, he prepared a table for me in the
presence of mine enemies, my cup ran over. Indeed my pasture was only too rank
and surfeiting. Ver. 5.
Jesuron-like, I waxed fat, and kicked, for want of applying to my own
practice, what I often inculcated upon others, Deuteronomy. 6. 11, 12. and 8. 10, 11, 12.
Moses his caution to the Israelites, I degenerated into Isreal's sin; instead
of acknowledging, I forgot God my Savior, and my mind becoming earthly and
sensual, I lightly esteemed the Rock of my salvation: Therefore he in his most
just judgment delivered me up to the lusts of my own heart. And you see what a
course I have run, and where it ended. You therefore that know his name, dread
his judgments, walk humbly before him, and Prove. 3. 6.
in all your ways acknowledge him, not trusting your own understanding, or your
own hearts, with the government and direction of your ways.

There is another sort of persons I shall humbly presume to leave a warning
for: Not that I think my self able to teach, or instruct their understandings;
but the sad circumstances of my present condition encourage my hope, I may have
a persuading influence upon them, that what they know may be reduced to
practice. I have indeed been such a reproach unto them, that I may be afraid
and ashamed to name them; yet I know their charity is such, that they will bear
with me in this liberty I take, to speak and to be free in my speech unto them.

You therefore that are the Pastors of the flock of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood, Feed that flock, let your light shine, and by
most Exemplary lives, wipe off the blemish that I have brought on your most
holy Function. You throw mighty and insuperable difficulties in your own way,
and too effectually obstruct the success of your own endeavors, if you do
otherwise. I have found the experiment too true, that loose living is fatal and
destructive to the ends of strict preaching. The Ministerial employment being
to demolish the strong holds of Satan, who so take liberty to sin, countermines
himself: and in stead of shaking, fortifies the kingdom of the Devil. What
effects can that Ambassador expect when his actions shall contradict his
instructions. Hier. in Epist ad Tit.
Quomodo potest praeses Ececlesiae auferre malum de medio, qui in delictum
simile corruit? with what reason shall I diswade another from that dish I so
heartily feed upon my self, which yet I often did, as if I would make a
monopoly of Sin, and ingross it all to my self. There is this inconvenience in
it, Qua liberate peccantem corripere potest, cum tacitus ille sibi respondet,
eadem se admisisse quae corripit. Hier. ubi sup.
That it greatly confines and straightens a man's zeal and affection, so that in
the management of the sword of the Spirit he cannot so heartily, and with that
vigor fetch his blow against sin, and hew it all to pieces. Though I acted my
part but too too artificially, yet I found my self under this confinement: It Is
not to kindle but to snuff the light in your understandings, that I refer you
to St. Paul's instructions, to Timothy and Titus: the one he commands to be an
example to believers in his Conversation, the other in all things to show
himself a pattern of good works; 1 Timothy 4. 12.
and St. Peter exhorts the elders to be examples to the flock: Tit. 2. 7.
it is the same word in all the three places, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
(...), a metaphor from a seal or stamp to which the people are like wax, and
accordingly receive the impression.

The Minister is the peoples Looking-glass, Ambr. de Dig Sacerd.
by which they commonly dress themselves: now if the glass be false and
counterfeit, how squallid and deformed must their attire be? Pardon me, I pray,
that I thus presume to instruct you; the intention of my desire for the
preservation of others from those destructive paths wherein I walked, has
transported me thus far. I will make but one step more, and then we will part
for good and all; I go before to Judgment and you must follow after. In the
Levitical Law I find that the weights and measures of the Sanctuary double the
common; certainly the sins of the Officers of the Sanctuary double and treble
the like of common people. This is an easy inferrence and collection, from
what we read of their expiatory offering (God preach this Doctrine to my heart,
and make it visible in my practice) If the Priest anointed sinned, Levit. 4. 3,
13, 23, 28.
his offering and expiation did not only exceed that of the Vulgar but even
that of the Magistrate; nay was to be equal to that of the whole Congregation.
A deep measure of Repentance, a greater proportion of Sorrow is certainly
required of Consecrated persons, supposing their sins to be the same in all
other circumstances; the dignity of their employment gives their impieties the
deep die, and will certainly aggravate their punishment: Grandis dignitas
sacerdotum, sed et grandis ruina si peccant, a man of your profession is saved
with greater difficulty than another; the reason of it affrights me, let it
awaken you: Aquinas.
Quia debet rationem reddere de proprus et alienis. Labor therefore so to
practice your own preaching, as that you may both save your selves and those
that hear you.

To that end, be not earthly-minded, nor lifted up with a prosperous condition;
let not your plenty become your snare, or puff you with pride; make no
provision for your flesh; but by frequent fasting and prayer, duties by me much
neglected, keep in subjection the insolent Rebel, at least disarm and disable
him as much as you can; otherwise he will employ you in the service of sin, and
cause you to fall under the condemnation of the Devil. Remember me, who though
now so deplorable a spectacle, yet was once, as little likely to fall into this
condition as any about me.

Thus far have I discharged my conscience, which also bears me witness herein,
that my only end is to glorify God, and to place the shame at the right door,
my Person not my Profession. I do again and again request and conjure all
persons who shall read these papers, to heed them seriously, because they
Contain the last Warning of a dying man, a man whom God has justly exposed to
public reproach for his high Crimes: in which I do not only acknowledge the
righteousness of his proceedings, but submit to it and bless him for it; for I
do confess my conscience was so dead asleep in sin, that nothing less than this
could have awakened it out of its Lethargy and deep security. Blessed be his
Name that has not suffered me to sleep the sleep of death, and though the
awakening may seem terrible, yet is it infinitely more gentle than to have the
first awakening in the midst of everlasting burnings, from which I hope to be
saved by the Blood that speaks better things than that Innocents which I have
shed.

For Satisfaction to those who were at my Trial, and may have their belief
warpt to uncharitableness, by the Confidence of my fellow Criminals
Accusations, and the Moderation of My Answers.
I Was indeed at a great Contest with my Self, whether I should by my Silence
submit, and so Consent to some untrue Reflections that were cast upon me in a
Place so Public, in a Concern so Great, and to my Prejudice so Fatal; about
this I had great tossings in my thoughts for three or four days since my
Sentence. Loath I was to lie under a greater Load of Ignominy than belonged to
me; my Burden was big Enough of it Self without any such Additions. Whilst I
was thus Irresolute I received the Credit as well as the Comfort of a Visit
from a Reverend Person: to him I Communicated my doubts, and from him received
this Resolution, that I may Lawfully Acquit my self of any unjust Aspersions;
my Expressions being under the Government of charity, and that Moderation which
becomes a Person under my Circumstances.

It is my purpose to walk by that Rule, and to keep close to the Truth, as I am
deeply Concerned, who am very shortly to Appear before the Judgment Seat of the
God of Truth. God forbid that I should dare to be so Audacious as to Scatter my
lies within a Step of his Tribunal.

It would ill become my Condition, and bring under suspicion, if not contradict
the Sincerity of my Confession, to Reflect upon the Justice of so Honorable a
Court, where were Present the two Lords Chief Justices assisted with four of
the Judges, the Lord Mayor and Recorder of London; No I Acknowledge them to be
Gods Ministers, and that they bear not the Sword of God in Vain, but Execute
Wrath upon them that do Evil: if there were any sharpness of Expression I
attribute it to their Zeal against my Crimes, and not to any prejudice against
my person.

The day after my Sentence there came to visit the Prisoners one Mr. Smith the
Ordinary of Newgate. He was pleased to tell me (but in Private) that he
observed me at my Trial Gazing about the Court and the Galleries, where Sat
several Gentlewomen. I confess I was formerly too apt to delight in such
sights, and let in abundance of Sin at those windows of my Soul; but at that
time I had other thoughts and Apprehensions: the cause of that diversion was to
spy out some Witnesses I thought Material, which though they were in Court I
could not find, and so lost their Evidence; This ('it is very probable) may have
been the observation of others as well as Mr. Smith, therefore I insert this
just Apology.

My Partner in the Guilt and Trial, though not in the Condemnation, was pleased
to load me with several Calumnies. I will only Note those that the Court
insisted on, and I hear are yet discoursed to my prejudice in the City.

First it was Alleged that she was committed to my Charge and Government by
her Father in her Minority and Childhood. This Report is so generally spread,
and indeed sounds so ill, that several since my Trial have discoursed it as a
great Aggravation; to commit so foul a thing against so Great a Trust, and some
have repaired to me for Satisfaction; to whom I then gave as I do now the World
this Account, That Her Father was a Gentleman whom I never saw, or had the
least Intercourse with

There are two more Accusations, which I would not so much as name, but that I
found them the only Ingredients that Imbittered my Cup both at my Trial, and at
my Sentence; The one was, That I should attempt and endeavor to vitiate her at
Nine years old. The other, That I had for that purpose corrupted her Judgment,
and misinformed her Conscience to believe Polygamy lawful: Impeachments highly
Criminal against the Law of God, and (as I am told) Capital against the Laws of
Man; I confess I have Sins that exceed them, yet I never was guilty of either
of these; and in the midst of abundance of Guilt, I find a little Comfort in
this, That I never prostituted the Word, or any Ordinance of God to serve the
turn of Lusts.

There is some offense taken, as I hear, at my Charging her with what she
denied at our Trial, she did indeed say, That she knew Nothing of the Fact, for
which we were Questioned, which she demonstrated by Arguments that could not
modestly be spoken in that place, without such unsavory and noisome
demonstrations: I affirm, Upon the word of a dying Man, That both her Eyes did
see, and her Hands did Act in all that was done: I am dead in Law, and I know
my sayings are no Evidence against her; but the next time we meet at the Bar,
which we shall infallibly do, and two thousand Witnesses shall be produced
against us, that is, Her Conscience and Mine, these things will be found to be
true; and as such I assert them, as I shall suddenly answer it before the
All-seeing and Heart-searching God. Thus I have satisfied the desires of some
of my Friends, done my self Right, without doing her or any person in the world
wrong.

As to the World, after excusing my self of things with which I am unjustly
charged, I shall charge my self with one thing which every one does not
consider. It is indeed, a great Aggravation of my Sin against that poor Infant;
That I, whose concern it was to provide for its safety in all Respects, should
in all deprive it, as far as in me lay; For by that barbarous Act upon its
Body, I have done what in me lay to Murder its Soul, by depriving it of the
ordinary means which God had ordained for its Salvation, The Sacrament of
Baptism. Though I am not of his Opinion, who for his severity in this Case, was
called Durus Pater Infantum; yet by the judgment of my own Conscience I find my
self to be Durus Pater, that I never once so much as considered this; so that
the poor innocent and harmless Babe, is only beholding to the Mercy of its
Heavenly, and not at all to that of its Earthly Parent for the Happiness I hope
it now enjoys.

I have done with the World, of which I have no more part; and I praise God
that he has chosen this way to take me out of it. I ought not to let so great a
Mercy pass, without a due acknowledgment. If God had not by this severe Course
opened my Eyes and alarmed me to Repent, and given me time considerable, and
great Assistances to perform it, I might have been surprised with some sudden
Death, and infallibly sunk headlong into Hell; from which I have good hopes to
be preserved through the Mercy of God, and the Merits of my blessed Savior and
Redeemer, Non ex Gradu a^t Mersura fidei et poenitentiae dependet Justificatio,
sed ex veritati.
Jesus Christ, who, I hope, does graciously accept of the Truth and Reality
(though weak degrees) of Faith and Repentance, which his Holy Spirit has
wrought in my Soul.

Though this Mercy was handed to me in a very sharp and bitter Providence, yet
I read a great deal of the Wisdom and Goodness of God in it; His Wisdom
foresaw, that more gentle Applications would not work upon a Disease grown so
headstrong and inveterate; his Goodness, (which makes Correction a foreign work
to him; for he goes out of his place to punish his People) has prevailed with
him to apply this Corrosive rather than suffer his Creature eternally to
perish; Therefore his glorious Name be eternally praised. And now to him I turn
in Prayer.

A PRAYER relating to the foregoing Confession.
O Lord, The Great and Dreadful God, the Impartial Judge of all Men, I blush to
lift up my Face to thee my God, Righteousness belongs to thee; for thou art
Just and Holy in all thy Ways: But I am a Vile and Miserable Sinner, the
Reproach of men, and therefore nothing belongs to me but Shame and Confusion of
face. Thou, O Lord, have dealt Mercifully and exceeding Bountifully with me; I
was Early taught to seek and serve thee; I felt the motions of thy Grace, and
the Powers of the World to come, to awaken my Conscience. Thou did call me to
thy Service to stand and minister at thy Altar, and thou did give me such a
measure of the good things of this life as was not only beyond my Deserts, but
Expectations; But I have forsaken thee and rebelled against thee: I waxed
wanton in my plenty, and kicked against that light and Easy Yoke which I
should have taught Others to bear. I drew near to thee with my lips, but my
heart was far from thee, and with my polluted hands I have presumed to compass
thine Altar, and to touch the holy things thereof; therefore it was just with
thee to give me up to my own Hearts Lusts, and to deliver me over to Judicial
hardness, that seeing I might see and not perceive, and hearing I might hear
and not understand. I have served diverse Lusts and Pleasures; My Eyes and Heart
were full of Adultery, so that I could not cease from Sin. Nor have I sinned
alone, O Lord; for I have drawn many with me into the snare of the Devil; so
that my Sins are Innumerable, and Aggravated by many Circumstances; but most of
all that I was called by thy Name, so that thy Enemies do blaspheme it upon my
account. I have to all this added that Execrable Sin of shedding Innocent
Blood, and done what I could to stifle the motions of thy Good Spirit: But now
my Sins and thy Righteous Judgments have found me out, I acknowledge this is in
great Mercy to my Soul, that I might not lie and perish in my Sins. I am
Confounded and Ashamed, I Abhor my self in dust and ashes: I Confess I do not
only deserve to die this Infamous death, but to be cast out of thy sight into
Outer-darkness; for thou art of purer Eyes then to behold Iniquity, and the
Deceitful and Blood-Thirsty man thy Soul abhors; so that I may justly fear
my Prayers are Abomination to thee; yet whither shall I fly from thy Presence?
thy Hand has overtaken me, and I am now to appear at thy Judgment Seat: My
Soul is full of Terror, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. The Remembrance of
my Sins is Grievous to me, the Burden of them is Intolerable: Yet my only Hope
is, that thou art Gracious and Merciful, Slow to Anger, Ready to Forgive, and
thy Son gave Himself to die, and bore our Sins on his own Body. He ever lives
and makes Intercession for Sinners, and is able to save to the uttermost all
that come to thee, O God, by Him. I confess I come at the last Moment, when I
have nothing else left me, and so thou may justly reject me. Yet, O most
Merciful God, take pity on the Work of thine own Hands: Beget in me, for Christ
his sake, a deeper Sense of my Sin and Guilt, that I may Tremble for fear of
thy Judgments, and Cry to thee Night and Day. Let none of this little time that
is given me to Repent, be lost: For thy Name sake pardon mine Iniquity, for it
is great; And deliver me from Blood-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of
my Salvation: Open my Heart and Lips, that my Mouth may show forth thy praise:
That Sinners seeing thy Judgments and my Repentance, may be Converted unto
thee; That I, who by my vicious Life have so much Dishonored Thee, may by my
Death Glorify Thee. O hear and have Mercy on me; Pity and Pardon, O most
Merciful Redeemer, wash my defiled Soul with thy most Precious Blood, and for
the Glory of thy Mercy, send down upon me thy free Spirit to Convince me of
Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment: And Grant me, a Wretched, and
Forlorn Sinner, some of those Comforts, that may Support me under those Agonies
that are so terrible. O Visit me with thy Salvation, Speak Comfortably to me;
say to my Soul, Thy Sins are forgiven thee. Lord deliver me from the fears of
Death, and be with me in my last passage; Give me some Glimpse of Hope, that I
may die with Assurance of thy Favor and Pardon. I humbly submit to thy Justice
in my Death; but I most Fa^nestly pray that I may be delivered from Eternal
Death and Everlasting Burnings; and when my Soul is departed from this vile
Body, Let it be brought into thy Presence, that I may Bless and Glorify thy
Name Eternally; for the Riches of thy Grace and Mercy which has so Abounded
toward me. And for thy Names sake role away the Reproach from thine Heritage,
and thine own Tribe, which I have brought upon it. Preserve thy Church; Let her
Priests be Clothed with Righteousness, and let her Saints sing with Joyfulness.
Be Gracious to the Nursing Father of it; our Dread Sovereign Lord the King's
Most Excellent Majesty, Protect his Person, Prosper his Affairs; As for his
Enemies, Cloth them with shame; but upon Himself let his Crown flourish: Grant
that he knowing whose Minister he is, may above all things seek thy Honor and
Glory; And that all his Subjects duly Considering whose Authority he has, may
faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him in Thee and for Thee, according
to thy Blessed Word and Ordinance. Be Merciful, O Lord, be Merciful, to my
Afflicted Family, Comfort my Desolate Wife according to the Evil that I have
caused her to see. Teach my Poor Children by my Example not to sin against
thee. Give true Repentance to all whom I have tempted to Sin, in particular, to
that miserable person who was my Partner in so much wickedness; thou have given
her time to repent, Lord give her grace to do it, lest a worse thing befall
her. Provide a faithful Pastor for that Flock I have scandalized, that may
build up what I have pulled down. And now into thy hands I commit my Soul, and
Conclude in his words, who taught me, when I pray, to say, Our Father, etc.

Having thus shaken hands with the World, I am too deeply Concerned to take a
particular leave of my Friends, especially my Dear (tho distressed,) Relations;
I have done them little Good in my Life; They may Live to Reap Benefit and
Advantage from these my Dying Directions.

To my Good Wife.
Dear Wife,
IT is too late to make wishes that I had admitted of thy Counsels; But it is
not too late, nor unprofitable, to Observe, That thy Comminations have proved
too Prophetical: The God of Heaven is a Just and Righteous God, and has clearly
discovered which was in the right, and which in the wrong, Thee or I: Dear
Heart, I am not now to Confess my Sins against thee, Nor am I now to receive
thy pardon and forgiveness; I Rejoice in the Entireness of thy Affection, which
all the cold Water I threw upon it could not quench. The Constancy of it,
especially in this Extremity, has given me the Comfort, and thee the Character
of being one of the best of Wives. In order of Nature I might have longer
enjoyed the happiness of thy Affections, and I was resolved to have made it my
only Happiness in that sense; but my Sins, and God's righteous Judgments hurry
me hence; yet before we part, I will leave with thee a few Directions, which is
all the Legacy my vicious Courses have left me power to bequeath; they proceed
from entire (though too late) love to thee, Therefore lay them up and peruse
them now and then.

First, For thy self, thy constant course of private Devotion, Reading the
Scriptures according to the direction of the Church, Fasting and Meditation
before the blessed Sacrament; save me the labor of any further, or other
Advice, save that of the Apostle, Be not weary of well-doing, etc. Only now
thou must be sure to add to thy private Devotion, what I too much neglected,
Prayer, in thy little Family: I have not time, nor is it necessary to say much
to the advantage of this Duty. It procures, it secures that that is Good, it
will be comfortable in thy solitary Condition, to have a good and a bountiful
God to converse with; Therefore, Pray without ceasing.

As to thy Children, As thou have begun; Teach them to Pray, and see that they
perform it; make them constantly read, at least every Night, in thy presence
the Psalms and Chapters for the Day, and let them learn by heart some select
Scriptures that do contain Injunctions to Duty, or Prohibitions against Sin,
and when they miscarry either on the one hand or the other, reprove them with
the repetition of those places. Keep them under severe Discipline, and in case
they should grow Headstrong and Rebel against thee, complain to their Uncle,
and if that should not reform them, Address thy self to the Minister of the
place, and if that will not do, then to the Magistrate, and let him be desired
to restrain them. If we should not suffer Sin upon our Neighbor, but in any
wise Reprove him, then certainly much less upon our Children. Keep them all
from that House at Stanton, there is nothing to be learnt there but Lying and
Hypocrisy; and not only-Opportunities, but Encouragements to Lust: I pray God
preserve them from, and Mortify in them the vicious Dispositions of my Nature;
If thou find them sally that way, delay not restraining Discipline: Keep
them from Idleness, the Nurse of Sin.

As to thy Servant; if thou keep any, Let her be of good Report; for her Modest
and Religious behavior; and let thy own Grave and Sober behavior be both
Motive and Encouragement to them all in well-doing, and Reproof too in case
they should miscarry.

As to me, fortify and arm thy self to undergo the Shame and Ignominy of my
fall: I charge thee from thy Heart to forgive our Enemies, and if thou desire
to see Good days, follow Peace and ensue it. I desire thee for my sake to dry
up thy tears, and not by Excessive Sorrow to throw thy self into Distempers.
Remember thou art now both Father and Mother, and what a desolate Family there
will be if thou should not do well; I am but going before, thou shall follow
after; and though now we part in abundance of Tears and Sorrow, yet I hope
God's Infinite Mercy will grant we shall again meet in Joy and Happiness, never
more to part; which God of his Infinite Mercy Grant for Christ his sake. In the
mean time cast all thy care on God; He cares for thee: Psalm. 146. 9.
And now (my Dear Wife) I must bid thee, and all the World farewell; and it
grieves me more to part with thee and thine, than all the World besides: But
God's Will be done. I remember thy good Brother; to whom, next God, I bequeath
thee for Advice and Direction: Be governed by him. Once again Adieu, forget my
many faults, and remember only those days, when we were at a distance from that
fatal Family. God of his Mercy be thy Husband, and a Father to thy Fatherless
Children, is the Prayer of

Thy Affectionate but Distressed Husband, R. Foulkes.

To My Children.
My sweet and distressed Infants,
ALthough (at present) poor Innocents, your tender Age and slender
understandings may make you incapable of benefit from what I shall here say,
yet your riper years may give you better Apprehensions; and poor wretches, I
will come as near your present Capacites as I can. I have no token to send you
by your dear Mother but my blessing, and it will be the last that ever you will
receive from me, for by that time this reaches you, your poor Father will be in
his Grave: Therefore in the Name of God the fountain of Blessings, I bless you
with all the powers of my Soul, and I charge you upon it to be dutiful to your
Mother and Uncle, they will (you may be sure) command you nothing but what is
for your Temporal and Eternal good; you must remember now your Mother has a
double power over you, mine and her own; therefore be careful you do nothing of
moment without her consent; grieve but as little as you can at my shameful end,
bear patiently the Scandal and Reproach that will reflect upon you for it, and
let it I charge you be a loud and a constant warning to you to live in the fear
of God, and to avoid those wicked and ungodly courses that will expose you to
his Righteous Judgments: Forgive those you may think to be the occasions of my
Death, seek not Revenge but leave all to God, in whose fear I charge you to
live, and love one another. I know you can already say what your Duty is
toward God and your Neighbor, labor to understand those plain Answers, and
what you understand be sure to practice. My dear little ones, remember who it
is that speaks to you, even your dying Father, who sums up all his Advice in
these two short Directions: Do not venture upon a known Sin though never so
little, that will harden and encourage you to more and greater: Do not neglect
a known Duty, especially your Prayers Night and Morning; Prayer will keep you
under Gods protection. Forgive me (good Children) that I have made my self so
much worse than an Infidel by making no better provision for you. Betty,
remember Modesty and Chastity are great Ornaments of a Woman, I charge thee on
my blessing to preserve them; Thou art old enough to observe what ruin and
destruction Whoredom makes in the world: be not harsh to poor Billy and Robin,
yet if you observe them in any fault advise them to forbear; if they refuse,
complain, but do not make unnecessary complaints: Now my dear Orphans, I am
ready to part with the World, but very loath to leave you, but we must part, God
send us a joyful meeting in Heaven, is the earnest Prayer of

Your disconsolate but tender Father, R. F.

To my Successor in the Parish of Stanton-Lacy.
SIR,
I Hope the Honorable Patron will settle there a Man of worth and
understanding, which may seem to make my well-meant Advice unnecessary: but a
Residence of seventeen or eighteen years amongst them may perhaps enable me to
speak something that is seasonable, yet but a few words. If You look over, once
mine, now your, Study Door, you will find these words affixed.

Deus and Dies.
Dic mihi cur Dei memor sis atque Diei?
Oro, Laboro.
Whether the ignorance or indocibleness of some of the People he considered,
you will find great need of both prayers and diligence; they are such as
require the Apostles sharp Reproof, and you may use it in the Pulpit, but take
heed of it out, they will be led, but not driven. But to prepare your way, I
have one request to propound to you, endeavor it, if not for mine, yet for
your own sake. Labor to compose and draw up a wide Rent or Schism between the
Parishioners; It may seem to commence, and bear no longer date but in my time,
but I know it is much more Ancient, almost Hereditary to some of them; Cut off
the Entail if you can, and so having cleared the passage by removing their
prejudices, then apply your self to your work: I will not presume to direct
you, but I desire you to make a work and not a play or jest of it; you will
find employment for both your hands, for your utmost diligence: There is no man
so stirring and active, but may admit of the Gentle Spur, I am sure if you well
consult it, you will find that the very necessities of your People may serve to
whet your endeavors: I am so acquainted with their State, that though it be
contrary to my Resolution, yet I cannot forbear to offer my opinion, take it, I
pray, with the same Candor as it comes; I suppose that either frequent (I had
almost said constant) Catechizing, or Catechistical Preaching is the most
proper for them, I am certain they are such as have more need of Milk, Heb. 5.
13.
than of strong Meat, for though such points have been often inculcated upon
them, yet they have been such slow Proficients in the School of Christ, that
they have need to be taught again which are the very first Principles of the
Oracles of God: In the delivery whereof, 1 Cor. 14. 9.
you are to be industriously plain. St. Paul's aim was to speak words easy to
be understood, apta non alta, which if you observe not, after many years you
will find you have frustrated your own design, and besides beating the Air have
done nothing at all, and will be no otherwise than as a 1 Cor. 13. 1.
sounding Brass or a tinkling Cymbal; 'Twere easy to enlarge, even to a
Surfeit, but I hope you have little need; I am sure I have less time. I have no
more to add, but my Prayers, That you may be in that Place the Spiritual Father
of a numerous Offspring, by begetting many Sons and Daughters unto God, and
enjoy more Comfort and Tranquillity there than did

Your Predecessor, R. Foulkes.

To the Parishioners of Stanton-Lacy.
Dear Friends, and late good Neighbors,
I Am now in view of Death, and have my Grave in prospect, I cannot therefore
(charitably) be suspected, in the few following and my last directions, to be
acted by any other motive but my Charity, or to aim at any other end but your
Good; I have been of late amongst you the occasion of some Contention, I hope
to obtain my pardon of God, and I believe you will not deny me yours, as I do
freely and heartily grant you mine. I beseech you contribute vigorously to the
sudden ending of that, and all other differences, and close with the first
offer of your Minister in that happy and most necessary Work. It Is high time to
lay aside Wrath, and Clamor, and Anger and evil speaking, with all Malice, and
to be kindly Affectioned one to another, tender Hearted, Forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ his sake has also Forgiven you. My time grows shorter
and shorter, else I could easily enlarge, and great need there is of some
strong persuasion to this Duty, Read and Meditate 1 Cor. 13. all over. I will
insert only one qualification, you will find it Romans 12. 9. Dear Friends, there
is abundance of that love that is from the Teeth outward, I pray let yours be
Cordial and Hearty. I must be abrupt and take my leave in two words.

1. My Prayer for you is the conclusion of Moses his Blessing to the Twelve
Tribes, Deuteronomy. 33. 27. Let the Eternal God be your Refuge, and underneath you be
his everlasting Arms.

2. My advice to you I borrow of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally, my Brethren,
farewell; be perfect, be of good Comfort, be of one Mind, live in Peace, and the
God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

The Conclusion.
FRom both Minister and People and all that knew me, or may hear of me, and
whose hands these papers shall reach, especially the Clergy, unto whom I have
given too just and too great an occasion of offense and scandal, I beg,
heartily beg their pardon and forgiveness, and while I live I shall pray that
you may be all delivered from the infectious influence of my vile and filthy
practices and example; and I charge you all, as you love your Souls, guard and
defend your selves against them, and take not the least encouragement from
them* let the instance of my shameful end effectually convince you, that
Vicious and Ungodly Courses, however concealed or gilded over with Hypocrisy,
God will detect, nay your very sins will find you out, and expose you to
certain vengeance. Oh that it had Recoiled on my self what I often urged upon
others, Tarditatem supplium gravitate compensat, The slowness of the blow God
will make up by the heaviness of it when it comes. You see I am crushed all to
pieces with it, take warning by me, it will else prove the Aggravation both of
your Sins and Punishments: Mine you see are great, exceeding great, scarcely to
be paralleled; but yours will surmount even mine, should you venture on them
after such loud warning. What were it but a Challenge to Divine Justice, and a
Defiance of his Omnipotency? Beware therefore of such dangerous paths* for if
after such signal instances of Gods Wrath and Displeasure, you should dash
against the same Rocks, they will certainly grind you to Powder. Let your own
Meditatition make up the Conclusion. St. Paul will furnish you with a subject
very proper for your thoughts to well and enlarge upon, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11. there I leave you, the Lord direct and assist you, Amen.

A Prayer frequently used by me during my Reprieve.
O Most Holy and Righteous Judge of the whole World, give a sinful and
miserable Wretch leave to prostrate himself before the Throne of thy Grace, and
implore that Mercy which I have formerly despised and abused. I am not worthy,
I confess, to lift up my eyes toward Heaven, and it becomes me in the greatest
dejection of Spirit to sigh and groan under the load of my sins, which have
been so great and many, so bold, so presumptuous, and shameless, that when with
an awakened Mind I reflect upon them, I am ready to sink into Hell, and despair
of any Mercy. O God, how have I hated instruction, and my heart despised
reproof, and have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine ear to
them that admonished me! How swift have my feet been to run into evil, and how
backward and averse have I been to any thing that is good! O the injuries which
I have done my Neighbors, the abuse of my Wife and Children, my self, and thy
good Creatures, the profane neglect, nay contempt of thee and the Duties of
thy Worship and Service -- The remembrance of all this is dreadful, the burden
is intolerable: How shall I appear before Thee, at whose rebuke the mountains
quake, since I could not think of appearing before an earthly Judge without
shame and affrightment of spirit? O Lord, work in me a greater dread of thee,
with a greater shame and confusion of face now that I am in thy presence; for
which end be pleased to represent unto me effectually the wickedness and
baseness and vileness of all my evil doings, as well as the guilt and just
desert of them, O that I could hate and abhor them more than that death which I
expect very shortly to suffer for them. Bestow on me, O Lord, that ingenuous
and godly sorrow which works repentance and unfeigned purposes of Amendment
of life. They come too late indeed, I may justly think, to find Acceptance with
thee; and therefore not without fear and trembling, and a great sense of my
undeservings I look up unto thee, acknowledging thy infinite goodness, if thou will vouchsafe me but the smallest hope of mercy.

Mercy, mercy, good Lord, cast me not quite out of thy sight for Jesus Christ
his sake, who gave himself for us to redeem us from all iniquity. It is the
beginning of some mercy and an Earnest I hope of more, that thou have made me
sensible of mine offenses, and that thou have wrought in me a resolution to
forsake them, and some love to a godly, sober, and righteous life. Help me, O
Lord, to manifest the sincerity and uprightness of my Soul in these resolutions
as much as I am able, by giving thee hearty thanks, that the hand of Justice
has overtaken and laid hold upon me, and put a stop to the further mischief
which I might have committed, and by making a free and open Confession of my
Crimes, and taking the shame which belongs to me before others, and by
acknowledging that I am unworthy to live, and by earnest Admonishments to all
to be warned by my Example, and to cease betimes to do evil, and learn to do
well. O God, that I could glorify thee a little in my latter end after this
manner, and till I come to receive my deserved punishment, help me to spend my
time in bewailing my sins, in humbling my self before thee for them, in setting
my heart against them, in studying and admiring, with the greatest affection,
the Holy life of the Lord Jesus, in calling other Offenders to Repentance, and
exhorting them thereby to give thee Glory. Deny me not Grace, I beseech thee,
to enable me thus to employ my self, that I may have some taste of thy Mercy,
and the fear of death may be abated by some hope, that when my Soul shall be
parted from the body, thou O blessed Jesus, wilt receive it, though so
unworthy, into some of the Heavenly Mansions. Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
His LAST WORDS, spoken at the place of Execution.
Good Christian People:
I Intend not, and I hope you will not expect any long Discourse at this time;
but I have taken care that my Confession, wherein (as I shall by and by answer
to the God of Truth) you will find nothing but the truth, shall be published
more fully, and to your better advantage, than I could possibly make it here.
It a few words therefore.

You may in me see what sin is, and what it will end in: you may in me see the
lamentable and irreparable mischiefs of Uncleanness and Hypocrisy in
particular; and what it is for one who was the Member of Christ, to make
himself the Member of a Harlot. It is a sin that seldom goes single and alone:
it is the Mother-sin to abundance more, and they more ugly and deformed than it
self: I have found it by sad and woeful experience. It led me to Lying, to Oaths
and Execrations, to conceal and defend it: Nay, I went further, to advise,
contrive, and assist in what might procure Abortions; which certainly, in the
sight of God, was Murder in intention. Nor stopped it there, but went forward to
murder in Act and Execution: for which crying sin I am come hither to satisfy
the Law of man, and do acknowledge the Justice of that Sentence.

And Oh that all you may fear and tremble at God's holy and righteous
Judgments, which have overtaken me; and that they may make you take warning to
avoid the Snares of a whorish woman, and especially to keep the Married bed
undefiled.

Beware of hypocritical pretenses to Religion, of coming to the Holy Sacrament
while you live in those filthy practices. Do not grieve or quench the Holy
Spirit of God, nor stifle the Convictions of your own Consciences, lest God
leave you (as he did me) to work all Uncleanness with greediness; and lest at
last you be brought to this most miserable condition to which he has most
justly brought me, to whose most righteous Judgment I do submit. I forgive all
the world, as I desire to find mercy at God's hands through Jesus Christ. I do
earnestly desire you, by me to take warning not to continue in sin, for in the
end it will find you out.

As to my sin, I have but two things to say: one I have cause exceedingly to
lament, and that is, the great Scandal I have thereby brought upon Religion,
and the holy Function of the Ministry. The great disparagement which reflects
on these, I look upon as the most heinous Aggravation of my loose and
licentious life: Therefore I pray you take up no prejudices against them upon
my Account: they are holy and good, and grant no Licenses at all to such wicked
and ungodly practices as I have been guilty of.

The other I have some reason to rejoice in: It Is true, my sin has exposed the
whole Nation to Judgment, for through Blood the Land is defiled; but this is my
comfort, that God by this punishment makes me expiate that Guilt, for the
Judgment falls upon my own pate; but I hope, through the mercy of God, and
merit of Christ, will proceed no further than my body. I desire all that hear
me, to take warning, not to continue in sin, but betimes to cease to do evil,
and learn to do well.

Now the Lord be with you all, and have mercy upon my poor Soul; for which I
desire you to pray with me and for me to the last moment of my life,


